Random Feature Stein Discrepancies
Jonathan H. Huggins⇤
Department of Biostatistics, Harvard
jhuggins@mit.edu

Lester Mackey⇤
Microsoft Research New England
lmackey@microsoft.com

Abstract
Computable Stein discrepancies have been deployed for a variety of applications,
ranging from sampler selection in posterior inference to approximate Bayesian
inference to goodness-of-fit testing. Existing convergence-determining Stein discrepancies admit strong theoretical guarantees but suffer from a computational cost
that grows quadratically in the sample size. While linear-time Stein discrepancies
have been proposed for goodness-of-fit testing, they exhibit avoidable degradations
in testing power—even when power is explicitly optimized. To address these
shortcomings, we introduce feature Stein discrepancies ( SDs), a new family of
quality measures that can be cheaply approximated using importance sampling.
We show how to construct SDs that provably determine the convergence of a
sample to its target and develop high-accuracy approximations—random SDs
(R SDs)—which are computable in near-linear time. In our experiments with
sampler selection for approximate posterior inference and goodness-of-fit testing,
R SDs perform as well or better than quadratic-time KSDs while being orders of
magnitude faster to compute.

1

Introduction

Motivated by the intractable integration problems arising from Bayesian inference and maximum
likelihood estimation [9], Gorham and Mackey [10] introduced the notion of a Stein discrepancy as a
quality measure that can potentially be computed even when direct integration under the distribution of
interest is unavailable. Two classes of computable Stein discrepancies—the graph Stein discrepancy
[10, 12] and the kernel Stein discrepancy (KSD) [7, 11, 19, 21]—have since been developed to
assess and tune Markov chain Monte Carlo samplers, test goodness-of-fit, train generative adversarial
networks and variational autoencoders, and more [7, 10–12, 16–19, 27]. However, in practice, the
cost of these Stein discrepancies grows quadratically in the size of the sample being evaluated,
limiting scalability. Jitkrittum et al. [16] introduced a special form of KSD termed the finite-set Stein
discrepancy (FSSD) to test goodness-of-fit in linear time. However, even after an optimization-based
preprocessing step to improve power, the proposed FSSD experiences a unnecessary degradation of
power relative to quadratic-time tests in higher dimensions.
To address the distinct shortcomings of existing linear- and quadratic-time Stein discrepancies, we
introduce a new class of Stein discrepancies we call feature Stein discrepancies ( SDs). We show
how to construct SDs that provably determine the convergence of a sample to its target, thus making
them attractive for goodness-of-fit testing, measuring sample quality, and other applications. We
then introduce a fast importance sampling-based approximation we call random SDs (R SDs).
We provide conditions under which, with an appropriate choice of proposal distribution, an R SD
is close in relative error to the SD with high probability. Using an R SD, we show how, for any
> 0, we can compute OP (N 1/2 )-precision estimates of an SD in O(N 1+ ) (near-linear) time
when the SD precision is ⌦(N 1/2 ). Additionally, to enable applications to goodness-of-fit testing,
⇤

Contributed equally

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

