ρ-POMDPs have Lipschitz-Continuous
-Optimal Value Functions

Mathieu Fehr1 , Olivier Buffet2 , Vincent Thomas2 , Jilles Dibangoye3
1
École Normale Supérieure de la rue d’Ulm, Paris, France
2
Université de Lorraine, CNRS, Inria, LORIA, Nancy, France
3
Université de Lyon, INSA Lyon, Inria, CITI, Lyon, France
mathieu.fehr@ens.fr, olivier.buffet@loria.fr, vincent.thomas@loria.fr, jilles.dibangoye@inria.fr

Abstract
Many state-of-the-art algorithms for solving Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs) rely on turning the problem into a “fully observable”
problem—a belief MDP—and exploiting the piece-wise linearity and convexity
(PWLC) of the optimal value function in this new state space (the belief simplex
∆). This approach has been extended to solving ρ-POMDPs—i.e., for informationoriented criteria—when the reward ρ is convex in ∆. General ρ-POMDPs can also
be turned into “fully observable” problems, but with no means to exploit the PWLC
property. In this paper, we focus on POMDPs and ρ-POMDPs with λρ -Lipschitz reward function, and demonstrate that, for finite horizons, the optimal value function
is Lipschitz-continuous. Then, value function approximators are proposed for both
upper- and lower-bounding the optimal value function, which are shown to provide
uniformly improvable bounds. This allows proposing two algorithms derived from
HSVI which are empirically evaluated on various benchmark problems.

1

Introduction

Many state-of-the-art algorithms for solving Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes
(POMDPs) rely on turning the problem into a “fully observable” problem—namely a belief MDP—
and exploiting the piece-wise linearity and convexity (PWLC) of the optimal value function [Sondik,
1971, Smallwood and Sondik, 1973] in this new problem’s state space (here the belief space ∆).
State of the art off-line algorithms [Pineau et al., 2006, Smith and Simmons, 2004] maintain approximators that (i) are upper or lower bounds, and (ii) have generalization capabilities: a local update
at b improves the bound in a surrounding region of b. This approach has been extended to solving
ρ-POMDPs as belief MDPs—i.e., problems whose performance criterion depends on the belief (e.g.,
active information gathering)—when the reward ρ is convex in ∆ [Araya-López et al., 2010].1 Yet, it
does not extend to problems with non-convex ρ—e.g., (i) if a museum monitoring system is rewarded
for each visitor located with “enough certainty” (i.e., using a threshold function), or (ii) if collecting
data regarding patients while preserving their privacy by discarding information that could harm
anonymity.
Generalizing value function approximators are also an important topic in (fully observable, monoagent) reinforcement learning, as recently with Deep RL [Mnih et al., 2013]. To allow for errorbounded approximations in continuous settings, some works have built on the hypothesis that
the dynamics and the reward function were Lipschitz-continuous (LC), which leads to Lipschitzcontinuous value functions [Laraki and Sudderth, 2004, Hinderer, 2005, Fonteneau et al., 2009,
1
And also to solving Decentralized POMDPs (Dec-POMDPs) as occupancy MDPs (oMDPs)—i.e., when
designing multiple collaborating controllers—[Dibangoye et al., 2013, 2016].

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

