Adaptation to Easy Data in Prediction with Limited
Advice
Yevgeny Seldin
Department of Computer Science
University of Copenhagen
seldin@di.ku.dk

Tobias Sommer Thune
Department of Computer Science
University of Copenhagen
tobias.thune@di.ku.dk

Abstract
We derive an online learning algorithm with improved regret guarantees for “easy”
loss sequences. We consider two types of “easiness”: (a) stochastic loss sequences
and (b) adversarial loss sequences with small effective range of the losses. While
a number of algorithms have been proposed for exploiting small effective range
in the full information setting, Gerchinovitz and Lattimore [2016] have shown
the impossibility of regret scaling with the effective range of the losses in the
bandit setting. We show that just one additional observation per round is sufficient
to circumvent the impossibility result. The proposed Second Order Difference
Adjustments (SODA) algorithm requires
of the effective range
√ no prior knowledge √
of the losses, ε, and achieves an O(ε KT ln K) + Õ(εK 4 T ) expected regret
guarantee, where T is the time horizon and K is the number of actions. The scaling
with the effective loss range is achieved under significantly weaker assumptions
than those made by Cesa-Bianchi and Shamir [2018] in an earlier attempt to
circumvent
the impossibility result. We also provide a regret lower bound of
√
Ω(ε T K), which almost matches the upper
bound. In addition,
we show that in

P
Kε2
the stochastic setting SODA achieves an O
pseudo-regret
bound
a:∆a >0 ∆a
that holds simultaneously with the adversarial regret guarantee. In other words,
SODA is safe against an unrestricted oblivious adversary and provides improved
regret guarantees for at least two different types of “easiness” simultaneously.

1

Introduction

Online learning algorithms with both worst-case regret guarantees and refined guarantees for “easy”
loss sequences have come into research focus in recent years. In our work we consider prediction
with limited advice games [Seldin et al., 2014], which are an interpolation between full information
games [Vovk, 1990, Littlestone and Warmuth, 1994, Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi, 2006] and games with
limited (a.k.a. bandit) feedback [Auer et al., 2002b, Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi, 2012].1 In prediction
with limited advice the learner faces K unobserved sequences of losses {`at }t,a , where a indexes
the sequence number and t indexes the elements within the a-th sequence. At each round t of the
t
game the learner picks a sequence At ∈ {1, . . . , K} and suffers the loss `A
t , which is then observed.
After that, the learner is allowed to observe the losses of M additional sequences in the same round t,
where 0 ≤ M ≤ K − 1. For M = K − 1 the setting is equivalent to a full information game and for
M = 0 it becomes a bandit game.
1
There exists an orthogonal interpolation between full information and bandit games through the use of
feedback graphs Alon et al. [2017], which is different and incomparable with prediction with limited advice, see
Seldin et al. [2014] for a discussion.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

