How Many Samples are Needed to Estimate a
Convolutional Neural Network?
Simon S. Du˚
Carnegie Mellon University

Yining Wang*
Carnegie Mellon University

Xiyu Zhai
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Ruslan Salakhutdinov
Carnegie Mellon University

Sivaraman Balakrishnan
Carnegie Mellon University
Aarti Singh
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
A widespread folklore for explaining the success of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) is that CNNs use a more compact representation than the Fullyconnected Neural Network (FNN) and thus require fewer training samples to accurately estimate their parameters. We initiate the study of rigorously characterizing
the sample complexity of estimating CNNs. We show that for an m-dimensional
convolutional filter with linear activation acting on a d-dimensional input, the sam2 2
r
ple complexity of achieving population prediction error of ✏ is Opm{✏
q , whereas
the sample-complexity for its FNN counterpart is lower bounded by ⌦pd{✏2 q samples. Since, in typical settings m ! d, this result demonstrates the advantage of
using a CNN. We further consider the sample complexity of estimating a onehidden-layer CNN with linear activation where both the m-dimensional convolutional filter and the r-dimensional output weights
are unknown.
For this model,
`
˘
2
r
we show that the sample complexity is O pm ` rq{✏ when the ratio between
the stride size and the filter size is a constant. For both models, we also present
lower bounds showing our sample complexities are tight up to logarithmic factors.
Our main tools for deriving these results are a localized empirical process analysis
and a new lemma characterizing the convolutional structure. We believe that these
tools may inspire further developments in understanding CNNs.

1

Introduction

Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have achieved remarkable impact in many machine learning applications, including computer vision (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), natural language processing (Yu et al., 2018) and reinforcement learning (Silver et al., 2016). The key building block of
these improvements is the use of convolutional (weight sharing) layers to replace traditional fully
connected layers, dating back to LeCun et al. (1995). A common folklore of explaining the success of CNNs is that they are a more compact representation than Fully-connected Neural Networks
(FNNs) and thus require fewer samples to estimate. However, to our knowledge, there is no rigorous
characterization of the sample complexity of learning a CNN.
The main difficulty lies in the convolution structure. Consider the simplest CNN, a single convolutional filter with linear activation followed by average pooling (see Figure 1a), which represents a
˚
2

Equal contribution.
r when we ignore poly-logarithmic factors.
We use the standard big-O notation in this paper and use Op¨q

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

