Deep State Space Models for
Unconditional Word Generation
Florian Schmidt
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich
florian.schmidt@inf.ethz.ch

Thomas Hofmann
Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich
thomas.hofmann@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Autoregressive feedback is considered a necessity for successful unconditional text
generation using stochastic sequence models. However, such feedback is known
to introduce systematic biases into the training process and it obscures a principle
of generation: committing to global information and forgetting local nuances. We
show that a non-autoregressive deep state space model with a clear separation of
global and local uncertainty can be built from only two ingredients: An independent
noise source and a deterministic transition function. Recent advances on flowbased variational inference can be used to train an evidence lower-bound without
resorting to annealing, auxiliary losses or similar measures. The result is a highly
interpretable generative model on par with comparable auto-regressive models on
the task of word generation.

1

Introduction

Deep generative models for sequential data are an active field of research. Generation of text, in
particular, remains a challenging and relevant area [HYX+ 17]. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are
a common model class, and are typically trained via maximum likelihood [BVV+ 15] or adversarially
[YZWY16, FGD18]. For conditional text generation, the sequence-to-sequence architecture of
[SVL14] has proven to be an excellent starting point, leading to significant improvements across
a range of tasks, including machine translation [BCB14, VSP+ 17], text summarization [RCW15],
sentence compression [FAC+ 15] and dialogue systems [SSB+ 16]. Similarly, RNN language models
have been used with success in speech recognition [MKB+ 10, GJ14]. In all these tasks, generation is
conditioned on information that severely narrows down the set of likely sequences. The role of the
model is then largely to distribute probability mass within relatively constrained sets of candidates.
Our interest is, by contrast, in unconditional or free generation of text via RNNs. We take as point of
departure the shortcomings of existing model architectures and training methodologies developed
for conditional tasks. These arise from the increased challenges on both, accuracy and coverage.
Generating grammatical and coherent text is considerably more difficult without reliance on an
acoustic signal or a source sentence, which may constrain, if not determine much of the sentence
structure. Moreover, failure to sufficiently capture the variety and variability of data may not surface
in conditional tasks, yet is a key desideratum in unconditional text generation.
The de facto standard model for text generation is based on the RNN architecture originally proposed
by [Gra13] and incorporated as a decoder network in [SVL14]. It evolves a continuous state vector,
emitting one symbol at a time, which is then fed back into the state evolution – a property that
characterizes the broader class of autoregressive models. However, even in a conditional setting,
these RNNs are difficult to train without substitution of previously generated words by ground
truth observations during training, a technique generally referred to as teacher forcing [WZ89].
This approach is known to cause biases [RCAZ15a, GLZ+ 16] that can be detrimental to test time
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

