Do Less, Get More: Streaming Submodular
Maximization with Subsampling
Moran Feldman
Open University of Israel
moranfe@openu.ac.il

Amin Karbasi
Yale University
amin.karbasi@yale.edu

Ehsan Kazemi
Yale University
ehsan.kazemi@yale.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we develop the first one-pass streaming algorithm for submodular
maximization that does not evaluate the entire stream even once. By carefully subsampling each element of the data stream, our algorithm enjoys the tightest approximation guarantees in various settings while having the smallest memory footprint
and requiring the lowest number of function evaluations. More specifically, for
a monotone submodular function and a p-matchoid constraint, our randomized
algorithm achieves a 4p approximation ratio (in expectation) with O(k) memory
and O(km/p) queries per element (k is the size of the largest feasible solution and
m is the number of matroids used to define the constraint). For the non-monotone
case, our approximation ratio increases only slightly to 4p + 2 o(1). To the best
or our knowledge, our algorithm is the first that combines the benefits of streaming
and subsampling in a novel way in order to truly scale submodular maximization to
massive machine learning problems. To showcase its practicality, we empirically
evaluated the performance of our algorithm on a video summarization application
and observed that it outperforms the state-of-the-art algorithm by up to fifty-fold
while maintaining practically the same utility. We also evaluated the scalability of
our algorithm on a large dataset of Uber pick up locations.

1

Introduction

Submodularity characterizes a wide variety of discrete optimization problems that naturally occur
in machine learning and artificial intelligence [2]. Of particular interest is submodular maximization, which captures many novel instances of data summarization such as active set selection in
non-parametric learning [31], image summarization [40], corpus summarization [28], fMRI parcellation [37], ensuring privacy and fairness [21], two-stage optimization [34] and removing redundant
elements from DNA sequencing [27], to name a few.
Often the collection of elements to be summarized is generated continuously, and it is important
to maintain at real time a summary of the part of the collection generated so far. For example, a
surveillance camera generates a continuous stream of frames, and it is desirable to be able to quickly
get at every given time point a short summary of the frames taken so far. The naïve way to handle
such a data summarization task is to store the entire set of generated elements, and then, upon request,
use an appropriate offline submodular maximization algorithm to generate a summary out of the
stored set. Unfortunately, this approach is usually not practical both because it requires the system to
store the entire generated set of elements and because the generation of the summary from such a
large amount of data can be very slow. These issues have motivated previous works to use streaming
submodular maximization algorithms for data summarization tasks [1, 17, 32].
The first works (we are aware of) to consider a one-pass streaming algorithm for submodular maximization problems were the work of Badanidiyuru et al. [1], who described a 1/2-approximation
streaming algorithm for maximizing a monotone submodular function subject to a cardinality con32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

