Early Stopping for Nonparametric Testing
Meimei Liu
Department of Statistical Science
Duke University
Durham, NC 27705
meimei.liu@duke.edu

Guang Cheng
Department of Statistics
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907
chengg@purdue.edu

Abstract
Early stopping of iterative algorithms is an algorithmic regularization method to
avoid over-fitting in estimation and classification. In this paper, we show that
early stopping can also be applied to obtain the minimax optimal testing in a
general non-parametric setup. Specifically, a Wald-type test statistic is obtained
based on an iterated estimate produced by functional gradient descent algorithms
in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space. A notable contribution is to establish a
“sharp” stopping rule: when the number of iterations achieves an optimal order,
testing optimality is achievable; otherwise, testing optimality becomes impossible.
As a by-product, a similar sharpness result is also derived for minimax optimal
estimation under early stopping. All obtained results hold for various kernel classes,
including Sobolev smoothness classes and Gaussian kernel classes.

1

Introduction

As a computationally efficient approach, early stopping often works by terminating an iterative
algorithm on a pre-specified number of steps to avoid over-fitting. Recently, various forms of early
stopping have been proposed in estimation and classification. Examples include boosting algorithms
(Bühlmann and Yu [2003], Zhang and Yu [2005], Wei et al. [2017]); gradient descent over reproducing
kernel Hilbert spaces (Yao et al. [2007], Raskutti et al. [2014]) and reference therein. However,
statistical inference based on early stopping has largely remained unexplored.
In this paper, we apply the early stopping regularization to nonparametric testing and characterize
its minimax optimality from an algorithmic perspective. Notably, it differs from the traditional
framework of using penalization methods to conduct statistical inference. Recall that classical
nonparametric inference often involves minimizing objective functions in the loss + penalty form to
avoid overfitting; examples include the penalized likelihood ratio test, Wald-type test, see Fan and
Jiang [2007], Shang and Cheng [2013], Liu et al. [2018] and reference therein. However, solving a
quadratic program in the penalized regularization requires O(n3 ) basic operations. Additionally, in
practice cross validation method (Golub et al. [1979]) is often used as a tuning procedure which is
known to be optimal for estimation but suboptimal for testing; see Fan et al. [2001]. As far as we are
aware, there is no theoretically justified tuning procedure for obtaining optimal testing in our setup.
We address this issue by proposing a data-dependent early stopping rule that enjoys both theoretical
support and computational efficiency.
To be more specific, we first develop a Wald-type test statistic Dn,t based on the iterated estimator
ft with t being the number of iterations. As illustrated in Figure 1 (a) and (b), the testing power
demonstrates a parabolic pattern. Specifically, it increases as the iteration grows in the beginning,
and then decreases after reaching its largest value when t = T ⇤ , implying how over-fitting affects the
power performance. To precisely quantify T ⇤ , we analyze the power performance by characterizing
the strength of the weakest detectable signals (SWDS). We show that SWDS at each iteration is
controlled by the bias of the iterated estimator and the standard derivation of the test statistic. In
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

