Learning convex bounds for linear quadratic control
policy synthesis
Jack Umenberger
Department of Information Technology
Uppsala University
Sweden
jack.umenberger@it.uu.se

Thomas B. Schön
Department of Information Technology
Uppsala University
Sweden
thomas.schon@it.uu.se

Abstract
Learning to make decisions from observed data in dynamic environments remains
a problem of fundamental importance in a number of fields, from artificial intelligence and robotics, to medicine and finance. This paper concerns the problem of
learning control policies for unknown linear dynamical systems so as to maximize
a quadratic reward function. We present a method to optimize the expected value
of the reward over the posterior distribution of the unknown system parameters,
given data. The algorithm involves sequential convex programing, and enjoys
reliable local convergence and robust stability guarantees. Numerical simulations
and stabilization of a real-world inverted pendulum are used to demonstrate the
approach, with strong performance and robustness properties observed in both.

1 Introduction
Decision making for dynamical systems in the presence of uncertainty is a problem of great prevalence
and importance, as well as considerable difficulty, especially when knowledge of the dynamics is
available only via limited observations of system behavior. In machine learning, the data-driven
search for a control policy to maximize the expected reward attained by a stochastic dynamic process
is known as reinforcement learning (RL) [45]. Despite remarkable recent success in games [32, 43], a
major obstacle to the deployment RL-based control on physical systems (e.g. robots and self-driving
cars) is the issue of robustness, i.e., guaranteed safe and reliable operation. With the necessity of such
guarantees widely acknowledged [2], so-called ‘safe RL’ remains an active area of research [21].
The problem of robust automatic decision making for uncertain dynamical systems has also been
the subject of intense study in the area of robust control (RC) [57]. In RC, one works with a set
of plausible models and seeks a control policy that is guaranteed to stabilize all models within the
set. In addition, there is also a performance objective to optimize, i.e. a reward to be maximized, or
equivalently, a cost to be minimized. Such cost functions are usually defined with reference to either
a nominal model [20, 25] or the worst-case model [36] in the set. RC has been extremely successful
in a number of engineering applications [38]; however, as has been noted, e.g., [48, 35], robustness
may (understandably) come at the expense of performance, particularly for worst-case design.
The problem we address in this paper lies at the intersection of reinforcement learning and robust
control, and can be summarized as follows: given observations from an unknown dynamical system,
we seek a policy to optimize the expected cost (as in RL), subject to certain robust stability guarantees
(as in RC). Specifically, we focus our attention on control of linear time-invariant dynamical systems,
subject to Gaussian disturbances, with the goal of minimizing a quadratic function penalizing state
deviations and control action. When the system is known, this is the classical linear quadratic
regulator (LQR), a.k.a. H2 , optimal control problem [8]. We are interested in the setting in which the
system is unknown, and knowledge of the dynamics must be inferred from observed data.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

