Collaborative Learning for Deep Neural Networks

Wei Chai
Google
Mountain View, CA 94043
chaiwei@google.com

Guocong Song
Playground Global
Palo Alto, CA 94306
songgc@gmail.com

Abstract
We introduce collaborative learning in which multiple classifier heads of the
same network are simultaneously trained on the same training data to improve
generalization and robustness to label noise with no extra inference cost. It acquires
the strengths from auxiliary training, multi-task learning and knowledge distillation.
There are two important mechanisms involved in collaborative learning. First, the
consensus of multiple views from different classifier heads on the same example
provides supplementary information as well as regularization to each classifier,
thereby improving generalization. Second, intermediate-level representation (ILR)
sharing with backpropagation rescaling aggregates the gradient flows from all heads,
which not only reduces training computational complexity, but also facilitates
supervision to the shared layers. The empirical results on CIFAR and ImageNet
datasets demonstrate that deep neural networks learned as a group in a collaborative
way significantly reduce the generalization error and increase the robustness to
label noise.

1

Introduction

When training deep neural networks, we must confront the challenges of general nonconvex optimization problems. Local gradient descent methods that most deep learning systems rely on, such
as variants of stochastic gradient descent (SGD), have no guarantee that the optimization algorithm
will converge to a global minimum. It is well known that an ensemble of multiple instances of a
target neural network trained with different random seeds generally yields better predictions than
a single trained instance. However, an ensemble of models is too computationally expensive at
inference time. To keep the exact same computational complexity for inference, several training
techniques have been developed by adding additional networks in the training graph to boost accuracy
without affecting the inference graph, including auxiliary training [19], multi-task learning [4, 3],
and knowledge distillation [10]. Auxiliary training is introduced to improve the convergence of deep
networks by adding auxiliary classifiers connected to certain intermediate layers [19]. However,
auxiliary classifiers require specific new designs for their network structures in addition to the target
network. Furthermore, it is found later [20] that auxiliary classifiers do not result in obvious improved
convergence or accuracy. Multi-task learning is an approach to learn multiple related tasks simultaneously so that knowledge obtained from each task can be reused by the others [4, 3, 21]. However, it
is not useful for a single task use case. Knowledge distillation is introduced to facilitate training a
smaller network by transferring knowledge from another high-capacity model, so that the smaller one
obtains better performance than that trained by using labels only [10]. However, distillation is not an
end-to-end solution due to having two separate training phases, which consume more training time.
In this paper, we propose a framework of collaborative learning that trains several classifier heads
of the same network simultaneously on the same training data to cope with the above challenges.
The method acquires the advantages from auxiliary training, multi-task learning, and knowledge
distillation, such as, appending the exact same network as the target one in the training graph for a
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

