Removing the Feature Correlation Effect of
Multiplicative Noise

Zijun Zhang
University of Calgary
zijun.zhang@ucalgary.ca

Yining Zhang
University of Calgary
yining.zhang1@ucalgary.ca

Zongpeng Li
Wuhan University
zongpeng@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Multiplicative noise, including dropout, is widely used to regularize deep neural
networks (DNNs), and is shown to be effective in a wide range of architectures
and tasks. From an information perspective, we consider injecting multiplicative
noise into a DNN as training the network to solve the task with noisy information
pathways, which leads to the observation that multiplicative noise tends to increase
the correlation between features, so as to increase the signal-to-noise ratio of
information pathways. However, high feature correlation is undesirable, as it
increases redundancy in representations. In this work, we propose non-correlating
multiplicative noise (NCMN), which exploits batch normalization to remove the
correlation effect in a simple yet effective way. We show that NCMN significantly
improves the performance of standard multiplicative noise on image classification
tasks, providing a better alternative to dropout for batch-normalized networks.
Additionally, we present a unified view of NCMN and shake-shake regularization,
which explains the performance gain of the latter.

1

Introduction

State-of-the-art deep neural networks are often over-parameterized to deliver more expressive power.
For instance, a typical convolutional neural network (CNN) for image classification can consist of
tens to hundreds of layers, and millions to tens of millions of learnable parameters [1, 2]. To combat
overfitting, a variety of regularization techniques have been developed. Examples include dropout [3],
DropConnect [4], and the recently proposed shake-shake regularization [5]. Among them, dropout is
arguably the most popular, due to its simplicity and effectiveness in a wide range of architectures and
tasks, e.g., convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for image recognition [6], and recurrent neural
networks (RNNs) for natural language processing (NLP) [7].
Nonetheless, we observe a side effect of dropout that has long been ignored. That is, it tends to increase
the correlation between the features it is applied to, which reduces the efficiency of representations.
It is also known that decorrelated features can lead to better generalization [8, 9, 10, 11]. Thus, this
side effect may counteract, to some extent, the regularization effect of dropout.
In this work, we demonstrate the feature correlation effect of dropout, as well as other types of
multiplicative noise, through analysis and experiments. Our analysis is based on a simple assumption
that, in order to reduce the interference of noise, the training process will try to maximize the
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of representations. We show that the tendency of increasing the SNR
will increase feature correlation as a result. To remove the correlation effect, it is possible to resort to
feature decorrelation techniques. However, existing techniques penalize high correlation explicitly;
they either introduce a substantial computational overhead [10], or yield marginal improvements
[11]. Moreover, these techniques require extra hyperparameters to control the strength of the penalty,
which further hinders their practical application.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

