A Mathematical Model For Optimal Decisions In A
Representative Democracy

Malik Magdon-Ismail
Department of Computer Science
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY 12180
magdon@cs.rpi.edu

Lirong Xia
Department of Computer Science
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY 12180
xial@cs.rpi.edu

Abstract
Direct democracy, where each voter casts one vote, fails when the average voter
competence falls below 50%. This happens in noisy settings when voters have limited information. Representative democracy, where voters choose representatives to
vote, can be an elixir in both these situations. We introduce a mathematical model
for studying representative democracy, in particular understanding the parameters
of a representative democracy that gives maximum decision making capability. Our
main result states that under general and natural conditions,
1. for fixed voting cost, the optimal number of representatives is linear;
2. for polynomial cost, the optimal number of representatives is logarithmic.

1

Introduction

Suppose a voter-population of size n must vote in a referendum to make an important binary decision
to optimize some objective, e.g. social welfare growth over 10 years. A typical solution is direct
democracy which decides based on a majority vote, the so called “wisdom of the crowd.” Direct
democracy works when the crowd does indeed have wisdom. In reality, the voters cannot directly
observe which decision is correct. Instead, they form beliefs using perceived information, which can
be inaccurate, misinterpretable or even manipulated. For example, suppose that each voter’s chance
to vote for the correct decision, called her competence, is i.i.d. generated uniformly over [0, 0.99].
Now, the majority among many voters makes the wrong decision with near certainty [17].
This highlights a flaw of direct democracy, where voters participate in decision-making irrespective
of their competence. The problems arise in high noise situations, where peoples’ beliefs between
two choices are nearly split, as in the example above. Such close ties are common in real high-stakes
scenarios. For example, in the 2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum,
51.89% voted for leave and 48.11% voted for remain. In the 2016 US Presidential Election, 46.1%
voted for Trump and 48.2% voted for Clinton.1 How can democracy cope with high-stakes noisy
issues where the average voter competence may drop below 0.5, especially if there is misinformation?
One promising rescue is representative democracy, where voters form groups, each group chooses a
representative, and the representatives decide via a majority vote. The tradeoff is that there are fewer
representatives than base-voters, but, in return, each representative is (hopefully) better informed,
being the “wisest” from its group, or at least having a higher competence than the average of its group
members. Continuing the example above, let us now use representative democracy, where people are
divided into households (e.g. 5 people per group), and let each group choose the member with highest
competence as its representative. Then, with high probability the representative’s competence is
1
These examples are only used to show real situations where close ties exist. We do not know if direct
democracy would succeed or fail in these cases since we do not know what the “correct” outcome is.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

