Regret bounds for meta Bayesian optimization
with an unknown Gaussian process prior

Zi Wang∗
MIT CSAIL
ziw@csail.mit.edu

Beomjoon Kim∗
MIT CSAIL
beomjoon@mit.edu

Leslie Pack Kaelbling
MIT CSAIL
lpk@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Bayesian optimization usually assumes that a Bayesian prior is given. However,
the strong theoretical guarantees in Bayesian optimization are often regrettably
compromised in practice because of unknown parameters in the prior. In this paper,
we adopt a variant of empirical Bayes and show that, by estimating the Gaussian
process prior from offline data sampled from the same prior and constructing
unbiased estimators of the posterior, variants of both GP-UCB and probability
of improvement achieve a near-zero regret bound, which decreases to a constant
proportional to the observational noise as the number of offline data and the
number of online evaluations increase. Empirically, we have verified our approach
on challenging simulated robotic problems featuring task and motion planning.

1

Introduction

Bayesian optimization (BO) is a popular approach to optimizing black-box functions that are expensive to evaluate. Because of expensive evaluations, BO aims to approximately locate the function
maximizer without evaluating the function too many times. This requires a good strategy to adaptively
choose where to evaluate based on the current observations.
BO adopts a Bayesian perspective and assumes that there is a prior on the function; typically, we use
a Gaussian process (GP) prior. Then, the information collection strategy can rely on the prior to focus
on good inputs, where the goodness is determined by an acquisition function derived from the GP
prior and current observations. In past literature, it has been shown both theoretically and empirically
that if the function is indeed drawn from the given prior, there are many acquisition functions that
BO can use to locate the function maximizer quickly [51, 5, 53].
However, in reality, the prior we choose to use in BO often does not reflect the distribution from
which the function is drawn. Hence, we sometimes have to estimate the hyper-parameters of a chosen
form of the prior on the fly as we collect more data [50]. One popular choice is to estimate the prior
parameters using empirical Bayes with, e.g., the maximum likelihood estimator [44] .
Despite the vast literature that shows many empirical Bayes approaches have well-founded theoretical
guarantees such as consistency [40] and admissibility [26], it is difficult to analyze a version of BO
that uses empirical Bayes because of the circular dependencies between the estimated parameters and
the data acquisition strategies. The requirement to select the prior model and estimate its parameters
leads to a BO version of the chicken-and-egg dilemma: the prior model selection depends on the data
collected and the data collection strategy depends on having a “correct” prior. Theoretically, there is
little evidence that BO with unknown parameters in the prior can work well. Empirically, there is
evidence showing it works well in some situations, but not others [33, 23], which is not surprising in
light of no free lunch results [56, 22].
∗

Equal contribution.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

