Extracting Relationships by Multi-Domain Matching
Yitong Li1 , Michael Murias2 , Samantha Major3 , Geraldine Dawson3 and David E. Carlson1,4,5
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University
2
Duke Institute for Brain Sciences, Duke University
3
Departments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Duke University
4
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Duke University
5
Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Duke University
{yitong.li,michael.murias,samantha.major,
geraldine.dawson,david.carlson}@duke.edu

Abstract
In many biological and medical contexts, we construct a large labeled corpus by
aggregating many sources to use in target prediction tasks. Unfortunately, many
of the sources may be irrelevant to our target task, so ignoring the structure of
the dataset is detrimental. This work proposes a novel approach, the Multiple
Domain Matching Network (MDMN), to exploit this structure. MDMN embeds
all data into a shared feature space while learning which domains share strong
statistical relationships. These relationships are often insightful in their own right,
and they allow domains to share strength without interference from irrelevant
data. This methodology builds on existing distribution-matching approaches by
assuming that source domains are varied and outcomes multi-factorial. Therefore,
each domain should only match a relevant subset. Theoretical analysis shows
that the proposed approach can have a tighter generalization bound than existing
multiple-domain adaptation approaches. Empirically, we show that the proposed
methodology handles higher numbers of source domains (up to 21 empirically), and
provides state-of-the-art performance on image, text, and multi-channel time series
classification, including clinical outcome data in an open label trial evaluating a
novel treatment for Autism Spectrum Disorder.

1

Introduction

Deep learning methods have shown unparalleled performance when trained on vast amounts of
diverse labeled training data [21], often collected at great cost. In many contexts, especially medical
and biological, it is prohibitively expensive to collect or label the number of observations necessary
to train an accurate deep neural network classifier. However, a number of related sources, each
with “moderate” data, may already be available, which can be combined to construct a large corpus.
Naively using the combined source data is often an ineffective strategy; instead, what is needed is
unsupervised multiple-domain adaptation. Given labeled data from several source domains (each
representing, e.g., one patient in a medical trial, or reviews of one type of product), and unlabeled
data from target domains (new patients, or new product categories), we wish to train a classifier that
makes accurate predictions about the target domain data at test time.
Recent approaches to multiple-domain adaptation involve learning a mapping from each domain into
a common feature space, in which observations from the target and source domains have similar
distributions [14, 45, 39, 30]. At test time, a target-domain observation is first mapped into this
shared feature space, then classified. However, few of the existing works can model the relationship
among different domains, which we note is important for several reasons. First, even though data in
different domains share labels, their cause and symptoms may be different. Patients with the same
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

