Bayesian Semi-supervised Learning with
Graph Gaussian Processes

Yin Cheng Ng1 , Nicolò Colombo1 , Ricardo Silva1,2
1
Statistical Science, University College London
2
The Alan Turing Institute
{y.ng.12, nicolo.colombo, ricardo.silva}@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose a data-efficient Gaussian process-based Bayesian approach to the semisupervised learning problem on graphs. The proposed model shows extremely
competitive performance when compared to the state-of-the-art graph neural networks on semi-supervised learning benchmark experiments, and outperforms the
neural networks in active learning experiments where labels are scarce. Furthermore, the model does not require a validation data set for early stopping to control
over-fitting. Our model can be viewed as an instance of empirical distribution
regression weighted locally by network connectivity. We further motivate the intuitive construction of the model with a Bayesian linear model interpretation where
the node features are filtered by an operator related to the graph Laplacian. The
method can be easily implemented by adapting off-the-shelf scalable variational
inference algorithms for Gaussian processes.

1

Introduction

Data sets with network and graph structures that describe the relationships between the data points
(nodes) are abundant in the real world. Examples of such data sets include friendship graphs on social
networks, citation networks of academic papers, web graphs and many others. The relational graphs
often provide rich information in addition to the node features that can be exploited to build better
predictive models of the node labels, which can be costly to collect. In scenarios where there are not
enough resources to collect sufficient labels, it is important to design data-efficient models that can
generalize well with few training labels. The class of learning problems where a relational graph of
the data points is available is referred to as graph-based semi-supervised learning in the literature
[7, 47].
Many of the successful graph-based semi-supervised learning models are based on graph Laplacian
regularization or learning embeddings of the nodes. While these models have been widely adopted,
their predictive performance leaves room for improvement. More recently, powerful graph neural
networks that surpass Laplacian and embedding based methods in predictive performance have
become popular. However, neural network models require relatively larger number of labels to
prevent over-fitting and work well. We discuss the existing models for graph-based semi-supervised
learning in detail in Section 4.
We propose a new Gaussian process model for graph-based semi-supervised learning problems that
can generalize well with few labels, bridging the gap between the simpler models and the more data
intensive graph neural networks. The proposed model is also competitive with graph neural networks
in settings where there are sufficient labelled data. While posterior inference for the proposed model
is intractable for classification problems, scalable variational inducing point approximation method
for Gaussian processes can be directly applied to perform inference. Despite the potentially large
number of inducing points that need to be optimized, the model is protected from over-fitting by the
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

