Learning towards Minimum Hyperspherical Energy

Weiyang Liu1,* , Rongmei Lin2,* , Zhen Liu1,* , Lixin Liu3 , Zhiding Yu4 , Bo Dai1,5 , Le Song1,6
1
Georgia Institute of Technology 2 Emory University
3
South China University of Technology 4 NVIDIA 5 Google Brain 6 Ant Financial

Abstract
Neural networks are a powerful class of nonlinear functions that can be trained
end-to-end on various applications. While the over-parametrization nature in
many neural networks renders the ability to fit complex functions and the strong
representation power to handle challenging tasks, it also leads to highly correlated
neurons that can hurt the generalization ability and incur unnecessary computation
cost. As a result, how to regularize the network to avoid undesired representation
redundancy becomes an important issue. To this end, we draw inspiration from a
well-known problem in physics – Thomson problem, where one seeks to find a state
that distributes N electrons on a unit sphere as evenly as possible with minimum
potential energy. In light of this intuition, we reduce the redundancy regularization
problem to generic energy minimization, and propose a minimum hyperspherical
energy (MHE) objective as generic regularization for neural networks. We also
propose a few novel variants of MHE, and provide some insights from a theoretical
point of view. Finally, we apply neural networks with MHE regularization to
several challenging tasks. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of
our intuition, by showing the superior performance with MHE regularization.

1

Introduction

The recent success of deep neural networks has led to its wide applications in a variety of tasks. With
the over-parametrization nature and deep layered architecture, current deep networks [14, 46, 42]
are able to achieve impressive performance on large-scale problems. Despite such success, having
redundant and highly correlated neurons (e.g., weights of kernels/filters in convolutional neural
networks (CNNs)) caused by over-parametrization presents an issue [37, 41], which motivated a series
of influential works in network compression [10, 1] and parameter-efficient network architectures [16,
19, 62]. These works either compress the network by pruning redundant neurons or directly modify
the network architecture, aiming to achieve comparable performance while using fewer parameters.
Yet, it remains an open problem to find a unified and principled theory that guides the network
compression in the context of optimal generalization ability.
Another stream of works seeks to further release the network generalization power by alleviating
redundancy through diversification [57, 56, 5, 36] as rigorously analyzed by [59]. Most of these
works address the redundancy problem by enforcing relatively large diversity between pairwise
projection bases via regularization. Our work broadly falls into this category by sharing similar
high-level target, but the spirit and motivation behind our proposed models are distinct. In particular,
there is a recent trend of studies that feature the significance of angular learning at both loss and
convolution levels [29, 28, 30, 27], based on the observation that the angles in deep embeddings
learned by CNNs tend to encode semantic difference. The key intuition is that angles preserve the
most abundant and discriminative information for visual recognition. As a result, hyperspherical
geodesic distances between neurons naturally play a key role in this context, and thus, it is intuitively
desired to impose discrimination by keeping their projections on the hypersphere as far away from
* indicates equal contributions. Correspondence to: Weiyang Liu <wyliu@gatech.edu>.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

