Learning semantic similarity in a continuous space

Michel Deudon
Ecole Polytechnique
Palaiseau, France
michel.deudon@polytechnique.edu

Abstract
We address the problem of learning semantic representation of questions to measure
similarity between pairs as a continuous distance metric. Our work naturally
extends Word Mover’s Distance (WMD) [1] by representing text documents as
normal distributions instead of bags of embedded words. Our learned metric
measures the dissimilarity between two questions as the minimum amount of
distance the intent (hidden representation) of one question needs to "travel" to
match the intent of another question. We first learn to repeat, reformulate questions
to infer intents as normal distributions with a deep generative model [2] (variational
auto encoder). Semantic similarity between pairs is then learned discriminatively
as an optimal transport distance metric (Wasserstein 2) with our novel variational
siamese framework. Among known models that can read sentences individually,
our proposed framework achieves competitive results on Quora duplicate questions
dataset. Our work sheds light on how deep generative models can approximate
distributions (semantic representations) to effectively measure semantic similarity
with meaningful distance metrics from Information Theory.

1

Introduction

Semantics is the study of meaning in language, used for understanding human expressions. It deals
with the relationship between signifiers and what they stand for, their denotation. Measuring semantic
similarity between pairs of sentences is an important problem in Natural Language Processing
(NLP), for conversation systems (chatbots, FAQ), knowledge deduplication [3] or image captioning
evaluation metrics [4] for example. In this paper, we consider the problem of determining the degree
of similarity between pairs of sentences. Without loss of generality, we consider the case where the
prediction is binary (duplicate pair or not), a problem known as paraphrase detection or semantic
question matching in NLP.
A major breakthrough in the field of semantics was the work done in [5] and [6]. The authors proposed
unsupervised methods to learn semantic representations of words (Word2vec [5], GloVe [6]). These
representations come in the form of vectors (typically of dimension 50 - 300) that capture relationships
between words in a geometric space. For instance, let νm ∈ Rd denote the learned representation
for word m. The following property holds νking − νman + νwoman ≃ νqueen (linear substructure).
In [1], the authors proposed a novel similarity metric for text documents: Word Mover’s Distance
(WMD). WMD [1] measures the dissimilarity between two bag-of-vectors (embedded words) with
an optimal transport distance metric, Wasserstein 1, also known as Earth Mover’s Distance [7] [8] [9].
The proposed method is conceptually appealing and accurate for news categorization and clustering
tasks. Yet, WMD experimentally struggles to finely capture the semantics of shorter pairs (sentences,
questions) because of the bag-of-word assumption. Indeed,"why do cats like mice ?" and "why do
mice like cats ?" are mapped to the same bag-of-vectors representation, thus classified as duplicate.
WMD does not capture the order in which words appear. Furthermore, because a computationally
expensive discrete transportation problem is required to solve WMD, its use in conversation systems
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

