Bilinear Attention Networks
Jin-Hwa Kim1⇤, Jaehyun Jun2 , Byoung-Tak Zhang2,3
SK T-Brain, 2 Seoul National University, 3 Surromind Robotics
jnhwkim@sktbrain.com, {jhjun,btzhang}@bi.snu.ac.kr
1

Abstract
Attention networks in multimodal learning provide an efficient way to utilize given
visual information selectively. However, the computational cost to learn attention
distributions for every pair of multimodal input channels is prohibitively expensive.
To solve this problem, co-attention builds two separate attention distributions for
each modality neglecting the interaction between multimodal inputs. In this paper,
we propose bilinear attention networks (BAN) that find bilinear attention distributions to utilize given vision-language information seamlessly. BAN considers
bilinear interactions among two groups of input channels, while low-rank bilinear
pooling extracts the joint representations for each pair of channels. Furthermore,
we propose a variant of multimodal residual networks to exploit eight-attention
maps of the BAN efficiently. We quantitatively and qualitatively evaluate our
model on visual question answering (VQA 2.0) and Flickr30k Entities datasets,
showing that BAN significantly outperforms previous methods and achieves new
state-of-the-arts on both datasets.

1

Introduction

Machine learning for computer vision and natural language processing accelerates the advancement of
artificial intelligence. Since vision and natural language are the major modalities of human interaction,
understanding and reasoning of vision and natural language information become a key challenge. For
instance, visual question answering involves a vision-language cross-grounding problem. A machine
is expected to answer given questions like "who is wearing glasses?", "is the umbrella upside down?",
or "how many children are in the bed?" exploiting visually-grounded information.
For this reason, visual attention based models have succeeded in multimodal learning tasks, identifying
selective regions in a spatial map of an image defined by the model. Also, textual attention can be
considered along with visual attention. The attention mechanism of co-attention networks [36, 18, 20,
39] concurrently infers visual and textual attention distributions for each modality. The co-attention
networks selectively attend to question words in addition to a part of image regions. However, the coattention neglects the interaction between words and visual regions to avoid increasing computational
complexity.
In this paper, we extend the idea of co-attention into bilinear attention which considers every pair
of multimodal channels, e.g., the pairs of question words and image regions. If the given question
involves multiple visual concepts represented by multiple words, the inference using visual attention
distributions for each word can exploit relevant information better than that using single compressed
attention distribution.
From this background, we propose bilinear attention networks (BAN) to use a bilinear attention
distribution, on top of low-rank bilinear pooling [15]. Notice that the BAN exploits bilinear interactions between two groups of input channels, while low-rank bilinear pooling extracts the joint
representations for each pair of channels. Furthermore, we propose a variant of multimodal residual
⇤

This work was done while at Seoul National University.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

