Visual Memory for Robust Path Following

Ashish Kumar∗

Saurabh Gupta∗ David Fouhey Sergey Levine
University of California, Berkeley

Jitendra Malik

ashish_kumar@berkeley.edu, {sgupta, dfouhey, svlevine, malik}@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Humans routinely retrace paths in a novel environment both forwards and backwards despite uncertainty in their motion. This paper presents an approach for
doing so. Given a demonstration of a path, a first network generates a path abstraction. Equipped with this abstraction, a second network observes the world
and decides how to act to retrace the path under noisy actuation and a changing
environment. The two networks are optimized end-to-end at training time. We evaluate the method in two realistic simulators, performing path following and homing
under actuation noise and environmental changes. Our experiments show that our
approach outperforms classical approaches and other learning based baselines.

1

Introduction

Consider the first morning of a conference in a city you have never been to. Rushing to the first
talk, you might follow your phone’s directions through a series of twists and turns to reach the
venue. When you return later in the day, you can retrace your steps to your hotel relatively robustly,
remembering to take a left turn at the bistro and keep straight past the coffee shop. The next day,
you may probably only look at your phone to check your email. At first glance, this seems like a
trivial ability. Humans routinely do this, for instance when a friend shows you the bathroom in their
apartment or when you go to a room in a new building. On second glance though, it is an amazing
ability since one never retraces one’s steps exactly and the visual experience is constantly changing in
fairly dramatic ways: people move their cars, shops open and close, and seasons change. This paper
aims to replicate this ability to retrace paths (including reversals) in new environments with imperfect
ability to replicate one’s actions (actuation) as well as a changing world.
How might we solve this problem? One classical approach, common in robotics, would be to build a
full 3D model of the world via SLAM, from building facades to the side-mirrors of cars, during the
first pass; after this is done, path following reduces to localizing in the model and selecting the best
action. For the task of navigation, this is simultaneously too much work – precisely reconstructing
the facade is less important than recognizing it as “the bistro at which I turn left” – as well as too
little work – the parts of the reconstruction that provide stable localization and the parts that do not
are mixed together with no way to disentangle them.
Given these difficulties of classical approaches, a large number of learning-based approaches have
sprung up to solve this and other related navigation tasks (e.g. [28, 27, 18, 35, 43, 30]). In these
works, an agent directly predicts actions from image observations in an end-to-end fashion. However,
unlike our setup of a single demonstration in a new environment, many of these setups require the
agent to have a great deal of experience with the test environment via reward based supervision
[27, 28, 43] or exhaustive human demonstrations [35]. Moreover, unlike most work on navigation in
new environments [18], our setup poses the additional challenge of noisy actuation as well as a world
that can change between the initial demonstration and path execution.
∗

Equal contribution. Project website with videos: https://ashishkumar1993.github.io/rpf/.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

