Faster Online Learning of Optimal Threshold for
Consistent F-measure Optimization

Mingrui Liu∗† , Xiaoxuan Zhang∗† , Xun Zhou‡ , Tianbao Yang†
Department of Computer Science, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA
‡
Department of Management Sciences, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA
mingrui-liu, tianbao-yang@uiowa.edu
†

Abstract
In this paper, we consider online F-measure optimization (OFO). Unlike traditional performance metrics (e.g., classification error rate), F-measure is nondecomposable over training examples and is a non-convex function of model
parameters, making it much more difficult to be optimized in an online fashion.
Most existing results of OFO usually suffer from high memory/computational
costs and/or lack statistical consistency guarantee for optimizing F-measure at
the population level. To advance OFO, we propose an efficient online algorithm
based on simultaneously learning a posterior probability of class and learning
an optimal threshold by minimizing a stochastic strongly convex function with
unknown strong convexity parameter. A key component of the proposed method
is a novel stochastic algorithm with low memory and computational costs, which
e √n) for learning the optimal threshold under
can enjoy a convergence rate of O(1/
a mild condition on the convergence of the posterior probability, where n is the
number of processed examples. It is provably faster than its predecessor based on a
heuristic for updating the threshold. The experiments verify the efficiency of the
proposed algorithm in comparison with state-of-the-art OFO algorithms.

1

Introduction

A learning algorithm is to optimize a certain performance metric defined over a set or population of
examples. Online learning [18, 28, 4, 10] is a paradigm in which an algorithm alternatively makes
prediction on a received data and then updates the model given the feedback of prediction to optimize
a target performance metric. It has attracted tremendous attention due to its efficiency in handling
large-scale and/or streaming data, and has been actively investigated for decades. While many studies
are devoted to learning with traditional performance metrics (e.g., classification error rate), there
has also been an increasing interest in designing efficient online learning algorithms to maximize Fmeasure for tackling large-scale streaming data or by one pass of large-scale batch data [3, 9, 14, 23].
This is because F-measure is more suited for imbalanced classification data because it enforces a
better balance between performance on the rare class and the dominating class. Imbalanced data can
be found in many applications, e.g., medical diagnostics [13], spam email detection [20], malicious
URL detection [27], etc.
Online F-measure optimization is much more challenging than traditional online learning with pointwise loss functions since F-measure is non-decomposable over training examples and is a non-convex
function of model parameters. Nevertheless, several previous works have made efforts to tackle
this difficult problem [3, 9, 14, 23], which fall into three categories. The first category is based
on minimizing a surrogate loss function or maximizing a surrogate reward function in an online
fashion. This type of approaches usually has large memory costs and/or lacks statistical consistency
for F-measure due to that the consistency/calibration of surrogate loss of F-measure is not clear.
∗

equal contribution

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

