Bayesian Control of Large MDPs with
Unknown Dynamics in Data-Poor Environments

Mahdi Imani
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX, USA
m.imani88@tamu.edu

Seyede Fatemeh Ghoreishi
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX, USA
f.ghoreishi88@tamu.edu

Ulisses M. Braga-Neto
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX, USA
ulisses@ece.tamu.edu

Abstract
We propose a Bayesian decision making framework for control of Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) with unknown dynamics and large, possibly continuous,
state, action, and parameter spaces in data-poor environments. Most of the existing adaptive controllers for MDPs with unknown dynamics are based on the reinforcement learning framework and rely on large data sets acquired by sustained
direct interaction with the system or via a simulator. This is not feasible in many
applications, due to ethical, economic, and physical constraints. The proposed
framework addresses the data poverty issue by decomposing the problem into an
offline planning stage that does not rely on sustained direct interaction with the
system or simulator and an online execution stage. In the offline process, parallel
Gaussian process temporal difference (GPTD) learning techniques are employed
for near-optimal Bayesian approximation of the expected discounted reward over
a sample drawn from the prior distribution of unknown parameters. In the online
stage, the action with the maximum expected return with respect to the posterior
distribution of the parameters is selected. This is achieved by an approximation
of the posterior distribution using a Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm, followed by constructing multiple Gaussian processes over the parameter
space for efficient prediction of the means of the expected return at the MCMC
sample. The effectiveness of the proposed framework is demonstrated using a
simple dynamical system model with continuous state and action spaces, as well
as a more complex model for a metastatic melanoma gene regulatory network
observed through noisy synthetic gene expression data.

1

Introduction

Dynamic programming (DP) solves the optimal control problem for Markov Decision Processes
(MDPs) with known dynamics and finite state and action spaces. However, in complex applications
there is often uncertainty about the system dynamics. In addition, many practical problems have
large or continuous state and action spaces. Reinforcement learning is a powerful technique widely
used for adaptive control of MDPs with unknown dynamics [1]. Existing RL techniques developed
for MDPs with unknown dynamics rely on data that is acquired via interaction with the system or
via simulation. While this is feasible in areas such as robotics or speech recognition, in other applications such as medicine, materials science, and business, there is either a lack of reliable simulators
or inaccessibility to the real system due to practical limitations, including cost, ethical, and physical
considerations. For instance, recent advances in metagenomics and neuroscience call for the development of efficient intervention strategies for disease treatment. However, these systems are often
modeled with MDPs with continuous state and action spaces, with limited access to expensive data.
Thus, there is a need for control of systems with unknown dynamics and large or continuous state,
action, and parameter spaces in data-poor environments.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

