Third-order Smoothness Helps: Faster Stochastic
Optimization Algorithms for Finding Local Minima
Yaodong Yu⇤
Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22904
yy8ms@virginia.edu

Pan Xu⇤
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
panxu@cs.ucla.edu

Quanquan Gu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We propose stochastic optimization algorithms that can find local minima faster
than existing algorithms for nonconvex optimization problems, by exploiting the
third-order smoothness to escape non-degenerate saddle points more efficiently.
More specifically, the proposed algorithm only needs e
O(✏ 10/3 ) stochastic gradient evaluations to converge to an approximate
local minimum x, which satisfies
p
krf (x)k2  ✏ and min (r2 f (x))
✏ in unconstrained stochastic optimizae hides logarithm polynomial terms and constants. This improves
tion, where O(·)
upon the e
O(✏ 7/2 ) gradient complexity achieved by the state-of-the-art stochastic
e 1/6 ). Experiments on two
local minima finding algorithms by a factor of O(✏
nonconvex optimization problems demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm
and corroborate our theory.

1

Introduction

We study the following unconstrained stochastic optimization problem
(1.1)

min f (x) = E⇠⇠D [F (x; ⇠)],

x2Rd

where F (x; ⇠) : Rd ! R is a stochastic function and ⇠ is a random variable sampled from a fixed
distribution D. In particular, we are interested in nonconvex optimization where the expected function
f (x) is not convex. This kind of nonconvex optimization is ubiquitous in machine learning, especially
deep learning [24]. Finding a global minimum of nonconvex problem (1.1) is generally NP hard [18].
Nevertheless, for many nonconvex optimization problems in machine learning, a local minimum is
adequate and can be as good as a global minimum in terms of generalization performance, such as in
deep learning [10, 13].
In this paper, we aim to design efficient stochastic optimization algorithms that can find an approximate local minimum of (1.1), i.e., an (✏, ✏H )-second-order stationary point x defined as follows
krf (x)k2  ✏, and
⇤

min

r2 f (x)

✏H ,

Equal contribution.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

(1.2)

