Snap ML: A Hierarchical Framework for Machine
Learning

Celestine Dünner∗1 Thomas Parnell∗1∗
Dimitrios Sarigiannis1 Nikolas Ioannou1 Andreea Anghel1 Gummadi Ravi2
Madhusudanan Kandasamy2 Haralampos Pozidis1
1
IBM Research, Zurich, Switzerland
2
IBM Systems, Bangalore, India
{cdu,tpa,rig,nio,aan}@zurich.ibm.com
{ravigumm,madhusudanan}@in.ibm.com
hap@zurich.ibm.com

Abstract
We describe a new software framework for fast training of generalized linear
models. The framework, named Snap Machine Learning (Snap ML), combines
recent advances in machine learning systems and algorithms in a nested manner
to reflect the hierarchical architecture of modern computing systems. We prove
theoretically that such a hierarchical system can accelerate training in distributed
environments where intra-node communication is cheaper than inter-node communication. Additionally, we provide a review of the implementation of Snap ML
in terms of GPU acceleration, pipelining, communication patterns and software
architecture, highlighting aspects that were critical for achieving high performance.
We evaluate the performance of Snap ML in both single-node and multi-node environments, quantifying the benefit of the hierarchical scheme and the data streaming
functionality, and comparing with other widely-used machine learning software
frameworks. Finally, we present a logistic regression benchmark on the Criteo
Terabyte Click Logs dataset and show that Snap ML achieves the same test loss
an order of magnitude faster than any of the previously reported results, including
those obtained using TensorFlow and scikit-learn.

1

Introduction

The widespread adoption of machine learning and artificial intelligence has been, in part, driven by
the ever-increasing availability of data. Large datasets can enable training of more expressive models,
thus leading to higher quality insights. However, when the size of such datasets grows to billions of
training examples and/or features, the training of even relatively simple models becomes prohibitively
time consuming. Training can also become a bottleneck in real-time or close-to-real-time applications,
in which one’s ability to react to events as they happen and adapt models accordingly can be critical
even when the data itself is relatively small.
A growing number of small and medium enterprises rely on machine learning as part of their everyday
business. Such companies often lack the on-premises infrastructure required to perform the computeintensive workloads that are characteristic of the field. As a result, they may turn to cloud providers in
order to gain access to such resources. Since cloud resources are typically billed by the hour, the time
required to train machine learning models is directly related to outgoing costs. For such an enterprise
cloud user, the ability to train faster can have an immediate effect on their profit margin.
∗

equal contribution.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

