SING: Symbol-to-Instrument Neural Generator

Alexandre Défossez
Facebook AI Research
INRIA / ENS
PSL Research University
Paris, France
defossez@fb.com

Neil Zeghidour
Facebook AI Research
LSCP / ENS / EHESS / CNRS
INRIA / PSL Research University
Paris, France
neilz@fb.com

Léon Bottou
Facebook AI Research
New York, USA
leonb@fb.com

Nicolas Usunier
Facebook AI Research
Paris, France
usunier@fb.com

Francis Bach
INRIA
École Normale Supérieure
PSL Research University
francis.bach@ens.fr

Abstract
Recent progress in deep learning for audio synthesis opens the way to models that
directly produce the waveform, shifting away from the traditional paradigm of
relying on vocoders or MIDI synthesizers for speech or music generation. Despite
their successes, current state-of-the-art neural audio synthesizers such as WaveNet
and SampleRNN [24, 17] suffer from prohibitive training and inference times
because they are based on autoregressive models that generate audio samples one
at a time at a rate of 16kHz. In this work, we study the more computationally
efficient alternative of generating the waveform frame-by-frame with large strides.
We present SING, a lightweight neural audio synthesizer for the original task of
generating musical notes given desired instrument, pitch and velocity. Our model
is trained end-to-end to generate notes from nearly 1000 instruments with a single
decoder, thanks to a new loss function that minimizes the distances between the
log spectrograms of the generated and target waveforms. On the generalization
task of synthesizing notes for pairs of pitch and instrument not seen during training,
SING produces audio with significantly improved perceptual quality compared to a
state-of-the-art autoencoder based on WaveNet [4] as measured by a Mean Opinion
Score (MOS), and is about 32 times faster for training and 2, 500 times faster for
inference.

1

Introduction

The recent progress in deep learning for sequence generation has led to the emergence of audio
synthesis systems that directly generate the waveform, reaching state-of-the-art perceptual quality in
speech synthesis, and promising results for music generation. This represents a shift of paradigm with
respect to approaches that generate sequences of parameters to vocoders in text-to-speech systems
[21, 23, 19], or MIDI partition in music generation [8, 3, 10]. A commonality between the state-ofthe-art neural audio synthesis models is the use of discretized sample values, so that an audio sample
is predicted by a categorical distribution trained with a classification loss [24, 17, 18, 14]. Another
significant commonality is the use of autoregressive models that generate samples one-by-one, which
leads to prohibitive training and inference times [24, 17], or requires specialized implementations and
low-level code optimizations to run in real time [14]. An exception is parallel WaveNet [18] which
generates a sequence with a fully convolutional network for faster inference. However, the parallel
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

