Compact Generalized Non-local Network

Kaiyu Yue†,§

Ming Sun† Yuchen Yuan† Feng Zhou‡ Errui Ding† Fuxin Xu§
Baidu VIS ‡ Baidu Research § Central South University
{yuekaiyu, sunming05, yuanyuchen02, zhoufeng09, dingerrui}@baidu.com
fxxu@csu.edu.cn
†

Abstract
The non-local module [27] is designed for capturing long-range spatio-temporal
dependencies in images and videos. Although having shown excellent performance,
it lacks the mechanism to model the interactions between positions across channels,
which are of vital importance in recognizing fine-grained objects and actions. To
address this limitation, we generalize the non-local module and take the correlations
between the positions of any two channels into account. This extension utilizes the
compact representation for multiple kernel functions with Taylor expansion that
makes the generalized non-local module in a fast and low-complexity computation
flow. Moreover, we implement our generalized non-local method within channel groups to ease the optimization. Experimental results illustrate the clear-cut
improvements and practical applicability of the generalized non-local module on
both fine-grained object recognition and video classification. Code is available at:
https://github.com/KaiyuYue/cgnl-network.pytorch.

1

Introduction

Figure 1: Comparison between non-local (NL) and compact generalized non-local (CGNL) networks on
recognizing an action video of kicking the ball. Given the reference patch (green rectangle) in the first frame, we
visualize for each method the highly related responses in the other frames by thresholding the feature space.
CGNL network out-performs the original NL network in capturing the ball that is not only in long-range distance
from the reference patch but also corresponds to different channels in the feature map.

Capturing spatio-temporal dependencies between spatial pixels or temporal frames plays a key role in
the tasks of fine-grained object and action classification. Modeling such interactions among images
and videos is the major topic of various feature extraction techniques, including SIFT, LBP, Dense
Trajectory [26], etc. In the past few years, deep neural network automates the feature designing
pipeline by stacking multiple end-to-end convolutional or recurrent modules, where each of them
processes correlation within spatial or temporal local regions. In general, capturing the long-range
dependencies among images or videos still requires multiple stacking of these modules, which greatly
hinders the learning and inference efficiency. A recent work [16] also suggests that stacking more
layers cannot always increase the effective receptive fields to capture enough local relations.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

