The Description Length of Deep Learning Models

Léonard Blier
École Normale Supérieure
Paris, France
leonard.blier@normalesup.org

Yann Ollivier
Facebook Artificial Intelligence Research
Paris, France
yol@fb.com

Abstract
Solomonoff’s general theory of inference (Solomonoff, 1964) and the Minimum
Description Length principle (Grünwald, 2007; Rissanen, 2007) formalize Occam’s razor, and hold that a good model of data is a model that is good at losslessly
compressing the data, including the cost of describing the model itself. Deep neural networks might seem to go against this principle given the large number of
parameters to be encoded.
We demonstrate experimentally the ability of deep neural networks to compress
the training data even when accounting for parameter encoding. The compression
viewpoint originally motivated the use of variational methods in neural networks
(Hinton and Van Camp, 1993; Schmidhuber, 1997). Unexpectedly, we found that
these variational methods provide surprisingly poor compression bounds, despite
being explicitly built to minimize such bounds. This might explain the relatively
poor practical performance of variational methods in deep learning. On the other
hand, simple incremental encoding methods yield excellent compression values
on deep networks, vindicating Solomonoff’s approach.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has achieved remarkable results in many different areas (LeCun et al., 2015). Still, the
ability of deep models not to overfit despite their large number of parameters is not well understood.
To quantify the complexity of these models in light of their generalization ability, several metrics
beyond parameter-counting have been measured, such as the number of degrees of freedom of models (Gao and Jojic, 2016), or their intrinsic dimension (Li et al., 2018). These works concluded that
deep learning models are significantly simpler than their numbers of parameters might suggest.
In information theory and Minimum Description Length (MDL), learning a good model of the data
is recast as using the model to losslessly transmit the data in as few bits as possible. More complex
models will compress the data more, but the model must be transmitted as well. The overall codelength can be understood as a combination of quality-of-fit of the model (compressed data length),
together with the cost of encoding (transmitting) the model itself. For neural networks, the MDL
viewpoint goes back as far as (Hinton and Van Camp, 1993), which used a variational technique to
estimate the joint compressed length of data and parameters in a neural network model.
Compression is strongly related to generalization and practical performance. Standard sample complexity bounds (VC-dimension, PAC-Bayes...) are related to the compressed length of the data in
a model, and any compression scheme leads to generalization bounds (Blum and Langford, 2003).
Specifically for deep learning, (Arora et al., 2018) showed that compression leads to generalization bounds (see also (Dziugaite and Roy, 2017)). Several other deep learning methods have been
inspired by information theory and the compression viewpoint. In unsupervised learning, autoencoders and especially variational autoencoders (Kingma and Welling, 2013) are compression methods of the data (Ollivier, 2014). In supervised learning, the information bottleneck method studies
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

