Confounding-Robust Policy Improvement
Nathan Kallus
Cornell University and Cornell Tech
New York, NY
kallus@cornell.edu

Angela Zhou
Cornell University and Cornell Tech
New York, NY
az434@cornell.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of learning personalized decision policies from observational
data while accounting for possible unobserved confounding in the data-generating
process. Unlike previous approaches that assume unconfoundedness, i.e., no
unobserved confounders affected both treatment assignment and outcomes, we
calibrate policy learning for realistic violations of this unverifiable assumption
with uncertainty sets motivated by sensitivity analysis in causal inference. Our
framework for confounding-robust policy improvement optimizes the minimax
regret of a candidate policy against a baseline or reference “status quo” policy,
over an uncertainty set around nominal propensity weights. We prove that if the
uncertainty set is well-specified, robust policy learning can do no worse than the
baseline, and only improve if the data supports it. We characterize the adversarial
subproblem and use efficient algorithmic solutions to optimize over parametrized
spaces of decision policies such as logistic treatment assignment. We assess our
methods on synthetic data and a large clinical trial, demonstrating that confounded
selection can hinder policy learning and lead to unwarranted harm, while our robust
approach guarantees safety and focuses on well-evidenced improvement.

1

Introduction

The problem of learning personalized decision policies to study “what works and for whom” in areas
such as medicine and e-commerce often endeavors to draw insights from observational data, since
data from randomized experiments may be scarce and costly or unethical to acquire [12, 3, 30, 6,
13]. These and other approaches for drawing conclusions from observational data in the NeymanRubin potential outcomes framework generally appeal to methodologies such as inverse-propensity
weighting, matching, and balancing, which compare outcomes across groups constructed such that
assignment is almost as if at random [23]. These methods rely on the controversial assumption of
unconfoundedness, which requires that the data are sufficiently informative of treatment assignment
such that no unobserved confounders jointly affect treatment assignment and individual response [24].
This key assumption may be made to hold ex ante by directly controlling the treatment assignment
policy as sometimes done in online advertising [4], but in other domains of key interest such as
personalized medicine where electronic medical records (EMRs) are increasingly being analyzed ex
post, unconfoundedness may never truly hold in fact.
Assuming unconfoundedness, also called ignorability, conditional exogeneity, or selection on observables, is controversial because it is fundamentally unverifiable since the counterfactual distribution
is not identified from the data, thus rendering any insights from observational studies vulnerable to
this fundamental critique [11]. If the data is truly unconfounded, it would be known by construction
because it would come from an RCT or logged bandit; any data whose unconfoundedness is uncertain
must be confounded to some extent. The growing availability of richer observational data such as
found in EMRs renders unconfoundedness more plausible, yet it still may never be fully satisfied in
practice. Because unconfoundedness may fail to hold, existing policy learning methods that assume
it can lead to personalized decision policies that seek to exploit individual-level effects that are not
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

