Are ResNets Provably Better than Linear Predictors?

Ohad Shamir
Department of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics
Weizmann Institute of Science
Rehovot, Israel
ohad.shamir@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
A residual network (or ResNet) is a standard deep neural net architecture, with stateof-the-art performance across numerous applications. The main premise of ResNets
is that they allow the training of each layer to focus on fitting just the residual of
the previous layer’s output and the target output. Thus, we should expect that the
trained network is no worse than what we can obtain if we remove the residual
layers and train a shallower network instead. However, due to the non-convexity
of the optimization problem, it is not at all clear that ResNets indeed achieve this
behavior, rather than getting stuck at some arbitrarily poor local minimum. In this
paper, we rigorously prove that arbitrarily deep, nonlinear residual units indeed
exhibit this behavior, in the sense that the optimization landscape contains no local
minima with value above what can be obtained with a linear predictor (namely
a 1-layer network). Notably, we show this under minimal or no assumptions on
the precise network architecture, data distribution, or loss function used. We also
provide a quantitative analysis of approximate stationary points for this problem.
Finally, we show that with a certain tweak to the architecture, training the network
with standard stochastic gradient descent achieves an objective value close or better
than any linear predictor.

1

Introduction

Residual networks (or ResNets) are a popular class of artificial neural networks, providing state-ofthe-art performance across numerous applications [He et al., 2016a,b, Kim et al., 2016, Xie et al.,
2017, Xiong et al., 2017]. Unlike vanilla feedforward neural networks, ResNets are characterized by
skip connections, in which the output of one layer is directly added to the output of some following
layer. Mathematically, whereas feedforward neural networks can be expressed as stacking layers of
the form
y = gΦ (x) ,
(where (x, y) is the input-output pair and Φ are the tunable parameters of the function gΦ ), ResNets
are built from “residual units” of the form y = f (h(x) + gΦ (x)), where f, h are fixed functions. In
fact, it is common to let f, h be the identity [He et al., 2016b], in which case each unit takes the form
y = x + gΦ (x) .

(1)

Intuitively, this means that in each layer, the training of fΦ can focus on fitting just the “residual”
of the target y given x, rather than y itself. In particular, adding more depth should not harm
performance, since we can effectively eliminate layers by tuning Φ such that gΦ is the zero function.
Due to this property, residual networks have proven to be very effective in training extremely deep
networks, with hundreds of layers or more.
Despite their widespread empirical success, our rigorous theoretical understanding of training residual
networks is very limited. Most recent theoretical works on optimization in deep learning (e.g.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

