Neural Nearest Neighbors Networks

Tobias Plötz
Stefan Roth
Department of Computer Science, TU Darmstadt

Abstract
Non-local methods exploiting the self-similarity of natural signals have been well
studied, for example in image analysis and restoration. Existing approaches,
however, rely on k-nearest neighbors (KNN) matching in a fixed feature space.
The main hurdle in optimizing this feature space w. r. t. application performance
is the non-differentiability of the KNN selection rule. To overcome this, we
propose a continuous deterministic relaxation of KNN selection that maintains
differentiability w. r. t. pairwise distances, but retains the original KNN as the limit
of a temperature parameter approaching zero. To exploit our relaxation, we propose
the neural nearest neighbors block (N3 block), a novel non-local processing layer
that leverages the principle of self-similarity and can be used as building block
in modern neural network architectures.1 We show its effectiveness for the set
reasoning task of correspondence classification as well as for image restoration,
including image denoising and single image super-resolution, where we outperform
strong convolutional neural network (CNN) baselines and recent non-local models
that rely on KNN selection in hand-chosen features spaces.

1

Introduction

The ongoing surge of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) has revolutionized many areas of machine learning and its applications by enabling unprecedented predictive accuracy. Most network
architectures focus on local processing by combining convolutional layers and element-wise operations. In order to draw upon information from a sufficiently broad context, several strategies,
including dilated convolutions [49] or hourglass-shaped architectures [27], have been explored to
increase the receptive field size. Yet, they trade off context size for localization accuracy. Hence, for
many dense prediction tasks, e. g. in image analysis and restoration, stacking ever more convolutional
blocks has remained the prevailing choice to obtain bigger receptive fields [20, 22, 31, 39, 50].
In contrast, traditional algorithms in image restoration increase the receptive field size via non-local
processing, leveraging the self-similarity of natural signals. They exploit that image structures tend to
re-occur within the same image [53], giving rise to a strong prior for image restoration [28]. Hence,
methods like non-local means [6] or BM3D [9] aggregate information across the whole image to
restore a local patch. Here, matching patches are usually selected based on some hand-crafted notion
of similarity, e. g. the Euclidean distance between patches of input intensities. Incorporating this kind
of non-local processing into neural network architectures for image restoration has only very recently
been considered [23, 47]. These methods replace the filtering of matched patches with a trainable
network, while the feature space on which k-nearest neighbors selection is carried out is taken to be
fixed. But why should we rely on a predefined matching space in an otherwise end-to-end trainable
neural network architecture? In this paper, we demonstrate that we can improve non-local processing
considerably by also optimizing the feature space for matching.
The main technical challenge is imposed by the non-differentiability of the KNN selection rule. To
overcome this, we make three contributions. First, we propose a continuous deterministic relaxation
1

Code and pretrained models are available at https://github.com/visinf/n3net/.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

