Sketching Method for Large Scale
Combinatorial Inference
Will Wei Sun
Department of Management Science
University of Miami
wsun@bus.miami.edu

Junwei Lu
Department of Biostatistics
Harvard University
junweilu@hsph.harvard.edu

Han Liu
Department of Computer Science
Northwestern University
hanliu@northwestern.edu

Abstract
We present computationally efficient algorithms to test various combinatorial structures of large-scale graphical models. In order to test the hypotheses on their
topological structures, we propose two adjacency matrix sketching frameworks:
neighborhood sketching and subgraph sketching. The neighborhood sketching
algorithm is proposed to test the connectivity of graphical models. This algorithm
randomly subsamples vertices and conducts neighborhood regression and screening.
The global sketching algorithm is proposed to test the topological properties requiring exponential computation complexity, especially testing the chromatic number
and the maximum clique. This algorithm infers the corresponding property based
on the sampled subgraph. Our algorithms are shown to substantially accelerate the
computation of existing methods. We validate our theory and method through both
synthetic simulations and a real application in neuroscience.

1

Introduction

Large-scale statistical inference has become a significant problem in era of big data especially in
many scientific applications where both the scale of hypotheses to test and the sample size of data
sets are significantly large [9]. One of the most important setting where the large-scale inference is
applied to is the high dimensional graphical models, since they are useful to quantify the conditional
dependency structure of a list of variables such as genes and brain neurons [20, 27].
There are two major challenges in the large-scale inference: statistical validity and computation
efficiency. Most of the literature focus on the statistical validity of testing a large set of hypotheses.
One of the criterion is to control the family-wise error of multiple hypothesis testing such that
there is no type-II error [6, 26, 7]. In specific, [25] and [18] study the family-wise error control on
the multiple hypotheses on the existence of edges in the graphical models. The other widely used
statistical criterion in the large-scale hypothesis testing literature is the false discovery rate which
aims to control the ratio between true discoveries and the number of hypotheses to test [3, 8, 2].
These large-scale inferential methods aim at inferring the edge-wise structure of graphs, while in
many real applications it is more important to study the global combinatorial structures of graphs, for
example, graph connectivity or maximal degree of the graph. [23] introduced statistical testings of
the combinatorial structure of the underlying graph. To conduct the statistical testing, they proposed
a two-step null-alternative witness technique by first identifying a minimal structure witnessing the
alternative hypothesis, and then certifying the presence of this structure in the graph. Both of two
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

