Out-of-Distribution Detection using Multiple
Semantic Label Representations

Gabi Shalev
Bar-Ilan University, Israel
shalev.gabi@gmail.com

Yossi Adi
Bar-Ilan University, Israel
yossiadidrum@gmail.com

Joseph Keshet
Bar-Ilan University, Israel
jkeshet@cs.biu.ac.il

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks are powerful models that attained remarkable results on a
variety of tasks. These models are shown to be extremely efficient when training
and test data are drawn from the same distribution. However, it is not clear how a
network will act when it is fed with an out-of-distribution example. In this work,
we consider the problem of out-of-distribution detection in neural networks. We
propose to use multiple semantic dense representations instead of sparse representation as the target label. Specifically, we propose to use several word representations
obtained from different corpora or architectures as target labels. We evaluated
the proposed model on computer vision, and speech commands detection tasks
and compared it to previous methods. Results suggest that our method compares
favorably with previous work. Besides, we present the efficiency of our approach
for detecting wrongly classified and adversarial examples.

1

Introduction

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have gained lots of success after enabling several breakthroughs in
notably challenging problems such as image classification [12], speech recognition [1] and machine
translation [4]. These models are known to generalize well on inputs that are drawn from the same
distribution as of the examples that were used to train the model [43]. In real-world scenarios, the
input instances to the model can be drawn from different distributions, and in these cases, DNNs
tend to perform poorly. Nevertheless, it was observed that DNNs often produce high confidence
predictions for unrecognizable inputs [33] or even for a random noise [13]. Moreover, recent works
in the field of adversarial examples generation show that due to small input perturbations, DNNs tend
to produce high probabilities while being greatly incorrect [11, 6, 17]. When considering AI Saftey,
it is essential to train DNNs that are aware of the uncertainty in the predictions [2]. Since DNNs are
ubiquitous, present in nearly all segments of technology industry from self-driving cars to automated
dialog agents, it becomes critical to design classifiers that can express uncertainty when predicting
out-of-distribution inputs.
Recently, several studies proposed different approaches to handle this uncertainty [13, 25, 23, 19].
In [13] the authors proposed a baseline method to detect out-of-distribution examples based on the
models’ output probabilities. The work in [25] extended the baseline method by using temperature
scaling of the softmax function and adding small controlled perturbations to inputs [14]. In [23] it
was suggested to add another term to the loss so as to minimize the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence
between the models’ output for out-of-distribution samples and the uniform distribution.
Ensemble of classifiers with optional adversarial training was proposed in [19] for detecting out-ofdistribution examples. Despite their high detection rate, ensemble methods require the optimization of
several models and therefore are resource intensive. Additionally, each of the classifiers participated
in the ensemble is trained independently and the representation is not shared among them.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

