Efficient Neural Network Robustness Certification
with General Activation Functions
Huan Zhang1,†,∗ Tsui-Wei Weng2,† Pin-Yu Chen3 Cho-Jui Hsieh1 Luca Daniel2
1
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles CA 90095
2
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139
3
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598
huan@huan-zhang.com, twweng@mit.edu
pin-yu.chen@ibm.com, chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu, dluca@mit.edu

Abstract
Finding minimum distortion of adversarial examples and thus certifying robustness
in neural network classifiers for given data points is known to be a challenging
problem. Nevertheless, recently it has been shown to be possible to give a nontrivial certified lower bound of minimum adversarial distortion, and some recent
progress has been made towards this direction by exploiting the piece-wise linear
nature of ReLU activations. However, a generic robustness certification for general
activation functions still remains largely unexplored. To address this issue, in
this paper we introduce CROWN, a general framework to certify robustness of
neural networks with general activation functions for given input data points. The
novelty in our algorithm consists of bounding a given activation function with linear
and quadratic functions, hence allowing it to tackle general activation functions
including but not limited to four popular choices: ReLU, tanh, sigmoid and arctan.
In addition, we facilitate the search for a tighter certified lower bound by adaptively
selecting appropriate surrogates for each neuron activation. Experimental results
show that CROWN on ReLU networks can notably improve the certified lower
bounds compared to the current state-of-the-art algorithm Fast-Lin, while having
comparable computational efficiency. Furthermore, CROWN also demonstrates
its effectiveness and flexibility on networks with general activation functions,
including tanh, sigmoid and arctan.

1

Introduction

While neural networks (NNs) have achieved remarkable performance and accomplished unprecedented breakthroughs in many machine learning tasks, recent studies have highlighted their lack of
robustness against adversarial perturbations [1, 2]. For example, in image learning tasks such as object
classification [3, 4, 5, 6] or content captioning [7], visually indistinguishable adversarial examples can
be easily crafted from natural images to alter a NN’s prediction result. Beyond the white-box attack
setting where the target model is entirely transparent, visually imperceptible adversarial perturbations
can also be generated in the black-box setting by only using the prediction results of the target model
[8, 9, 10, 11]. In addition, real-life adversarial examples have been made possible through the lens
of realizing physical perturbations [12, 13, 14]. As NNs are becoming a core technique deployed in
a wide range of applications, including safety-critical tasks, certifying robustness of a NN against
adversarial perturbations has become an important research topic in machine learning.
∗

Work done during internship at IBM Research. † Equal contribution.
Correspondence to Huan Zhang <huan@huan-zhang.com> and Tsui-Wei Weng <twweng@mit.edu>

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

