Learning Deep Disentangled Embeddings
With the F-Statistic Loss
Karl Ridgeway
Department of Computer Science
University of Colorado
and Sensory, Inc.
Boulder, Colorado
karl.ridgeway@colorado.edu

Michael C. Mozer
Department of Computer Science
University of Colorado
Boulder, Colorado
mozer@colorado.edu

Abstract
Deep-embedding methods aim to discover representations of a domain that make
explicit the domain’s class structure and thereby support few-shot learning. Disentangling methods aim to make explicit compositional or factorial structure. We
combine these two active but independent lines of research and propose a new
paradigm suitable for both goals. We propose and evaluate a novel loss function
based on the F statistic, which describes the separation of two or more distributions. By ensuring that distinct classes are well separated on a subset of embedding
dimensions, we obtain embeddings that are useful for few-shot learning. By not
requiring separation on all dimensions, we encourage the discovery of disentangled representations. Our embedding method matches or beats state-of-the-art, as
evaluated by performance on recall@k and few-shot learning tasks. Our method
also obtains performance superior to a variety of alternatives on disentangling, as
evaluated by two key properties of a disentangled representation: modularity and
explicitness. The goal of our work is to obtain more interpretable, manipulable,
and generalizable deep representations of concepts and categories.
The literature on deep embeddings (Chopra et al., 2005; Yi et al., 2014a; Schroff et al., 2015; Ustinova
& Lempitsky, 2016; Song et al., 2016; Vinyals et al., 2016; Snell et al., 2017) addresses the problem
of discovering representations of a domain that make explicit a particular property of the domain
instances. We refer to this property as class or category or identity. For example, a set of animal
images might be embedded such that animals of the same species lie closer to one another in the
embedding space than to animals of a different species. Deep-embedding methods are trained using
a class-aware oracle which can be queried to indicate whether two instances are of the same or
different class. Because this paradigm can handle an arbitrary number of classes, and because the
complete set of classes does not have to be specified in advance—as they would be in an ordinary
classifier—deep embeddings are useful for few-shot learning. A small set of examples of novel
classes can be projected into the embedding space, and an unknown instance can be classified by its
proximity to the embeddings of the labeled examples.
Similar to deep embeddings, the literature on disentangling attempts to discover representations of a
set of instances, but rather than making explicit a single property of the instances (class), the goal
is to make explicit multiple, independent properties, which we refer to as factors. For example, a
disentangled representation of animals might include factors indicating its size, length of its ears, and
whether it has feet or fins. We will later be more rigorous in defining a disentangled representation,
but for now we operate with the informal notion that the factors form a compositional or distributed
representation such that with relatively few factors and relatively few values of each factor, the
factor values can be recombined to span the set of instances. Disentangling has been explored using
either a fully unsupervised procedure (Chen et al., 2016; Higgins et al., 2017) or a semi-supervised
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

