Learning Beam Search Policies via Imitation
Learning

Renato Negrinho1
Matthew R. Gormley1
Geoffrey J. Gordon1,2
1
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University
2
Microsoft Research
{negrinho,mgormley,ggordon}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Beam search is widely used for approximate decoding in structured prediction
problems. Models often use a beam at test time but ignore its existence at train
time, and therefore do not explicitly learn how to use the beam. We develop an
unifying meta-algorithm for learning beam search policies using imitation learning.
In our setting, the beam is part of the model, and not just an artifact of approximate
decoding. Our meta-algorithm captures existing learning algorithms and suggests
new ones. It also lets us show novel no-regret guarantees for learning beam search
policies.

1

Introduction

Beam search is the dominant method for approximate decoding in structured prediction tasks such
as machine translation [1], speech recognition [2], image captioning [3], and syntactic parsing [4].
Most models that use beam search at test time ignore the beam at train time and instead are learned
via methods like likelihood maximization. They therefore suffer from two issues that we jointly
address in this work: (1) learning ignores the existence of the beam and (2) learning uses only oracle
trajectories. These issues lead to mismatches between the train and test settings that negatively
affect performance. Our work addresses these two issues simultaneously by using imitation learning
to develop novel beam-aware algorithms with no-regret guarantees. Our analysis is inspired by
DAgger [5].
Beam-aware learning algorithms use beam search at both train and test time. These contrast with
common two-stage learning algorithms that, first, at train time, learn a probabilistic model via
maximum likelihood, and then, at test time, use beam search for approximate decoding. The insight
behind beam-aware algorithms is that, if the model uses beam search at test time, then the model
should be learned using beam search at train time. Resulting beam-aware methods run beam search
at train time (i.e., roll-in) to collect losses that are then used to update the model parameters. The first
proposed beam-aware algorithms are perceptron-based, updating the parameters either when the best
hypothesis does not score first in the beam [6], or when it falls out of the beam [7].
While there is substantial prior work on beam-aware algorithms, none of the existing algorithms
expose the learned model to its own consecutive mistakes at train time. When rolling in with the
learned model, if a transition leads to a beam without the correct hypothesis, existing algorithms
either stop [6, 8, 9] or reset to a beam with the correct hypothesis [7, 10, 11].1 Additionally, existing
beam-aware algorithms either do not have theoretical guarantees or only have perceptron-style
guarantees [10]. We are the first to prove no-regret guarantees for an algorithm to learn beam search
policies.
1
[12] take a different approach by training with a differentiable approximation of beam search, but decode
with the standard (non-differentiable) search algorithm at test time.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

