Bayesian multi-domain learning for cancer subtype
discovery from next-generation sequencing count data

Ehsan Hajiramezanali
Texas A&M University
ehsanr@tamu.edu

Siamak Zamani Dadaneh
Texas A&M University
siamak@tamu.edu

Mingyuan Zhou
University of Texas at Austin
Mingyuan.Zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu

Alireza Karbalayghareh
Texas A&M University
alireza.kg@tamu.edu
Xiaoning Qian
Texas A&M University
xqian@ece.tamu.edu

Abstract
Precision medicine aims for personalized prognosis and therapeutics by utilizing recent genome-scale high-throughput profiling techniques, including next-generation
sequencing (NGS). However, translating NGS data faces several challenges. First,
NGS count data are often overdispersed, requiring appropriate modeling. Second,
compared to the number of involved molecules and system complexity, the number
of available samples for studying complex disease, such as cancer, is often limited, especially considering disease heterogeneity. The key question is whether
we may integrate available data from all different sources or domains to achieve
reproducible disease prognosis based on NGS count data. In this paper, we develop
a Bayesian Multi-Domain Learning (BMDL) model that derives domain-dependent
latent representations of overdispersed count data based on hierarchical negative
binomial factorization for accurate cancer subtyping even if the number of samples
for a specific cancer type is small. Experimental results from both our simulated and
NGS datasets from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) demonstrate the promising
potential of BMDL for effective multi-domain learning without “negative transfer”
effects often seen in existing multi-task learning and transfer learning methods.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we study Bayesian Multi-Domain Learning (BMDL) for analyzing count data from
next-generation sequencing (NGS) experiments, with the goal of enhancing cancer subtyping in the
target domain with a limited number of NGS samples by leveraging surrogate data from other domains,
for example relevant data from other well-studied cancer types. Due to both biological and technical
limitations, it is often difficult and costly, if not prohibitive, to collect enough samples when studying
complex diseases, especially considering the complexity of disease processes. When studying one
cancer type, there are typically at most hundreds of samples available with tens of thousands of
genes/molecules involved, including in the case of the arguably largest cancer consortium, The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA) [The Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network et al., 2008]. Considering the
heterogeneity in cancer and the potential cost of clinical studies and profiling, we usually have only
less than one hundred samples, which often does not lead to generalizable results. Our goal here is to
develop effective ways to derive predictive feature representations using available NGS data from
different sources to help accurate and reproducible cancer subtyping.
The assumption of having only one domain is restrictive in many practical scenarios due to the
nonstationarity of the underlying system and data heterogeneity. Multi-task learning (MTL), transfer
learning (TL), and domain adaptation (DA) techniques have recently been utilized to leverage the
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

