Semi-Supervised Learning with Declaratively
Specified Entropy Constraints

Haitian Sun
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
haitians@cs.cmu.edu
Lidong Bing∗
R&D Center Singapore
Machine Intelligence Technology
Alibaba DAMO Academy
l.bing@alibaba-inc.com

William W. Cohen
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
wcohen@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We propose a technique for declaratively specifying strategies for semi-supervised
learning (SSL). SSL methods based on different assumptions perform differently
on different tasks, which leads to difficulties applying them in practice. In this
paper, we propose to use entropy to unify many types of constraints. Our method
can be used to easily specify ensembles of semi-supervised learners, as well
as agreement constraints and entropic regularization constraints between these
learners, and can be used to model both well-known heuristics such as co-training,
and novel domain-specific heuristics. Besides, our model is flexible as to the
underlying learning mechanism. Compared to prior frameworks for specifying
SSL techniques, our technique achieves consistent improvements on a suite of
well-studied SSL benchmarks, and obtains a new state-of-the-art result on a difficult
relation extraction task.

1

Introduction

Many semi-supervised learning (SSL) methods are based on regularizers which impose “soft constraints” on how the learned classifier will behave on unlabeled data. For example, logistic regression
with entropy regularization [11] and transductive SVMs [13] constrain the classifier to make confident
predictions at unlabeled points; the NELL system [7] imposes consistency constraints based on an
ontology of types and relations; and graph-based SSL approaches require that the instances associated
with the endpoints of an edge have similar labels [31, 1, 25] or embedded representations [28, 30, 14].
Certain other weakly-supervised methods also can be viewed as constraining predictions made by a
classifier: for instance, in distantly-supervised information extraction, a useful constraint requires
that the classifier, when applied to the set S of mentions of an entity pair that is a member of relation
r, classifies at least one mention in S as a positive instance of r [12].
Unfortunately, although many specific SSL constraints have been proposed, there is little consensus
as to which constraint should be used in which setting, so determining which SSL approach to use
on a specific task remains an experimental question—and one which requires substantial effort to
answer, since different SSL strategies are often embedded in different learning systems. To address
∗

This work was mainly done when Lidong Bing was working at Tencent AI Lab.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

