Contrastive Learning from Pairwise
Measurements
Yi Chen† Zhuoran Yang‡ Yuchen Xie† Zhaoran Wang†
†
‡
Northwestern University
Princeton University
{yichen2016, ycxie}@u.northwestern.edu
zy6@princeton.edu
zhaoran.wang@northwestern.edu

Abstract
Learning from pairwise measurements naturally arises from many applications,
such as rank aggregation, ordinal embedding, and crowdsourcing. However, most
existing models and algorithms are susceptible to potential model misspecification.
In this paper, we study a semiparametric model where the pairwise measurements
follow a natural exponential family distribution with an unknown base measure.
Such a semiparametric model includes various popular parametric models, such
as the Bradley-Terry-Luce model and the paired cardinal model, as special cases.
To estimate this semiparametric model without specifying the base measure, we
propose a data augmentation technique to create virtual examples, which enables
us to define a contrastive estimator. In particular, we prove that such a contrastive
estimator is invariant to model misspecification within the natural exponential
family, and moreover, attains the optimal statistical rate of convergence up to a
logarithmic factor. We provide numerical experiments to corroborate our theory.

1

Introduction

Learning from pairwise measurements is a fundamental problem which arises in many real-world
scenarios, such as the customers’ preferences among a set of alternative products, the performance of
athletes in a tournament, and the allocation of resources among a set of competing alternatives. In
this paper, we consider the setting where the users perform evaluations on alternative items based on
pairwise comparisons. That is, the data are generated by the preferences of the users on item pairs
randomly selected from the set of alternatives. Various models and estimators have been proposed to
study the pairwise measurements problem. For example, the Bradley-Terry-Luce Model (Bradley
and Terry, 1952) uses Bernoulli distributions with parameters quantifying the users’ preferences on
alternative items to explain the users’ choices. In this case, the maximum likelihood approach can
be used to estimate the model parameters. In spite of the empirical success in many applications,
most of the existing models and the corresponding estimators are based on specific distributions of
pairwise measurements, whose correctness hinges on that the models are correctly specified. However,
in practice, without the knowledge of the true model, applying these methods might incur huge
estimation errors. To alleviate this problem, in this paper, we consider a semiparametric model for
pairwise comparison which incorporates a broad class of distributions of the pairwise measurements,
and contains various popular parametric models, such as the Bradley-Terry-Luce model and the paired
cardinal model (Gopalan et al., 2014), as special cases. Specifically, we assume that the pairwise
measurements follow a natural exponential family distribution that is parametrized by a underlying
score matrix. The underlying score matrix quantifies the users’ evaluations on different items. In
addition, to characterize the similarities between users and items, we further assume that underlying
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

