Generalizing Tree Probability Estimation via
Bayesian Networks

Cheng Zhang
Computational Biology Program
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
Seattle, WA 98109
chengz23@fredhutch.org

Frederick A. Matsen IV
Computational Biology Program
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
Seattle, WA 98109
matsen@fredhutch.org

Abstract
Probability estimation is one of the fundamental tasks in statistics and machine
learning. However, standard methods for probability estimation on discrete objects
do not handle object structure in a satisfactory manner. In this paper, we derive a
general Bayesian network formulation for probability estimation on leaf-labeled
trees that enables flexible approximations which can generalize beyond observations. We show that efficient algorithms for learning Bayesian networks can be
easily extended to probability estimation on this challenging structured space. Experiments on both synthetic and real data show that our methods greatly outperform
the current practice of using the empirical distribution, as well as a previous effort
for probability estimation on trees.

1

Introduction

Leaf-labeled trees, where labels are associated with the observed variables, are extensively used in
probabilistic graphical models. A typical example is the phylogenetic leaf-labeled tree, which is
the fundamental structure for modeling the evolutionary history of a family of genes [Felsenstein,
2003, Friedman et al., 2002]. Inferring a phylogenetic tree based on a set of DNA sequences under a
probabilistic model of nucleotide substitutions has been one of the central problems in computational
biology, with a wide range of applications from genomic epidemiology [Neher and Bedford, 2015]
to conservation genetics [DeSalle and Amato, 2004]. To account for the phylogenetic uncertainty,
Bayesian approaches are adopted [Huelsenbeck et al., 2001] and Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
[Yang and Rannala, 1997, Mau et al., 1999, Huelsenbeck and Ronquist, 2001] is commonly used to
sample from the posterior of phylogenetic trees. Posterior probabilities of phylogenetic trees are then
typically estimated with simple sample relative frequencies (SRF), based on those MCMC samples.
While classical, this empirical approach is unsatisfactory for tree posterior estimation due to the
combinatorially exploding size of tree space. Specifically, SRF does not support trees beyond
observed samples (i.e., simply sets the probabilities of unsampled trees to zero), and is prone to
unstable estimates for low-probability trees. As a result, reliable estimations using SRF usually
require impractically large sample sizes. Previous work [Höhna and Drummond, 2012, Larget,
2013] attempted to remedy these problems by harnessing the similarity among trees and proposed
several probability estimators using MCMC samples based on conditional independence of separated
subtrees. Although these estimators do extend to unsampled trees, the conditional independence
assumption therein is often too strong to provide accurate approximations for posteriors inferred from
real data [Whidden and Matsen, 2015].
In this paper, we present a general framework for tree probability estimation given a collection of
trees (e.g., MCMC samples) by introducing a novel structure called subsplit Bayesian networks
(SBNs). This structure provides rich distributions over the entire tree space and hence differs from
existing applications of Bayesian networks in phylogenetic inference [e.g. Strimmer and Moulton,
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

