Wasserstein Variational Inference
Luca Ambrogioni*
Radboud University
l.ambrogioni@donders.ru.nl
Yağmur Güçlütürk
Radboud University
y.gucluturk@donders.ru.nl

Umut Güçlü*
Radboud University
u.guclu@donders.ru.nl

Max Hinne
University of Amsterdam
m.hinne@uva.nl

Eric Maris
Radboud University
e.maris@donders.ru.nl

Marcel A. J. van Gerven
Radboud University
m.vangerven@donders.ru.nl

Abstract
This paper introduces Wasserstein variational inference, a new form of approximate Bayesian inference based on optimal transport theory. Wasserstein variational
inference uses a new family of divergences that includes both f-divergences and the
Wasserstein distance as special cases. The gradients of the Wasserstein variational
loss are obtained by backpropagating through the Sinkhorn iterations. This technique results in a very stable likelihood-free training method that can be used with
implicit distributions and probabilistic programs. Using the Wasserstein variational
inference framework, we introduce several new forms of autoencoders and test their
robustness and performance against existing variational autoencoding techniques.

1

Introduction

Variational Bayesian inference is gaining a central role in machine learning. Modern stochastic
variational techniques can be easily implemented using differentiable programming frameworks
[1–3]. As a consequence, complex Bayesian inference is becoming almost as user friendly as deep
learning [4, 5]. This is in sharp contrast with old-school variational methods that required modelspecific mathematical derivations and imposed strong constraints on the possible family of models
and variational distributions. Given the rapidness of this transition it is not surprising that modern
variational inference research is still influenced by some legacy effects from the days when analytical
tractability was the main concern. One of the most salient examples of this is the central role of
the (reverse) KL divergence [6, 7]. While several other divergence measures have been suggested
[8–12], the reverse KL divergence still dominates both research and applications. Recently, optimal
transport divergences such as the Wasserstein distance [13, 14] have gained substantial popularity
in the generative modeling literature as they can be shown to be well-behaved in several situations
where the KL divergence is either infinite or undefined [15–18]. For example, the distribution of
natural images is thought to span a sub-manifold of the original pixel space [15]. In these situations
Wasserstein distances are considered to be particularly appropriate because they can be used for
fitting degenerate distributions that cannot be expressed in terms of densities [15].
In this paper we introduce the use of optimal transport methods in variational Bayesian inference. To
this end, we define the new c-Wasserstein family of divergences, which includes both Wasserstein
*

These authors contributed equally to this paper.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

