Causal Inference with Noisy and Missing Covariates
via Matrix Factorization
Nathan Kallus∗

Xiaojie Mao∗

Madeleine Udell∗

Cornell University
{kallus, xm77, udell}@cornell.edu

Abstract
Valid causal inference in observational studies often requires controlling for confounders. However, in practice measurements of confounders may be noisy, and
can lead to biased estimates of causal effects. We show that we can reduce bias
induced by measurement noise using a large number of noisy measurements of
the underlying confounders. We propose the use of matrix factorization to infer
the confounders from noisy covariates. This flexible and principled framework
adapts to missing values, accommodates a wide variety of data types, and can
enhance a wide variety of causal inference methods. We bound the error for the
induced average treatment effect estimator and show it is consistent in a linear
regression setting, using Exponential Family Matrix Completion preprocessing. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed procedure in numerical experiments
with both synthetic data and real clinical data.

1

Introduction

Estimating the causal effect of an intervention is a fundamental goal across many domains. Examples
include evaluating the effectiveness of recommender systems [1], identifying the effect of therapies on
patients’ health [2] and understanding the impact of compulsory schooling on earnings [3]. However,
this task is notoriously difficult in observatonal studies due to the presence of confounders: variables
that affect both the intervention and the outcomes. For example, intelligence level can influence both
students’ decisions regarding whether to go to college, and their earnings later on. Students who
choose to go to college may have higher intelligence than those who do not. As a result, the observed
increase in earnings associated with attending college is confounded with the effect of intelligence
and thus cannot faithfully represent the causal effect of college education.
One standard way to avoid such confounding effect is to control for all confounders [4]. However,
this solution poses practical difficulties. On the one hand, an exhaustive list of confounders is not
known a priori, so investigators usually adjust for a large number of covariates for fear of missing
important confounders. On the other hand, measurement noise may abound in the collected data:
some confounder measurements may be contaminated with noise (e.g., data recording error), while
other confounders may not be amenable to direct measurements and instead admit only proxy
measurements. For example, we may use an IQ test score as a proxy for intelligence. It is well
known that using proxies in place of the true confounders leads to biased causal effect estimates
[5, 6, 7]. However, we show in a linear regression setting that the bias due to measurement noise
can be effectively alleviated by using many proxies for the underlying confounders (Section 2.2).
For example, in addition to IQ test score, we may also use coursework grades and other academic
achievements to characterize the intelligence. Intuitively, using more proxies may allow for a more
accurate reconstruction of the confounder and thus may facilitate more accurate causal inference.
∗

Alphabetical order

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

