Multiplicative Weights Updates with Constant
Step-Size in Graphical Constant-Sum Games

Yun Kuen Cheung ∗
Singapore University of Technology and Design
Singapore
yunkuen_cheung@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Since Multiplicative Weights (MW) updates are the discrete analogue of the continuous Replicator Dynamics (RD), some researchers had expected their qualitative
behaviours would be similar. We show that this is false in the context of graphical
constant-sum games, which include two-person zero-sum games as special cases.
In such games which have a fully-mixed Nash Equilibrium (NE), it was known that
RD satisfy the permanence and Poincaré recurrence properties, but we show that
MW updates with any constant step-size ε > 0 converge to the boundary of the
state space, and thus do not satisfy the two properties. Using this result, we show
that MW updates have a regret lower bound of Ω(1/(εT )), while it was known
that the regret of RD is upper bounded by O(1/T ).
Interestingly, the regret perspective can be useful for better understanding of the
behaviours of MW updates. In a two-person zero-sum game, if it has a unique NE
which is fully mixed, then we show, via regret, that for any sufficiently small ε,
there exist at least two probability densities and a constant Z > 0, such that for
any arbitrarily small z > 0, each of the two densities fluctuates above Z and below
z infinitely often.

1

Introduction

The concept of Nash Equilibrium (NE) has been central in game theory. The existential proof of
Nash [20] is non-constructive, while the definition of NE itself is also static, both of which shed no
insight how NE can be computed or reached. In turn, lots of researchers have devoted efforts to justify
the concept of NE by providing algorithms/dynamics which might compute/reach a NE. Among
them, Multiplicative Weights (MW) updates have drawn a lot of attention, due to its simplicity and
naturalness, and perhaps more importantly, its distributive implementability2 which is essential in
games we observe in reality, where information communicated between players is often very limited.
MW updates have also made profound impacts in algorithm design; see [1] for details. However,
various PPAD-hardness and communication complexity results [8, 6, 13] serve as strong indicators
that no efficient algorithm/dynamic, MW updates included, can efficiently compute/reach NE for
general games. But can MW updates do so for interesting sub-families of games?
The best we could hope for is pointwise convergence toward a NE, but it is known not to hold
even in the simplest scenario of two-person zero-sum games. A weaker notion of convergence,
called empirical convergence (i.e., the average of the time series history converges), has been sought.
While this notion might seem less natural, it is interesting from the perspective of statistics; this
∗

Most work done while the author was at Max-Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus.
In the context of game dynamics, distributive implementability means each player only needs information
she can observe locally (e.g., payoffs to each of her own strategies) to run the updates, and does not need to
know other global information such as the value of the underlying game matrix and the updates of other players.
2

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

