Doubly Robust Bayesian Inference for
Non-Stationary Streaming Data with β-Divergences

Jeremias Knoblauch
The Alan Turing Institute
Department of Statistics
University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL
j.knoblauch@warwick.ac.uk

Jack Jewson
Department of Statistics
University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL
j.e.jewson@warwick.ac.uk

Theodoros Damoulas
The Alan Turing Institute
Department of Computer Science & Department of Statistics
University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL
t.damoulas@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract
We present the first robust Bayesian Online Changepoint Detection algorithm
through General Bayesian Inference (GBI) with β-divergences. The resulting
inference procedure is doubly robust for both the parameter and the changepoint
(CP) posterior, with linear time and constant space complexity. We provide a
construction for exponential models and demonstrate it on the Bayesian Linear
Regression model. In so doing, we make two additional contributions: Firstly, we
make GBI scalable using Structural Variational approximations that are exact as
β → 0. Secondly, we give a principled way of choosing the divergence parameter
β by minimizing expected predictive loss on-line. Reducing False Discovery Rates
of CP S from over 90% to 0% on real world data, this offers the state of the art.

1

Introduction

Modeling non-stationary time series with changepoints (CP S) is popular [23, 50, 33] and important
in a wide variety of research fields, including genetics [8, 16, 42], finance [27], oceanography [24],
brain imaging and cognition [13, 20], cybersecurity [37] and robotics [2, 26]. For streaming data,
a particularly important subclass are Bayesian On-line Changepoint Detection (BOCPD) methods
that can process data sequentially [1, 11, 43, 47, 46, 41, 8, 34, 44, 40, 25] while providing full
probabilistic uncertainty quantification. These algorithms declare CP S if the posterior predictive
computed from y1:t at time t has low density for the value of the observation yt+1 at time t + 1.
Naturally, this leads to a high false CP discovery rate in the presence of outliers and as they run
on-line, pre-processing is not an option. In this work, we provide the first robust on-line CP detection
method that is applicable to multivariate data, works with a class of scalable models and quantifies
model, CP and parameter uncertainty in a principled Bayesian fashion.
Standard Bayesian inference minimizes the Kullback-Leibler divergence (KLD) between the fitted
model and the Data Generating Mechanism (DGM), but is not robust under outliers or model misspecification due to its strictly increasing influence function. We remedy this by instead minimizing
the β-divergence (β-D) whose influence function has a unique maximum, allowing us to deal with
outliers effectively. Fig. 1 A illustrates this: Under the β-D, the influence of observations first
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

