The Limits of Post-Selection Generalization
Kobbi Nissim∗
Georgetown University
kobbi.nissim@georgetown.edu

Adam Smith†
Boston University
ads22@bu.edu

Uri Stemmer‡
Ben-Gurion University
u@uri.co.il

Thomas Steinke
IBM Research – Almaden
posel@thomas-steinke.net

Jonathan Ullman§
Northeastern University
jullman@ccs.neu.edu

Abstract
While statistics and machine learning offers numerous methods for ensuring generalization, these methods often fail in the presence of post selection—the common
practice in which the choice of analysis depends on previous interactions with the
same dataset. A recent line of work has introduced powerful, general purpose
algorithms that ensure a property called post hoc generalization (Cummings et
al., COLT’16), which says that no person when given the output of the algorithm
should be able to find any statistic for which the data differs significantly from the
population it came from.
In this work we show several limitations on the power of algorithms satisfying post
hoc generalization. First, we show a tight lower bound on the error of any algorithm
that satisfies post hoc generalization and answers adaptively chosen statistical
queries, showing a strong barrier to progress in post selection data analysis. Second,
we show that post hoc generalization is not closed under composition, despite many
examples of such algorithms exhibiting strong composition properties.

1

Introduction

Consider a dataset X consisting of n independent samples from some unknown population P. How
can we ensure that the conclusions drawn from X generalize to the population P? Despite decades
of research in statistics and machine learning on methods for ensuring generalization, there is an
increased recognition that many scientific findings do not generalize, with some even declaring this
to be a “statistical crisis in science” [14]. While there are many reasons a conclusion might fail to
generalize, one that is receiving increasing attention is post-selection, in which the choice of method
for analyzing the dataset depends on previous interactions with the same dataset. Post-selection can
arise from many common practices, such as variable selection, exploratory data analysis, and dataset
re-use. Unfortunately, post-selection invalidates traditional methods for ensuring generalization,
which assume that the method is independent of the data.
Numerous methods have been devised for statistical inference after post selection (e.g. [16, 18, 12,
13, 23]). These are primarily special purpose procedures that apply to specific types of simple post
selection that admit direct analysis. A more limited number of methods apply where the data is reused
in one of a small number of prescribed ways (e.g. [2, 4]).
∗

Supported by NSF award CNS-1565387.
Supported by NSF awards IIS-1447700 and AF-1763665, a Google Faculty Award and a Sloan Foundation
Research Award.
‡
Work done while U.S. was a postdoctoral researcher at the Weizmann Institute of Science, supported by a
Koshland fellowship, and by the Israel Science Foundation (grants 950/16 and 5219/17).
§
Supported by NSF awards CCF-1718088, CCF-1750640, and CNS-1816028, and a Google Faculty Award.
†

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

