Some Considerations on Learning to Explore via
Meta-Reinforcement Learning

Bradly C. Stadie∗
UC Berkeley
Xi Chen
Covariant.ai

Yan Duan
Covariant.ai

Ge Yang∗
University of Chicago
Yuhuai Wu
University of Toronto

Rein Houthooft
OpenAI
Pieter Abbeel
UC Berkeley

Ilya Sutskever
OpenAI

Abstract
We interpret meta-reinforcement learning as the problem of learning how to quickly
find a good sampling distribution in a new environment. This interpretation leads
to the development of two new meta-reinforcement learning algorithms: E-MAML
and E-RL2 . Results are presented on a new environment we call ‘Krazy World’: a
difficult high-dimensional gridworld which is designed to highlight the importance
of correctly differentiating through sampling distributions in meta-reinforcement
learning. Further results are presented on a set of maze environments. We show
E-MAML and E-RL2 deliver better performance than baseline algorithms on both
tasks.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning can be thought of as a procedure wherein an agent bias its sampling process
towards areas with higher rewards. This sampling process is embodied as the policy π, which is
responsible for outputting an action a conditioned on past environmental states {s}. Such action
affects changes in the distribution of the next state s0 ∼ T (s, a). As a result, it is natural to identify
the policy π with a sampling distribution over the state space.
This perspective highlights a key difference between reinforcement learning and supervised learning:
In supervised learning, the data is sampled from a fixed set. The i.i.d. assumption implies that the
model does not affect the underlying distribution. In reinforcement learning, however, the very goal
is to learn a policy π(a|s) that can manipulate the sampled states Pπ (s) to the agent’s advantage.
This property of RL algorithms to affect their own data distribution during the learning process is
particularly salient in the field of meta-reinforcement learning. Meta RL goes by many different
names: learning to learn, multi-task learning, lifelong learning, transfer learning, etc [25, 26, 22,
21, 23, 12, 24, 39, 37]. The goal, however, is usually the same–we wish to train the agents to learn
transferable knowledge that helps it generalize to new situations. The most straightforward way
to tackle this problem is to explicitly optimize the agent to deliver good performance after some
adaptation step. Typically, this adaptation step will take the agent’s prior and use it to update its
current policy to fit its current environment.
This problem definition induces an interesting consequence: during meta-learning, we are no longer
under the obligation to optimize for maximal reward during training. Instead, we can optimize for a
∗

equal contribution, correspondence to {bstadie, ge.yang}@berkeley.edu
Code for Krazy World available at: https://github.com/bstadie/krazyworld
Code for meta RL algorithms available at: https://github.com/episodeyang/e-maml

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

