High Dimensional Linear Regression
using Lattice Basis Reduction

David Gamarnik
Sloan School of Management
Massachussetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
gamarnik@mit.edu

Ilias Zadik
Operations Research Center
Massachussetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
izadik@mit.edu

Abstract
We consider a high dimensional linear regression problem where the goal is to
efficiently recover an unknown vector β ∗ from n noisy linear observations Y =
Xβ ∗ + W ∈ Rn , for known X ∈ Rn×p and unknown W ∈ Rn . Unlike most
of the literature on this model we make no sparsity assumption on β ∗ . Instead
we adopt a regularization based on assuming that the underlying vectors β ∗ have
rational entries with the same denominator Q ∈ Z>0 . We call this Q-rationality
assumption. We propose a new polynomial-time algorithm for this task which
is based on the seminal Lenstra-Lenstra-Lovasz (LLL) lattice basis reduction
algorithm. We establish that under the Q-rationality assumption, our algorithm
recovers exactly the vector β ∗ for a large class of distributions for the iid entries of
X and non-zero noise W . We prove that it is successful under small noise, even
when the learner has access to only one observation (n = 1). Furthermore, we
prove that in the case of the Gaussian white noise for W , n = o (p/ log p) and Q
sufficiently large, our algorithm tolerates a nearly optimal information-theoretic
level of the noise.

1

Introduction

We consider the following high-dimensional linear regression model. Consider n samples of a vector
β ∗ ∈ Rp in a vector form Y = Xβ ∗ + W for some X ∈ Rn×p and W ∈ Rn . Given the knowledge
of Y and X the goal is to infer β ∗ using an efficient algorithm and the minimum number n of samples
possible. Throughout the paper we call p the number of features, X the measurement matrix and W
the noise vector.
We focus on the high-dimensional case where n may be much smaller than p and p grows to infinity,
a setting that has been very popular in the literature during the last years Chen et al. (2001), Donoho
(2006), Candes et al. (2006), Foucart and Rauhut (2013), Wainwright (2009). In this case, and under
no additional structural assumption, the inference task becomes impossible, even in the noiseless case
W = 0, as the underlying linear system becomes underdetermined. Most papers address this issue by
imposing a sparsity assumption on β ∗ , which refers to β ∗ having only a limited number of non-zero
entries compared to its dimension Donoho (2006), Candes et al. (2006), Foucart and Rauhut (2013).
During the past decades, the sparsity assumption led to a fascinating line of research in statistics and
compressed sensing, which established, among other results, that several polynomial-time algorithms,
such as Basis Pursuit Denoising Scheme and LASSO, can efficiently recover a sparse β ∗ with number
of samples much smaller than the number of features Candes et al. (2006), Wainwright (2009),
Foucart and Rauhut (2013). For example, it is established that if β ∗ is constrained to have at most
k ≤ p non-zero
entries, X has iid N (0, 1) entries, W has iid N (0, σ 2 ) entries and n is of the order

p
k log k , then both of the mentioned algorithms can recover β ∗ , up to the level of the noise. Different
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

