Differentially Private Testing of Identity and
Closeness of Discrete Distributions
Jayadev Acharya ú
Cornell University
acharya@cornell.edu

Ziteng Sun ú
Cornell University
zs335@cornell.edu

Huanyu Zhang ú
Cornell University
hz388@cornell.edu

Abstract
We study the fundamental problems of identity testing (goodness of fit), and
closeness testing (two sample test) of distributions over k elements, under
differential privacy. While the problems have a long history in statistics,
finite sample bounds for these problems have only been established recently.
In this work, we derive upper and lower bounds on the sample complexity
of both the problems under (Á, ”)-differential privacy. We provide sample
optimal algorithms for identity testing problem for all parameter ranges,
and the first results for closeness testing. Our closeness testing bounds are
optimal in the sparse regime where the number of samples is at most k.
Our upper bounds are obtained by privatizing non-private estimators for
these problems. The non-private estimators are chosen to have small sensitivity. We propose a general framework to establish lower bounds on the
sample complexity of statistical tasks under differential privacy. We show a
bound on differentially private algorithms in terms of a coupling between
the two hypothesis classes we aim to test. By carefully constructing chosen
priors over the hypothesis classes, and using Le Cam’s two point theorem we
provide a general mechanism for proving lower bounds. We believe that the
framework can be used to obtain strong lower bounds for other statistical
tasks under privacy.

1

Introduction

Testing whether observed data conforms to an underlying model is a fundamental scientific
problem. In a statistical framework, given samples from an unknown probabilistic model,
the goal is to determine whether the underlying model has a property of interest.
This question has received great attention in statistics as hypothesis testing [1, 2], where it
was mostly studied in the asymptotic regime when the number of samples m æ Œ. In the
past two decades there has been a lot of work from the computer science, information theory,
and statistics community on various distribution testing problems in the non-asymptotic
(small-sample) regime, where the domain size k could be potentially larger than m (See [3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15], references therein, and [16] for a recent survey). Here
the goal is to characterize the minimum number of samples necessary (sample complexity)
as a function of the domain size k, and the other parameters.
At the same time, preserving the privacy of individuals who contribute to the data samples
has emerged as one of the key challenges in designing statistical mechanisms over the last few
years. For example, the privacy of individuals participating in surveys on sensitive subjects
The authors are listed in alphabetical order. This research was supported by NSF-CCF-CRII
1657471, and a grant from Cornell University.
ú

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

