GIANT: Globally Improved Approximate Newton
Method for Distributed Optimization

Shusen Wang
Stevens Institute of Technology
shusen.wang@stevens.edu

Farbod Roosta-Khorasani
University of Queensland
fred.roosta@uq.edu.au

Peng Xu
Stanford University
pengxu@stanford.edu

Michael W. Mahoney
University of California at Berkeley
mmahoney@stat.berkeley.edu

Abstract
For distributed computing environment, we consider the empirical risk minimization problem and propose a distributed and communication-efficient Newton-type
optimization method. At every iteration, each worker locally finds an Approximate
NewTon (ANT) direction, which is sent to the main driver. The main driver, then,
averages all the ANT directions received from workers to form a Globally Improved
ANT (GIANT) direction. GIANT is highly communication efficient and naturally
exploits the trade-offs between local computations and global communications
in that more local computations result in fewer overall rounds of communications. Theoretically, we show that GIANT enjoys an improved convergence rate as
compared with first-order methods and existing distributed Newton-type methods.
Further, and in sharp contrast with many existing distributed Newton-type methods,
as well as popular first-order methods, a highly advantageous practical feature
of GIANT is that it only involves one tuning parameter. We conduct large-scale
experiments on a computer cluster and, empirically, demonstrate the superior
performance of GIANT.

1

Introduction

The large-scale nature of many modern “big-data” problems, arising routinely in science, engineering,
financial markets, Internet and social media, etc., poses significant computational as well as storage
challenges for machine learning procedures. For example, the scale of data gathered in many
applications nowadays typically exceeds the memory capacity of a single machine, which, in turn,
makes learning from data ever more challenging. In this light, several modern parallel (or distributed)
computing architectures, e.g., MapReduce [4], Apache Spark [44, 19], GraphLab [14], and Parameter
Server [11], have been designed to operate on and learn from data at massive scales. Despite the
fact that, when compared to a single machine, distributed systems tremendously reduce the storage
and (local) computational costs, the inevitable cost of communications across the network can often
be the bottleneck of distributed computations. As a result, designing methods which can strike an
appropriate balance between the cost of computations and that of communications are increasingly
desired.
The desire to reduce communication costs is even more pronounced in the federated learning
framework [8, 9, 1, 18, 37]. Similarly to typical settings of distributed computing, federated learning
assumes data are distributed over a network across nodes that enjoy reasonable computational
resources, e.g., mobile phones, wearable devices, and smart homes. However, the network has
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

