Heterogeneous Multi-output Gaussian Process
Prediction
Pablo Moreno-Muñoz1
Antonio Artés-Rodríguez1
Mauricio A. Álvarez2
Dept. of Signal Theory and Communications, Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, Spain
2
Dept. of Computer Science, University of Sheffield, UK
{pmoreno,antonio}@tsc.uc3m.es, mauricio.alvarez@sheffield.ac.uk

1

Abstract
We present a novel extension of multi-output Gaussian processes for handling
heterogeneous outputs. We assume that each output has its own likelihood function
and use a vector-valued Gaussian process prior to jointly model the parameters
in all likelihoods as latent functions. Our multi-output Gaussian process uses a
covariance function with a linear model of coregionalisation form. Assuming
conditional independence across the underlying latent functions together with an
inducing variable framework, we are able to obtain tractable variational bounds
amenable to stochastic variational inference. We illustrate the performance of the
model on synthetic data and two real datasets: a human behavioral study and a
demographic high-dimensional dataset.

1

Introduction

Multi-output Gaussian processes (MOGP) generalise the powerful Gaussian process (GP) predictive
model to the vector-valued random field setup (Alvarez et al., 2012). It has been experimentally
shown that by simultaneously exploiting correlations between multiple outputs and across the input
space, it is possible to provide better predictions, particularly in scenarios with missing or noisy data
(Bonilla et al., 2008; Dai et al., 2017).
The main focus in the literature for MOGP has been on the definition of a suitable cross-covariance
function between the multiple outputs that allows for the treatment of outputs as a single GP with
a properly defined covariance function (Alvarez et al., 2012). The two classical alternatives to
define such cross-covariance functions are the linear model of coregionalisation (LMC) (Journel
and Huijbregts, 1978) and process convolutions (Higdon, 2002). In the former case, each output
corresponds to a weighted sum of shared latent random functions. In the latter, each output is
modelled as the convolution integral between a smoothing kernel and a latent random function
common to all outputs. In both cases, the unknown latent functions follow Gaussian process priors
leading to straight-forward expressions to compute the cross-covariance functions among different
outputs. More recent alternatives to build valid covariance functions for MOGP include the work
by Ulrich et al. (2015) and Parra and Tobar (2017), that build the cross-covariances in the spectral
domain.
Regarding the type of outputs that can be modelled, most alternatives focus on multiple-output
regression for continuous variables. Traditionally, each output is assumed to follow a Gaussian
likelihood where the mean function is given by one of the outputs of the MOGP and the variance in
that distribution is treated as an unknown parameter. Bayesian inference is tractable for these models.
In this paper, we are interested in the heterogeneous case for which the outputs are a mix of continuous,
categorical, binary or discrete variables with different likelihood functions.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

