New Insight into Hybrid Stochastic Gradient Descent:
Beyond With-Replacement Sampling and Convexity

Pan Zhou∗
Xiao-Tong Yuan†
Jiashi Feng∗
Learning & Vision Lab, National University of Singapore, Singapore
†
B-DAT Lab, Nanjing University of Information Science & Technology, Nanjing, China
pzhou@u.nus.edu
xtyuan@nuist.edu.cn
elefjia@nus.edu.sg
∗

Abstract
As an incremental-gradient algorithm, the hybrid stochastic gradient descent (HSGD) enjoys merits of both stochastic and full gradient methods for finite-sum
problem optimization. However, the existing rate-of-convergence analysis for
HSGD is made under with-replacement sampling (WRS) and is restricted to convex problems. It is not clear whether HSGD still carries these advantages under
the common practice of without-replacement sampling (WoRS) for non-convex
problems. In this paper, we affirmatively answer this open question by showing
that under WoRS and for both convex and non-convex problems, it is still possible for HSGD (with constant step-size) to match full gradient descent in rate of
convergence, while maintaining comparable sample-size-independent incremental
first-order oracle complexity to stochastic gradient descent. For a special class of
finite-sum problems with linear prediction models, our convergence results can be
further improved in some cases. Extensive numerical results confirm our theoretical
affirmation and demonstrate the favorable efficiency of WoRS-based HSGD.

1

Introduction

We consider the following finite-sum minimization problem:
1 Xn
min f (x) :=
fi (x),
(1)
i=1
x∈X
n
where each individual fi (x) is `-smooth and the feasible set X ⊆ Rd is convex. In the field of
machine learning, formulation (1) encapsulates a large body of optimization problems including
least square regression, logistic regression and deep neural networks training, to name a few. Such a
problem can be solved by various algorithms, e.g. full gradient descent (FGD) [1], stochastic GD
(SGD) [2], hybrid SGD [3], SDCA [4] and SVRG [5].
In this paper, we are particularly interested in Hybrid SGD (HSGD) [3, 6, 7] which is an inexact
gradient method that iteratively samples an evolving mini-batch of the terms in (1) for gradient
estimation. The iteration of HSGD is given by

1 X
xk+1 = ΦX xk − ηk g k , with g k =
∇fik (xk ),
ik ∈Sk
sk
where ΦX (·) denotes the Euclidean projection onto X , ηk is the learning rate, and Sk denotes the set
of the sk selected samples at the k-th iteration. In early iterations, HSGD selects a few samples to
compute the full gradient approximately; and along with more iterations, sk is increased gradually,
leading to more accurate full gradient estimation. Such a mechanism allows HSGD to simultaneously
enjoy the merits of both SGD and FGD, i.e. rapid initial process of SGD and constant learning rate
ηk without sacrificing the convergence rate of FGD [6].
Motivation. Though HSGD has been shown, both in theory and practice, to bridge smoothly the
gap between full and stochastic gradient descent methods, its rate-of-convergence analysis remains
restrictive in several aspects.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

