Representation Learning of Compositional Data

Marta Avalos-Fernandez† Richard Nock‡§\ Cheng Soon Ong‡§ Julien Rouar† Ke Sun‡ ∗
†
Université de Bordeaux, ‡ Data61,
§
the Australian National University and \ the University of Sydney
first.last@{u-bordeaux.fr,data61.csiro.au}

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning a low dimensional representation for compositional data. Compositional data consists of a collection of nonnegative data that
sum to a constant value. Since the parts of the collection are statistically dependent,
many standard tools cannot be directly applied. Instead, compositional data must
be first transformed before analysis. Focusing on principal component analysis
(PCA), we propose an approach that allows low dimensional representation learning directly from the original data. Our approach combines the benefits of the
log-ratio transformation from compositional data analysis and exponential family
PCA. A key tool in its derivation is a generalization of the scaled Bregman theorem,
that relates the perspective transform of a Bregman divergence to the Bregman
divergence of a perspective transform and a remainder conformal divergence. Our
proposed approach includes a convenient surrogate (upper bound) loss of the exponential family PCA which has an easy to optimize form. We also derive the
corresponding form for nonlinear autoencoders. Experiments on simulated data
and microbiome data show the promise of our method.

1

Introduction

Compositional data analysis (CoDA) is a subfield of statistics introduced more than three decades ago
[3, 2, 1, 29]. Compositional data consist of a collection of nonnegative measurements that sum to a
constant value, typically, proportions that sum to 1. Because knowing the sum, one component can be
determined from the sum of the remainder, the parts that make up the composition are mathematically
and statistically dependent. This distinct structure complicates analysis and does not allow standard
statistical analyses. Ignoring the underlying nature of the data studied might give rise to misleading
conclusions.
Among others, [1] and [13] provided a framework to perform CoDA by mapping data from the
constrained simplex space to the Euclidian space using nonlinear log-ratio transforms. In this paper,
we focus on Principal Components Analysis (PCA), one of the main tools for exploratory analysis of
compositional data. Just like in standard Euclidean data, it is particularly useful when the first few
principal components explain enough variability to be considered as representative. Unfortunately,
any operation of centering or scaling destroys the compositional nature of the data, which complicates
a direct application of PCA.
Our motivation for studying CoDA comes from the recent explosion of microbiome studies [14, 15].
Indeed, spectacular advances in 16S rRNA gene sequencing of the bacterial component of the human
microbial community (microbiota) have enabled researchers to investigate human health and disease,
leading to new insights into the role of these microbial communities. The microbiota sequencing data
are measured as read counts interpreted as a species’ abundance in a microbial community. To make
the microbial abundance comparable across samples, data are normalized to the relative abundances
∗

Authors in alphabetical order

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

