Temporal alignment and latent Gaussian process
factor inference in population spike trains

Lea Duncker & Maneesh Sahani
Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit
University College London
London, W1T 4JG
{duncker,maneesh}@gatsby.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
We introduce a novel scalable approach to identifying common latent structure in
neural population spike-trains, which allows for variability both in the trajectory
and in the rate of progression of the underlying computation. Our approach is
based on shared latent Gaussian processes (GPs) which are combined linearly, as
in the Gaussian Process Factor Analysis (GPFA) algorithm. We extend GPFA to
handle unbinned spike-train data by incorporating a continuous time point-process
likelihood model, achieving scalability with a sparse variational approximation.
Shared variability is separated into terms that express condition dependence, as
well as trial-to-trial variation in trajectories. Finally, we introduce a nested GP
formulation to capture variability in the rate of evolution along the trajectory. We
show that the new method learns to recover latent trajectories in synthetic data, and
can accurately identify the trial-to-trial timing of movement-related parameters
from motor cortical data without any supervision.

1

Introduction

Many computations in the brain are thought to be implemented by the dynamical evolution of activity
distributed across large neural populations. As simultaneous recordings of population activity have
become more common, the need has grown for analytic methods that can identify these dynamical
computational variables from the data. Where the computation is tightly coupled to an externally
measurable covariate — a stimulus or a movement, perhaps — such identification is a simple matter
of exploiting linear or non-linear regression to describe a population encoding or decoding model.
However, when aspects of the computation are likely to reflect internal mental states, which may vary
substantially even when external covariates remain constant, the relevant variables must be uncovered
from neural data alone, most typically using a latent variable model [1–6].
However, most such methods fail to account properly for at least one key form of dynamical variability
— trial-to-trial differences in the timing of the computation. Such differences may be reflected in
behavioural variability, for instance in reaction times or movement durations [7], or in varying
relationships between external events and neural firing, for instance in sensory onset latencies [8]. In
some cases manual alignment to salient external events or behavioural time-course may be used to
reduce temporal misalignment [8, 9]. However, just as with variability in the trajectories themselves,
temporal variations in purely internal states must ultimately be identified from neural data alone [10].
A particularly challenging problem is to build models that capture the variability both in the latent
trajectories underlying spiking population activity, and in the time-course with which such trajectories
are followed. Temporal misalignment in trajectories might be confused for variability in the trajectory
itself; while genuine variability in that trajectory makes alignment more difficult. Indeed, previous
work has considered these problems separately. Algorithms like dynamic time warping (DTW) [11]
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

