Learning Conditioned Graph Structures for
Interpretable Visual Question Answering

Will Norcliffe-Brown
AimBrain Ltd.
will.norcliffe@aimbrain.com

Efstathios Vafeias
AimBrain Ltd.
stathis@aimbrain.com

Sarah Parisot
AimBrain Ltd.
sarah@aimbrain.com

Abstract
Visual Question answering is a challenging problem requiring a combination of
concepts from Computer Vision and Natural Language Processing. Most existing
approaches use a two streams strategy, computing image and question features
that are consequently merged using a variety of techniques. Nonetheless, very few
rely on higher level image representations, which can capture semantic and spatial
relationships. In this paper, we propose a novel graph-based approach for Visual
Question Answering. Our method combines a graph learner module, which learns
a question specific graph representation of the input image, with the recent concept
of graph convolutions, aiming to learn image representations that capture question
specific interactions. We test our approach on the VQA v2 dataset using a simple
baseline architecture enhanced by the proposed graph learner module. We obtain
promising results with 66.18% accuracy and demonstrate the interpretability of the
proposed method. Code can be found at github.com/aimbrain/vqa-project.

1

Introduction

Visual Question Answering (VQA) is an emerging topic that has received an increasing amount of
attention in recent years [1]. Its attractiveness lies in the fact that it combines two fields that are
typically approached individually (Computer Vision and Natural Language Processing (NLP)). This
allows researchers to look at both problems from a new perspective. Given an image and a question,
the objective of VQA is to answer the question based on the information provided by the image.
Understanding both the question and image, as well as modelling their interactions requires us
to combine Computer Vision and NLP techniques. The problem is generally framed in terms of
classification, such that the network learns to produce answers from a finite set of classes which
facilitates training and evaluation. Most VQA methods follow a two-stream strategy, learning
separate image and question embeddings from deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and
well known word embedding strategies respectively. Techniques to combine the two streams range
from element-wise product to bilinear pooling [2, 3] as well as attention based approaches [4].
Recent computer vision works have been exploring higher level representation of images, notably
using object detectors and graph-based structures for better semantic and spatial image understanding
[5]. Representing images as graphs allows one to explicitly model interactions, so as to seamlessly
transfer information between graph items (e.g. objects in the image) through advanced graph
processing techniques such as the emerging paradigm of graph CNNs [6, 7, 8, 9]. Such graph based
techniques have been the focus of recent VQA works, for abstract image understanding [10] or
object counting [11], reaching state of the art performance. Nonetheless, an important drawback
of the proposed techniques is the fact that the input graph structures are heavily engineered, image
specific rather than question specific, and not easily transferable from abstract scenes to real images.
Furthermore, very few approaches provide means to interpret the model’s behaviour, an essential
aspect that is often lacking in deep learning models.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

