Bias and Generalization in Deep Generative Models:
An Empirical Study

Shengjia Zhao† , Hongyu Ren† , Arianna Yuan, Jiaming Song, Noah Goodman, Stefano Ermon
Stanford University
{sjzhao,hyren,xfyuan,tsong,ngoodman,ermon}@stanford.edu

Abstract
In high dimensional settings, density estimation algorithms rely crucially on their
inductive bias. Despite recent empirical success, the inductive bias of deep generative models is not well understood. In this paper we propose a framework to
systematically investigate bias and generalization in deep generative models of
images. Inspired by experimental methods from cognitive psychology, we probe
each learning algorithm with carefully designed training datasets to characterize
when and how existing models generate novel attributes and their combinations.
We identify similarities to human psychology and verify that these patterns are
consistent across commonly used models and architectures.

1

Introduction

The goal of a density estimation algorithm is to learn a distribution from training data (Figure 1,A).
However, unbiased and consistent density estimation is known to be impossible [1, 2]. Even in
discrete settings, the number of possible distributions scales doubly exponentially w.r.t. dimensionality [3], suggesting extremely high data requirements. As a result, the assumptions made by a learning
algorithm, or its inductive bias, are key when practical data regimes are concerned. For simple
density estimation algorithms, such as fitting a Gaussian distribution via maximum likelihood, we can
easily characterize the distribution that is produced given some training data. However, for complex
algorithms involving deep generative models such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) and
variational autoencoders (VAE) [4–8], the nature of the inductive bias is very difficult to characterize.
In the absence of insights in analytic form, a possible strategy to evaluate this bias is to probe the
input-output behavior of the learning algorithm. The challenge with this approach is that both inputs
and outputs are high dimensional (e.g., distributions over images), making it difficult to exhaustively
characterize the input-output relationship. A strategy for studying high-dimensional objects is to
project them onto a lower dimensional space where analysis is feasible. In fact, similar problems
have long challenged cognitive psychologists. As visual cognitive functions are extremely complex,
cognitive psychologists and neuroscientists have developed controlled experiments to investigate the
visual system. For example, experiments on perception and representation of shape, color, numerosity,
etc., have led to important discoveries such as ensemble representation [9], prototype enhancement
effect [10], and Weber’s law [11].
We propose to adopt experimental methods from cognitive psychology to characterize the generalization biases of machine intelligence. To characterize the input-output relationship of an algorithm, we
explore its behavior by projecting the image space onto a carefully chosen low dimensional feature
space. We select several features that are known to be important to humans, such as shape, color, size,
numerosity, etc. We systematically explore these dimensions by crafting suitable training datasets and
measuring corresponding properties of the learned distribution. For example, we ask, after training
on a dataset with red and yellow spheres, and red cubes, will the model generates yellow cubes, as a
result of its inductive bias?
† co-first authorship.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

