Distributed Learning without Distress:
Privacy-Preserving Empirical Risk Minimization

Bargav Jayaraman
Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22903
bj4nq@virginia.edu

Lingxiao Wang
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
lingxw@cs.ucla.edu

David Evans
Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22903
evans@virginia.edu

Quanquan Gu
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095
qgu@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Distributed learning allows a group of independent data owners to collaboratively
learn a model over their data sets without exposing their private data. We present a
distributed learning approach that combines differential privacy with secure multiparty computation. We explore two popular methods of differential privacy, output
perturbation and gradient perturbation, and advance the state-of-the-art for both
methods in the distributed learning setting. In our output perturbation method,
the parties combine local models within a secure computation and then add the
required differential privacy noise before revealing the model. In our gradient
perturbation method, the data owners collaboratively train a global model via an
iterative learning algorithm. At each iteration, the parties aggregate their local
gradients within a secure computation, adding sufficient noise to ensure privacy
before the gradient updates are revealed. For both methods, we show that the noise
can be reduced in the multi-party setting by adding the noise inside the secure
computation after aggregation, asymptotically improving upon the best previous
results. Experiments on real world data sets demonstrate that our methods provide
substantial utility gains for typical privacy requirements.

1

Introduction

In many applications, such as medical research and financial fraud detection, it is valuable to
build machine learning models by training on sensitive data. This raises privacy concerns since
adversaries may be able to infer information about the training data from the learned model. Model
parameters can reveal sensitive information about individual records including specific features of the
records [20] to the presence of particular records in the data set [47]. In the case of neural networks,
the model parameters can also inadvertently store sensitive parts of the training data [8]. Differential
privacy [19, 16] aims to thwart such analysis. It provides statistical privacy for individual records
by adding random noise to the model parameters. Many works have shown that differential privacy
can be used to enable privacy-preserving machine learning in the centralized setting where a single
organization owns all the data [10, 11, 29, 30, 51, 58].
The problem becomes more acute when the data is owned by different organizations that wish to
collaboratively learn from their private data. For instance, multiple hospitals may want to collabora32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

