Robust Detection of Adversarial Attacks by Modeling
the Intrinsic Properties of Deep Neural Networks

Zhihao Zheng
Department of Computer Science
Brandeis University
Waltham, MA 02453
zhihaozh@brandeis.edu

Pengyu Hong
Department of Computer Science
Brandeis University
Waltham, MA 02453
hongpeng@brandeis.edu

Abstract
It has been shown that deep neural network (DNN) based classifiers are vulnerable
to human-imperceptive adversarial perturbations which can cause DNN classifiers
to output wrong predictions with high confidence. We propose an unsupervised
learning approach to detect adversarial inputs without any knowledge of attackers.
Our approach tries to capture the intrinsic properties of a DNN classifier and uses
them to detect adversarial inputs. The intrinsic properties used in this study are the
output distributions of the hidden neurons in a DNN classifier presented with natural
images. Our approach can be easily applied to any DNN classifiers or combined
with other defense strategies to improve robustness. Experimental results show that
our approach demonstrates state-of-the-art robustness in defending black-box and
gray-box attacks.

1

Introduction

Since the successful application of deep convolutional neural network to large-scale image recognition
[26] by Krizhevsky et al. [11], neural network based Deep Learning has gained significant attentions.
Researchers have been shown that deep neural networks (DNN) were able to deliver state-of-the-art
performances in various fields, such as, robotics [20, 7], self-driving cars [1, 2], face recognition
for identification [33], games [29, 30, 19], biomedical image processing [6, 28], and so on. Despite
of these successes, DNN-based classifiers have a severe weakness [34]. For example, knowing the
architecture and parameters of a DNN classifier (i.e., white-box attack), an adversarial example can
be easily constructed to fool the DNN classifier by applying a small perturbation to an input image.
Even though the perturbations are too small to affect human recognition, the DNN classifier can
misclassify the perturbed input with high confidence. Successful attacks can also be black-box, in
which the architecture and parameters of a DNN are unknown to the attackers [23]. Interestingly,
adversarial images remain malicious even after printed out and then fed to a well trained DNN [12]. A
variety of algorithms have been developed to generate powerful attacks [34, 9, 12, 24, 32, 4, 21, 22].
Without proper safeguards, users of DNN-based applications can be exposed to unforeseen hazardous
situations caused by "trivial" noises. Various attempts have been conducted to defend adversarial
attacks. Papernot et al. [25] proposed a defensive distillation approach, which reduces the magnitude
of gradients during training, to make the trained model more robust to input perturbations . However,
it was later shown that the distillation approach was still highly vulnerable to attacks [3]. Recently,
the adversarial training strategy became popular [9, 18, 13]. This strategy augments the training data
with adversarial examples to enhance the capability of DNNs to deal with targeted attacks. It focuses
more on defending black-box attacks, and usually does not consider white-box attacks. Hence, it
is still vulnerable to iterative attacks [13]. In addition, the robustness of the model trained by this
strategy depends on the attacks covered by the adversarial training examples. Another strategy is
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

