Unsupervised Adversarial Invariance

Ayush Jaiswal, Yue Wu, Wael AbdAlmageed, Premkumar Natarajan
USC Information Sciences Institute
Marina del Rey, CA, USA
{ajaiswal, yue_wu, wamageed, pnataraj}@isi.edu

Abstract
Data representations that contain all the information about target variables but
are invariant to nuisance factors benefit supervised learning algorithms by preventing them from learning associations between these factors and the targets,
thus reducing overfitting. We present a novel unsupervised invariance induction
framework for neural networks that learns a split representation of data through
competitive training between the prediction task and a reconstruction task coupled
with disentanglement, without needing any labeled information about nuisance
factors or domain knowledge. We describe an adversarial instantiation of this
framework and provide analysis of its working. Our unsupervised model outperforms state-of-the-art methods, which are supervised, at inducing invariance to
inherent nuisance factors, effectively using synthetic data augmentation to learn
invariance, and domain adaptation. Our method can be applied to any prediction
task, eg., binary/multi-class classification or regression, without loss of generality.

1

Introduction

Supervised learning, arguably the most popular branch of machine learning, involves estimating a
mapping from data samples (x) to target variables (y). A common formulation of this task is the
estimation of the conditional probability p(y∣x) from data through learning associations between y
and underlying factors of variation of x. However, data often contains nuisance factors (z) that are
irrelevant to the prediction of y from x and estimation of p(y∣x) in such cases leads to overfitting
when the model incorrectly learns to associate some z with y. Thus, when applied to new data
containing unseen variations of z, trained models perform poorly. For example, a nuisance factor
in the case of face recognition in images is the lighting condition the photograph was captured in,
and a recognition model that associates lighting with subject identity is expected to perform poorly.
Developing machine learning methods that are invariant to nuisance factors has been a long-standing
problem in machine learning; studied under various names such as “feature selection”, “robustness
through data augmentation” and “invariance induction”.
While deep neural networks (DNNs) have outperformed traditional methods at highly sophisticated
and challenging supervised learning tasks, providing better estimates of p(y∣x), they are prone to
the same problem of incorrectly learning associations between z and y. An architectural solution to
this problem is the development of neural network units that capture specific forms of information,
and thus are inherently invariant to certain nuisance factors [3, 19]. For example, convolutional
operations coupled with pooling strategies capture shift-invariant spatial information while recurrent
operations robustly capture high-level trends in sequential data. However, this approach requires
significant effort for engineering custom network modules and layers to achieve invariance to specific
nuisance factors, making it inflexible [19]. A different but popularly adopted solution to the problem
of nuisance factors is the use of data augmentation where synthetic versions of real data samples are
generated, during training, with specific forms of variation [3]. For example, rotation, translation
and additive noise are typical methods of augmentation used in computer vision, especially for
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

