Multiple Instance Learning for Efficient Sequential
Data Classification on Resource-constrained Devices
Don Kurian Dennis

Chirag Pabbaraju
Harsha Vardhan Simhadri
Prateek Jain
Microsoft Research, India
{t-dodenn, t-chpab, harshasi, prajain}@microsoft.com

Abstract
We study the problem of fast and efficient classification of sequential data (such as
time-series) on tiny devices, which is critical for various IoT related applications
like audio keyword detection or gesture detection. Such tasks are cast as a standard
classification task by sliding windows over the data stream to construct data points.
Deploying such classification modules on tiny devices is challenging as predictions
over sliding windows of data need to be invoked continuously at a high frequency.
Each such predictor instance in itself is expensive as it evaluates large models
over long windows of data. In this paper, we address this challenge by exploiting
the following two observations about classification tasks arising in typical IoT
related applications: (a) the "signature" of a particular class (e.g. an audio keyword)
typically occupies a small fraction of the overall data, and (b) class signatures
tend to be discernible early on in the data. We propose a method, EMI-RNN, that
exploits these observations by using a multiple instance learning formulation along
with an early prediction technique to learn a model that achieves better accuracy
compared to baseline models, while simultaneously reducing computation by a
large fraction. For instance, on a gesture detection benchmark [26], EMI-RNN
requires 72x less computation than standard LSTM while improving accuracy by
1%. This enables us to deploy such models for continuous real-time prediction
on devices as small as a Raspberry Pi0 and Arduino variants, a task that the
baseline LSTM could not achieve. Finally, we also provide an analysis of our
multiple instance learning algorithm in a simple setting and show that the proposed
algorithm converges to the global optima at a linear rate, one of the first such result
in this domain. The code for EMI-RNN is available at [14].

1

Introduction

Classification of sequential data: Several critical applications, especially in the Internet of Things
(IoT) domain, require real-time predictions on sensor data. For example, wrist bands attempt to
recognize gestures or activities (such as walking, climbing) from Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU)
sensor data [2, 26]. Similarly, several audio applications require detection of specific keywords like
"up", "down" or certain urban sounds [35, 32, 29, 5].
LSTM based models: Typically, such problems are modeled as a multi-class classification problem
where each sliding window over the sensor data forms a sequential data point and each class represents
one category of events to be detected. Additionally, there is a "noise" class which denotes a no-event
data point. Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) like LSTMs [21] are a popular tool for modeling
such problems where the RNN produces an embedding of the given sequential data point that can
then be consumed by a standard classifier like logistic regression to predict label of the point [20, 30].
Deployment on tiny devices: Such event detection applications, especially in the IoT domain,
require deployment of inference on tiny edge devices with capabilities comparable to an Arduino
Uno [13] or a Raspberry Pi0 [19]. Further, the data is sampled at a high rate for good resolution
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

