A flexible model for training action localization
with varying levels of supervision

Guilhem Chéron∗ 1 2

Jean-Baptiste Alayrac∗ 1

Ivan Laptev1

Cordelia Schmid2

Abstract
Spatio-temporal action detection in videos is typically addressed in a fullysupervised setup with manual annotation of training videos required at every frame.
Since such annotation is extremely tedious and prohibits scalability, there is a clear
need to minimize the amount of manual supervision. In this work we propose a
unifying framework that can handle and combine varying types of less-demanding
weak supervision. Our model is based on discriminative clustering and integrates
different types of supervision as constraints on the optimization. We investigate
applications of such a model to training setups with alternative supervisory signals
ranging from video-level class labels to the full per-frame annotation of action
bounding boxes. Experiments on the challenging UCF101-24 and DALY datasets
demonstrate competitive performance of our method at a fraction of supervision
used by previous methods. The flexibility of our model enables joint learning
from data with different levels of annotation. Experimental results demonstrate a
significant gain by adding a few fully supervised examples to otherwise weakly
labeled videos.

1

Introduction

Action localization aims to find spatial and temporal extents as well as classes of actions in the
video, answering questions such as what are the performed actions? when do they happen? and
where do they take place? This is a challenging task with many potential applications in surveillance,
autonomous driving, video description and search. To address this challenge, a number of successful
methods have been proposed [11, 13, 18, 31, 36, 37, 45]. Such methods, however, typically rely on
exhaustive supervision where each frame of a training action has to be manually annotated with an
action bounding box.
Manual annotation of video frames is extremely tedious. Moreover, achieving consensus when
annotating action intervals is often problematic due to ambiguities in the start and end times of an
action. This prevents fully-supervised methods from scaling to many action classes and training
from many examples. To avoid exhaustive annotation, recent works have developed several weaklysupervised methods. For example, [46] learns action localization from a sparse set of frames with
annotated bounding boxes. [27] reduces bounding box annotation to a single spatial point specified
for each frame of an action. Such methods, however, are designed for particular types of weak
supervision and can be directly used neither to compare nor to combine various types of annotation.
In this work we design a unifying framework for handling various levels of supervision† . Our
model is based on discriminative clustering and integrates different types of supervision in a form of
1

Inria, École normale supérieure, CNRS, PSL Research University, 75005 Paris, France.
University Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France.
∗
Equal contribution.
†
Project webpage https://www.di.ens.fr/willow/research/weakactionloc/.
2

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

