Mallows Models for Top-k Lists

Flavio Chierichetti
Sapienza University, Rome, Italy
flavio@di.uniroma1.it

Anirban Dasgupta
IIT, Gandhinagar, India
anirban.dasgupta@gmail.com

Shahrzad Haddadan
Sapienza University, Rome, Italy
shahrzad.haddadan@uniroma1.it

Ravi Kumar
Google, Mountain View, CA
ravi.k53@gmail.com

Silvio Lattanzi
Google, Zurich, Switzerland
silviolat@gmail.com

Abstract
The classic Mallows model is a widely-used tool to realize distributions on permutations. Motivated by common practical situations, in this paper, we generalize
Mallows to model distributions on top-k lists by using a suitable distance measure
between top-k lists. Unlike many earlier works, our model is both analytically
tractable and computationally efficient. We demonstrate this by studying two
basic problems in this model, namely, sampling and reconstruction, from both
algorithmic and experimental points of view.

1

Introduction

Ordering objects according to a set of criteria and presenting a prefix of the ordering to a user
has become an accepted form of processed knowledge and is ubiquitous in practical settings. A
search engine’s result page typically contains the top ten results for a query. Newspapers and media
outlets often list the top few movies in a year and the top few restaurants in a neighborhood. Social
networking sites list the top followers or friends of a user. The popularity of top lists has resulted in
the proliferation of dedicated portals such as listverse.com and www.thetoptens.com/lists.
Presenting a top list instead of a total ordering (permutation) also has many advantages in practice.
First, the universe of objects might be too large to order and present, e.g., even for a niche subject
like number theory, Google returns 9.7M Web pages. Secondly, the cognitive load on the user can
become immense if the entire ordering is shown to her, especially when the most interesting piece
of information is in a short prefix—in most cases, the user is indifferent to the 100th most popular
restaurant in a city. Thirdly, it may be impossible or meaningless to total order the objects beyond a
certain prefix length. Sociologists would be hard-pressed to pinpoint the 10000th most livable city.
Permutations and generative models for permutations have been studied for many decades, backed
by a rich and elegant mathematical theory. In particular, the well-studied Mallows model offers
the conceptual equivalent of the Gaussian distribution in the space of permutations: given a center
permutation and a spread parameter, this generative model induces a distribution on all permutations,
where the probability of a given permutation is a function of the (Kendall) distance to the center,
scaled by the spread parameter. The problems of generating a random sample from a Mallows
distribution [10], learning the center given a set of samples from the model [4, 5], and learning in
a Mallows mixture setting [1, 6], have all been extensively studied in the literature. The ease of
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

