Information Constraints on Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes

Romain Lopez1 , Jeffrey Regier1 , Michael I. Jordan1,2 , and Nir Yosef1,3,4
{romain_lopez, regier, niryosef}@berkeley.edu
jordan@cs.berkeley.edu
1

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley
2
Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley
3
Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and Harvard
4
Chan-Zuckerberg Biohub

Abstract
Parameterizing the approximate posterior of a generative model with neural networks has become a common theme in recent machine learning research. While
providing appealing flexibility, this approach makes it difficult to impose or assess
structural constraints such as conditional independence. We propose a framework
for learning representations that relies on auto-encoding variational Bayes, in
which the search space is constrained via kernel-based measures of independence.
In particular, our method employs the d-variable Hilbert-Schmidt Independence
Criterion (dHSIC) to enforce independence between the latent representations and
arbitrary nuisance factors. We show how this method can be applied to a range
of problems, including problems that involve learning invariant and conditionally
independent representations. We also present a full-fledged application to singlecell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq). In this setting the biological signal is mixed
in complex ways with sequencing errors and sampling effects. We show that our
method outperforms the state-of-the-art approach in this domain.

1

Introduction

Since the introduction of variational auto-encoders (VAEs) [1], graphical models whose conditional
distribution are specified by deep neural networks have become commonplace. For problems where
all that matters is the goodness-of-fit (e.g., marginal log probability of the data), there is little reason
to constrain the flexibility/expressiveness of these networks other than possible considerations of
overfitting. In other problems, however, some latent representations may be preferable to others—
for example, for reasons of interpretability or modularity. Traditionally, such constraints on latent
representations have been expressed in the graphical model setting via conditional independence
assumptions. But these assumptions are relatively rigid, and with the advent of highly flexible
conditional distributions, it has become important to find ways to constrain latent representations that
go beyond the rigid conditional independence structures of classical graphical models.
In this paper, we propose a new method for restricting the search space to latent representations with
desired independence properties. As in [1], we approximate the posterior for each observation X
with an encoder network that parameterizes qφ (Z ∣ X). Restricting this search space amounts to
constraining the class of variational distributions that we consider. In particular, we aim to constrain
the aggregated variational posterior [2]:
q̂φ (Z) ∶= Epdata (X) [qφ (Z ∣ X)] .

(1)

Here pdata (X) denotes the empirical distribution. We aim to enforce independence statements of the
form q̂φ (Z i ) á q̂φ (Z j ), where i and j are different coordinates of our latent representation.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

