Query K-means Clustering and the Double Dixie Cup
Problem
I (Eli) Chien
Department ECE
UIUC
ichien3@illinois.edu

Chao Pan
Department ECE
UIUC
chaopan2@illinois.edu

Olgica Milenkovic
Department ECE
UIUC
milenkov@illinois.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of approximate K-means clustering with outliers and
side information provided by same-cluster queries and possibly noisy answers. Our
solution shows that, under some mild assumptions on the smallest cluster size,
one can obtain an (1 + )-approximation for the optimal potential with probability
3
at least 1 − δ, where  > 0 and δ ∈ (0, 1), using an expected number of O( Kδ )
noiseless same-cluster queries and comparison-based clustering of complexity
3
O(ndK + Kδ ); here, n denotes the number of points and d the dimension of
space. Compared to a handful of other known approaches that perform importance
sampling to account for small cluster sizes, the proposed query technique reduces
6
the number of queries by a factor of roughly O( K3 ), at the cost of possibly missing
very small clusters. We extend this settings to the case where some queries to the
oracle produce erroneous information, and where certain points, termed outliers,
do not belong to any clusters. Our proof techniques differ from previous methods
used for K-means clustering analysis, as they rely on estimating the sizes of
the clusters and the number of points needed for accurate centroid estimation
and subsequent nontrivial generalizations of the double Dixie cup problem. We
illustrate the performance of the proposed algorithm both on synthetic and real
datasets, including MNIST and CIFAR 10.

1

Introduction

K-means clustering is one of the most studied unsupervised learning problems [1, 2, 3] that has
a rich application domain spanning areas as diverse as lossy source coding and quantization [4],
image segmentation [5] and community detection [3]. The core question in K-means clustering is
to find a set of K centroids that minimizes the K-means potential function, equal to the sum of the
squared distances of the points from their closest centroids. An optimal set of centroids can be used
to partition the points into clusters by simply assigning each point to its closest centroid.
The K-means clustering problem is NP-hard even for the case when K= 2, and when the points lie in
a two-dimensional Euclidean space [6]. Moreover, finding an (1 + )-approximation for 0 <  < 1
remains NP-hard, unless further assumptions are made on the point and cluster structures [7, 8].
Among the state-of-the-art K-means approximation methods are the algorithms of Kanungo et al. and
Ahmadian et al [9, 10]. There also exist many heuristic algorithms for solving the problem, including
Lloyd’s algorithm [2] and Hartigan’s method [1].
An interesting new direction in K-means clustering was recently initiated by Ashtiani et al [11] who
proposed to examine the effects of side-information on the complexity of the K-means algorithm.
In their semi-supervised active clustering framework, one is allowed to query an oracle whether
two points from the dataset belong to the same optimal cluster or not. The oracle answer to queries
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

