FRAGE: Frequency-Agnostic Word Representation

Chengyue Gong1
cygong@pku.edu.cn
Tao Qin3
taoqin@microsoft.com

Di He2
di_he@pku.edu.cn

Xu Tan3
xu.tan@microsoft.com

Liwei Wang2,4
wanglw@cis.pku.edu.cn

Tie-Yan Liu3
tie-yan.liu@microsoft.com

1

Peking University
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, MOE, School of EECS, Peking University
3
Microsoft Research Asia
4
Center for Data Science, Peking University, Beijing Institute of Big Data Research

2

Abstract
Continuous word representation (aka word embedding) is a basic building block
in many neural network-based models used in natural language processing tasks.
Although it is widely accepted that words with similar semantics should be close
to each other in the embedding space, we find that word embeddings learned in
several tasks are biased towards word frequency: the embeddings of high-frequency
and low-frequency words lie in different subregions of the embedding space, and
the embedding of a rare word and a popular word can be far from each other even
if they are semantically similar. This makes learned word embeddings ineffective,
especially for rare words, and consequently limits the performance of these neural
network models. In this paper, we develop FRequency-AGnostic word Embedding
(FRAGE) which is a neat, simple yet effective way to learn word representation
using adversarial training. We conducted comprehensive studies on ten datasets
across four natural language processing tasks, including word similarity, language
modeling, machine translation, and text classification. Results show that with
FRAGE, we achieve higher performance than the baselines in all tasks.

1

Introduction

Word embeddings, which are distributed and continuous vector representations for word tokens,
have been one of the basic building blocks for many neural network-based models used in natural
language processing (NLP) tasks, such as language modeling [18, 16], text classification [24, 7] and
machine translation [4, 5, 40, 38, 11]. Different from classic one-hot representation, the learned word
embeddings contain semantic information which can measure the semantic similarity between words
[28], and can also be transferred into other learning tasks [29, 3].
In deep learning approaches for NLP tasks, word embeddings act as the inputs of the neural network
and are usually trained together with neural network parameters. As the inputs of the neural network,
word embeddings carry all the information of words that will be further processed by the network,
and the quality of embeddings is critical and highly impacts the final performance of the learning task
[15]. Unfortunately, we find the word embeddings learned by many deep learning approaches are far
from perfect. As shown in Figure 1(a) and 1(b), in the embedding space learned by word2vec model,
the nearest neighbors of word “Peking” includes “quickest”, “multicellular”, and “epigenetic”, which
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

