Evidential Deep Learning to Quantify Classification
Uncertainty

Murat Sensoy
Department of Computer Science
Ozyegin University, Turkey
murat.sensoy@ozyegin.edu.tr

Lance Kaplan
US Army Research Lab
Adelphi, MD 20783, USA
lkaplan@ieee.org

Melih Kandemir
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence
Robert-Bosch-Campus 1, 71272 Renningen, Germany
melih.kandemir@bosch.com

Abstract
Deterministic neural nets have been shown to learn effective predictors on a wide
range of machine learning problems. However, as the standard approach is to train
the network to minimize a prediction loss, the resultant model remains ignorant to
its prediction confidence. Orthogonally to Bayesian neural nets that indirectly infer
prediction uncertainty through weight uncertainties, we propose explicit modeling
of the same using the theory of subjective logic. By placing a Dirichlet distribution
on the class probabilities, we treat predictions of a neural net as subjective opinions
and learn the function that collects the evidence leading to these opinions by
a deterministic neural net from data. The resultant predictor for a multi-class
classification problem is another Dirichlet distribution whose parameters are set by
the continuous output of a neural net. We provide a preliminary analysis on how
the peculiarities of our new loss function drive improved uncertainty estimation.
We observe that our method achieves unprecedented success on detection of outof-distribution queries and endurance against adversarial perturbations.

1

Introduction

The present decade has commenced with the deep learning approach shaking the machine learning
world [20]. New-age deep neural net constructions have exhibited amazing success on nearly all
applications of machine learning thanks to recent inventions such as dropout [30], batch normalization
[13], and skip connections [11]. Further ramifications that adapt neural nets to particular applications
have brought unprecedented prediction accuracies, which in certain cases exceed human-level
performance [5, 4]. While one side of the coin is a boost of interest and investment on deep
learning research, the other is an emergent need for its robustness, sample efficiency, security, and
interpretability.
On setups where abundant labeled data are available, the capability to achieve sufficiently high
accuracy by following a short list of rules of thumb has been taken for granted. The major challenges
of the upcoming era, hence, are likely to lie elsewhere rather than test set accuracy improvement. For
instance, is the neural net able to identify data points belonging to an unrelated data distribution? Can
it simply say "I do not know" if we feed in a cat picture after training the net on a set of handwritten
digits? Even more critically, can the net protect its users against adversarial attacks? These questions
have been addressed by a stream of research on Bayesian Neural Nets (BNNs) [8, 18, 26], which
estimate prediction uncertainty by approximating the moments of the posterior predictive distribution.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

