Balanced Policy Evaluation and Learning
Nathan Kallus
Cornell University and Cornell Tech
kallus@cornell.edu

Abstract
We present a new approach to the problems of evaluating and learning personalized
decision policies from observational data of past contexts, decisions, and outcomes.
Only the outcome of the enacted decision is available and the historical policy is
unknown. These problems arise in personalized medicine using electronic health
records and in internet advertising. Existing approaches use inverse propensity
weighting (or, doubly robust versions) to make historical outcome (or, residual)
data look like it were generated by a new policy being evaluated or learned. But this
relies on a plug-in approach that rejects data points with a decision that disagrees
with the new policy, leading to high variance estimates and ineffective learning. We
propose a new, balance-based approach that too makes the data look like the new
policy but does so directly by finding weights that optimize for balance between the
weighted data and the target policy in the given, finite sample, which is equivalent
to minimizing worst-case or posterior conditional mean square error. Our policy
learner proceeds as a two-level optimization problem over policies and weights.
We demonstrate that this approach markedly outperforms existing ones both in
evaluation and learning, which is unsurprising given the wider support of balancebased weights. We establish extensive theoretical consistency guarantees and regret
bounds that support this empirical success.

1

Introduction

Using observational data with partially observed outcomes to develop new and effective personalized
decision policies has received increased attention recently [1, 7, 8, 13, 23, 29, 41–43, 45]. The
aim is to transform electronic health records to personalized treatment regimes [6], transactional
records to personalized pricing strategies [5], and click- and “like”-streams to personalized advertising
campaigns [8] – problems of great practical significance. Many of the existing methods rely on a
reduction to weighted classification via a rejection and importance sampling technique related to
inverse propensity weighting and to doubly robust estimation. However, inherent in this reduction
are several shortcomings that lead to reduced personalization efficacy: it involves a naïve plug-in
estimation of a denominator nuisance parameter leading either to high variance or scarcely-motivated
stopgaps; it necessarily rejects a significant amount of observations leading to smaller datasets in
effect; and it proceeds in a two-stage approach that is unnatural to the single learning task.
In this paper, we attempt to ameliorate these by using a new approach that directly optimizes for the
balance that is achieved only on average or asymptotically by the rejection and importance sampling
approach. We demonstrate that this new approach provides improved performance and explain why.
And, we provide extensive theory to characterize the behavior of the new methods. The proofs are
given in the supplementary material.
1.1

Setting, Notation, and Problem Description

The problem we consider is how to choose the best of m treatments based on an observation of
covariates x 2 X ✓ Rd (also known as a context). An instance is characterized by the random
variables X 2 X and Y (1), . . . , Y (m) 2 R, where X denotes the covariates and Y (t) for t 2 [m] =
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

