Regularization Learning Networks: Deep Learning
for Tabular Datasets
Ira Shavitt
Weizmann Institute of Science
irashavitt@gmail.com

Eran Segal
Weizmann Institute of Science
eran.segal@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
Despite their impressive performance, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) typically
underperform Gradient Boosting Trees (GBTs) on many tabular-dataset learning
tasks. We propose that applying a different regularization coefficient to each
weight might boost the performance of DNNs by allowing them to make more use
of the more relevant inputs. However, this will lead to an intractable number of
hyperparameters. Here, we introduce Regularization Learning Networks (RLNs),
which overcome this challenge by introducing an efficient hyperparameter tuning
scheme which minimizes a new Counterfactual Loss. Our results show that RLNs
significantly improve DNNs on tabular datasets, and achieve comparable results
to GBTs, with the best performance achieved with an ensemble that combines
GBTs and RLNs. RLNs produce extremely sparse networks, eliminating up to
99.8% of the network edges and 82% of the input features, thus providing more
interpretable models and reveal the importance that the network assigns to different inputs. RLNs could efficiently learn a single network in datasets that comprise both tabular and unstructured data, such as in the setting of medical imaging
accompanied by electronic health records. An open source implementation of
RLN can be found at https://github.com/irashavitt/regularization_
learning_networks.

1 Introduction
Despite their impressive achievements on various prediction tasks on datasets with distributed representation [14, 4, 5] such as images [19], speech [9], and text [18], there are many tasks in which
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) underperform compared to other models such as Gradient Boosting
Trees (GBTs). This is evident in various Kaggle [1, 2], or KDD Cup [7, 16, 27] competitions, which
are typically won by GBT-based approaches and specifically by its XGBoost [8] implementation,
either when run alone or within a combination of several different types of models.
The datasets in which neural networks are inferior to GBTs typically have different statistical properties. Consider the task of image recognition as compared to the task of predicting the life expectancy
of patients based on electronic health records. One key difference is that in image classification,
many pixels need to change in order for the image to depict a different object [25].1 In contrast, the
relative contribution of the input features in the electronic health records example can vary greatly:
Changing a single input such as the age of the patient can profoundly impact the life expectancy of
the patient, while changes in other input features, such as the time that passed since the last test was
taken, may have smaller effects.
1
This is not contradictory to the existence of adversarial examples [12], which are able to fool DNNs by
changing a small number of input features, but do not actually depict a different object, and generally are not
able to fool humans.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

