Beyond Grids: Learning Graph Representations
for Visual Recognition

Yin Li ∗
Department of Biostatistics & Medical Informatics
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin–Madison
yin.li@wisc.edu

Abhinav Gupta
The Robotics Institute
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
abhinavg@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We propose learning graph representations from 2D feature maps for visual recognition. Our method draws inspiration from region based recognition, and learns
to transform a 2D image into a graph structure. The vertices of the graph define
clusters of pixels (“regions”), and the edges measure the similarity between these
clusters in a feature space. Our method further learns to propagate information
across all vertices on the graph, and is able to project the learned graph representation back into 2D grids. Our graph representation facilitates reasoning beyond
regular grids and can capture long range dependencies among regions. We demonstrate that our model can be trained from end-to-end, and is easily integrated into
existing networks. Finally, we evaluate our method on three challenging recognition
tasks: semantic segmentation, object detection and object instance segmentation.
For all tasks, our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Deep convolutional networks have been tremendously successful for visual recognition [1]. These
deep models stack many local operations of convolution and pooling. The assumption is that this
stacking will not only provide a strong model for local patterns, but also create a large receptive field
to capture long range dependencies, e.g., contextual relations between an object and other elements
of the scene. However, this approach for modeling context is highly inefficient. A recent study [2]
showed that even after hundreds of convolutions, the effective receptive field of a network’s units is
severely limited. Such a model may fail to incorporate global context beyond local regions.
Instead of the “deep stacking”, one appealing idea is using image regions for context reasoning and
visual recognition [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. This paradigm builds on the theory of perceptual organization,
and starts by grouping pixels into a small set of coherent regions. Recognition and context modeling
are often postulated as an inference problem on a graph structure [8, 10]–with regions as vertices
and the similarity between regions as edges. This graph thus encodes dependencies between regions.
These dependencies are of much longer range than those are captured by local convolutions.
Inspired by region based recognition, we propose a novel approach for capturing long range dependencies using deep networks. Our key idea is to move beyond regular grids, and learn a graph
representation for a 2D input image or feature map. This graph has its vertices defining clusters of
pixels (“regions”), and its edges measuring the similarity between these clusters in a feature space.
Our method further learns to propagate messages across all vertices on this graph, making it possible
to share global information in a single operation. Finally, our method is able to project the learned
graph representation back into 2D grids, and thus is fully compatible with existing networks.
∗

The work was done when Y. Li was at CMU.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

