Hardware Conditioned Policies for Multi-Robot
Transfer Learning

Tao Chen
The Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
taoc1@cs.cmu.edu

Adithyavairavan Murali
The Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
amurali@cs.cmu.edu

Abhinav Gupta
The Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
abhinavg@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Deep reinforcement learning could be used to learn dexterous robotic policies
but it is challenging to transfer them to new robots with vastly different hardware
properties. It is also prohibitively expensive to learn a new policy from scratch
for each robot hardware due to the high sample complexity of modern state-ofthe-art algorithms. We propose a novel approach called Hardware Conditioned
Policies where we train a universal policy conditioned on a vector representation
of robot hardware. We considered robots in simulation with varied dynamics,
kinematic structure, kinematic lengths and degrees-of-freedom. First, we use the
kinematic structure directly as the hardware encoding and show great zero-shot
transfer to completely novel robots not seen during training. For robots with lower
zero-shot success rate, we also demonstrate that fine-tuning the policy network
is significantly more sample-efficient than training a model from scratch. In
tasks where knowing the agent dynamics is important for success, we learn an
embedding for robot hardware and show that policies conditioned on the encoding
of hardware tend to generalize and transfer well. Videos of experiments are
available at: https://sites.google.com/view/robot-transfer-hcp.

1

Introduction

In recent years, we have seen remarkable success in the field of deep reinforcement learning (DRL).
From learning policies for games [1, 2] to training robots in simulators [3], neural network based
policies have shown remarkable success. But will these successes translate to real world robots? Can
we use DRL for learning policies of how to open a bottle, grasping or even simpler tasks like fixturing
and peg-insertion? One major shortcoming of current approaches is that they are not sample-efficient.
We need millions of training examples to learn policies for even simple actions. Another major
bottleneck is that these policies are specific to the hardware on which training is performed. If we
apply a policy trained on one robot to a different robot it will fail to generalize. Therefore, in this
paradigm, one would need to collect millions of examples for each task and each robot.
But what makes this problem even more frustrating is that since there is no standardization in terms
of hardware, different labs collect large-scale data using different hardware. These hardware vary in
degrees of freedom (DOF), kinematic design and even dynamics. Because the learning process is so
hardware-specific, there is no way to pool and use all the shared data collected across using different
types of robots, especially when the robots are trained under torque control. There have been efforts
to overcome dependence on hardware properties by learning invariance to robot dynamics using
dynamic randomization [4]. However, learning a policy invariant to other hardware properties such
as degrees of freedom and kinematic structure is a challenging problem.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

