KONG: Kernels for ordered-neighborhood graphs

Moez Draief1
Konstantin Kutzkov2
Kevin Scaman1
Milan Vojnovic2
1
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
London School of Economics, London
moez.draief@huawei.com, kutzkov@gmail.com (Corresponding author),
kevin.scaman@huawei.com, m.vojnovic@lse.ac.uk

Abstract
We present novel graph kernels for graphs with node and edge labels that have
ordered neighborhoods, i.e. when neighbor nodes follow an order. Graphs with
ordered neighborhoods are a natural data representation for evolving graphs where
edges are created over time, which induces an order. Combining convolutional
subgraph kernels and string kernels, we design new scalable algorithms for generation of explicit graph feature maps using sketching techniques. We obtain
precise bounds for the approximation accuracy and computational complexity of
the proposed approaches and demonstrate their applicability on real datasets. In
particular, our experiments demonstrate that neighborhood ordering results in more
informative features. For the special case of general graphs, i.e., graphs without
ordered neighborhoods, the new graph kernels yield efficient and simple algorithms
for the comparison of label distributions between graphs.

1

Introduction

Graphs are ubiquitous representations for structured data and have found numerous applications in
machine learning and related fields, ranging from community detection in online social networks [Fortunato, 2010] to protein structure prediction [Rual et al., 2005]. Unsurprisingly, learning from graphs
has attracted much attention from the research community. Graphs kernels have become a standard
tool for graph classification [Kriege et al., 2017]. Given a large collection of graphs, possibly with
node and edge attributes, we are interested in learning a kernel function that best captures the similarity between any two graphs. The graph kernel function can be used to classify graphs using standard
kernel methods such as support vector machines.
Graph similarity is a broadly defined concept and therefore many different graph kernels with different
properties have been proposed. Previous works have considered graph kernels for different graph
classes distinguishing between simple unweighted graphs without node or edge attributes, graphs with
discrete node and edge labels, and graphs with more complex attributes such as real-valued vectors
and partial labels. For evolving graphs, the ordering of the node neighborhoods can be indicative for
the graph class. Concrete examples include graphs that describe user web browsing patterns, evolving
networks such as social graphs, product purchases and reviews, ratings in recommendation systems,
co-authorship networks, and software API calls used for malware detection.
The order in which edges are created can be informative about the structure of the original data. To
the best of our knowledge, existing graph kernels do not consider this aspect. Addressing the gap, we
present a novel framework for graph kernels where the edges adjacent to a node follow specific order.
The proposed algorithmic framework KONG, referring to Kernels for Ordered-Neighborhood Graphs,
accommodates highly efficient algorithms that scale to both massive graphs and large collections
of graphs. The key ideas are: (a) representation of each node neighborhood by a string using a tree
traversal method, and (b) efficient computation of explicit graph feature maps based on generating kgram frequency vectors of each node’s string without explicitly storing the strings. The latter enables
to approximate the explicit feature maps of various kernel functions using sketching techniques.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

