Binary Classification from Positive-Confidence Data
Takashi Ishida1,2 Gang Niu2 Masashi Sugiyama2,1
1
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
2
RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan
{ishida@ms., sugi@}k.u-tokyo.ac.jp, gang.niu@riken.jp

Abstract
Can we learn a binary classifier from only positive data, without any negative data
or unlabeled data? We show that if one can equip positive data with confidence
(positive-confidence), one can successfully learn a binary classifier, which we name
positive-confidence (Pconf) classification. Our work is related to one-class classification which is aimed at “describing” the positive class by clustering-related methods, but one-class classification does not have the ability to tune hyper-parameters
and their aim is not on “discriminating” positive and negative classes. For the Pconf
classification problem, we provide a simple empirical risk minimization framework
that is model-independent and optimization-independent. We theoretically establish the consistency and an estimation error bound, and demonstrate the usefulness
of the proposed method for training deep neural networks through experiments.

1

Introduction

Machine learning with big labeled data has been highly successful in applications such as image
recognition, speech recognition, recommendation, and machine translation [14]. However, in many
other real-world problems including robotics, disaster resilience, medical diagnosis, and bioinformatics, massive labeled data cannot be easily collected typically. For this reason, machine learning
from weak supervision has been actively explored recently, including semi-supervised classification [6, 30, 40, 53, 23, 36], one-class classification [5, 21, 42, 51, 16, 46], positive-unlabeled (PU)
classification [12, 33, 8, 9, 34, 24, 41], label-proportion classification [39, 54], unlabeled-unlabeled
classification [7, 29, 26], complementary-label classification [18, 55, 19], and similar-unlabeled
classification [1].
In this paper, we consider a novel setting of classification from weak supervision called positiveconfidence (Pconf) classification, which is aimed at training a binary classifier only from positive data
equipped with confidence, without negative data. Such a Pconf classification scenario is conceivable
in various real-world problems. For example, in purchase prediction, we can easily collect customer
data from our own company (positive data), but not from rival companies (negative data). Often times,
our customers are asked to answer questionnaires/surveys on how strong their buying intention was
over rival products. This may be transformed into a probability between 0 and 1 by pre-processing,
and then it can be used as positive-confidence, which is all we need for Pconf classification.
Another example is a common task for app developers, where they need to predict whether app users
will continue using the app or unsubscribe in the future. The critical issue is that depending on the
privacy/opt-out policy or data regulation, they need to fully discard the unsubscribed user’s data.
Hence, developers will not have access to users who quit using their services, but they can associate a
positive-confidence score with each remaining user by, e.g., how actively they use the app.
In these applications, as long as positive-confidence data can be collected, Pconf classification allows
us to obtain a classifier that discriminates between positive and negative data.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

