Learning from discriminative feature feedback
Sanjoy Dasgupta, Akansha Dey, Nicholas Roberts
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of California, San Diego
dasgupta@eng.ucsd.edu,n3robert@ucsd.edu,a1dey@ucsd.edu
Sivan Sabato
Department of Computer Science
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
sabatos@cs.bgu.ac.il

Abstract
We consider the problem of learning a multi-class classifier from labels as well
as simple explanations that we call discriminative features. We show that such
explanations can be provided whenever the target concept is a decision tree, or
can be expressed as a particular type of multi-class DNF formula. We present an
efficient online algorithm for learning from such feedback and we give tight bounds
on the number of mistakes made during the learning process. These bounds depend
only on the representation size of the target concept and not on the overall number
of available features, which could be infinite. We also demonstrate the learning
procedure experimentally.

1

Introduction

Communication between humans and machine learning systems has typically been restricted to labels
alone. A human provides labels for a data set and in return gets a classifier that predicts labels of
new instances. This is a lot more rigid than the way humans learn. The field of interactive learning
explores richer learning frameworks in which the machine engages with the human (or other sources
of annotation) while learning is taking place, and the communication between the two is allowed to be
more varied. A key question in this enterprise is whether such interaction can overcome fundamental
algorithmic and statistical barriers to learning.
The one interactive framework that has perhaps been explored the most thoroughly is active learning
of classifiers. Here, the learning machine begins with just a pool of unlabeled data, and interacts with
a human by asking for labels of specific points. By adaptively focusing on maximally informative
points, it can sometimes dramatically reduce the amount of labeling effort. Indeed, over the past
two decades, a number of active learning algorithms have been designed that provably require only
logarithmically as many labels as random querying, or otherwise reduce the labeling requirement
considerably, in a variety of canonical settings, e.g. [1, 7].
In this paper, our interest is in feedback that goes beyond labels, to simple explanations of a particular
type. Imagine, for instance, that you have just finished watching a movie in your living room, and
your electronic assistant—Siri, Alexa, or one of their colleagues—asks “Did you like the movie?”
You dutifully reply “yes”, in effect providing a labeled data point. But then you casually add “I really
like John Hurt”. This last piece of information is spontaneous and does not require extra effort. But it
can be far more useful, for the purposes of determining what movie to recommend next, than a mere
thumbs-up or thumbs-down label. This kind of explanation could be called feature feedback, because
it helps identify relevant features in a high-dimensional space of rationales for user preferences.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

