Stochastic Composite Mirror Descent: Optimal
Bounds with High Probabilities

Yunwen Lei and Ke Tang∗
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Computational Intelligence, Department of Computer Science
and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China
leiyw@sustc.edu.cn tangk3@sustc.edu.cn

Abstract
We study stochastic composite mirror descent, a class of scalable algorithms able
to exploit the geometry and composite structure of a problem. We consider both
convex and strongly convex objectives with non-smooth loss functions, for each
of which we establish high-probability convergence rates optimal up to a logarithmic factor. We apply the derived computational error bounds to study the
generalization performance of multi-pass stochastic gradient descent (SGD) in a
non-parametric setting. Our high-probability generalization bounds enjoy a logarithmical dependency on the number of passes provided that the step size sequence
is square-summable, which improves the existing bounds in expectation with a
polynomial dependency and therefore gives a strong justification on the ability
of multi-pass SGD to overcome overfitting. Our analysis removes boundedness
assumptions on subgradients often imposed in the literature. Numerical results are
reported to support our theoretical findings.

1

Introduction

Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) has found wide applications in machine learning problems due
to its simplicity in implementation, low memory requirement and low computational complexity
per iteration, as well as good practical behavior [2, 6, 28, 32, 41]. As an iterative method, SGD
minimizes empirical errors by moving iterates along the direction of a negative gradient calculated
based on a loss function on a single training example or a batch of few examples. This strategy of
processing few examples per iteration makes SGD particularly suitable for large scale applications
with very large data points [2, 41], which are becoming ubiquitous in the big data era.
Stochastic composite mirror descent (SCMD) is a powerful extension of SGD based on two motivations [12]. Firstly, it relaxes the Hilbert space structure of SGD by using a mirror map to capture
geometric properties of data from a Banach space [4, 25]. Secondly, it exploits the problem structure
by separating, at every iteration, a data-fitting term and a regularization term in structured optimization
problems to obtain a desired regularization effect, which arise naturally since a regularizer is often
introduced to either avoid overfitting or impose a priori information [12, 37].
Although much theoretical analysis has been performed to understand the practical behavior of
SGD and SCMD, the existing theoretical results are still not quite satisfactory. Firstly, most of
the existing theoretical results are stated in expectation which inevitably ignore some information
on high-order moments of the random variable we are interested in. In practice, we may be more
interested in high-probability bounds to understand the variability of the learned model which is
also an important factor we should take into account when measuring the quality of models [32].
Secondly, the existing generalization bounds, stated in expectation, for SGD either are suboptimal
∗

Corresponding author

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

