Dual Principal Component Pursuit:
Improved Analysis and Efficient Algorithms

Zhihui Zhu
MINDS
Johns Hopkins University

Yifan Wang
SIST
ShanghaiTech University

Daniel Robinson
AMS
Johns Hopkins University

zzhu29@jhu.edu

wangyf@shanghaitech.edu.cn

daniel.p.robinson@jhu.edu

Daniel Naiman
AMS
Johns Hopkins University

Rene Vidal
MINDS
Johns Hopkins University

Manolis C. Tsakiris
SIST
ShanghaiTech University

daniel.naiman@jhu.edu

rvidal@jhu.edu

mtsakiris@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent methods for learning a linear subspace from data corrupted by outliers are
based on convex `1 and nuclear norm optimization and require the dimension of
the subspace and the number of outliers to be sufficiently small [27]. In sharp
contrast, the recently proposed Dual Principal Component Pursuit (DPCP) method
[22] can provably handle subspaces of high dimension by solving a non-convex `1
optimization problem on the sphere. However, its geometric analysis is based on
quantities that are difficult to interpret and are not amenable to statistical analysis.
In this paper we provide a refined geometric analysis and a new statistical analysis
that show that DPCP can tolerate as many outliers as the square of the number of
inliers, thus improving upon other provably correct robust PCA methods. We also
propose a scalable Projected Sub-Gradient Method (DPCP-PSGM) for solving
the DPCP problem and show that it achieves linear convergence even though the
underlying optimization problem is non-convex and non-smooth. Experiments on
road plane detection from 3D point cloud data demonstrate that DPCP-PSGM can
be more efficient than the traditional RANSAC algorithm, which is one of the most
popular methods for such computer vision applications.

1

Introduction

Fitting a linear subspace to a dataset corrupted by outliers is a fundamental problem in machine
learning and statistics, primarily known as (Robust) Principal Component Analysis (PCA) [10, 2].
The classical formulation of PCA, dating back to Carl F. Gauss, is based on minimizing the sum of
squares of the distances of all points in the dataset to the estimated linear subspace. Although this
problem is non-convex, it admits a closed form solution given by the span of the top eigenvectors of
the data covariance matrix. Nevertheless, it is well-known that the presence of outliers can severely
affect the quality of the computed solution because the Euclidean norm is not robust to outliers.
The sensitivity of classical `2 -based PCA to outliers has been addressed by using robust maximum
likelihood covariance estimators, such as the one in [25]. However, the associated optimization
problems are non-convex and thus difficult to provide global optimality guarantees. Another classical
approach is the exhaustive-search method of Random Sampling And Consensus (RANSAC) [5], which
given a time budget, computes at each iteration a d-dimensional subspace as the span of d randomly
chosen points, and outputs the subspace that agrees with the largest number of points. Even though
RANSAC is currently one of the most popular methods in many computer vision applications such as
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

