Generalization Bounds for Uniformly Stable
Algorithms

Vitaly Feldman
Google Brain

Jan Vondrak
Stanford University

Abstract
Uniform stability of a learning algorithm is a classical notion of algorithmic stability
introduced to derive high-probability bounds on the generalization error (Bousquet
and Elisseeff, 2002). Specifically, for a loss function with range bounded in [0, 1],
the generalization error of a γ-uniformly
p stable learning algorithm on n samples
is known to be within O((γ + 1/n) n log(1/δ)) of the empirical error with
probability at least 1 − δ. Unfortunately, this bound does not lead
√ to meaningful
generalization bounds in many common settings where γ ≥ 1/ n. At the same
time the bound is known to be tight only when γ = O(1/n).
We substantially improve generalization bounds for uniformly stable algorithms
without making
p any additional assumptions. First, we show that the bound in this
setting is O( (γ + 1/n) log(1/δ)) with probability at least 1 − δ. In addition,
we prove a tight bound of O(γ 2 + 1/n) on the second moment of the estimation
error. The best previous bound on the second moment is O(γ + 1/n). Our proofs
are based on new analysis techniques and our results imply substantially stronger
generalization guarantees for several well-studied algorithms.

1

Introduction

We consider the basic problem of estimating the generalization error of learning algorithms. Over
the last couple of decades, a remarkably rich and deep theory has been developed for bounding
the generalization error via notions of complexity of the class of models (or predictors) output by
the learning algorithm. At the same time, for a variety of learning algorithms this theory does not
provide satisfactory bounds (even as compared with other theoretical analyses). Most notable among
these are continuous optimization algorithms that play the central role in modern machine learning.
For example, the standard generalization error bounds for stochastic gradient descent (SGD) on
convex Lipschitz functions cannot be obtained by proving uniform convergence for all empirical risk
minimizers (ERM) [13,
√ 26]. Specifically, there exist empirical risk minimizing algorithms whose
generalization error is d times larger than the generalization error of SGD, where d is the dimension
of the problem (without the Lipschitzness assumption the gap is infinite even for d = 2) [13]. This
disparity stems from the fact that uniform convergence bounds largely ignore the way in which
the model output by the algorithm depends on the data. We note that in the restricted setting of
generalized linear models one can obtain tight generalization bounds via uniform convergence [15].
Another classical and popular approach to proving generalization bounds is to analyze the stability of
the learning algorithm to changes in the dataset. This approach has been used to obtain relatively
strong generalization bounds for several convex optimization algorithms. For example, the seminal
works of Bousquet and Elisseeff [4] and Shalev-Shwartz et al. [26] demonstrate that for strongly
convex losses the ERM solution is stable. The use of stability is also implicit in standard analyses
of online convex optimization [26] and online-to-batch conversion [5]. More recently, Hardt et al.
[14] showed that for convex smooth losses the solution obtained via (stochastic) gradient descent is
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

