Constructing Fast Network
through Deconstruction of Convolution

Yunho Jeon
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST
jyh2986@kaist.ac.kr

Junmo Kim
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST
junmo.kim@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks have achieved great success in various vision tasks;
however, they incur heavy resource costs. By using deeper and wider networks,
network accuracy can be improved rapidly. However, in an environment with
limited resources (e.g., mobile applications), heavy networks may not be usable.
This study shows that naive convolution can be deconstructed into a shift operation
and pointwise convolution. To cope with various convolutions, we propose a
new shift operation called active shift layer (ASL) that formulates the amount
of shift as a learnable function with shift parameters. This new layer can be
optimized end-to-end through backpropagation and it can provide optimal shift
values. Finally, we apply this layer to a light and fast network that surpasses
existing state-of-the-art networks. Code is available at https://github.com/
jyh2986/Active-Shift.

1

Introduction

Deep learning has been applied successfully in various fields. For example, convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) have been developed and applied successfully to a wide variety of vision tasks.
In this light, the current study examines various network structures[15, 19, 21, 20, 22, 6, 7, 9]. In
particular, networks are being made deeper and wider because doing so improves accuracy. This
approach has been facilitated by hardware developments such as graphics processing units (GPUs).
However, this approach increases the inference and training times and consumes more memory.
Therefore, a large network might not be implementable in environments with limited resources, such
as mobile applications. In fact, accuracy may need to be sacrificed in such environments. Two
main types of approaches have been proposed to avoid this problem. The first approach is network
reduction via pruning[5, 4, 17], in which the learned network is reduced while maximizing accuracy.
This method can be applied to most general network architectures. However, it requires additional
processes after or during training, and therefore, it may further increase the overall amount of time
required for preparing the final networks.
The second approach is to use lightweight network architectures[10, 8, 18] or new components[13,
23, 26] to accommodate limited environments. This approach does not focus only on limited
resource environments; it can provide better solutions for many applications by reducing resource
usage while maintaining or even improving accuracy. Recently, grouped or depthwise convolution
has attracted attention because it reduces the computational complexity greatly while maintaining
accuracy. Therefore, it has been adopted in many new architectures[2, 24, 8, 18, 26].
Decomposing a convolution is effective for reducing the number of parameters and computational
complexity. Initially, a large convolution was decomposed using several small convolutions[19, 22].
Binary pattern networks[13] have also been proposed to reduce network size. This raises the
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

