Local Differential Privacy for Evolving Data

Matthew Joseph
Computer and Information Science
University of Pennsylvania
majos@cis.upenn.edu

Aaron Roth
Computer and Information Science
University of Pennsylvania
aaroth@cis.upenn.edu

Jonathan Ullman
Computer and Information Sciences
Northeastern University
jullman@ccs.neu.edu

Bo Waggoner
Computer and Information Science
University of Pennsylvania
bowaggoner@gmail.com

Abstract
There are now several large scale deployments of differential privacy used to
collect statistical information about users. However, these deployments periodically
recollect the data and recompute the statistics using algorithms designed for a single
use. As a result, these systems do not provide meaningful privacy guarantees over
long time scales. Moreover, existing techniques to mitigate this effect do not apply
in the “local model” of differential privacy that these systems use.
In this paper, we introduce a new technique for local differential privacy that makes
it possible to maintain up-to-date statistics over time, with privacy guarantees that
degrade only in the number of changes in the underlying distribution rather than
the number of collection periods. We use our technique for tracking a changing
statistic in the setting where users are partitioned into an unknown collection of
groups, and at every time period each user draws a single bit from a common (but
changing) group-specific distribution. We also provide an application to frequency
and heavy-hitter estimation.

1

Introduction

After over a decade of research, differential privacy [12] is moving from theory to practice, with
notable deployments by Google [15, 6], Apple [2], Microsoft [10], and the U.S. Census Bureau [1].
These deployments have revealed gaps between existing theory and the needs of practitioners. For
example, the bulk of the differential privacy literature has focused on the central model, in which user
data is collected by a trusted aggregator who performs and publishes the results of a differentially
private computation [11]. However, Google, Apple, and Microsoft have instead chosen to operate in
the local model [15, 6, 2, 10], where users individually randomize their data on their own devices and
send it to a potentially untrusted aggregator for analysis [18]. In addition, the academic literature has
largely focused on algorithms for performing one-time computations, like estimating many statistical
quantities [7, 22, 16] or training a classifier [18, 9, 4]. Industrial applications, however have focused
on tracking statistics about a user population, like the set of most frequently used emojis or words [2].
These statistics evolve over time and so must be re-computed periodically.
Together, the two problems of periodically recomputing a population statistic and operating in the local
model pose a challenge. Naïvely repeating a differentially private computation causes the privacy loss
to degrade as the square root of the number of recomputations, quickly leading to enormous values of
. This naïve strategy is what is used in practice [15, 6, 2]. As a result, Tang et al. [23] discovered that
the privacy parameters guaranteed by Apple’s implementation of differentially private data collection
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

