Minimax statistical learning
with Wasserstein distances
Jaeho Lee
Maxim Raginsky
{jlee620, maxim}@illinois.edu⇤

Abstract
As opposed to standard empirical risk minimization (ERM), distributionally robust
optimization aims to minimize the worst-case risk over a larger ambiguity set
containing the original empirical distribution of the training data. In this work,
we describe a minimax framework for statistical learning with ambiguity sets
given by balls in Wasserstein space. In particular, we prove generalization bounds
that involve the covering number properties of the original ERM problem. As
an illustrative example, we provide generalization guarantees for transport-based
domain adaptation problems where the Wasserstein distance between the source
and target domain distributions can be reliably estimated from unlabeled samples.

1

Introduction

In the traditional paradigm of statistical learning [20], we have a class P of probability measures on
a measurable instance space Z and a class F of measurable functions f : Z ! R+ . Each f 2 F
quantifies the loss of some decision rule or a hypothesis applied to instances z 2 Z, so, with a slight
abuse of terminology, we will refer to F as the hypothesis space. The (expected) risk of a hypothesis
f on instances generated according to P is given by
Z
R(P, f ) := EP [f (Z)] =
f (z)P (dz).
Z

Given an n-tuple Z1 , . . . , Zn of i.i.d. training examples drawn from an unknown P 2 P, the objective
is to find a hypothesis fb 2 F whose risk R(P, fb) is close to the minimum risk
R⇤ (P, F) := inf R(P, f )
f 2F

(1)

with high probability. Under suitable regularity assumptions, this objective can be accomplished via
Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) [20, 13]:
n

R(Pn , f ) =
where Pn := n1

Pn

1X
f (Zi ) ! min, f 2 F
n i=1

(2)

i=1 Zi is the empirical distribution of the training examples.

Recently, however, an alternative viewpoint has emerged, inspired by ideas from robust statistics and
robust stochastic optimization. In this distributionally robust framework, instead of solving the ERM
problem (2), one aims to solve the minimax problem
sup
Q2A(Pn )

R(Q, f ) ! min, f 2 F

⇤

(3)

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of
Illinois, Urbana, IL 61801, USA. This work was supported in part by NSF grant nos. CIF-1527 388 and
CIF-1302438, and in part by the NSF CAREER award 1254041.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

