Stochastic Expectation Maximization
with Variance Reduction

†

Jianfei Chen† , Jun Zhu†∗, Yee Whye Teh‡ and Tong Zhang§
Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., BNRist Center, State Key Lab for Intell. Tech. & Sys.,
Institute for AI, THBI Lab, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China
‡
Department of Statistics, University of Oxford
§
Tencent AI Lab
{chenjian14@mails,dcszj@}.tsinghua.edu.cn
y.w.teh@stats.ox.ac.uk; tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org

Abstract
Expectation-Maximization (EM) is a popular tool for learning latent variable
models, but the vanilla batch EM does not scale to large data sets because the whole
data set is needed at every E-step. Stochastic Expectation Maximization (sEM)
reduces the cost of E-step by stochastic approximation. However, sEM has a slower
asymptotic convergence rate than batch EM, and requires a decreasing sequence of
step sizes, which is difficult to tune. In this paper, we propose a variance reduced
stochastic EM (sEM-vr) algorithm inspired by variance reduced stochastic gradient
descent algorithms. We show that sEM-vr has the same exponential asymptotic
convergence rate as batch EM. Moreover, sEM-vr only requires a constant step size
to achieve this rate, which alleviates the burden of parameter tuning. We compare
sEM-vr with batch EM, sEM and other algorithms on Gaussian mixture models and
probabilistic latent semantic analysis, and sEM-vr converges significantly faster
than these baselines.

1

Introduction

Latent variable models are an important class of models due to their wide applicability across machine
learning and statistics. Examples include factor analysis in psychology and the understanding of
human cognition [32], hidden Markov models for modelling sequences, e.g. speech and language
[29], and DNA [15], document and topic models [17, 4] and mixture models for density estimation
and clustering [26]. Expectation Maximization (EM) [12] is a basic tool for maximum likelihood
estimation for the parameters in latent variable models. It is an iterative algorithm with two steps:
an E-step which calculates the expectation of sufficient statistics under the latent variable posteriors
given the current parameters, and an M-step which updates the parameters given the expectations.
With the phenomenal growth in big data sets in recent years, the basic batch EM (bEM) algorithm
in [12] is quickly becoming infeasible because the whole data set is needed at every E-step. Cappé
and Moulines [6] proposed a stochastic EM (sEM) algorithm for exponential family models, which
reduces the time complexity for the E-step by approximating the full-batch expectation with an
exponential moving average over minibatches of data. sEM has been adopted in many applications
including natural language processing [24], topic modeling [16, 14] and hidden Markov models [5].
However, sEM has a slow asymptotic convergence rate due to the high variance of each update.
Unlike the original batch EM (bEM), which converges exponentially√fast near a local optimum, the
distance towards a local optimum only decreases at the rate O(1/ T ) for sEM, where T is the
∗

corresponding author

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

