Video Prediction via Selective Sampling

Jingwei Xu, Bingbing Ni∗, Xiaokang Yang
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute
SJTU-UCLA Joint Research Center on Machine Perception and Inference,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Communication and Data Science
xjwxjw,nibingbing,xkyang@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Most adversarial learning based video prediction methods suffer from image blur,
since the commonly used adversarial and regression loss pair work rather in a
competitive way than collaboration, yielding compromised blur effect. In the
meantime, as often relying on a single-pass architecture, the predictor is inadequate
to explicitly capture the forthcoming uncertainty. Our work involves two key
insights: (1) Video prediction can be approached as a stochastic process: we sample
a collection of proposals conforming to possible frame distribution at following time
stamp, and one can select the final prediction from it. (2) De-coupling combined
loss functions into dedicatedly designed sub-networks encourages them to work
in a collaborative way. Combining above two insights we propose a two-stage
framework called VPSS (Video Prediction via Selective Sampling). Specifically a
Sampling module produces a collection of high quality proposals, facilitated by a
multiple choice adversarial learning scheme, yielding diverse frame proposal set.
Subsequently a Selection module selects high possibility candidates from proposals
and combines them to produce final prediction. Extensive experiments on diverse
challenging datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of proposed video prediction
approach, i.e., yielding more diverse proposals and accurate prediction results.

1

Introduction

Video prediction has been receiving increasing research attention in computer vision [3, 29, 10, 8, 19],
which has great potentials in applications such as future decision, robot manipulation and autonomous
driving [20]. Previous methods [10, 19] with pixel-wise regression loss tend to produce blurry
results as they seek the average from possible futures [29]. To enhance the generation quality, some
works [8, 34] utilize adversarial learning [13] to facilitate video prediction task, i.e., adding an
adversarial loss [13] on the prediction module.
However, paired regression and adversarial loss still CANNOT solve image blur and motion deformation problems in principle. A generator often struggles to balance between adversarial [13] and
regression loss during training procedure [18, 2, 5], thus most possibly yielding an averaged result.
As in worse case either adversarial [13] or regression loss tend to take dominate place, which forces
the other term to fail to play its role. In other words, both loss functions work rather in a competitive
way than collaboration. We start to think: (1) To address the blur issue, is it possible to sample
a collection of high quality proposals conforming to possible frame distribution at following time
stamp, and select the final prediction from it? (2) To encourage collaboration between loss functions,
is it possible to design dedicated sub-networks for adversarial and regression loss respectively?
∗

Corresponding Author

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

