Removing Hidden Confounding by
Experimental Grounding

Nathan Kallus
Cornell University and Cornell Tech
New York, NY
kallus@cornell.edu

Aahlad Manas Puli
New York University
New York, NY
apm470@nyu.edu

Uri Shalit
Technion
Haifa, Israel
urishalit@technion.ac.il

Abstract
Observational data is increasingly used as a means for making individual-level
causal predictions and intervention recommendations. The foremost challenge of
causal inference from observational data is hidden confounding, whose presence
cannot be tested in data and can invalidate any causal conclusion. Experimental
data does not suffer from confounding but is usually limited in both scope and
scale. We introduce a novel method of using limited experimental data to correct
the hidden confounding in causal effect models trained on larger observational data,
even if the observational data does not fully overlap with the experimental data.
Our method makes strictly weaker assumptions than existing approaches, and we
prove conditions under which it yields a consistent estimator. We demonstrate our
method’s efficacy using real-world data from a large educational experiment.

1

Introduction

In domains such as healthcare, education, and marketing there is growing interest in using observational data to draw causal conclusions about individual-level effects; for example, using electronic
healthcare records to determine which patients should get what treatments, using school records to
optimize educational policy interventions, or using past advertising campaign data to refine targeting
and maximize lift. Observational datasets, due to their often very large number of samples and
exhaustive scope (many measured covariates) in comparison to experimental datasets, offer a unique
opportunity to uncover fine-grained effects that may apply to many target populations.
However, a significant obstacle when attempting to draw causal conclusions from observational data
is the problem of hidden confounders: factors that affect both treatment assignment and outcome, but
are unmeasured in the observational data. Example cases where hidden confounders arise include
physicians prescribing medication based on indicators not present in the health record, or classes
being assigned a teacher’s aide because of special efforts by a competent school principal. Hidden
confounding can lead to no-vanishing bias in causal estimates even in the limit of infinite samples
[Pea09].
In an observational study, one can never prove that there is no hidden confounding [Pea09]. However,
a possible fix can be found if there exists a Randomized Controlled Trial (RCT) testing the effect
of the intervention in question. For example, if a Health Management Organization (HMO) is
considering the effect of a medication on its patient population, it might look at an RCT which tested
this medication. The problem with using RCTs is that often their participants do not fully reflect the
target population. As an example, an HMO in California might have to use an RCT from Switzerland,
conducted perhaps several years ago, on a much smaller population. The problem of generalizing
conclusions from an RCT to a different target population is known as the problem of external validity
[Rot05, AO17], or more specifically, transportability [BP13, PB14].
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

