Connecting Optimization and Regularization Paths
Arun Sai Suggala
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
asuggala@cs.cmu.edu

Adarsh Prasad
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
adarshp@cs.cmu.edu

Pradeep Ravikumar
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
pradeepr@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We study the implicit regularization properties of optimization techniques by
explicitly connecting their optimization paths to the regularization paths of “corresponding” regularized problems. This surprising connection shows that iterates
of optimization techniques such as gradient descent and mirror descent are pointwise close to solutions of appropriately regularized objectives. While such a tight
connection between optimization and regularization is of independent intellectual
interest, it also has important implications for machine learning: we can port results
from regularized estimators to optimization, and vice versa. We investigate one key
consequence, that borrows from the well-studied analysis of regularized estimators,
to then obtain tight excess risk bounds of the iterates generated by optimization
techniques.

1

Introduction

With the recent success of optimization techniques in training over-parametrized deep neural networks,
there has been a growing interest in understanding the implicit regularization properties of various
optimization techniques. Consequently, a line of work has focused on characterizing the implicit
biases of global optimum reached by various optimization algorithms. For example, Gunasekar
et al. [2017] consider the problem of matrix factorization and show that gradient descent (GD) on
un-regularized objective converges to the minimum nuclear norm solution. Soudry et al. [2017]
study gradient descent on un-regularized logistic regression and show that when the data is linearly
separable, gradient descent converges to a max-margin solution. Gunasekar et al. [2018] generalized
the results of Soudry et al. [2017] and study the limit behavior of the iterates of general optimization
techniques when the data is linearly separable.
Another line of work has focused on studying the implicit regularization properties of early stopping
various optimization algorithms, which is a widely used technique in neural network training. These
works show that early stopping the iterative optimization of an empirical problem performs a form of
implicit regularization. Yao et al. [2007] focus on non-parametric regression in reproducing kernel
Hilbert spaces and provide theoretical justification for early stopping. In a similar setting, Raskutti
et al. [2014] show that early stopping gradient descent on least squares objective achieves similar risk
bounds as the corresponding regularized problem, also called ridge regression. Hardt et al. [2015],
Rosasco and Villa [2015] study the implicit regularization properties of early stopping stochastic
gradient descent (SGD). All these results show that early stopping achieves similar performance as
optimizing the corresponding regularized objective.
Furthermore, several recent works suggest that there could be a much deeper connection between
the iterates generated by optimization techniques on un-regularized objectives (optimization path)
and minimizers of corresponding regularized objectives (regularization path), than the performance
similarity observed in the early stopping literature. Friedman and Popescu [2003] empirically observe
that for linear regression, the optimization and regularization paths are very similar to each other.
Rosset et al. [2004a] show that under certain conditions on the problem, the path traced by coordinate
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

