Nonparametric Bayesian Lomax delegate racing
for survival analysis with competing risks

Quan Zhang
McCombs School of Business
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
quan.zhang@mccombs.utexas.edu

Mingyuan Zhou
McCombs School of Business
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712
mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu

Abstract
We propose Lomax delegate racing (LDR) to explicitly model the mechanism of
survival under competing risks and to interpret how the covariates accelerate or
decelerate the time to event. LDR explains non-monotonic covariate effects by
racing a potentially infinite number of sub-risks, and consequently relaxes the ubiquitous proportional-hazards assumption which may be too restrictive. Moreover,
LDR is naturally able to model not only censoring, but also missing event times or
event types. For inference, we develop a Gibbs sampler under data augmentation
for moderately sized data, along with a stochastic gradient descent maximum a
posteriori inference algorithm for big data applications. Illustrative experiments
are provided on both synthetic and real datasets, and comparison with various
benchmark algorithms for survival analysis with competing risks demonstrates
distinguished performance of LDR.

1

Introduction

In survival analysis, one can often use nonparametric approaches to flexibly estimate the survival
function from lifetime data, such as the Kaplan–Meier estimator [1], or to estimate the intensity
of a point process for event arrivals, such as the isotonic Hawkes process [2] and neural Hawkes
process [3] that can be applied to the analysis of recurring events. When exploring the relationship
between the covariates and time to events, existing survival analysis methods often parameterize the
hazard function with a weighted linear combination of covariates. One of the most popular ones is
the Cox proportional hazards model [4], which is semi-parametric in that it assumes a non-parametric
baseline hazard rate to capture the time effect. These methods are often applied to population-level
studies that try to unveil the relationship between the risk factors and hazard function, such as to what
degree a unit increase in a covariate is multiplicative to the hazard rate. However, the interpretability
is often obtained by sacrificing model flexibility, because the proportional-hazards assumption is
violated when the covariate effects are non-monotonic. For example, both very high and very low
ambient temperature were related to high mortality rates in Valencia, Spain, 1991-1993 [5], and a
significantly increased mortality rate is associated with both underweight and obesity [6].
To accommodate nonlinear covariate effects such as non-monotonicity, existing (semi-)parametric
models often expand the design matrix with transformed data, like the basis functions of smoothing
splines [7, 8] and other transformations guided by subjective knowledge. Instead of using handdesigned data transformations, there are several recent studies in machine learning that model
complex covariate dependence with flexible functions, such as deep exponential families [9], neural
networks [10–12] and Gaussian processes [13]. With enhanced flexibilities, these recent approaches
are often good at assessing individual risks, such as predicting a patient’s hazard function or survival
time. However, except for the Gaussian process whose results are not too difficult to interpret for
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

