Optimal Algorithms for Non-Smooth
Distributed Optimization in Networks

Kevin Scaman1 Francis Bach2 Sébastien Bubeck3 Yin Tat Lee3,4 Laurent Massoulié2,5
1
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, 2 INRIA, Ecole Normale Supérieure, PSL Research University,
3
Microsoft Research, 4 University of Washington, 5 MSR-INRIA Joint Centre

Abstract
In this work, we consider the distributed optimization of non-smooth convex functions using a network of computing units. We investigate this problem under two
regularity assumptions: (1) the Lipschitz continuity of the global objective function,
and (2) the Lipschitz continuity of local individual functions. Under the local regularity assumption, we provide the first optimal first-order decentralized algorithm
called multi-step primal-dual (MSPD) and its corresponding optimal convergence
rate. A notable aspect of this result is that,
√ for non-smooth functions, while the
dominant term of the error is in O(1/ t), the structure of the communication
network only impacts a second-order term in O(1/t), where t is time. In other
words, the error due to limits in communication resources decreases at a fast rate
even in the case of non-strongly-convex objective functions. Under the global regularity assumption, we provide a simple yet efficient algorithm called distributed
randomized smoothing (DRS) based on a local smoothing of the objective function,
and show that DRS is within a d1/4 multiplicative factor of the optimal convergence
rate, where d is the underlying dimension.

1

Introduction

Distributed optimization finds many applications in machine learning, for example when the dataset
is large and training is achieved using a cluster of computing
Pn units. As a result, many algorithms were
recently introduced to minimize the average f¯ = n1 i=1 fi of functions fi which are respectively
accessible by separate nodes in a network [1, 2, 3, 4]. Most often, these algorithms alternate between
local and incremental improvement steps (such as gradient steps) with communication steps between
nodes in the network, and come with a variety of convergence rates (see for example [5, 4, 6, 7]).
Recently, a theoretical analysis of first-order distributed methods provided optimal convergence rates
for strongly-convex and smooth optimization in networks [8]. In this paper, we extend this analysis to
the more challenging case of non-smooth convex optimization. The main contribution of this paper is
to provide optimal convergence rates and their corresponding optimal algorithms for this class of
distributed problems under two regularity assumptions: (1) the Lipschitz continuity of the global
objective function f¯, and (2) a bound on the average of Lipschitz constants of local functions fi .
Under the local regularity assumption, we provide in Section 4 matching upper and lower bounds
of complexity in a decentralized setting in which communication is performed using the gossip
algorithm [9]. Moreover, we propose the first optimal algorithm for non-smooth decentralized
optimization, called multi-step primal-dual (MSPD). Under the more challenging global regularity
assumption, we show in Section 3 that distributing the simple smoothing approach introduced in [10]
yields fast convergence rates with respect to communication. This algorithm, called distributed
randomized smoothing (DRS), achieves a convergence rate matching the lower bound up to a d1/4
multiplicative factor, where d is the dimensionality of the problem.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

