Neural Edit Operations for Biological Sequences

Satoshi Koide
Toyota Central R&D Labs.
koide@mosk.tytlabs.co.jp

Keisuke Kawano
Toyota Central R&D Labs.
kawano@mosk.tytlabs.co.jp

Takuro Kutsuna
Toyota Central R&D Labs.
kutsuna@mosk.tytlabs.co.jp

Abstract
The evolution of biological sequences, such as proteins or DNAs, is driven by the
three basic edit operations: substitution, insertion, and deletion. Motivated by the
recent progress of neural network models for biological tasks, we implement two
neural network architectures that can treat such edit operations. The first proposal
is the edit invariant neural networks, based on differentiable Needleman-Wunsch
algorithms. The second is the use of deep CNNs with concatenations. Our analysis
shows that CNNs can recognize regular expressions without Kleene star, and
that deeper CNNs can recognize more complex regular expressions including the
insertion/deletion of characters. The experimental results for the protein secondary
structure prediction task suggest the importance of insertion/deletion. The test
accuracy on the widely-used CB513 dataset is 71.5%, which is 1.2-points better
than the current best result on non-ensemble models.

1

Introduction

Neural networks are now used in many applications, not limited to classical fields such as image
processing, speech recognition, and natural language processing. Bioinformatics is becoming an
important application field of neural networks. These biological applications are often implemented
as a supervised learning model that takes a biological string (such as DNA or protein) as an input,
and outputs the corresponding label(s), such as a protein secondary structure [13, 14, 15, 18, 19, 23,
24, 26], protein contact maps [4, 8], and genome accessibility [12].
Invariance, which forces a prediction model to satisfy a desirable property for a specific task, is
important in neural networks. For example, CNNs with pooling layers capture the shift invariant
property that is considered to be an important property for image recognition tasks. CNNs were first
proposed to imitate the organization of the visual cortex [6]. This is often used to explain why CNNs
work for visual tasks. Similarly, rotation invariance for image tasks is also studied [25]. Generally, it
is important to model the proper invariances for a given application domain.
What is, then, the invariance in biological tasks? As is well known in bioinformatics, similar
sequences tend to exhibit similar functions or structures (i.e., similar labels in terms of machine
learning). Here, the similarity is evaluated by sequence alignment, which is closely related to the edit
distance. This implies that labels associated with the biological sequences exhibit (weak) invariance
with respect to a small number of edit operations, i.e., substitution, insertion, and deletion. This paper
aims to incorporate such invariances, which we call edit invariance, into neural networks.
Contribution. We consider two neural network architectures that incorporate the edit operations.
First, we propose the edit invariant neural networks. This is obtained by interpreting the classical
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

