BRITS: Bidirectional Recurrent Imputation for Time
Series
Wei Cao∗
Tsinghua University
Bytedance AI Lab
cao-13@tsinghua.org.cn
Hao Zhou
Bytedance AI Lab
haozhou0806@gmail.com

Dong Wang
Duke University
dong.wang363@duke.edu

Jian Li
Tsinghua University
lijian83@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Yitan Li
Bytedance AI Lab
liyitan@bytedance.com

Lei Li
Bytedance AI Lab
lileilab@bytedance.com

Abstract
Time series are ubiquitous in many classification/regression applications. However,
the time series data in real applications may contain many missing values. Hence,
given multiple (possibly correlated) time series data, it is important to fill in
missing values and at the same time to predict their class labels. Existing imputation
methods often impose strong assumptions of the underlying data generating process,
such as linear dynamics in the state space. In this paper, we propose a novel method,
called BRITS, based on recurrent neural networks for missing value imputation
in time series data. Our proposed method directly learns the missing values in a
bidirectional recurrent dynamical system, without any specific assumption. The
imputed values are treated as variables of RNN graph and can be effectively
updated during backpropagation. BRITS has three advantages: (a) it can handle
multiple correlated missing values in time series; (b) it generalizes to time series
with nonlinear dynamics underlying; (c) it provides a data-driven imputation
procedure and applies to general settings with missing data. We evaluate our
model on three real-world datasets, including an air quality dataset, a healthcare dataset, and a localization dataset for human activity. Experiments show
that our model outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in both imputation and
classification/regression.

1

Introduction

Multivariate time series data are abundant in many application areas, such as financial marketing
[5, 4], health-care [10, 22], meteorology [31, 26], and traffic engineering [29, 35]. Time series
are widely used as signals for classification/regression in various applications of corresponding
areas. However, missing values in time series are very common, due to unexpected accidents, such
as equipment damage or communication error, and may significantly harm the performance of
downstream applications.
Much prior work proposed to fix the missing data problem with statistics and machine learning
approaches. However most of them require fairly strong assumptions on missing values. We can fill
the missing values using classical statistical time series models such as ARMA or ARIMA (e.g., [1]).
But these models are essentially linear (after differencing). Kreindler et al. [19] assume that the data
are smoothable, i.e., there is no sudden wave in the periods of missing values, hence imputing missing
∗

Work done while Wei Cao was a research intern at Bytedance AI Lab

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

