Object-Oriented Dynamics Predictor

Guangxiang Zhu, Zhiao Huang, and Chongjie Zhang
Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
guangxiangzhu@outlook.com,hza14@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,chongjie@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Generalization has been one of the major challenges for learning dynamics models in model-based reinforcement learning. However, previous work on actionconditioned dynamics prediction focuses on learning the pixel-level motion and
thus does not generalize well to novel environments with different object layouts.
In this paper, we present a novel object-oriented framework, called object-oriented
dynamics predictor (OODP), which decomposes the environment into objects and
predicts the dynamics of objects conditioned on both actions and object-to-object
relations. It is an end-to-end neural network and can be trained in an unsupervised
manner. To enable the generalization ability of dynamics learning, we design a novel CNN-based relation mechanism that is class-specific (rather than object-specific)
and exploits the locality principle. Empirical results show that OODP significantly
outperforms previous methods in terms of generalization over novel environments
with various object layouts. OODP is able to learn from very few environments
and accurately predict dynamics in a large number of unseen environments. In
addition, OODP learns semantically and visually interpretable dynamics models.

1

Introduction

Recently, model-free deep reinforcement learning (DRL) has been extensively studied for automatically learning representations and decisions from visual observations to actions. Although such
approach is able to achieve human-level control in games [1, 2, 3, 4, 5], it is not efficient enough and
cannot generalize across different tasks. To improve sample-efficiency and enable generalization for
tasks with different goals, model-based DRL approaches (e.g., [6, 7, 8, 9]) are extensively studied.
One of the core problems of model-based DRL is to learn a dynamics model through interacting
with environments. Existing work on learning action-conditioned dynamics models [10, 11, 12] has
achieved significant progress, which learns dynamics models and achieves remarkable performance
in training environments [10, 11], and further makes a step towards generalization over object
appearances [12]. However, these models focus on learning pixel-level motions and thus their
learned dynamics models do not generalize well to novel environments with different object layouts.
Cognitive studies show that objects are the basic units of decomposing and understanding the world
through natural human senses [13, 14, 15, 16], which indicates object-based models are useful for
generalization [17, 18, 19].
In this paper, we develop a novel object-oriented framework, called object-oriented dynamics predictor (OODP). It is an end-to-end neural network and can be trained in an unsupervised manner.
It follows an object-oriented paradigm, which decomposes the environment into objects and learns
the object-level dynamic effects of actions conditioned on object-to-object relations. To enable
the generalization ability of OODP’s dynamics learning, we design a novel CNN-based relation
mechanism that is class-specific (rather than object-specific) and exploits the locality principle. This
mechanism induces neural networks to distinguish objects based on their appearances, as well as
their effects on an agent’s dynamics.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

