Automatic Program Synthesis of Long Programs
with a Learned Garbage Collector

Amit Zohar1
1

Lior Wolf 1 2

The School of Computer Science , Tel Aviv University
2
Facebook AI Research

Abstract
We consider the problem of generating automatic code given sample input-output
pairs. We train a neural network to map from the current state and the outputs
to the program’s next statement. The neural network optimizes multiple tasks
concurrently: the next operation out of a set of high level commands, the operands
of the next statement, and which variables can be dropped from memory. Using
our method we are able to create programs that are more than twice as long as
existing state-of-the-art solutions, while improving the success rate for comparable
lengths, and cutting the run-time by two orders of magnitude. Our code, including
an implementation of various literature baselines, is publicly available at https:
//github.com/amitz25/PCCoder

1

Introduction

Automatic program synthesis has been repeatedly identified as a key goal of AI research. However,
despite decades of interest, this goal is still largely unrealized. In this work, we study program
synthesis in a Domain Specific Language (DSL), following [1]. This allows us to focus on high-level
programs, in which complex methods are implemented in a few lines of code. Our input is a handful
of input/output examples, and the desired output is a program that agrees with all of these examples.
In [1], the authors train a neural network to predict the existence of functions in the program and then
employ a highly optimized search in order to find a correct solution based on this prediction. While
this approach works for short programs, the number of possible solutions grows exponentially with
program length, making it infeasible to identify the solution based on global properties.
Our work employs a step-wise approach to the program synthesis problem. Given the current state,
our neural network directly predicts the next statement, including both the function (operator) and
parameters (operands). We then perform a beam search based on the network’s predictions, reapplying
the neural network at each step. The more accurate the neural network, the less programs one needs
to include in the search before identifying the correct solution.
Since the number of variables increases with the program’s length, some of the variables in memory
need to be discarded. We therefore train a second network to predict the variables that are to be
discarded. Training the new network does not only enable us to solve more complex problems, but
also serves as an auxiliary task that improves the generalization of the statement prediction network.
Our approach is relatively slow in the number of evaluations per time unit. However, it turns out to be
much more efficient with respect to selecting promising search directions, and we present empirical
results that demonstrate that: (i) For the length and level of accuracy reported in [1], our method is
two orders of magnitude faster. (ii) For the level of accuracy and time budget used in that paper, we
are able to solve programs more than two times as complex, as measured by program length (iii) For
the time budget and length tested in the previous work, we are able to achieve a near perfect accuracy.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

