Gaussian Process Conditional Density Estimation

Vincent Dutordoir∗ 1 Hugh Salimbeni∗ 1,2 Marc Peter Deisenroth1,2 James Hensman1
1
PROWLER.io, Cambridge, UK 2 Imperial College London
{vincent, hugh, marc, james}@prowler.io

Abstract
Conditional Density Estimation (CDE) models deal with estimating conditional
distributions. The conditions imposed on the distribution are the inputs of the
model. CDE is a challenging task as there is a fundamental trade-off between model
complexity, representational capacity and overfitting. In this work, we propose to
extend the model’s input with latent variables and use Gaussian processes (GPs)
to map this augmented input onto samples from the conditional distribution. Our
Bayesian approach allows for the modeling of small datasets, but we also provide
the machinery for it to be applied to big data using stochastic variational inference.
Our approach can be used to model densities even in sparse data regions, and allows
for sharing learned structure between conditions. We illustrate the effectiveness
and wide-reaching applicability of our model on a variety of real-world problems,
such as spatio-temporal density estimation of taxi drop-offs, non-Gaussian noise
modeling, and few-shot learning on omniglot images.

1

Introduction

Conditional Density Estimation (CDE) is the very general task of inferring the probability distribution
p(f (x) | x), where f (x) is a random variable for each x. Regression can be considered a CDE
problem, although the emphasis is on modeling the mapping rather than the conditional density. The
conditional density is commonly Gaussian with parameters that depend on x. This simple model for
data may be inappropriate if the conditional density is multi-modal or has non-linear associations.
Throughout this paper we consider an input x to be the condition, and the output y to be a sample
from the conditional density imposed by x. For example, in the case of estimating the density of
taxi drop-offs, the input or condition x could be the pick-up location and the output y would be
the corresponding drop-off. In this context, we are more interested in learning the complete density
over drop-offs rather than only a single point estimate, as we would expect the taxi drop-off to be
multi-modal because passengers need to go to different places (e.g., airport/city center/suburbs). We
would also expect the drop-off location to depend on the starting point and time of day: therefore, we
are interested in conditional densities. In the experiment section we will return to this example.
In this work, we present a Gaussian process (GP) based model for estimating conditional densities,
abbreviated as GP-CDE. While a vanilla GP used directly is unlikely to be a good model for
conditional density estimation as the marginals are Gaussian, we extend the inputs to the model with
latent variables to allow for modeling richer, non-Gaussian densities when marginalizing the latent
variable. Fig. 1 shows a high-level overview of the model. The added latent variables are denoted by
w. The latent variable w and condition x are used as input of the GP. A recognition/encoder network
is used to amortize the learning of the variational posterior of the latent variables. The matrices A
and P act as probabilistic linear transforms on the input and the output of the GP, respectively.
The GP-CDE model is closely related to both supervised and unsupervised, non-Bayesian and
Bayesian models. We first consider the relationship to parametric models, in particular Variational
∗

Equal contribution

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

