Neural Code Comprehension: A Learnable
Representation of Code Semantics

Tal Ben-Nun
ETH Zurich
Zurich 8092, Switzerland
talbn@inf.ethz.ch

Alice Shoshana Jakobovits
ETH Zurich
Zurich 8092, Switzerland
alicej@student.ethz.ch

Torsten Hoefler
ETH Zurich
Zurich 8092, Switzerland
htor@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
With the recent success of embeddings in natural language processing, research
has been conducted into applying similar methods to code analysis. Most works
attempt to process the code directly or use a syntactic tree representation, treating it
like sentences written in a natural language. However, none of the existing methods
are sufficient to comprehend program semantics robustly, due to structural features
such as function calls, branching, and interchangeable order of statements. In this
paper, we propose a novel processing technique to learn code semantics, and apply
it to a variety of program analysis tasks. In particular, we stipulate that a robust
distributional hypothesis of code applies to both human- and machine-generated
programs. Following this hypothesis, we define an embedding space, inst2vec,
based on an Intermediate Representation (IR) of the code that is independent of the
source programming language. We provide a novel definition of contextual flow
for this IR, leveraging both the underlying data- and control-flow of the program.
We then analyze the embeddings qualitatively using analogies and clustering, and
evaluate the learned representation on three different high-level tasks. We show that
even without fine-tuning, a single RNN architecture and fixed inst2vec embeddings
outperform specialized approaches for performance prediction (compute device
mapping, optimal thread coarsening); and algorithm classification from raw code
(104 classes), where we set a new state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

The emergence of the “Big Data era” manifests in the form of a dramatic increase in accessible code.
In the year 2017 alone, GitHub reports [25] approximately 1 billion git commits (code modification
uploads) written in 337 different programming languages. Sifting through, categorizing, and understanding code thus becomes an essential task for a variety of fields. Applications include identifying
code duplication, performance prediction, algorithm detection for alternative code suggestion (guided
programming), vulnerability analysis, and malicious code detection. These tasks are challenging,
as code can be modified such that it syntactically differs (for instance, via different or reordered
operations, or written in a different language altogether), but remains semantically equivalent (i.e.,
produces the same result). However, these tasks are also ideal for machine learning, since they can be
represented as classic regression and classification problems.
In order to mechanize code comprehension, the research community typically employs reinforcement
learning and stochastic compilation for super-optimization [13, 56]; or borrows concepts from Natural
Language Processing (NLP) for human-authored code, relying on the following hypothesis:
The naturalness hypothesis [3]. Software is a form of human communication;
software corpora have similar statistical properties to natural language corpora;
and these properties can be exploited to build better software engineering tools.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

