Multi-Agent Generative Adversarial Imitation
Learning

Jiaming Song
Stanford University
tsong@cs.stanford.edu

Hongyu Ren
Stanford University
hyren@cs.stanford.edu

Dorsa Sadigh
Stanford University
dorsa@cs.stanford.edu

Stefano Ermon
Stanford University
ermon@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Imitation learning algorithms can be used to learn a policy from expert demonstrations without access to a reward signal. However, most existing approaches are not
applicable in multi-agent settings due to the existence of multiple (Nash) equilibria
and non-stationary environments. We propose a new framework for multi-agent
imitation learning for general Markov games, where we build upon a generalized
notion of inverse reinforcement learning. We further introduce a practical multiagent actor-critic algorithm with good empirical performance. Our method can be
used to imitate complex behaviors in high-dimensional environments with multiple
cooperative or competing agents.

1

Introduction

Reinforcement learning (RL) methods are becoming increasingly successful at optimizing reward
signals in complex, high dimensional environments [1]. A key limitation of RL, however, is the
difficulty of designing suitable reward functions for complex and not well-specified tasks [2, 3]. If
the reward function does not cover all important aspects of the task, the agent could easily learn
undesirable behaviors [4]. This problem is further exacerbated in multi-agent scenarios, such as
multiplayer games [5], multi-robot control [6] and social interactions [7]; in these cases, agents do
not even necessarily share the same reward function and might even have conflicting rewards.
Imitation learning methods address these problems via expert demonstrations [8–11]; the agent
directly learns desirable behaviors by imitating an expert. Notably, inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) frameworks assume that the expert is (approximately) optimizing an underlying reward
function, and attempt to recover a reward function that rationalizes the demonstrations; an agent
policy is subsequently learned through RL [12, 13]. Unfortunately, this paradigm is not suitable for
general multi-agent settings due to environment being non-stationary to individual agents [14] and
the existence of multiple equilibrium solutions [15]. The optimal policy of one agent could depend
on the policies of other agents, and vice versa, so there could exist multiple solutions in which each
agents’ policy is the optimal response to others.
In this paper, we propose a new framework for multi-agent imitation learning – provided with
demonstrations of a set of experts interacting with each other in the same environment, we aim to
learn multiple parametrized policies that imitate the behavior of each expert respectively. Using the
framework of Markov games, we integrate multi-agent RL with a suitable extension of multi-agent
inverse RL. The resulting procedure strictly generalizes Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning
(GAIL, [16]) in the single agent case. Imitation learning in our setting corresponds to a two-player
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

