Dimensionally Tight Bounds for Second-Order
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
Oren Mangoubi
EPFL
omangoubi@gmail.com

Nisheeth K. Vishnoi
EPFL
nisheeth.vishnoi@gmail.com

Abstract
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) is a widely deployed method to sample from highdimensional distributions in Statistics and Machine learning. HMC is known to run
very efficiently in practice and its popular second-order “leapfrog" implementation
has long been conjectured to run in d1/4 gradient evaluations. Here we show that
this conjecture is true when sampling from strongly log-concave target distributions
that satisfy a weak third-order regularity property associated with the input data.
Our regularity condition is weaker than the Lipschitz Hessian property and allows
us to show faster convergence bounds for a much larger class of distributions than
would be possible with the usual Lipschitz Hessian constant alone. Important
distributions that satisfy our regularity condition include posterior distributions
used in Bayesian logistic regression for which the data satisfies an “incoherence"
property. Our result compares favorably with the best available bounds for the class
of strongly log-concave distributions, which grow like d1/2 gradient evaluations
with the dimension. Moreover, our simulations on synthetic data suggest that,
when our regularity condition is satisfied, leapfrog HMC performs better than its
competitors – both in terms of accuracy and in terms of the number of gradient
evaluations it requires.

1

Introduction

Sampling problems are ubiquitous in a wide range of scientific and engineering disciplines and have
received significant attention in Machine Learning and Statistics. In a typical sampling problem, one
wants to generate samples from a given target distribution π(x) ∝ e−U (x) , where one is given access
to a function U ∶ Rd → R and possibly its gradient ∇U . In many situations, such as when d is large,
sampling problems are computationally difficult, and Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms
are used. MCMC algorithms generate samples by running a Markov chain which converges to the
target distribution π. Unfortunately, many MCMC algorithms work by taking independent
√ steps of
short size η, meaning that they typically only travel a distance roughly proportional to i × η in i
steps, preventing the algorithm from quickly exploring the target distribution.
One MCMC algorithm that can take large steps is the Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) algorithm.
Each step of the HMC Markov chain involves simulating the trajectory of a particle in the “potential
well” U , with the trajectory determined by Hamilton’s equations from classical mechanics [2, 38].
To ensure randomization, the momentum is refreshed after each step by independently sampling from
a multivariate Gaussian. HMC is a natural approach to the sampling problem because Hamilton’s
equations preserve the target distribution π. This convenient property reduces the need for frequent
Metropolis corrections which slow down traditional MCMC algorithms, and allows HMC to take
large steps. HMC was first discovered by physicists [14], was adopted soon afterwards with much
success in Bayesian Statistics and Machine learning [36, 37], and is currently the main algorithm
used in the popular software package Stan [5]. Despite its popularity and the widespread belief
that HMC is faster than its competitor algorithms in a wide range of high-dimensional sampling
problems [11, 1, 38, 3], its theoretical properties are not as well-understood as its older competitor
MCMC algorithms, such as the random walk Metropolis [35] or Langevin [16, 17, 13] algorithms.
The lack of theoretical results makes it more difficult to tune the parameters of HMC, and prevents us
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

