Factored Bandits
Yevgeny Seldin
University of Copenhagen
seldin@di.ku.dk

Julian Zimmert
University of Copenhagen
zimmert@di.ku.dk

Abstract
We introduce the factored bandits model, which is a framework for learning with
limited (bandit) feedback, where actions can be decomposed into a Cartesian
product of atomic actions. Factored bandits incorporate rank-1 bandits as a special
case, but signiﬁcantly relax the assumptions on the form of the reward function. We
provide an anytime algorithm for stochastic factored bandits and up to constants
matching upper and lower regret bounds for the problem. Furthermore, we show
how a slight modiﬁcation enables the proposed algorithm to be applied to utilitybased dueling bandits. We obtain an improvement in the additive terms of the regret
bound compared to state-of-the-art algorithms (the additive terms are dominating
up to time horizons that are exponential in the number of arms).

1

Introduction

We introduce factored bandits, which is a bandit learning model, where actions can be decomposed
into a Cartesian product of atomic actions. As an example, consider an advertising task, where the
actions can be decomposed into (1) selection of an advertisement from a pool of advertisements and
(2) selection of a location on a web page out of a set of locations, where it can be presented. The
probability of a click is then a function of the quality of the two actions, the attractiveness of the
advertisement and the visibility of the location it was placed at. In order to maximize the reward the
learner has to maximize the quality of actions along each dimension of the problem. Factored bandits
generalize the above example to an arbitrary number of atomic actions and arbitrary reward functions
satisfying some mild assumptions.
Stochastic
(Generalized) Rank-1
Linear
Bandits
Utility
Based

A “ t0, 1ud
explicit
reward models

Combin.
Bandits

Factored
Bandits

Uniformly
Identiﬁable

Condorcet
Winner
Dueling
Bandits

relaxation
Chen et al.
(2016)

weakly constrained
reward models

Figure 1: Relations between factored bandits and other bandit models.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

