Inequity aversion improves cooperation in
intertemporal social dilemmas

Edward Hughes∗, Joel Z. Leibo∗, Matthew Phillips, Karl Tuyls, Edgar Dueñez-Guzman,
Antonio García Castañeda, Iain Dunning, Tina Zhu, Kevin McKee, Raphael Koster,
Heather Roff, Thore Graepel
DeepMind, London, United Kingdom
{edwardhughes, jzl, karltuyls, duenez, antoniogc, idunning, tinazhu,
kevinrmckee, rkoster, hroff, thore}@google.com,
matthew.phillips.12@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Groups of humans are often able to find ways to cooperate with one another
in complex, temporally extended social dilemmas. Models based on behavioral
economics are only able to explain this phenomenon for unrealistic stateless matrix
games. Recently, multi-agent reinforcement learning has been applied to generalize
social dilemma problems to temporally and spatially extended Markov games.
However, this has not yet generated an agent that learns to cooperate in social
dilemmas as humans do. A key insight is that many, but not all, human individuals
have inequity averse social preferences. This promotes a particular resolution of
the matrix game social dilemma wherein inequity-averse individuals are personally
pro-social and punish defectors. Here we extend this idea to Markov games and
show that it promotes cooperation in several types of sequential social dilemma,
via a profitable interaction with policy learnability. In particular, we find that
inequity aversion improves temporal credit assignment for the important class
of intertemporal social dilemmas. These results help explain how large-scale
cooperation may emerge and persist.

1

Introduction

In intertemporal social dilemmas, there is a tradeoff between short-term individual incentives and
long-term collective interest. Humans face such dilemmas when contributing to a collective food
storage during the summer in preparation for a harsh winter, organizing annual maintenance of
irrigation systems, or sustainably sharing a local fishery. Classical models of human behavior based
on rational choice theory predict that cooperation in these situations is impossible [1, 2]. This poses
a puzzle since humans evidently do find ways to cooperate in many everyday intertemporal social
dilemmas, as documented by decades of fieldwork [3, 4] and laboratory experiments [5, 6]. Providing
an empirically grounded explanation of how individual behavior gives rise to societal cooperation is
seen as a core goal in several subfields of the social sciences and evolutionary biology [7, 8, 9].
[10, 11] proposed influential models based on behavioral game theory. However, these models have
limited applicability since they only generate predictions when the problem can be cast as a matrix
game (see e.g. [12, 13]). Here we consider a more realistic video-game setting, like those introduced
in the behavioral research of [14, 15, 16]. In this environment, agents do not simply choose to
cooperate or defect like they do in matrix games. Rather they must learn policies to implement their
strategic decisions, and must do so while coping with the non-stationarity arising from other agents
learning simultaneously. Several papers used multi-agent reinforcement learning [17, 18, 19] and
∗

Equal contribution.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

