Theoretical Linear Convergence of Unfolded ISTA
and its Practical Weights and Thresholds

Xiaohan Chen∗
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843, USA
chernxh@tamu.edu

Jialin Liu∗
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
liujl11@math.ucla.edu

Zhangyang Wang
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843, USA
atlaswang@tamu.edu

Wotao Yin
Department of Mathematics
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
wotaoyin@math.ucla.edu

Abstract
In recent years, unfolding iterative algorithms as neural networks has become an
empirical success in solving sparse recovery problems. However, its theoretical
understanding is still immature, which prevents us from fully utilizing the power
of neural networks. In this work, we study unfolded ISTA (Iterative Shrinkage
Thresholding Algorithm) for sparse signal recovery. We introduce a weight structure that is necessary for asymptotic convergence to the true sparse signal. With this
structure, unfolded ISTA can attain a linear convergence, which is better than the
sublinear convergence of ISTA/FISTA in general cases. Furthermore, we propose
to incorporate thresholding in the network to perform support selection, which
is easy to implement and able to boost the convergence rate both theoretically
and empirically. Extensive simulations, including sparse vector recovery and a
compressive sensing experiment on real image data, corroborate our theoretical
results and demonstrate their practical usefulness. We have made our codes publicly
available.2 .

1

Introduction

This paper aims to recover a sparse vector x∗ from its noisy linear measurements:
b = Ax∗ + ε,
(1)
where b ∈ Rm , x ∈ Rn , A ∈ Rm×n , ε ∈ Rm is additive Gaussian white noise, and we have m  n.
(1) is an ill-posed, highly under-determined system. However, it becomes easier to solve if x∗ is
assumed to be sparse, i.e. the cardinality of support of x∗ , S = {i|x∗i 6= 0}, is small compared to n.
A popular approach is to model the problem as the LASSO formulation (λ is a scalar):
1
minimize kb − Axk22 + λkxk1
(2)
x
2
and solve it using iterative algorithms such as the iterative shrinkage thresholding algorithm (ISTA)
[1]:


1
xk+1 = ηλ/L xk + AT (b − Axk ) , k = 0, 1, 2, . . .
(3)
L
∗
2

These authors contributed equally and are listed alphabetically.
https://github.com/xchen-tamu/linear-lista-cpss

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

