Faster Neural Networks Straight from JPEG

Lionel Gueguen1
1

Uber

2

Alex Sergeev1

Uber AI Labs

Ben Kadlec1

Rosanne Liu2

Jason Yosinski2

{lgueguen,asergeev,bkadlec,rosanne,yosinski}@uber.com

Abstract
The simple, elegant approach of training convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
directly from RGB pixels has enjoyed overwhelming empirical success. But
could more performance be squeezed out of networks by using different input
representations? In this paper we propose and explore a simple idea: train CNNs
directly on the blockwise discrete cosine transform (DCT) coefficients computed
and available in the middle of the JPEG codec. Intuitively, when processing JPEG
images using CNNs, it seems unnecessary to decompress a blockwise frequency
representation to an expanded pixel representation, shuffle it from CPU to GPU,
and then process it with a CNN that will learn something similar to a transform
back to frequency representation in its first layers. Why not skip both steps and
feed the frequency domain into the network directly? In this paper, we modify
libjpeg to produce DCT coefficients directly, modify a ResNet-50 network to
accommodate the differently sized and strided input, and evaluate performance
on ImageNet. We find networks that are both faster and more accurate, as well as
networks with about the same accuracy but 1.77x faster than ResNet-50.

1

Introduction

The amazing progress toward training neural networks, particularly convolutional neural networks
[14], to attain good performance on a variety of tasks [13, 19, 20, 10] has led to the widespread
adoption of such models in both academia and industry. When CNNs are trained using image data as
input, data is most often provided as an array of red-green-blue (RGB) pixels. Convolutional layers
proceed to compute features starting from pixels, with early layers often learning Gabor filters and
later layers learning higher level, more abstract features [13, 27].
In this paper, we propose and explore a simple idea for accelerating neural network training and
inference in the common scenario where networks are applied to images encoded in the JPEG format.
In such scenarios, images would typically be decoded from a compressed format to an array of RGB
pixels and then fed into a neural network. Here we propose and explore a more direct approach.
First, we modify the libjpeg library to decode JPEG images only partially, resulting in an image
representation consisting of a triple of tensors containing discrete cosine transform (DCT) coefficients
in the YCbCr color space. Due to how the JPEG codec works, these tensors are at different spatial
resolutions. We then design and train a network to operate directly from this representation; as one
might suspect, this turns out to work reasonably well.
Related Work When training and/or inference speed is critical, much work has focused on accelerating network computation by reducing the number of parameters or by using operations more
computationally efficient on a graphics processing unit (GPU) [12, 3, 9]. Several works have employed spatial frequency decomposition and other compressed representations for image processing
without using deep learning [22, 18, 8, 5, 7]. Other works have combined deep learning with compressed representations other than JPEG to promising effect [24, 1]. The most similar works to ours
come from [6] and [25]. [6] train on DCT coefficients compressed not via the JPEG encoder but by a
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

