Supervising Unsupervised Learning

Vikas K. Garg
CSAIL, MIT
vgarg@csail.mit.edu

Adam Kalai
Microsoft Research
noreply@microsoft.com

Abstract
We introduce a framework to transfer knowledge acquired from a repository of
(heterogeneous) supervised datasets to new unsupervised datasets. Our perspective
avoids the subjectivity inherent in unsupervised learning by reducing it to supervised learning, and provides a principled way to evaluate unsupervised algorithms.
We demonstrate the versatility of our framework via rigorous agnostic bounds on a
variety of unsupervised problems. In the context of clustering, our approach helps
choose the number of clusters and the clustering algorithm, remove the outliers,
and provably circumvent Kleinberg’s impossibility result. Experiments across hundreds of problems demonstrate improvements in performance on unsupervised data
with simple algorithms despite the fact our problems come from heterogeneous
domains. Additionally, our framework lets us leverage deep networks to learn
common features across many small datasets, and perform zero shot learning.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised Learning (UL) is an elusive branch of Machine Learning (ML), including problems
such as clustering and manifold learning, that seeks to identify structure among unlabeled data. UL is
notoriously hard to evaluate and inherently undefinable. To illustrate this point, we consider clustering
the points on the line in Figure 1. One can easily justify 2, 3, or 4 clusters. As Kleinberg argues [1], it
is impossible to give an axiomatically consistent definition of the “right” clustering. However, now
suppose that one can access a bank of prior clustering problems, drawn from the same distribution as
the current problem at hand, but for which ground-truth labels are available. In this example, evidence
may favor two clusters since the unlabeled data closely resembles two of the three 1-dimensional
clustering problems, and all the clusterings share the common property of roughly equal size clusters.
Given sufficiently many problems in high dimensions, one can learn to extract features of the data
common across problems to improve clustering.
We model UL problems as representative samples from a meta-distribution, and offer a solution
using an annotated collection of prior datasets. Specifically, we propose a meta-unsupervisedlearning (MUL) framework that, by considering a distribution over unsupervised problems, reduces
UL to Supervised Learning (SL). Going beyond transfer learning, semi-supervised learning, and
domain adaptation [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8] where problems have the same dimensionality or at least the
same type of data (text, images, etc.), our framework can be used to improve UL performance for
problems of different representations and from different domains. While the apparent distinctions
between the domains might make our view seem outlandish, they are merely an artifact of human
perception or representation. Fundamentally, we may encode any kind of data as a program or a bit
stream. Depending on considerations such as the amount of available data, one can choose to have
a distribution over only the programs from a single domain such as images, and consider all other
programs as a set of measure 0; or alternatively, as we do, consider a distribution over all programs.
Empirically, we train meta-algorithms on the repository of classification problems from openml.org
that has a variety of datasets spanning domains such as NLP, computer vision, and bioinformatics.
Ignoring labels, each dataset can be viewed as a UL problem. We take a data-driven approach to
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

