Convergence of Cubic Regularization for Nonconvex
Optimization under KŁ Property

Yi Zhou
Department of ECE
The Ohio State University
zhou.1172@osu.edu

Zhe Wang
Department of ECE
The Ohio State University
wang.10982@osu.edu

Yingbin Liang
Department of ECE
The Ohio State University
liang.889@osu.edu

Abstract
Cubic-regularized Newton’s method (CR) is a popular algorithm that guarantees
to produce a second-order stationary solution for solving nonconvex optimization
problems. However, existing understandings of the convergence rate of CR are
conditioned on special types of geometrical properties of the objective function.
In this paper, we explore the asymptotic convergence rate of CR by exploiting the
ubiquitous Kurdyka-Łojasiewicz (KŁ) property of nonconvex objective functions.
In specific, we characterize the asymptotic convergence rate of various types
of optimality measures for CR including function value gap, variable distance
gap, gradient norm and least eigenvalue of the Hessian matrix. Our results fully
characterize the diverse convergence behaviors of these optimality measures in the
full parameter regime of the KŁ property. Moreover, we show that the obtained
asymptotic convergence rates of CR are order-wise faster than those of first-order
gradient descent algorithms under the KŁ property.

1

Introduction

A majority of machine learning applications are naturally formulated as nonconvex optimization
due to the complex mechanism of the underlying model. Typical examples include training neural
networks in deep learning Goodfellow et al. (2016), low-rank matrix factorization Ge et al. (2016);
Bhojanapalli et al. (2016), phase retrieval Candès et al. (2015); Zhang et al. (2017), etc. In particular,
these machine learning problems take the generic form
min f (x),

x∈Rd

(P)

where the objective function f : Rd → R is a differentiable and nonconvex function, and usually
corresponds to the total loss over a set of data samples. Traditional first-order algorithms such
as gradient descent can produce a solution x̄ that satisfies the first-order stationary condition, i.e.,
∇f (x̄) = 0. However, such first-order stationary condition does not exclude the possibility of
approaching a saddle point, which can be a highly suboptimal solution and therefore deteriorate the
performance.
Recently in the machine learning community, there has been an emerging interest in designing
algorithms to scape saddle points in nonconvex optimization, and one popular algorithm is the
cubic-regularized Newton’s algorithm Nesterov and Polyak (2006); Agarwal et al. (2017); Yue et al.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

