Sequential Test for the Lowest Mean:
From Thompson to Murphy Sampling

1

Emilie Kaufmann1 Wouter M. Koolen2 Aurélien Garivier3
CNRS & U. Lille, CRIStAL / SequeL Inria Lille, emilie.kaufmann@univ-lille.fr
2
Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica, Amsterdam, wmkoolen@cwi.nl
3
UMPA, École normale supérieure de Lyon, aurelien.garivier@ens-lyon.fr

Abstract
Learning the minimum/maximum mean among a finite set of distributions is a
fundamental sub-task in planning, game tree search and reinforcement learning.
We formalize this learning task as the problem of sequentially testing how the
minimum mean among a finite set of distributions compares to a given threshold.
We develop refined non-asymptotic lower bounds, which show that optimality
mandates very different sampling behavior for a low vs high true minimum. We
show that Thompson Sampling and the intuitive Lower Confidence Bounds policy
each nail only one of these cases. We develop a novel approach that we call Murphy
Sampling. Even though it entertains exclusively low true minima, we prove that
MS is optimal for both possibilities. We then design advanced self-normalized
deviation inequalities, fueling more aggressive stopping rules. We complement our
theoretical guarantees by experiments showing that MS works best in practice.

1

Introduction

We consider a collection of core problems related to minimums of means. For a given finite collection
of probability distributions parameterized by their means µ1 , . . . , µK , we are interested in learning
about µ∗ = mina µa from adaptive samples Xt ∼ µAt , where At indicates the distribution sampled
at time t. We shall refer to these distributions as arms in reference to a multi-armed bandit model
[28, 26]. Knowing about minima/maxima is crucial in reinforcement learning or game-playing, where
the value of a state for an agent is the maximum over actions of the (expected) successor state value
or the minimum over adversary moves of the next state value.
The problem of estimating µ∗ = mina µa was studied in [34] and subsequently [7, 31, 8]. It is
known that no unbiased estimator exists for µ∗ , and that estimators face an intricate bias-variance
trade-off. Beyond estimation, the problem of constructing confidence intervals on minima/maxima
naturally arises in (Monte Carlo) planning in Markov Decision Processes [15] and games [25]. Such
confidence intervals are used hierarchically for Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) in [32, 11, 17, 20].
The open problem of designing asymptotically optimal algorithms for MCTS led us to isolate one
core difficulty that we study here, namely the construction of confidence intervals and associated
sampling/stopping rules for learning minima (and, by symmetry, maxima).
Confidence intervals (that are uniform over time) can be naturally obtained from a (sequential)
test of {µ∗ < γ} versus {µ∗ > γ}, given a threshold γ. The main focus of the paper goes even
further and investigates the minimum number of samples required for adaptively testing whether
{µ∗ < γ} or {µ∗ > γ}, that is sequentially sampling the arms in order to decide for one hypothesis
as quickly as possible. Such a problem is interesting in its own right as it naturally arises in several
statistical certification applications. As an example we may consider quality control testing in
manufacturing, where we want to certify that in a batch of machines each has a guaranteed probability
of successfully producing a widget. In e-learning, we may want to certify that a given student has
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

