Learning without the Phase: Regularized PhaseMax
Achieves Optimal Sample Complexity

Fariborz Salehi
Department of Electrical Engineering
Caltech
fsalehi@caltech.edu

Ehsan Abbasi
Department of Electrical Engineering
Caltech
eabbasi@caltech.edu

Babak Hassibi
Department of Electrical Engineering
Caltech
hassibi@caltech.edu∗

Abstract
The problem of estimating an unknown signal, x0 ∈ Rn , from a vector y ∈ Rm
consisting of m magnitude-only measurements of the form yi = |ai x0 |, where
ai ’s are the rows of a known measurement matrix A, is a classical problem known
as phase retrieval. This problem arises when measuring the phase is costly or
altogether infeasible. In many applications in machine learning, signal processing,
statistics, etc., the underlying signal has certain structure (sparse, low-rank, finite
alphabet, etc.), opening of up the possibility of recovering x0 from a number of
measurements smaller than the ambient dimension, i.e., m < n. Ideally, one
would like to recover the signal from a number of phaseless measurements that
is on the order of the "degrees of freedom" of the structured x0 . To this end,
inspired by the PhaseMax algorithm, we formulate a convex optimization problem,
where the objective function relies on an initial estimate of the true signal and
also includes an additive regularization term to encourage structure. The new
formulation is referred to as regularized PhaseMax. We analyze the performance
of regularized PhaseMax to find the minimum number of phaseless measurements
required for perfect signal recovery. The results are asymptotic and are in terms of
the geometrical properties (such as the Gaussian width) of certain convex cones.
When the measurement matrix has i.i.d. Gaussian entries, we show that our
proposed method is indeed order-wise optimal, allowing perfect recovery from a
number of phaseless measurements that is only a constant factor away from the
optimal number of measurements required when phase information is available.
We explicitly compute this constant factor, in terms of the quality of the initial
estimate, by deriving the exact phase transition. The theory well matches empirical
results from numerical simulations.

1

Introduction

Recovering an unknown signal or model given a limited number of linear measurements is an
important problem that appears in many applications. Researchers have developed various methods
∗
This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under grants CNS-0932428, CCF1018927, CCF-1423663 and CCF-1409204, by a grant from Qualcomm Inc., by NASA’s Jet Propulsion
Laboratory through the President and Director’s Fund, and by King Abdullah University of Science and
Technology.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

