Masking: A New Perspective of Noisy Supervision

Bo Han∗1,2 , Jiangchao Yao∗3,1 , Gang Niu2 , Mingyuan Zhou4 ,
Ivor W. Tsang1 , Ya Zhang3 , Masashi Sugiyama2,5
1

Centre for Artificial Intelligence, University of Technology Sydney
2
Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN
3
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
McCombs School of Business, The University of Texas at Austin
5
Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, University of Tokyo

Abstract
It is important to learn various types of classifiers given training data with noisy
labels. Noisy labels, in the most popular noise model hitherto, are corrupted from
ground-truth labels by an unknown noise transition matrix. Thus, by estimating
this matrix, classifiers can escape from overfitting those noisy labels. However,
such estimation is practically difficult, due to either the indirect nature of two-step
approaches, or not big enough data to afford end-to-end approaches. In this paper,
we propose a human-assisted approach called “Masking” that conveys human cognition of invalid class transitions and naturally speculates the structure of the noise
transition matrix. To this end, we derive a structure-aware probabilistic model
incorporating a structure prior, and solve the challenges from structure extraction
and structure alignment. Thanks to Masking, we only estimate unmasked noise
transition probabilities and the burden of estimation is tremendously reduced. We
conduct extensive experiments on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 with three noise
structures as well as the industrial-level Clothing1M with agnostic noise structure, and the results show that Masking can improve the robustness of classifiers
significantly.

1

Introduction

It is always challenging to learn from noisy labels [2, 34, 4, 37, 25], since these labels are systematically corrupted. As a negative effect, noisy labels inevitably degenerate the accuracy of classifiers.
This negative effect becomes more prominent for deep learning, since these complex models can fully
memorize noisy labels, which correspondingly degenerates their generalization [48]. Unfortunately,
noisy labels are ubiquitous and unavoidable in our daily life, such as web queries [24], social-network
tagging [6], crowdsourcing [45], medical images [8], and financial analysis [1].
To handle such noisy labels, recent approaches explore three directions mainly. One direction focuses
on training only on selected samples, which leverages the sample-selection bias [18] to overcome
the label noise issue. For example, MentorNet [19] trains on “small-loss” samples. Meanwhile,
Decoupling [26] trains on “disagreement” samples, for which the predictions of two networks
disagree. However, since the data for training are selected on the fly rather than selected in the
beginning, it is hard to characterize these sample-selection biases, and then it is hard to give any
theoretical guarantee on the consistency of learning.
Another direction develops regularization techniques, including explicit and implicit regularizations.
This direction employs the regularization bias to overcome the label noise issue. Explicit regulariza∗

The first two authors (Bo Han and Jiangchao Yao) made equal contributions. The implementation is available
at https://github.com/bhanML/Masking.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

