ResNet with one-neuron hidden layers is a Universal
Approximator

Hongzhou Lin
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
hongzhou@mit.edu

Stefanie Jegelka
MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139
stefje@mit.edu

Abstract
We demonstrate that a very deep ResNet with stacked modules that have one
neuron per hidden layer and ReLU activation functions can uniformly approximate
any Lebesgue integrable function in d dimensions, i.e. ℓ1 (Rd ). Due to the identity
mapping inherent to ResNets, our network has alternating layers of dimension one
and d. This stands in sharp contrast to fully connected networks, which are not
universal approximators if their width is the input dimension d [21, 11]. Hence,
our result implies an increase in representational power for narrow deep networks
by the ResNet architecture.

1

Introduction

Deep neural networks are central to many recent successes of machine learning, including applications
such as computer vision, natural language processing, or reinforcement learning. A common trend in
deep learning has been to construct larger and deeper networks, starting from the pioneer convolutional
network LeNet [19], to networks with tens of layers such as AlexNet [17] or VGG-Net [28], or recent
architectures like GoogLeNet/Inception [30] or ResNet [13, 14], which may contain hundreds or
thousands of layers. A typical observation is that deeper networks offer better performance. This
phenomenon, at least on the training set, supports the intuition that a deeper network should have
more capacity to approximate the target function, and leads to a question that has received increasing
interest in the theory of deep learning: can all functions that we may care about be approximated well
by a sufficiently large and deep network? In this work, we address this important question for the
popular ResNet architecture.
The question of representational power of neural networks has been answered in different forms.
Results in the late eighties showed that a network with a single hidden layer can approximate any
continuous function with compact support to arbitrary accuracy, when the width goes to infinity [7,
15, 10, 18]. This result is referred to as the universal approximation theorem. Analogous to the
classical Stone-Weierstrass theorem on polynomials or the convergence theorem on Fourier series,
this theorem implies that the family of neural networks are universal approximators: we can apply
neural networks to approximate any continuous function and the accuracy improves as we add more
neurons in the width. More importantly, the coefficients in the network can be efficiently learned via
back-propagation, providing an explicit representation of the approximation.
This classical universal approximation theorem completely relies on the power of the width increasing
to infinity, i.e., “fat” networks. Current “tall” deep learning models, however, are not captured by this
setting. Consequently, theoretically analyzing the benefit of depth has gained much attention in the
recent literature [31, 6, 9, 32, 23, 20, 25]. The main focus of these papers is to provide examples of
functions that can be efficiently represented by a deep network but are hard to represent by shallow
networks. These examples require exponentially many neurons in a shallow network to achieve
the same approximation accuracy as a deep network with only a polynomial or linear number of
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

