Testing for Families of Distributions
via the Fourier Transform∗
Clément L. Canonne
Stanford University
ccanonne@stanford.edu

Ilias Diakonikolas
University of Southern California
diakonik@usc.edu

Alistair Stewart
University of Southern California
stewart.al@gmail.com

Abstract
We study the general problem of testing whether an unknown discrete distribution
belongs to a specified family of distributions. More specifically, given a distribution
family P and sample access to an unknown discrete distribution P, we want to
distinguish (with high probability) between the case that P ∈ P and the case that
P is -far, in total variation distance, from every distribution in P. This is the
prototypical hypothesis testing problem that has received significant attention in
statistics and, more recently, in computer science. The main contribution of this
work is a simple and general testing technique that is applicable to all distribution
families whose Fourier spectrum satisfies a certain approximate sparsity property.
We apply our Fourier-based framework to obtain near sample-optimal and computationally efficient testers for the following fundamental distribution families:
Sums of Independent Integer Random Variables (SIIRVs), Poisson Multinomial
Distributions (PMDs), and Discrete Log-Concave Distributions. For the first two,
ours are the first non-trivial testers in the literature, vastly generalizing previous
work on testing Poisson Binomial Distributions. For the third, our tester improves
on prior work in both sample and time complexity.

1

Introduction

1.1

Background and Motivation

The prototypical inference question in the area of distribution property testing [6] is the following:
Given a set of samples from a collection of probability distributions, can we determine whether
these distributions satisfy a certain property? During the past two decades, this broad question –
whose roots lie in statistical hypothesis testing [43, 40] – has received considerable attention by the
computer science community, see [49, 10] for two recent surveys. After two decades of study, for
many properties of interest there exist sample-optimal testers (matched by information-theoretic
lower bounds) [44, 14, 54, 30, 2, 29, 12].
In this work, we focus on the problem of testing whether an unknown distribution belongs to a given
family of discrete structured distributions. Let P be a family of discrete distributions over a total order
(e.g., [n]) or a partial order (e.g., [n]k ). The problem of membership testing for P is the following:
Given sample access to an unknown distribution P (effectively supported on the same domain as P),
we want to distinguish between the case that P ∈ P versus dTV (P, P) > . (Here, dTV denotes the
1

The full version of this paper is available at [13].

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

