MacNet: Transferring Knowledge from Machine
Comprehension to Sequence-to-Sequence Models

Boyuan Pan† , Yazheng Yang‡ , Hao Li† , Zhou Zhao‡ , Yueting Zhuang‡ , Deng Cai†]∗, Xiaofei He?†
†
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
‡
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University
]
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Institute of Frontier Technologies
?
Fabu Inc., Hangzhou, China
{panby, yazheng_yang, haolics, zhaozhou, yzhuang, dcai}@zju.edu.cn
xiaofeihe@fabu.ai

Abstract
Machine Comprehension (MC) is one of the core problems in natural language processing, requiring both understanding of the natural language and knowledge about
the world. Rapid progress has been made since the release of several benchmark
datasets, and recently the state-of-the-art models even surpass human performance
on the well-known SQuAD evaluation. In this paper, we transfer knowledge learned
from machine comprehension to the sequence-to-sequence tasks to deepen the
understanding of the text. We propose MacNet: a novel encoder-decoder supplementary architecture to the widely used attention-based sequence-to-sequence
models. Experiments on neural machine translation (NMT) and abstractive text
summarization show that our proposed framework can significantly improve the
performance of the baseline models, and our method for the abstractive text summarization achieves the state-of-the-art results on the Gigaword dataset.

1

Introduction

Machine comprehension (MC) has gained significant popularity over the past few years and it is
a coveted goal in the field of natural language understanding. Its task is to teach the machine to
understand the content of a given passage and then answer a related question, which requires deep
comprehension and accurate information extraction towards the text. With the release of several
high-quality benchmark datasets [Hermann et al., 2015; Rajpurkar et al., 2016; Joshi et al., 2017],
end-to-end neural networks [Wang et al., 2017; Xiong et al., 2017; Cui et al., 2017] have achieved
promising results on the MC tasks and some even outperform humans on the SQuAD [Rajpurkar et
al., 2016], which is one of the most popular machine comprehension tests. Table 1 shows a simple
example from the SQuAD dataset.
Sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) models [Sutskever et al., 2014] with attention mechanism [Bahdanau
et al., 2015], in which an encoder compresses the source text and a decoder with an attention mechanism generates target words, have shown great capability to handle many natural language generation
tasks such as machine translation [Luong et al., 2015; Xia et al., 2017], text summarization [Rush
et al., 2015; Nallapati et al., 2016] and dialogue systems [Williams et al., 2017], etc. However,
these encoder-decoder networks directly map the source input to a fixed target sentence to learn the
relationship between the natural language texts, which makes them hard to capture a lot of deep
intrinsic details and understand the potential implication of them [Li et al., 2017; Shi et al., 2016].
∗

corresponding author

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

