But How Does It Work in Theory?
Linear SVM with Random Features
Yitong Sun
Department of Mathematics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI, 48109
syitong@umich.edu

Anna Gilbert
Department of Mathematics
University of Michigan
annacg@umich.edu

Ambuj Tewari
Department of Statistics
University of Michigan
tewaria@umich.edu

Abstract
We prove that, under low noise assumptions, the support vector machine with
N √m random features (RFSVM) can achieve the learning rate faster than
O(1/ m) on a training set with m samples when an optimized feature map is
used. Our work extends the previous fast rate analysis of random features method
from least square loss to 0-1 loss. We also show that the reweighted feature
selection method, which approximates the optimized feature map, helps improve
the performance of RFSVM in experiments on a synthetic data set.

1

Introduction

Kernel methods such as kernel support vector machines (KSVMs) have been widely and successfully
used in classification tasks (Steinwart and Christmann [2008]). The power of kernel methods comes
from the fact that they implicitly map the data to a high dimensional, or even infinite dimensional,
feature space, where points with different labels can be separated by a linear functional. It is, however,
time-consuming to compute the kernel matrix and thus KSVMs do not scale well to extremely
large datasets. To overcome this challenge, researchers have developed various ways to efficiently
approximate the kernel matrix or the kernel function.
The random features method, proposed by Rahimi and Recht [2008], maps the data to a finite
dimensional feature space as a random approximation to the feature space of RBF kernels. With
explicit finite dimensional feature vectors available, the original KSVM is converted to a linear
support vector machine (LSVM), that can be trained by faster algorithms (Shalev-Shwartz et al.
[2011], Hsieh et al. [2008]) and tested in constant time with respect to the number of training samples.
For example, Huang et al. [2014] and Dai et al. [2014] applied RFSVM or its variant to datasets
containing millions of data points and achieved performance comparable to deep neural nets.
Despite solid practical performance, there is a lack of clear theoretical guarantees
√ for the learning
rate of RFSVM. Rahimi and Recht [2009] obtained a risk gap of order O(1/ N ) between the
best RFSVM and KSVM classifiers, where N is the number of features. Although the order of
the error bound is correct for general cases, it is too pessimistic to justify or to explain the actual
computational benefits of random features method in practice. And the model is formulated as a
constrained optimization problem, which is rarely used in practice.
Cortes et al. [2010] and Sutherland and Schneider [2015] considered the performance of RFSVM as a
perturbed optimization problem, using the fact that the dual form of KSVM is a constrained quadratic
optimization problem. Although the maximizer of a quadratic function depends continuously on the
quadratic form, its dependence is weak and thus, both papers failed to obtain an informative bound
for the excess risk of RFSVM in the classification problem. In particular, such an approach requires
RFSVM and KSVM to be compared under the same hyper-parameters. This assumption is, in fact,
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

