Video-to-Video Synthesis

Ting-Chun Wang1 , Ming-Yu Liu1 , Jun-Yan Zhu2 , Guilin Liu1 ,
Andrew Tao1 , Jan Kautz1 , Bryan Catanzaro1
1
NVIDIA, 2 MIT CSAIL
{tingchunw,mingyul,guilinl,atao,jkautz,bcatanzaro}@nvidia.com,
junyanz@mit.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of video-to-video synthesis, whose goal is to learn a mapping
function from an input source video (e.g., a sequence of semantic segmentation
masks) to an output photorealistic video that precisely depicts the content of the
source video. While its image counterpart, the image-to-image translation problem,
is a popular topic, the video-to-video synthesis problem is less explored in the
literature. Without modeling temporal dynamics, directly applying existing image
synthesis approaches to an input video often results in temporally incoherent videos
of low visual quality. In this paper, we propose a video-to-video synthesis approach
under the generative adversarial learning framework. Through carefully-designed
generators and discriminators, coupled with a spatio-temporal adversarial objective,
we achieve high-resolution, photorealistic, temporally coherent video results on
a diverse set of input formats including segmentation masks, sketches, and poses.
Experiments on multiple benchmarks show the advantage of our method compared
to strong baselines. In particular, our model is capable of synthesizing 2K resolution
videos of street scenes up to 30 seconds long, which significantly advances the
state-of-the-art of video synthesis. Finally, we apply our method to future video
prediction, outperforming several competing systems. Code, models, and more
results are available at our website.

1

Introduction

The capability to model and recreate the dynamics of our visual world is essential to building
intelligent agents. Apart from purely scientific interests, learning to synthesize continuous visual
experiences has a wide range of applications in computer vision, robotics, and computer graphics.
For example, in model-based reinforcement learning [2, 24], a video synthesis model finds use in
approximating visual dynamics of the world for training the agent with less amount of real experience
data. Using a learned video synthesis model, one can generate realistic videos without explicitly
specifying scene geometry, materials, lighting, and dynamics, which would be cumbersome but
necessary when using a standard graphics rendering engine [35].
The video synthesis problem exists in various forms, including future video prediction [15, 18, 42, 45,
50, 64, 67, 70, 76] and unconditional video synthesis [59, 66, 68]. In this paper, we study a new form:
video-to-video synthesis. At the core, we aim to learn a mapping function that can convert an input
video to an output video. To the best of our knowledge, a general-purpose solution to video-to-video
synthesis has not yet been explored by prior work, although its image counterpart, the image-to-image
translation problem, is a popular research topic [6, 31, 33, 43, 44, 63, 65, 72, 81, 82]. Our method is
inspired by previous application-specific video synthesis methods [58, 60, 61, 74].
We cast the video-to-video synthesis problem as a distribution matching problem, where the goal is
to train a model such that the conditional distribution of the synthesized videos given input videos
resembles that of real videos. To this end, we learn a conditional generative adversarial model [20]
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

