Hyperbolic Neural Networks

Octavian-Eugen Ganea∗
Dept. of Computer Science
ETH Zürich
Zurich, Switzerland

Gary Bécigneul∗
Dept. of Computer Science
ETH Zürich
Zurich, Switzerland

Thomas Hofmann
Dept. of Computer Science
ETH Zürich
Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract
Hyperbolic spaces have recently gained momentum in the context of machine
learning due to their high capacity and tree-likeliness properties. However, the
representational power of hyperbolic geometry is not yet on par with Euclidean
geometry, mostly because of the absence of corresponding hyperbolic neural
network layers. This makes it hard to use hyperbolic embeddings in downstream
tasks. Here, we bridge this gap in a principled manner by combining the formalism
of Möbius gyrovector spaces with the Riemannian geometry of the Poincaré model
of hyperbolic spaces. As a result, we derive hyperbolic versions of important deep
learning tools: multinomial logistic regression, feed-forward and recurrent neural
networks such as gated recurrent units. This allows to embed sequential data and
perform classification in the hyperbolic space. Empirically, we show that, even if
hyperbolic optimization tools are limited, hyperbolic sentence embeddings either
outperform or are on par with their Euclidean variants on textual entailment and
noisy-prefix recognition tasks.

1

Introduction

It is common in machine learning to represent data as being embedded in the Euclidean space Rn . The
main reason for such a choice is simply convenience, as this space has a vectorial structure, closedform formulas of distance and inner-product, and is the natural generalization of our intuition-friendly,
visual three-dimensional space. Moreover, embedding entities in such a continuous space allows to
feed them as input to neural networks, which has led to unprecedented performance on a broad range
of problems, including sentiment detection [15], machine translation [3], textual entailment [22] or
knowledge base link prediction [20, 6].
Despite the success of Euclidean embeddings, recent research has proven that many types of complex data (e.g. graph data) from a multitude of fields (e.g. Biology, Network Science, Computer
Graphics or Computer Vision) exhibit a highly non-Euclidean latent anatomy [8]. In such cases, the
Euclidean space does not provide the most powerful or meaningful geometrical representations. For
example, [10] shows that arbitrary tree structures cannot be embedded with arbitrary low distortion
(i.e. almost preserving their metric) in the Euclidean space with unbounded number of dimensions,
but this task becomes surprisingly easy in the hyperbolic space with only 2 dimensions where the
exponential growth of distances matches the exponential growth of nodes with the tree depth.
The adoption of neural networks and deep learning in these non-Euclidean settings has been rather
limited until very recently, the main reason being the non-trivial or impossible principled generalizations of basic operations (e.g. vector addition, matrix-vector multiplication, vector translation,
vector inner product) as well as, in more complex geometries, the lack of closed form expressions for
basic objects (e.g. distances, geodesics, parallel transport). Thus, classic tools such as multinomial
∗

Equal contribution, correspondence at {octavian.ganea,gary.becigneul}@inf.ethz.ch

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

