DropMax: Adaptive Variational Softmax

Hae Beom Lee1,2 , Juho Lee3,2 , Saehoon Kim2 , Eunho Yang1,2 , Sung Ju Hwang1,2
KAIST1 , AItrics2 , South Korea,
University of Oxford3 , United Kingdom,
{haebeom.lee, eunhoy, sjhwang82}@kaist.ac.kr
juho.lee@stats.ox.ac.uk, shkim@aitrics.com

Abstract
We propose DropMax, a stochastic version of softmax classifier which at each
iteration drops non-target classes according to dropout probabilities adaptively
decided for each instance. Specifically, we overlay binary masking variables
over class output probabilities, which are input-adaptively learned via variational
inference. This stochastic regularization has an effect of building an ensemble
classifier out of exponentially many classifiers with different decision boundaries.
Moreover, the learning of dropout rates for non-target classes on each instance
allows the classifier to focus more on classification against the most confusing
classes. We validate our model on multiple public datasets for classification, on
which it obtains significantly improved accuracy over the regular softmax classifier
and other baselines. Further analysis of the learned dropout probabilities shows
that our model indeed selects confusing classes more often when it performs
classification.

1

Introduction

Deep learning models have shown impressive performances on classification tasks [17, 10, 11].
However, most of the efforts thus far have been made on improving the network architecture, while
the predominant choice of the final classification function remained to be the basic softmax regression.
Relatively less research has been done here, except for few works that propose variants of softmax,
such as Sampled Softmax [12], Spherical Softmax [5], and Sparsemax [22]. However, they either do
not target accuracy improvement or obtain improved accuracy only on certain limited settings.
In this paper, we propose a novel variant of softmax classifier that achieves improved accuracy over
the regular softmax function by leveraging the popular dropout regularization, which we refer to as
DropMax. At each stochastic gradient descent step in network training, DropMax classifier applies
dropout to the exponentiations in the softmax function, such that we consider the true class and a
random subset of other classes to learn the classifier. At each training step, this allows the classifier to
be learned to solve a distinct subproblem of the given multi-class classification problem, enabling it
to focus on discriminative properties of the target class relative to the sampled classes. Finally, when
training is over, we can obtain an ensemble of exponentially many 1 classifiers with different decision
boundaries.
Moreover, when doing so, we further exploit the intuition that some classes could be more important
than others in correct classification of each instance, as they may be confused more with the given
instance. For example in Figure 1, the instance of the class cat on the left is likely to be more confused
with class lion because of the lion mane wig it is wearing. The cat instance on the right, on the other
hand, resembles Jaguar due to its spots. Thus, we extend our classifier to learn the probability of
dropping non-target classes for each input instance, such that the stochastic classifier can consider
1

to number of classes

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

