Ex ante coordination and collusion in zero-sum
multi-player extensive-form games
Gabriele Farina∗
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
gfarina@cs.cmu.edu

Andrea Celli∗
DEIB
Politecnico di Milano
andrea.celli@polimi.it

Nicola Gatti
DEIB
Politecnico di Milano
nicola.gatti@polimi.it

Tuomas Sandholm
Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
sandholm@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Recent milestones in equilibrium computation, such as the success of Libratus,
show that it is possible to compute strong solutions to two-player zero-sum games
in theory and practice. This is not the case for games with more than two players,
which remain one of the main open challenges in computational game theory. This
paper focuses on zero-sum games where a team of players faces an opponent, as
is the case, for example, in Bridge, collusion in poker, and many non-recreational
applications such as war, where the colluders do not have time or means of communicating during battle, collusion in bidding, where communication during the
auction is illegal, and coordinated swindling in public. The possibility for the team
members to communicate before game play—that is, coordinate their strategies ex
ante—makes the use of behavioral strategies unsatisfactory. The reasons for this
are closely related to the fact that the team can be represented as a single player
with imperfect recall. We propose a new game representation, the realization
form, that generalizes the sequence form but can also be applied to imperfect-recall
games. Then, we use it to derive an auxiliary game that is equivalent to the original
one. It provides a sound way to map the problem of finding an optimal ex-antecoordinated strategy for the team to the well-understood Nash equilibrium-finding
problem in a (larger) two-player zero-sum perfect-recall game. By reasoning over
the auxiliary game, we devise an anytime algorithm, fictitious team-play, that is
guaranteed to converge to an optimal coordinated strategy for the team against
an optimal opponent, and that is dramatically faster than the prior state-of-the-art
algorithm for this problem.

1

Introduction

In recent years, computational studies on imperfect-information games have largely focused on twoplayer zero-sum games. In that setting, AI techniques have achieved remarkable results, such as
defeating top human specialist professionals in heads-up no-limit Texas hold’em poker [4, 5].
Fewer results are known for settings with more than two players. Yet, many strategic interactions
provide players with incentives to team up. In some cases, players may have a similar goal and may
be willing to coordinate and share their final reward. Consider, as an illustration, the case of a poker
∗

Equal contribution.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

