Benefits of over-parameterization with EM
Ji Xu
Columbia University
jixu@cs.columbia.edu

Daniel Hsu
Columbia University
djhsu@cs.columbia.edu

Arian Maleki
Columbia University
arian@stat.columbia.edu

Abstract
Expectation Maximization (EM) is among the most popular algorithms for maximum likelihood estimation, but it is generally only guaranteed to find its stationary
points of the log-likelihood objective. The goal of this article is to present theoretical and empirical evidence that over-parameterization can help EM avoid spurious
local optima in the log-likelihood. We consider the problem of estimating the
mean vectors of a Gaussian mixture model in a scenario where the mixing weights
are known. Our study shows that the global behavior of EM, when one uses an
over-parameterized model in which the mixing weights are treated as unknown, is
better than that when one uses the (correct) model with the mixing weights fixed to
the known values. For symmetric Gaussians mixtures with two components, we
prove that introducing the (statistically redundant) weight parameters enables EM
to find the global maximizer of the log-likelihood starting from almost any initial
mean parameters, whereas EM without this over-parameterization may very often
fail. For other Gaussian mixtures, we provide empirical evidence that shows similar
behavior. Our results corroborate the value of over-parameterization in solving
non-convex optimization problems, previously observed in other domains.

1

Introduction

In a Gaussian mixture model (GMM), the observed data Y = {y 1 , y 2 , . . . , y n } ⇢ Rd comprise an
i.i.d. sample from a mixture of k Gaussians:
y1 , . . . , yn

i.i.d.

⇠

k
X
i=1

wi⇤ N (✓ ⇤i , ⌃⇤i )

(1)

where (wi⇤ , ✓ ⇤i , ⌃⇤i ) denote the weight, mean, and covariance matrix of the ith mixture component.
Parameters of the GMM are often estimated using the Expectation Maximization (EM) algorithm,
which aims to find the maximizer of the log-likelihood objective. However, the log-likelihood function
is not concave, so EM is only guaranteed to find its stationary points. This leads to the following
natural and fundamental question in the study of EM and non-convex optimization: How can EM
escape spurious local maxima and saddle points to reach the maximum likelihood estimate (MLE)?
In this work, we give theoretical and empirical evidence that over-parameterizing the mixture model
can help EM achieve this objective.
Our evidence is based on models in (1) where the mixture components share a known, common
covariance, i.e., we fix ⌃⇤i = ⌃⇤ for all i. First, we assume that the mixing weights wi are also
fixed to known values. Under this model, which we call Model 1, EM finds a stationary point of
the log-likelihood function in the parameter space of component means (✓ 1 , . . . , ✓ k ). Next, we
over-parameterize Model 1 as follows. Despite the fact that the weights fixed in Model 1, we now
pretend that they are not fixed. This gives a second model, which we call Model 2. Parameter
estimation for Model 2 requires EM to estimate the mixing weights in addition to the component
means. Finding the global maximizer of the log-likelihood over this enlarged parameter space is
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

