Relating Leverage Scores and Density
using Regularized Christoffel Functions

Edouard Pauwels
IRIT-AOC
Université Toulouse 3
Paul Sabatier
Toulouse, France

Francis Bach
INRIA
Ecole Normale Supérieure
PSL Research University
Paris, France

Jean-Philippe Vert
Google Brain
CBIO Mines ParisTech
PSL Research University
Paris, France

Abstract
Statistical leverage scores emerged as a fundamental tool for matrix sketching
and column sampling with applications to low rank approximation, regression,
random feature learning and quadrature. Yet, the very nature of this quantity is
barely understood. Borrowing ideas from the orthogonal polynomial literature, we
introduce the regularized Christoffel function associated to a positive definite kernel.
This uncovers a variational formulation for leverage scores for kernel methods and
allows to elucidate their relationships with the chosen kernel as well as population
density. Our main result quantitatively describes a decreasing relation between
leverage score and population density for a broad class of kernels on Euclidean
spaces. Numerical simulations support our findings.

1

Introduction

Statistical leverage scores have been historically used as a diagnosis tool for linear regression
[16, 34, 10]. To be concrete, for a ridge regression problem with design matrix X and regularization
parameter λ > 0, the leverage score of each data point is given by the diagonal elements of X(X > X +
λI)−1 X > . These leverage scores characterize the importance of the corresponding observations
and are key to efficient subsampling with optimal approximation guarantees. Therefore, leverage
scores emerged as a fundamental tool for matrix sketching and column sampling [22, 21, 13, 36],
and play an important role in low rank matrix approximation [11, 6], regression [2, 28, 20], random
feature learning [29] and quadrature [7]. The notion of leverage score is seen as an intrinsic, settingdependent quantity, and should eventually be estimated. In this work we elucidate a relation between
leverage score and the learning setting (population measure and statistical model) when used with
kernel methods.
For that purpose, we introduce a variant of the Christoffel function, a classical tool in polynomial
algebra which provides a bound for the evaluation at a given point of a given degree polynomial P
in terms of an average value of P 2 . The Christoffel function is an important object in the theory of
orthogonal polynomials [32, 14] and found applications in approximation theory [26] and spectral
analysis of random matrices [5]. It is parametrized by the degree of polynomials considered and an
associated measure, and we know that, as the polynomial degree increases, it encodes information
about the support and the density of its associated measures, see [23, 24, 33] for the univariate case
and [8, 9, 37, 38, 18, 19] in the multivariate case.
The variant we propose amounts to replacing the set of polynomials with fixed degree, used in the
definition of the Christoffel function, by a set of function with bounded norm in a reproducing kernel
Hilbert space (RKHS)1 . More precisely, given a density p on Rd and a regularization parameter
1

Kernelized Christoffel functions were first proposed by Laurent El Ghaoui and independently studied in [4].

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

