Adaptive Methods for Nonconvex Optimization

Manzil Zaheer ∗
Google Research
manzilzaheer@google.com
Devendra Sachan
Carnegie Mellon University
dsachan@andrew.cmu.edu

Sashank J. Reddi ∗
Google Research
sashank@google.com

Satyen Kale
Google Research
satyenkale@google.com

Sanjiv Kumar
Google Research
sanjivk@google.com

Abstract
Adaptive gradient methods that rely on scaling gradients down by the square root of
exponential moving averages of past squared gradients, such RMS PROP, A DAM,
A DADELTA have found wide application in optimizing the nonconvex problems
that arise in deep learning. However, it has been recently demonstrated that such
methods can fail to converge even in simple convex optimization settings. In this
work, we provide a new analysis of such methods applied to nonconvex stochastic
optimization problems, characterizing the effect of increasing minibatch size. Our
analysis shows that under this scenario such methods do converge to stationarity up
to the statistical limit of variance in the stochastic gradients (scaled by a constant
factor). In particular, our result implies that increasing minibatch sizes enables
convergence, thus providing a way to circumvent the nonconvergence issues. Furthermore, we provide a new adaptive optimization algorithm, YOGI, which controls
the increase in effective learning rate, leading to even better performance with
similar theoretical guarantees on convergence. Extensive experiments show that
YOGI with very little hyperparameter tuning outperforms methods such as A DAM
in several challenging machine learning tasks.

1

Introduction

We study nonconvex stochastic optimization problems of the form
min f (x) := Es∼P [`(x, s)],
x∈Rd

(1)

where ` is a smooth (possibly nonconvex) function and P is a probability distribution on the domain
S ⊂ Rk . Optimization problems of this form arise naturally in machine learning where x are model
parameters, ` is the loss function and P is an unknown data distribution. Stochastic gradient descent
(S GD) is the dominant method for solving such optimization problems, especially in nonconvex
settings. S GD [29] iteratively updates the parameters of the model by moving them in the direction of
the negative gradient computed on a minibatch scaled by step length, typically referred to as learning
rate. One has to decay this learning rate as the algorithm proceeds in order to control the variance in
the stochastic gradients computed over a minibatch and thereby, ensure convergence. Hand tuning
the learning rate decay in S GD is often painstakingly hard. To tackle this issue, several methods that
automatically decay the learning rate have been proposed. The first prominent algorithms in this
line of research is A DAGRAD [7, 22], which uses a per-dimension learning rate based on squared
past gradients. A DAGRAD achieved significant performance gains in comparison to S GD when the
gradients are sparse.
Although A DAGRAD has been demonstrated to work well in sparse settings, it has been observed that
its performance, unfortunately, degrades in dense and nonconvex settings. This degraded performance
∗

Equal Contribution

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

