Meta-Reinforcement Learning of Structured
Exploration Strategies

Abhishek Gupta, Russell Mendonca, YuXuan Liu, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey Levine
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of California, Berkeley
{abhigupta, pabbeel, svlevine}@eecs.berkeley.edu
{russellm, yuxuanliu}@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Exploration is a fundamental challenge in reinforcement learning (RL). Many
current exploration methods for deep RL use task-agnostic objectives, such as
information gain or bonuses based on state visitation. However, many practical
applications of RL involve learning more than a single task, and prior tasks can be
used to inform how exploration should be performed in new tasks. In this work, we
study how prior tasks can inform an agent about how to explore effectively in new
situations. We introduce a novel gradient-based fast adaptation algorithm – model
agnostic exploration with structured noise (MAESN) – to learn exploration strategies from prior experience. The prior experience is used both to initialize a policy
and to acquire a latent exploration space that can inject structured stochasticity into
a policy, producing exploration strategies that are informed by prior knowledge
and are more effective than random action-space noise. We show that MAESN is
more effective at learning exploration strategies when compared to prior meta-RL
methods, RL without learned exploration strategies, and task-agnostic exploration
methods. We evaluate our method on a variety of simulated tasks: locomotion with
a wheeled robot, locomotion with a quadrupedal walker, and object manipulation.

1

Introduction

Deep reinforcement learning methods have been shown to learn complex tasks ranging from
games [17] to robotic control [14, 20] with minimal supervision, by simply exploring the environment and experiencing rewards. As tasks become more complex or temporally extended, simple
exploration strategies become less effective. Prior works have proposed guiding exploration based
on criteria such as intrinsic motivation [23, 26, 25], state-visitation counts [16, 27, 2], Thompson
sampling and bootstrapped models [4, 18], optimism in the face of uncertainty [3, 12], and parameter
space exploration [19, 8]. These exploration strategies are largely task agnostic, in that they aim to
provide good exploration without exploiting the particular structure of the task itself.
However, an intelligent agent interacting with the real world will likely need to learn many tasks, not
just one, in which case prior tasks should be used to inform how exploration in new tasks should be
performed. For example, a robot that is tasked with learning a new household chore likely has prior
experience of learning other related chores. It can draw on these experiences to decide how to explore
the environment to acquire the new skill more quickly. Similarly, a walking robot that has previously
learned to navigate different buildings doesn’t need to reacquire the skill of walking when it must
learn to navigate through a maze, but simply needs to explore in the space of navigation strategies.
In this work, we study how experience from multiple distinct but related prior tasks can be used to
autonomously acquire directed exploration strategies via meta-learning. Meta-learning, or learning to
learn, refers to the problem of learning strategies which can adapt quickly to novel tasks by using
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

