SNIPER: Efficient Multi-Scale Training

Bharat Singh ∗

Mahyar Najibi ∗
Larry S. Davis
University of Maryland, College Park
{bharat,najibi,lsd}@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
We present SNIPER, an algorithm for performing efficient multi-scale training in
instance level visual recognition tasks. Instead of processing every pixel in an
image pyramid, SNIPER processes context regions around ground-truth instances
(referred to as chips) at the appropriate scale. For background sampling, these
context-regions are generated using proposals extracted from a region proposal
network trained with a short learning schedule. Hence, the number of chips generated per image during training adaptively changes based on the scene complexity.
SNIPER only processes 30% more pixels compared to the commonly used single
scale training at 800x1333 pixels on the COCO dataset. But, it also observes
samples from extreme resolutions of the image pyramid, like 1400x2000 pixels. As
SNIPER operates on resampled low resolution chips (512x512 pixels), it can have a
batch size as large as 20 on a single GPU even with a ResNet-101 backbone. Therefore it can benefit from batch-normalization during training without the need for
synchronizing batch-normalization statistics across GPUs. SNIPER brings training
of instance level recognition tasks like object detection closer to the protocol for
image classification and suggests that the commonly accepted guideline that it is
important to train on high resolution images for instance level visual recognition
tasks might not be correct. Our implementation based on Faster-RCNN with a
ResNet-101 backbone obtains an mAP of 47.6% on the COCO dataset for bounding
box detection and can process 5 images per second during inference with a single
GPU. Code is available at https://github.com/mahyarnajibi/SNIPER/.

1

Introduction

Humans have a foveal visual system which attends to objects at a fixed distance and size. For
example, when we focus on nearby objects, far away objects get blurred [7]. Naturally, it is difficult
for us to focus on objects of different scales simultaneously [30]. We only process a small field of
view at any given point of time and adaptively ignore the remaining visual content in the image.
However, computer algorithms which are designed for instance level visual recognition tasks like
object detection depart from this natural way of processing visual information. For obtaining a
representation robust to scale, popular detection algorithms like Faster-RCNN/Mask-RCNN [29, 12]
are trained on a multi-scale image pyramid [22, 33]. Since every pixel is processed at each scale,
this approach to processing visual information increases the training time significantly. For example,
constructing a 3 scale image pyramid (e.g. scales=1x,2x,3x) requires processing 14 times the number
of pixels present in the original image. For this reason, it is impractical to use multi-scale training in
many scenarios.
Recently, it is shown that ignoring gradients of objects which are of extreme resolutions is beneficial
while using multiple scales during training [33]. For example, when constructing an image pyramid
of 3 scales, the gradients of large and small objects should be ignored at large and small resolutions
∗

Equal Contribution

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

