Learning Bounds for Greedy Approximation with
Explicit Feature Maps from Multiple Kernels
Shahin Shahrampour
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843
shahin@tamu.edu
Vahid Tarokh
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
vahid.tarokh@duke.edu

Abstract
Nonlinear kernels can be approximated using finite-dimensional feature maps for
efficient risk minimization. Due to the inherent trade-off between the dimension
of the (mapped) feature space and the approximation accuracy, the key problem
is to identify promising (explicit) features leading to a satisfactory out-of-sample
performance. In this work, we tackle this problem by efficiently choosing such
features from multiple kernels in a greedy fashion. Our method sequentially selects
these explicit features from a set of candidate features using a correlation metric.
We establish an out-of-sample error bound capturing the trade-off between the error
in terms of explicit features (approximation error) and the error due to spectral
properties of the best model in the Hilbert space associated to the combined kernel
(spectral error). The result verifies that when the (best) underlying data model is
sparse enough, i.e., the spectral error is negligible, one can control the test error
with a small number of explicit features, that can scale poly-logarithmically with
data. Our empirical results show that given a fixed number of explicit features, the
method can achieve a lower test error with a smaller time cost, compared to the
state-of-the-art in data-dependent random features.

1

Introduction

Kernel methods are powerful tools in describing the nonlinear representation of data. Mapping the
inputs to a high-dimensional feature space, kernel methods compute their inner products without
recourse to the explicit form of the feature map (kernel trick). However, unfortunately, calculating
the kernel matrix for the training stage requires a prohibitive computational cost scaling quadratically
with data. To address this shortcoming, recent years have witnessed an intense interest on the
approximation of kernels using low-rank surrogates [1, 2, 3]. Such techniques can turn the kernel
formulation to a linear problem, which is potentially solvable in a linear time with respect to data
(see e.g. [4] for linear Support Vector Machines (SVM)) and thus applicable to large data sets. In
the approximation of kernels via their corresponding finite-dimensional feature maps, regardless of
whether the approximation is deterministic [5] or random [3], it is extremely critical that – we can
compute the feature maps efficiently – and – we can (hopefully) represent the data in a sparse fashion.
The challenge is that finding feature maps with these characteristics is generally hard.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

