Statistical Optimality of Stochastic Gradient Descent
on Hard Learning Problems through Multiple Passes
Loucas Pillaud-Vivien
INRIA - Ecole Normale Supérieure
PSL Research University
loucas.pillaud-vivien@inria.fr

Alessandro Rudi
INRIA - Ecole Normale Supérieure
PSL Research University
alessandro.rudi@inria.fr

Francis Bach
INRIA - Ecole Normale Supérieure
PSL Research University
francis.bach@inria.fr

Abstract
We consider stochastic gradient descent (SGD) for least-squares regression with
potentially several passes over the data. While several passes have been widely
reported to perform practically better in terms of predictive performance on unseen
data, the existing theoretical analysis of SGD suggests that a single pass is statistically optimal. While this is true for low-dimensional easy problems, we show that
for hard problems, multiple passes lead to statistically optimal predictions while
single pass does not; we also show that in these hard models, the optimal number
of passes over the data increases with sample size. In order to define the notion
of hardness and show that our predictive performances are optimal, we consider
potentially infinite-dimensional models and notions typically associated to kernel
methods, namely, the decay of eigenvalues of the covariance matrix of the features
and the complexity of the optimal predictor as measured through the covariance
matrix. We illustrate our results on synthetic experiments with non-linear kernel
methods and on a classical benchmark with a linear model.

1

Introduction

Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and its multiple variants—averaged [1], accelerated [2], variancereduced [3, 4, 5]—are the workhorses of large-scale machine learning, because (a) these methods
looks at only a few observations before updating the corresponding model, and (b) they are known in
theory and in practice to generalize well to unseen data [6].
Beyond the choice of step-size (often referred to as the learning rate), the number of passes to make
on the data remains an important practical and theoretical issue. In the context of finite-dimensional
models (least-squares regression or logistic regression), the theoretical answer has been known for
many years: a single passes suffices for the optimal statistical performance [1, 7]. Worse, most of the
theoretical work only apply to single pass algorithms, with some exceptions leading to analyses of
multiple passes when the step-size is taken smaller than the best known setting [8, 9].
However, in practice, multiple passes are always performed as they empirically lead to better
generalization (e.g., loss on unseen test data) [6]. But no analysis so far has been able to show that,
given the appropriate step-size, multiple pass SGD was theoretically better than single pass SGD.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

