Probabilistic Matrix Factorization for Automated
Machine Learning

Nicolo Fusi, Rishit Sheth
Microsoft Research, New England
{nfusi,rishet}@microsoft.com

Melih Elibol∗
EECS, University of California, Berkeley
elibol@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
In order to achieve state-of-the-art performance, modern machine learning techniques require careful data pre-processing and hyperparameter tuning. Moreover,
given the ever increasing number of machine learning models being developed,
model selection is becoming increasingly important. Automating the selection
and tuning of machine learning pipelines, which can include different data preprocessing methods and machine learning models, has long been one of the goals
of the machine learning community. In this paper, we propose to solve this
meta-learning task by combining ideas from collaborative filtering and Bayesian
optimization. Specifically, we use a probabilistic matrix factorization model to
transfer knowledge across experiments performed in hundreds of different datasets
and use an acquisition function to guide the exploration of the space of possible
pipelines. In our experiments, we show that our approach quickly identifies highperforming pipelines across a wide range of datasets, significantly outperforming
the current state-of-the-art.

1

Introduction

Machine learning models often depend on hyperparameters that require extensive fine-tuning in order
to achieve optimal performance. For example, state-of-the-art deep neural networks have highly tuned
architectures and require careful initialization of the weights and learning algorithm (for example, by
setting the initial learning rate and various decay parameters). These hyperparameters can be learned
by cross-validation (or holdout set performance) over a grid of values, or by randomly sampling
the hyperparameter space [2]; but, these approaches do not take advantage of any continuity in the
parameter space. More recently, Bayesian optimization has emerged as a promising alternative to
these approaches [25, 8, 16, 1, 23, 3]. In Bayesian optimization, the loss (e.g. root mean square
error) is modeled as a function of the hyperparameters. A regression model (usually a Gaussian
process) and an acquisition function are then used to iteratively decide which hyperparameter setting
should be evaluated next. More formally, the goal of Bayesian optimization is to find the vector of
hyperparameters θ that corresponds to
arg min L (M(x; θ), y),
θ
where M(x; θ) are the predictions generated by a machine learning model M (e.g. SVM, random
forest, etc.) with hyperparameters θ on some inputs x, y are the targets/labels, and L is a loss
function. Usually, the hyperparameters are a subset of RD , although in practice many hyperparameters
can be discrete (e.g. the number of layers in a neural network) or categorical (e.g. the loss function to
use in a gradient boosted regression tree).
∗

Work conducted at Microsoft Research, New England

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

