Evolutionary Stochastic Gradient Descent for
Optimization of Deep Neural Networks

Xiaodong Cui, Wei Zhang, Zoltán Tüske and Michael Picheny
IBM Research AI
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA
{cuix, weiz, picheny}@us.ibm.com, {Zoltan.Tuske}@ibm.com

Abstract
We propose a population-based Evolutionary Stochastic Gradient Descent (ESGD)
framework for optimizing deep neural networks. ESGD combines SGD and
gradient-free evolutionary algorithms as complementary algorithms in one framework in which the optimization alternates between the SGD step and evolution
step to improve the average fitness of the population. With a back-off strategy in
the SGD step and an elitist strategy in the evolution step, it guarantees that the
best fitness in the population will never degrade. In addition, individuals in the
population optimized with various SGD-based optimizers using distinct hyperparameters in the SGD step are considered as competing species in a coevolution
setting such that the complementarity of the optimizers is also taken into account.
The effectiveness of ESGD is demonstrated across multiple applications including
speech recognition, image recognition and language modeling, using networks
with a variety of deep architectures.

1

Introduction

Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is the dominant technique in deep neural network optimization
[1]. Over the years, a wide variety of SGD-based algorithms have been developed [2, 3, 4, 5].
SGD algorithms have proved to be effective in optimization of large-scale deep learning models.
Meanwhile, gradient-free evolutionary algorithms (EA) [6, 7, 8, 9, 10] also have been used in various
applications. They represent another family of so-called black-box optimization techniques which
are well suited for some non-linear, non-convex or non-smooth optimization problems. Biologically
inspired, population-based EA make no assumptions on the optimization landscape. The population
evolves based on genetic variation and selection towards better solutions of the problems of interest.
In deep learning applications, EA such as genetic algorithms (GA), evolutionary strategies (ES) and
neuroevolution have been used for optimizing neural network architectures [11, 12, 13, 14, 15] and
tuning hyper-parameters [16, 17]. Applying EA to the direct optimization of deep neural networks
is less common. In [18], a simple EA is shown to be competitive to SGD when optimizing a small
neural network (around 1,000 parameters). However, competitive performance on a state-of-the-art
deep neural network with complex architectures and more parameters is yet to be seen.
The complementarity between SGD and EA is worth investigating. While SGD optimizes objective
functions based on their gradient or curvature information, gradient-free EA sometimes are advantageous when dealing with complex and poorly-understood optimization landscape. Furthermore,
EA are population-based so computation is intrinsically parallel. Hence, implementation is very
suitable for large-scale distributed optimization. In this paper we propose Evolutionary Stochastic
Gradient Descent (ESGD) – a framework to combine the merits of SGD and EA by treating them as
complementary optimization techniques.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

