Fairness Behind a Veil of Ignorance:
A Welfare Analysis for Automated Decision Making
Hoda Heidari
ETH Zürich
hheidari@inf.ethz.ch

Claudio Ferrari
ETH Zürich
ferraric@ethz.ch

Krishna P. Gummadi
MPI-SWS
gummadi@mpi-sws.org

Andreas Krause
ETH Zürich
krausea@ethz.ch

Abstract
We draw attention to an important, yet largely overlooked aspect of evaluating
fairness for automated decision making systems—namely risk and welfare considerations. Our proposed family of measures corresponds to the long-established
formulations of cardinal social welfare in economics, and is justified by the Rawlsian conception of fairness behind a veil of ignorance. The convex formulation
of our welfare-based measures of fairness allows us to integrate them as a constraint into any convex loss minimization pipeline. Our empirical analysis reveals
interesting trade-offs between our proposal and (a) prediction accuracy, (b) group
discrimination, and (c) Dwork et al.’s notion of individual fairness. Furthermore
and perhaps most importantly, our work provides both heuristic justification and
empirical evidence suggesting that a lower-bound on our measures often leads to
bounded inequality in algorithmic outcomes; hence presenting the first computationally feasible mechanism for bounding individual-level inequality.

1

Introduction

Traditionally, data-driven decision making systems have been designed with the sole purpose of
maximizing some system-wide measure of performance, such as accuracy or revenue. Today, these
systems are increasingly employed to make consequential decisions for human subjects—examples
include employment [Miller, 2015], credit lending [Petrasic et al., 2017], policing [Rudin, 2013],
and criminal justice [Barry-Jester et al., 2015]. Decisions made in this fashion have long-lasting
impact on people’s lives and—absent a careful ethical analysis—may affect certain individuals or
social groups negatively [Sweeney, 2013; Angwin et al., 2016; Levin, 2016]. This realization has
recently spawned an active area of research into quantifying and guaranteeing fairness for machine
learning [Dwork et al., 2012; Kleinberg et al., 2017; Hardt et al., 2016].
Virtually all existing formulations of algorithmic fairness focus on guaranteeing equality of some
notion of benefit across different individuals or socially salient groups. For instance, demographic
parity [Kamiran and Calders, 2009; Kamishima et al., 2011; Feldman et al., 2015] seeks to equalize
the percentage of people receiving a particular outcome across different groups. Equality of opportunity [Hardt et al., 2016] requires the equality of false positive/false negative rates. Individual
fairness [Dwork et al., 2012] demands that people who are equal with respect to the task at hand
receive equal outcomes. In essence, the debate so far has mostly revolved around identifying the right
notion of benefit and a tractable mathematical formulation for equalizing it.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

