Efficient Stochastic Gradient Hard Thresholding

Pan Zhou∗
Xiao-Tong Yuan†
Jiashi Feng∗
Learning & Vision Lab, National University of Singapore, Singapore
†
B-DAT Lab, Nanjing University of Information Science & Technology, Nanjing, China
pzhou@u.nus.edu
xtyuan@nuist.edu.cn
elefjia@nus.edu.sg
∗

Abstract
Stochastic gradient hard thresholding methods have recently been shown to work
favorably in solving large-scale empirical risk minimization problems under sparsity or rank constraint. Despite the improved iteration complexity over full gradient
methods, the gradient evaluation and hard thresholding complexity of the existing
stochastic algorithms usually scales linearly with data size, which could still be
expensive when data is huge and the hard thresholding step could be as expensive
as singular value decomposition in rank-constrained problems. To address these
deficiencies, we propose an efficient hybrid stochastic gradient hard thresholding
(HSG-HT) method that can be provably shown to have sample-size-independent
gradient evaluation and hard thresholding complexity bounds. Specifically, we
prove that the stochastic gradient evaluation complexity of HSG-HT scales linearly
with inverse of sub-optimality and its hard thresholding complexity scales logarithmically. By applying the heavy ball acceleration technique, we further propose
an accelerated variant of HSG-HT which can be shown to have improved factor
dependence on restricted condition number in the quadratic case. Numerical results
confirm our theoretical affirmation and demonstrate the computational efficiency
of the proposed methods.

1

Introduction

We consider the following sparsity- or rank-constrained finite-sum minimization problems which are
widely applied in high-dimensional statistical estimation:
1 Xn
min f (x) :=
fi (x), s.t. kxk0 ≤ k or rank (x) ≤ k,
(1)
x
i=1
n
where each individual loss fi (x) is associated with the i-th sample, kxk0 denotes the number of
nonzero entries in x as a vector variable, rank (x) denotes the rank of x as a matrix variable, and k
represents the sparsity/low-rankness level. Such a formulation encapsulates several important problems, including `0 -constrained linear/logistic regression [1, 2, 3], sparse graphical model learning [4],
and low-rank multivariate and multi-task regression [5, 6, 7, 8, 9], to name a few.
We are particularly interested in gradient hard thresholding methods [10, 11, 12, 13] which are
popular and effective for solving problem (1). The common theme of this class of methods is to
iterate between gradient descent and hard thresholding to maintain sparsity/low-rankness of solution
while minimizing the loss function. In our problem setting, a plain gradient hard thresholding iteration
is given by xt+1 = Φk (xt − η∇f (xt )), where Φk (·), as defined in Section 2, denotes the hard
thresholding operation that preserves the top k entries (in magnitude) of a vector or produces an
optimal rank-k approximation to a matrix via singular value decomposition (SVD). When considering
gradient hard thresholding methods, two main sources of computational complexity are at play:
the gradient evaluation complexity and the hard thresholding complexity. As the per-iteration hard
thresholding can be as expensive as SVD in rank-constrained problems, our goal is to develop methods
that iterate and converge quickly while using a minimal number of hard thresholding operations.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

