Low-shot Learning via Covariance-Preserving
Adversarial Augmentation Networks

Hang Gao1 , Zheng Shou1 , Alireza Zareian1 , Hanwang Zhang2 , Shih-Fu Chang1
1
Columbia University, 2 Nanyang Technological University
{hg2469, zs2262, az2407, sc250}@columbia.edu
hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Deep neural networks suffer from over-fitting and catastrophic forgetting when
trained with small data. One natural remedy for this problem is data augmentation,
which has been recently shown to be effective. However, previous works either
assume that intra-class variances can always be generalized to new classes, or
employ naive generation methods to hallucinate finite examples without modeling
their latent distributions. In this work, we propose Covariance-Preserving Adversarial Augmentation Networks to overcome existing limits of low-shot learning.
Specifically, a novel Generative Adversarial Network is designed to model the
latent distribution of each novel class given its related base counterparts. Since
direct estimation of novel classes can be inductively biased, we explicitly preserve
covariance information as the “variability” of base examples during the generation
process. Empirical results show that our model can generate realistic yet diverse
examples, leading to substantial improvements on the ImageNet benchmark over
the state of the art.

1

Introduction

The hallmark of learning new concepts from very few examples characterizes human intelligence.
Though constantly pushing limits forward in various visual tasks, current deep learning approaches
struggle in cases when abundant training data is impractical to gather. A straightforward idea to learn
new concepts is to fine-tune a model pre-trained on base categories, using limited data from another
set of novel categories. However, this usually leads to catastrophic forgetting [1], i.e., fine-tuning
makes the model over-fitting on novel classes, and agnostic to the majority of base classes [2, 3],
deteriorating overall performance.
One way to address this problem is to augment data for novel classes. Since generating images could
be both unnecessary [4] and impractical [5] on large datasets, feature augmentation [6, 7] is more
preferable in this scenario. Building upon learned representations [8, 9, 10], recently two variants
of generative models show the promising capability of learning variation modes from base classes
to imagine the missing pattern of novel classes. Hariharan et al. proposed Feature Hallucination
(FH) [11], which can learn a finite set of transformation mappings between examples in each base
category and directly apply them to seed novel points for extra data. However, since mappings are
enumerable (even in large amount), this model suffers from poor generalization. To address this issue,
Wang et al. [12] proposed Feature Imagination (FI), a meta-learning based generation framework
that can train an agent to synthesize extra data given a specific task. They circumvented the demand
for latent distribution of novel classes by end-to-end optimization. But the generation results usually
collapse into certain modes. Finally, it should be noted that both works erroneously assume that
intra-class variances of base classes are shareable with any novel classes. For example, the visual
variability of the concept lemon cannot be generalized to other irrelevant categories such as raccoon.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

