Loss Functions for Multiset Prediction
Sean Welleck1,2 , Zixin Yao1 , Yu Gai1 , Jialin Mao1 , Zheng Zhang1 , Kyunghyun Cho2,3
1
New York University Shanghai
2
New York University
3
CIFAR Azrieli Global Scholar
{wellecks,zixin.yao,yg1246,jialin.mao,zz,kyunghyun.cho}@nyu.edu

Abstract
We study the problem of multiset prediction. The goal of multiset prediction is
to train a predictor that maps an input to a multiset consisting of multiple items.
Unlike existing problems in supervised learning, such as classification, ranking
and sequence generation, there is no known order among items in a target multiset,
and each item in the multiset may appear more than once, making this problem
extremely challenging. In this paper, we propose a novel multiset loss function
by viewing this problem from the perspective of sequential decision making. The
proposed multiset loss function is empirically evaluated on two families of datasets,
one synthetic and the other real, with varying levels of difficulty, against various
baseline loss functions including reinforcement learning, sequence, and aggregated
distribution matching loss functions. The experiments reveal the effectiveness of
the proposed loss function over the others.

1

Introduction

A relatively less studied problem in machine learning, particularly supervised learning, is the problem
of multiset prediction. The goal of this problem is to learn a mapping from an arbitrary input to a
multiset1 of items. This problem appears in a variety of contexts. For instance, in the context of
high-energy physics, one of the important problems in a particle physics data analysis is to count how
many physics objects, such as electrons, muons, photons, taus, and jets, are in a collision event [5]. In
computer vision, object counting and automatic alt-text can be framed as multiset prediction [25, 12].
In multiset prediction, a learner is presented with an arbitrary input and the associated multiset of
items. It is assumed that there is no predefined order among the items, and that there are no further
annotations containing information about the relationship between the input and each of the items in
the multiset. These properties make the problem of multiset prediction unique from other well-studied
problems. It is different from sequence prediction, because there is no known order among the items.
It is not a ranking problem, since each item may appear more than once. It cannot be transformed
into classification, because the number of possible multisets grows exponentially with respect to the
maximum multiset size.
In this paper, we view multiset prediction as a sequential decision making process. Under this
view, the problem reduces to finding a policy that sequentially predicts one item at a time, while the
outcome is still evaluated based on the aggregate multiset of the predicted items. We first propose an
oracle policy that assigns non-zero probabilities only to prediction sequences that result exactly in the
target, ground-truth multiset given an input. This oracle is optimal in the sense that its prediction
never decreases the precision and recall regardless of previous predictions. That is, its decision is
optimal in any state (i.e., prediction prefix). We then propose a novel multiset loss which minimizes
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

1

A set that allows multiple instances, e.g. {x, y, x}. See Appendix A for a detailed definition.

