DeepProbLog:
Neural Probabilistic Logic Programming

Robin Manhaeve
KU Leuven
robin.manhaeve@cs.kuleuven.be
Angelika Kimmig
Cardiff University
KimmigA@cardiff.ac.uk

Sebastijan Dumančić
KU Leuven
sebastijan.dumancic@cs.kuleuven.be
Thomas Demeester∗
Ghent University - imec
thomas.demeester@ugent.be

Luc De Raedt*
KU Leuven
luc.deraedt@cs.kuleuven.be

Abstract
We introduce DeepProbLog, a probabilistic logic programming language that incorporates deep learning by means of neural predicates. We show how existing inference and learning techniques can be adapted for the new language. Our
experiments demonstrate that DeepProbLog supports (i) both symbolic and subsymbolic representations and inference, (ii) program induction, (iii) probabilistic
(logic) programming, and (iv) (deep) learning from examples. To the best of our
knowledge, this work is the first to propose a framework where general-purpose
neural networks and expressive probabilistic-logical modeling and reasoning are
integrated in a way that exploits the full expressiveness and strengths of both
worlds and can be trained end-to-end based on examples.

1

Introduction

The integration of low-level perception with high-level reasoning is one of the oldest, and yet most
current open challenges in the field of artificial intelligence. Today, low-level perception is typically
handled by neural networks and deep learning, whereas high-level reasoning is typically addressed
using logical and probabilistic representations and inference. While it is clear that there have been
breakthroughs in deep learning, there has also been a lot of progress in the area of high-level reasoning. Indeed, today there exist approaches that tightly integrate logical and probabilistic reasoning
with statistical learning; cf. the areas of statistical relational artificial intelligence [De Raedt et al.,
2016, Getoor and Taskar, 2007] and probabilistic logic programming [De Raedt and Kimmig, 2015].
Recently, a number of researchers have revisited and modernized older ideas originating from the
field of neural-symbolic integration [Garcez et al., 2012], searching for ways to combine the best of
both worlds [Bošnjak et al., 2017, Rocktäschel and Riedel, 2017, Cohen et al., 2018, Santoro et al.,
2017], for example, by designing neural architectures representing differentiable counterparts of
symbolic operations in classical reasoning tools. Yet, joining the full flexibility of high-level probabilistic reasoning with the representational power of deep neural networks is still an open problem.
This paper tackles this challenge from a different perspective. Instead of integrating reasoning capabilities into a complex neural network architecture, we proceed the other way round. We start
∗

joint last authors

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

