Efficient Convex Completion of Coupled Tensors
using Coupled Nuclear Norms
Kishan Wimalawarne1 and Hiroshi Mamitsuka1,2
2

1
Bioinformatics Center, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan
Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, Espoo, Finland
kishanwn@gmail.com, mami@kuicr.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract
Coupled norms have emerged as a convex method to solve coupled tensor completion. A limitation with coupled norms is that they only induce low-rankness
using the multilinear rank of coupled tensors. In this paper, we introduce a new
set of coupled norms known as coupled nuclear norms by constraining the CP
rank of coupled tensors. We propose new coupled completion models using the
coupled nuclear norms as regularizers, which can be optimized using computationally efficient optimization methods. We derive excess risk bounds for proposed coupled completion models and show that proposed norms lead to better
performance. Through simulation and real-data experiments, we demonstrate that
proposed norms achieve better performance for coupled completion compared to
existing coupled norms.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we investigate convex coupled norms for coupled tensor completion. Two tensors
are considered to be coupled when they share a common mode. A well explored problem with
coupled tensors is coupled tensor completion, which studies imputation of partially observed tensors
using coupled tensors as side information (Acar et al., 2014; Bouchard et al., 2013). Coupled tensor
completion is commonly found in many real world applications such as link prediction (Ermis et al.,
2015), recommendation systems (Acar et al., 2014) and computer vision (Li et al., 2015). Moreover,
the increase in availability of data from multiple sources further makes coupled tensor completion
an important research area requiring thorough investigation.
Over the years, several methods have been proposed to solve coupled tensor completion (Acar et al.,
2014; Ermis et al., 2015). However, many of these methods are non-convex models leading to local
optimal solutions. Additionally, these non-convex models have requirements of specifying ranks
of coupled tensors, which are in many situations unknown. The recent development of coupled
norms (Wimalawarne et al., 2018) has emerged as a convex solution for coupled completion. These
coupled norms are modeled using the trace norm regularization, which eliminates the requirement
of pre-specifying ranks. In spite of favorable qualities, coupled norms only induce low-rankness
with respect to the multilinear rank of coupled tensors. This makes coupled norms sub-optimal for
completion of coupled tensors with other low rank structures.
Until recently, most of the research on convex norms that induces low-rankness of tensors has focused on constraining the multilinear rank (Tomioka and Suzuki, 2013; Wimalawarne et al., 2014).
However, recent studies (Yuan and Zhang, 2016) have shown that the tensor nuclear norm, which
is a convex relaxation to minimizing the CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) rank (Carroll and Chang,
1970; Harshman, 1970; Hitchcock, 1927; Kolda and Bader, 2009) has favorable properties compared low rank inducing norms that constrains the multilinear rank (Tomioka and Suzuki, 2013;
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

