Toddler-Inspired Visual Object Learning

1

Sven Bambach1 , David J. Crandall1 , Linda B. Smith2 , Chen Yu2
School of Informatics, Computing, and Engineering, 2 Dept. of Psychological and Brain Sciences
Indiana University Bloomington
{sbambach, djcran, smith4, chenyu}@iu.edu

Abstract
Real-world learning systems have practical limitations on the quality and quantity
of the training datasets that they can collect and consider. How should a system
go about choosing a subset of the possible training examples that still allows for
learning accurate, generalizable models? To help address this question, we draw
inspiration from a highly efficient practical learning system: the human child.
Using head-mounted cameras, eye gaze trackers, and a model of foveated vision,
we collected first-person (egocentric) images that represent a highly accurate approximation of the "training data" that toddlers’ visual systems collect in everyday,
naturalistic learning contexts. We used state-of-the-art computer vision learning
models (convolutional neural networks) to help characterize the structure of these
data, and found that child data produce significantly better object models than
egocentric data experienced by adults in exactly the same environment. By using
the CNNs as a modeling tool to investigate the properties of the child data that may
enable this rapid learning, we found that child data exhibit a unique combination of
quality and diversity, with not only many similar large, high-quality object views
but also a greater number and diversity of rare views. This novel methodology of
analyzing the visual "training data" used by children may not only reveal insights
to improve machine learning, but also may suggest new experimental tools to better
understand infant learning in developmental psychology.

1

Introduction

Any learning system — human or machine — faces the challenge of building an accurate, general
model of the world from a limited amount of training data. Both quality and quantity of the training
data are critical to successful learning. In the field of computer vision, for example, much of the
dramatic recent progress in object recognition accuracy has been due to massive new datasets like
ImageNet [28]. While more training data is probably always better — very recent results show that
recognition models continue to improve even as datasets reach into the billions of images [19] —
both human and machine learning systems in the real world are bounded by practical constraints on
the time and energy needed to collect and process a potentially infinite amount of training data.
The usual approach in machine learning is to simply collect and use as much data as possible, with
the assumption that the training data is independently sampled from some underlying distribution
that is representative of the examples encountered in the real world. Since quality and quantity of
the training data are correlated, more quantity naturally leads to better overall quality. In the case of
visual recognition of object categories, for example, large datasets like ImageNet [28] contain not
only many instances of clear, canonical objects (e.g., side views of Toyota sedans) but also relatively
few instances of many less common objects (e.g., oblique views of Model T’s). The larger the dataset
is, the more likely it contains high-quality data points (e.g., uncommon instances) for generalization.
In this paper our goal is to delve into the data side of machine learning, but we draw inspiration
from perhaps the best known visual learning system — the human child. We know that by the age of
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

