Self-Erasing Network for Integral Object Attention

Qibin Hou Peng-Tao Jiang
Colledge of Computer Science, Nankai University
andrewhoux@gmail.com

Yunchao Wei
UIUC
Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA

Ming-Ming Cheng ∗
Colledge of Computer Science, Nankai University
cmm@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, adversarial erasing for weakly-supervised object attention has been
deeply studied due to its capability in localizing integral object regions. However,
such a strategy raises one key problem that attention regions will gradually expand
to non-object regions as training iterations continue, which significantly decreases
the quality of the produced attention maps. To tackle such an issue as well as
promote the quality of object attention, we introduce a simple yet effective SelfErasing Network (SeeNet) to prohibit attentions from spreading to unexpected
background regions. In particular, SeeNet leverages two self-erasing strategies
to encourage networks to use reliable object and background cues for learning to
attention. In this way, integral object regions can be effectively highlighted without
including much more background regions. To test the quality of the generated
attention maps, we employ the mined object regions as heuristic cues for learning
semantic segmentation models. Experiments on Pascal VOC well demonstrate the
superiority of our SeeNet over other state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

Semantic segmentation aims at assigning each pixel a label from a predefined label set given a
scene. For fully-supervised semantic segmentation [21, 4, 40, 41, 20], the requirement of large-scale
pixel-level annotations considerably limits its generality [3]. Some weakly-supervised works attempt
to leverage relatively weak supervisions, such as scribbles [19], bounding boxes [27], or points [1],
but they still need large amount of hand labors. Therefore, semantic segmentation with image-level
supervision [25, 16, 35, 12, 34] is becoming a promising way to relief lots of human labors. In this
paper, we are also interested in the problem of weakly-supervised semantic segmentation. As only
image-level labels are available, most recent approaches [16, 3, 12, 34, 9], more or less, rely on
different attention models due to their ability of covering small but discriminative semantic regions.
Therefore, how to generate high-quality attention maps is essential for offering reliable initial heuristic
cues for training segmentation networks. Earlier weakly-supervised semantic segmentation methods
[16, 34] mostly adopt the original Class Activation Maps (CAM) model [42] for object localization.
For small objects, CAM does work well but when encountering large objects of large scales it can only
localize small areas of discriminative regions, which is harmful for training segmentation networks in
that the undetected semantic regions will be judged to background.
Interestingly, the adversarial erasing strategy [34, 18] (Fig. 1) has been proposed recently. Benefiting
from the powerful localization ability of CNNs, this type of methods is able to further discover
more object-related regions by erasing the detected regions. However, a key problem of this type of
∗

MM Cheng is the corresponding author of this paper. Project page: http://mmcheng.net/SeeNet/.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

