Human-in-the-Loop Interpretability Prior

Andrew Slavin Ross
Department of Computer Science
Harvard University
andrew_ross@g.harvard.edu

Isaac Lage
Department of Computer Science
Harvard University
isaaclage@g.harvard.edu
Been Kim
Google Brain
beenkim@google.com

Samuel J. Gershman
Department of Psychology
Harvard University
gershman@fas.harvard.edu

Finale Doshi-Velez
Department of Computer Science
Harvard University
finale@seas.harvard.edu

Abstract
We often desire our models to be interpretable as well as accurate. Prior work on
optimizing models for interpretability has relied on easy-to-quantify proxies for
interpretability, such as sparsity or the number of operations required. In this work,
we optimize for interpretability by directly including humans in the optimization
loop. We develop an algorithm that minimizes the number of user studies to find
models that are both predictive and interpretable and demonstrate our approach
on several data sets. Our human subjects results show trends towards different
proxy notions of interpretability on different datasets, which suggests that different
proxies are preferred on different tasks.

1

Introduction

Understanding machine learning models can help people discover confounders in their training
data, and dangerous associations or new scientific insights learned by their models [3, 9, 15]. This
means that we can encourage the models we learn to be safer and more useful to us by effectively
incorporating interpretability into our training objectives. But interpretability depends on both the
subjective experience of human users and the downstream application, which makes it difficult to
incorporate into computational learning methods.
Human-interpretability can be achieved by learning models that are inherently easier to explain or
by developing more sophisticated explanation methods; we focus on the first problem. This can be
solved with one of two broad approaches. The first defines certain classes of models as inherently
interpretable. Well known examples include decision trees [9], generalized additive models [3], and
decision sets [13]. The second approach identifies some proxy that (presumably) makes a model
interpretable and then optimizes that proxy. Examples of this second approach include optimizing
linear models to be sparse [29], optimizing functions to be monotone [1], or optimizing neural
networks to be easily explained by decision trees [33].
In many cases, the optimization of a property can be viewed as placing a prior over models and
solving for a MAP solution of the following form:
max p(X|M )p(M )

M ∈M

(1)

where M is a family of models, X is the data, p(X|M ) is the likelihood, and p(M ) is a prior on the
model that encourages it to share some aspect of our inductive biases. Two examples of biases include
the interpretation of the L1 penalty on logistic regression as a Laplace prior on the weights and the
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

