Dynamic Network Model from Partial Observations

Elahe Ghalebi
TU Wien
eghalebi@cps.tuwien.ac.at

Baharan Mirzasoleiman
Stanford University
baharanm@cs.stanford.edu

Radu Grosu
TU Wien
radu.grosu@tuwien.ac.at

Jure Leskovec
Stanford University
jure@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Can evolving networks be inferred and modeled without directly observing their
nodes and edges? In many applications, the edges of a dynamic network might not
be observed, but one can observe the dynamics of stochastic cascading processes
(e.g., information diffusion, virus propagation) occurring over the unobserved
network. While there have been efforts to infer networks based on such data,
providing a generative probabilistic model that is able to identify the underlying
time-varying network remains an open question. Here we consider the problem of
inferring generative dynamic network models based on network cascade diffusion
data. We propose a novel framework for providing a non-parametric dynamic
network model—based on a mixture of coupled hierarchical Dirichlet processes—
based on data capturing cascade node infection times. Our approach allows us
to infer the evolving community structure in networks and to obtain an explicit
predictive distribution over the edges of the underlying network—including those
that were not involved in transmission of any cascade, or are likely to appear in the
future. We show the effectiveness of our approach using extensive experiments on
synthetic as well as real-world networks.

1

Introduction

Networks of interconnected entities are widely used to model pairwise relations between objects in
many important problems in sociology, finance, computer science, and operations research [1, 2, 3].
Often times, these networks are dynamic, with nodes or edges appearing or disappearing over time,
and the underlying network structure evolving over time. As a result, there is a growing interest in
developing dynamic network models allowing for the study of evolving networks.
Non-parametric models are specially useful when there is no prior knowledge or assumption about
the shape or size of the network as they can automatically address the model selection problem. Nonparametric Bayesian approaches mostly rely on the assumption of vertex exchangeability, in which
the distribution of a graph is invariant to the order of its vertices [4, 5, 6]. Vertex-exchangeable models
such as the Stochastic Block model and its variants, explain the data by means of an underlying
latent clustering structure. However, such models yield dense graphs [7] and are less appropriate
for predicting unseen interactions. Recently, an alternative notion of edge-exchangeability was
introduced for graphs, in which the distribution of a graph is invariant to the order of its edges [8, 9].
Edge-exchangeable models can exhibit sparsity, and small-world behavior of real-world networks.
Such models allow both the latent dimensionality of the model and the number of nodes to grow over
time, and are suitable for predicting future interactions.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

