Dropping Symmetry for Fast
Symmetric Nonnegative Matrix Factorization

Zhihui Zhu∗
Mathematical Institute for Data Science
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD, USA
zzhu29@jhu.edu
Kai Liu
Department of Computer Science
Colorado School of Mines
Golden, CO, USA
kaliu@mines.edu

Xiao Li∗
Department of Electronic Engineering
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shatin, NT, Hong Kong
xli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk
Qiuwei Li
Department of Electrical Engineering
Colorado School of Mines
Golden, CO, USA
qiuli@mines.edu

Abstract
Symmetric nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF)—a special but important class
of the general NMF—is demonstrated to be useful for data analysis and in particular
for various clustering tasks. Unfortunately, designing fast algorithms for Symmetric
NMF is not as easy as for the nonsymmetric counterpart, the later admitting the
splitting property that allows efficient alternating-type algorithms. To overcome this
issue, we transfer the symmetric NMF to a nonsymmetric one, then we can adopt
the idea from the state-of-the-art algorithms for nonsymmetric NMF to design
fast algorithms solving symmetric NMF. We rigorously establish that solving
nonsymmetric reformulation returns a solution for symmetric NMF and then apply
fast alternating based algorithms for the corresponding reformulated problem.
Furthermore, we show these fast algorithms admit strong convergence guarantee
in the sense that the generated sequence is convergent at least at a sublinear rate
and it converges globally to a critical point of the symmetric NMF. We conduct
experiments on both synthetic data and image clustering to support our result.

1

Introduction

General nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) is referred to the following problem: Given a matrix
Y ∈ Rn×m and a factorization rank r, solve
min

U ∈Rn×r ,V ∈Rm×r

1
kY − U V T k2F ,
2

s. t. U ≥ 0, V ≥ 0,

(1)

where U ≥ 0 means each element in U is nonnegative. NMF has been successfully used in the
applications of face feature extraction [1, 2], document clustering [3], source separation [4] and many
others [5]. Because of the ubiquitous applications of NMF, many efficient algorithms have been
proposed for solving (1). Well-known algorithms include MUA [6], projected gradientd descent [7],
alternating nonnegative least squares (ANLS) [8], and hierarchical ALS (HALS) [9]. In particular,
ANLS (which uses the block principal pivoting algorithm to very efficiently solve the nonnegative
least squares) and HALS achive the state-of-the-art performance.
∗

Equal contribution

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

