Kalman Normalization: Normalizing Internal
Representations Across Network Layers

Guangrun Wang
Sun Yat-sen University
wanggrun@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
Ping Luo
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
pluo.lhi@gmail.com

Jiefeng Peng
Sun Yat-sen University
jiefengpeng@gmail.com

Xinjiang Wang
SenseTime Group Ltd.

Liang Lin ∗
Sun Yat-sen University
linliang@ieee.org

Abstract
As an indispensable component, Batch Normalization (BN) has successfully improved the training of deep neural networks (DNNs) with mini-batches, by normalizing the distribution of the internal representation for each hidden layer. However,
the effectiveness of BN would diminish with the scenario of micro-batch (e.g. less
than 4 samples in a mini-batch), since the estimated statistics in a mini-batch are
not reliable with insufficient samples. This limits BN’s room in training larger
models on segmentation, detection, and video-related problems, which require
small batches constrained by memory consumption. In this paper, we present a
novel normalization method, called Kalman Normalization (KN), for improving
and accelerating the training of DNNs, particularly under the context of microbatches. Specifically, unlike the existing solutions treating each hidden layer as
an isolated system, KN treats all the layers in a network as a whole system, and
estimates the statistics of a certain layer by considering the distributions of all its
preceding layers, mimicking the merits of Kalman Filtering. On ResNet50 trained
in ImageNet, KN has 3.4% lower error than its BN counterpart when using a batch
size of 4; Even when using typical batch sizes, KN still maintains an advantage
over BN while other BN variants suffer a performance degradation. Moreover,
KN can be naturally generalized to many existing normalization variants to obtain
gains, e.g.equipping Group Normalization [34] with Group Kalman Normalization
(GKN). KN can outperform BN and its variants for large scale object detection and
segmentation task in COCO 2017.

1

Introduction

Batch Normalization (BN) [13] has recently become a standard and crucial component for improving
the training of deep neural networks (DNNs), which is successfully employed to harness several
state-of-the-art architectures[8, 27]. In the training and inference of DNNs, BN normalizes the
internal representations of each hidden layer by subtracting the mean and dividing the standard
deviation, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (a). As pointed out in [13], BN enables using larger learning rate in
training, leading to faster convergence.
Although the significance of BN has been demonstrated in many previous works, its drawback
cannot be neglected, i.e.its effectiveness diminishing when small mini-batch is presented in training.
Consider a DNN consisting of a number of layers from bottom to top. In the traditional BN, the
∗

Corresponding author: Liang Lin.

32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

