Understanding Batch Normalization

Johan Bjorck, Carla Gomes, Bart Selman, Kilian Q. Weinberger
Cornell University
{njb225,gomes,selman,kqw4} @cornell.edu

Abstract
Batch normalization (BN) is a technique to normalize activations in intermediate
layers of deep neural networks. Its tendency to improve accuracy and speed
up training have established BN as a favorite technique in deep learning. Yet,
despite its enormous success, there remains little consensus on the exact reason
and mechanism behind these improvements. In this paper we take a step towards a
better understanding of BN, following an empirical approach. We conduct several
experiments, and show that BN primarily enables training with larger learning rates,
which is the cause for faster convergence and better generalization. For networks
without BN we demonstrate how large gradient updates can result in diverging loss
and activations growing uncontrollably with network depth, which limits possible
learning rates. BN avoids this problem by constantly correcting activations to
be zero-mean and of unit standard deviation, which enables larger gradient steps,
yields faster convergence and may help bypass sharp local minima. We further show
various ways in which gradients and activations of deep unnormalized networks are
ill-behaved. We contrast our results against recent findings in random matrix theory,
shedding new light on classical initialization schemes and their consequences.

1

Introduction

Normalizing the input data of neural networks to zero-mean and constant standard deviation has been
known for decades [29] to be beneficial to neural network training. With the rise of deep networks,
Batch Normalization (BN) naturally extends this idea across the intermediate layers within a deep
network [23], although for speed reasons the normalization is performed across mini-batches and not
the entire training set. Nowadays, there is little disagreement in the machine learning community that
BN accelerates training, enables higher learning rates, and improves generalization accuracy [23]
and BN has successfully proliferated throughout all areas of deep learning [2, 17, 21, 46]. However,
despite its undeniable success, there is still little consensus on why the benefits of BN are so
pronounced. In their original publication [23] Ioffe and Szegedy hypothesize that BN may alleviate
“internal covariate shift” – the tendency of the distribution of activations to drift during training, thus
affecting the inputs to subsequent layers. However, other explanations such as improved stability of
concurrent updates [13] or conditioning [42] have also been proposed.
Inspired by recent empirical insights into deep learning [25, 36, 57], in this paper we aim to clarify
these vague intuitions by placing them on solid experimental footing. We show that the activations
and gradients in deep neural networks without BN tend to be heavy-tailed. In particular, during an
early on-set of divergence, a small subset of activations (typically in deep layer) “explode”. The
typical practice to avoid such divergence is to set the learning rate to be sufficiently small such that
no steep gradient direction can lead to divergence. However, small learning rates yield little progress
along flat directions of the optimization landscape and may be more prone to convergence to sharp
local minima with possibly worse generalization performance [25].
BN avoids activation explosion by repeatedly correcting all activations to be zero-mean and of unit
standard deviation. With this “safety precaution”, it is possible to train networks with large learning
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

