N EON 2: Finding Local Minima
via First-Order Oracles
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu∗
Microsoft Research AI
Redmond, WA 98052
zeyuan@csail.mit.edu

Yuanzhi Li∗
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
yuanzhil@stanford.edu

Abstract
We propose a reduction for non-convex optimization that can (1) turn an
stationary-point finding algorithm into an local-minimum finding one, and (2) replace the Hessian-vector product computations with only gradient computations.
It works both in the stochastic and the deterministic settings, without hurting the
algorithm’s performance.
As applications, our reduction turns Natasha2 into a first-order method without hurting its theoretical performance. It also converts SGD, GD, SCSG, and
SVRG into algorithms finding approximate local minima, outperforming some
best known results.

1

Introduction

Nonconvex optimization has become increasingly popular due its ability to capture modern machine
learning tasks in large scale. For instance, training neural nets corresponds to minimizing a function
n
1X
f (x) =
fi (x)
n i=1
over x ∈ Rd that is non-convex, where each training sample i corresponds to one loss function
fi (·) in the summation. This average structure allows one to perform stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) which uses a random ∇fi (x) —corresponding to computing backpropagation once— to
approximate ∇f (x) and performs descent updates.
Motivated by such large-scale machine learning applications, we wish to design faster first-order
non-convex optimization methods that outperform the performance of gradient descent, both in the
online and offline settings. In this paper, we say an algorithm is online if its complexity is independent of n (so n can be infinite), and offline otherwise. In recently years, researchers across different
communities have gathered together to tackle this challenging question. By far, known theoretical
approaches mostly fall into one of the following two categories.
First-order methods for stationary points. In analyzing first-order methods, we denote by gradient complexity T the number of computations of ∇fi (x). To achieve an ε-approximate stationary
point —namely, a point
 x with k∇f (x)k ≤ ε— it is a folklore that gradient descent (GD) is offline

and needs T ∝ O εn2 , while stochastic gradient decent (SGD) is online and needs T ∝ O ε14 .
2/3 
In recent years, the offline complexity has been improved to T ∝ O nε2 by the SVRG method [4,
1
by the SCSG method [19].
24], and the online complexity has been improved to T ∝ O ε10/3
Both of them rely on the so-called variance-reduction technique, originally discovered for convex
problems [12, 17, 27, 29].
∗

Authors sorted in alphabetical order. We acknowledge a parallel work of Xu and Yang [31] (which appeared online a few days before us), and have adopted their algorithm name Neon and called our new algorithm
Neon2. Our algorithms are very different from theirs, and give better theoretical performance. The full version
of this paper can be found on https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.06673.
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

