Adaptive Online Learning in Dynamic Environments

Lijun Zhang, Shiyin Lu, Zhi-Hua Zhou
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
{zhanglj, lusy, zhouzh}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we study online convex optimization in dynamic environments, and
aim to bound the dynamic regret with respect to any sequence of√comparators.
Existing work have shown that online gradient descent enjoys an O( T (1 + PT ))
dynamic regret, where T is the number of iterations and PT is the path-length of
the comparator sequence.
p However, this result is unsatisfactory, as there exists
a large gap from the Ω( T (1 + PT )) lower bound established in our paper. To
address this limitation, we develop a novel online method, namely adaptive
learning
p
for dynamic environment (Ader), which achieves an optimal O( T (1 + PT ))
dynamic regret. The basic idea is to maintain a set of experts, each attaining an
optimal dynamic regret for a specific path-length, and combines them with an
expert-tracking algorithm. Furthermore, we propose an improved Ader based on
the surrogate loss, and in this way the number of gradient evaluations per round is
reduced from O(log T ) to 1. Finally, we extend Ader to the setting that a sequence
of dynamical models is available to characterize the comparators.

1

Introduction

Online convex optimization (OCO) has become a popular learning framework for modeling various
real-world problems, such as online routing, ad selection for search engines and spam filtering [Hazan,
2016]. The protocol of OCO is as follows: At iteration t, the online learner chooses xt from a convex
set X . After the learner has committed to this choice, a convex cost function ft : X 7→ R is revealed.
Then, the learner suffers an instantaneous loss ft (xt ), and the goal is to minimize the cumulative loss
over T iterations. The standard performance measure of OCO is regret:
T
X
t=1

ft (xt ) − min
x∈X

T
X

ft (x)

(1)

t=1

which is the cumulative loss of the learner minus that of the best constant point chosen in hindsight.
The notion of regret has been extensively studied, and there exist plenty of algorithms and theories
for minimizing regret [Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2007, Hazan et al., 2007, Srebro et al., 2010, Duchi
et al., 2011, Shalev-Shwartz, 2011, Zhang et al., 2013]. However, when the environment is changing,
the traditional regret is no longer a suitable measure, since it compares the learner against a static
point. To address this limitation, recent advances in online learning have introduced an enhanced
measure—dynamic regret, which received considerable research interest over the years [Hall and
Willett, 2013, Jadbabaie et al., 2015, Mokhtari et al., 2016, Yang et al., 2016, Zhang et al., 2017].
In the literature, there are two different forms of dynamic regret. The general one is introduced by
Zinkevich [2003], who proposes to compare the cumulative loss of the learner against any sequence
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

