When do random forests fail?
Cheng Tang
George Washington University
Washington, DC
tangch@gwu.edu

Damien Garreau
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany
damien.garreau@tuebingen.mpg.de

Ulrike von Luxburg
University of Tübingen
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Tübingen, Germany
luxburg@informatik.uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
Random forests are learning algorithms that build large collections of random trees
and make predictions by averaging the individual tree predictions. In this paper,
we consider various tree constructions and examine how the choice of parameters affects the generalization error of the resulting random forests as the sample
size goes to infinity. We show that subsampling of data points during the tree
construction phase is important: Forests can become inconsistent with either no
subsampling or too severe subsampling. As a consequence, even highly randomized trees can lead to inconsistent forests if no subsampling is used, which implies
that some of the commonly used setups for random forests can be inconsistent.
As a second consequence we can show that trees that have good performance in
nearest-neighbor search can be a poor choice for random forests.

1

Introduction

Random forests (Breiman, 2001) are considered as one of the most successful general-purpose algorithms in modern-times (Biau and Scornet, 2016). They can be applied to a wide range of learning
tasks, but most prominently to classification and regression. A random forest is an ensemble of trees,
where the construction of each tree is random. After building an ensemble of trees, the random forest makes predictions by averaging the predictions of individual trees. Random forests often make
accurate and robust predictions, even for very high-dimensional problems (Biau, 2012), in a variety
of applications (Criminisi and Shotton, 2013; Belgiu and Drăguţ, 2016; Dı́az-Uriarte and Alvarez de
Andrés, 2006). Recent theoretical works have established a series of consistency results of different
variants of random forests, when the forests’ parameters are tuned in certain ways (Scornet, 2016;
Scornet et al., 2015; Biau, 2012; Biau et al., 2008). In this paper, however, we ask the question of
when do random forests fail. In particular, we examine how varying several key parameters of the
algorithm affects the generalization error of forests.
When building a random forest, there are several parameters to tune: the choice of the base trees
(the randomized algorithm that generates the individual trees), the number of trees in the forest, the
size of the leaf nodes, the rate of data subsampling, and sometimes the rate of feature subsampling.
Popular variants of random forests usually come with their own default parameter tuning guidelines,
often suggested by practice. For example, common wisdom suggests that training a large number
of trees and growing deep trees whose leaf sizes are fixed to a small constant lead to better performance. For data subsampling, the original random forest paper (Breiman, 2001) suggests to set
the subsampling (with replacement) rate to be 1, while a later popular variant (Geurts et al., 2006)
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

