One-Shot Unsupervised Cross Domain Translation
Sagie Benaim1 and Lior Wolf1,2
1

The School of Computer Science , Tel Aviv University, Israel
2
Facebook AI Research

Abstract
Given a single image x from domain A and a set of images from domain B,
our task is to generate the analogous of x in B. We argue that this task could
be a key AI capability that underlines the ability of cognitive agents to act in
the world and present empirical evidence that the existing unsupervised domain
translation methods fail on this task. Our method follows a two step process. First,
a variational autoencoder for domain B is trained. Then, given the new sample
x, we create a variational autoencoder for domain A by adapting the layers that
are close to the image in order to directly fit x, and only indirectly adapt the other
layers. Our experiments indicate that the new method does as well, when trained
on one sample x, as the existing domain transfer methods, when these enjoy a
multitude of training samples from domain A. Our code is made publicly available
at https://github.com/sagiebenaim/OneShotTranslation.

1

Introduction

A simplification of an intuitive paradigm for accumulating knowledge by an intelligent agent is as
follows. The gained knowledge is captured by a model that retains previously seen samples and is
also able to generate new samples by blending the observed ones. The agent learns continuously by
being exposed to a series of objects. Whenever a new sample is observed, the agent generates, using
the internal model, a virtual sample that is analogous to the observed one, and compares the observed
and blended objects in order to update the internal model.
This variant of the perceptual blending framework [1], requires multiple algorithmic solutions. One
major challenge is a specific case of “the learning paradox”, i.e., how can one learn what it does not
already know, or, in the paradigm above, how can the analogous mental image be constructed if the
observed sample is unseen and potentially very different than anything that was already observed.
Computationally, this generation step requires solving the task that we term one-shot unsupervised
cross domain translation: given a single sample x from an unknown domain A and many samples
or, almost equivalently, a model of domain B, generate a sample y ∈ B that is analogous to x.
While there has been a great deal of research dedicated to unsupervised domain translation, where
many samples from domain A are provided, the literature does not deal, as far as we know, with the
one-shot case.
To be clear, since parts of the literature may refer to these type of tasks as zero-shot learning, we are
not given any training images in A except for the image to be mapped x. Consider, for example, the
task posed in [2] of mapping zebras to horses. The existing methods can perform this task well, given
many training images of zebras and horses. However, it seems entirely possible to map a single zebra
image to the analogous horse image even without seeing any other zebra image.
The method we present, called OST (One Shot Translation), uses the two domains asymmetrically
and employs two steps. First, a variational autoencoder is constructed for domain B. This allows
us to encode samples from domain B effectively as well as generate new samples based on random
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

