What Makes Tom Hanks Look Like Tom Hanks
Supasorn Suwajanakorn
Steven M. Seitz
Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Washington

Tom Hanks

Daniel Craig

George W. Bush

Figure 1. Model of Tom Hanks (bottom), derived from Internet Photos, is controlled by his own photos or videos of other celebrities (top).
The Tom Hanks model captures his appearance and behavior, while mimicking the pose and expression of the controllers.

Abstract
We reconstruct a controllable model of a person from
a large photo collection that captures his or her persona,
i.e., physical appearance and behavior. The ability to operate on unstructured photo collections enables modeling a
huge number of people, including celebrities and other well
photographed people without requiring them to be scanned.
Moreover, we show the ability to drive or puppeteer the captured person B using any other video of a different person A.
In this scenario, B acts out the role of person A, but retains
his/her own personality and character. Our system is based
on a novel combination of 3D face reconstruction, tracking,
alignment, and multi-texture modeling, applied to the puppeteering problem. We demonstrate convincing results on
a large variety of celebrities derived from Internet imagery
and video.

1. Introduction
Tom Hanks has appeared in many acting roles over the
years. He’s played young and old, smart and simple, characters with a wide variety of temperaments and personalities.
Yet, we always recognize him as Tom Hanks. Why? Is it
his shape? His appearance? The way he moves?
Inspired by Doersch et al’s “What Makes Paris Look
Like Paris” [10], who sought to capture the essence of a
city, we seek to capture an actor’s persona. But what de-

fines a persona, how can we capture it, and how will we
know if we’ve succeeded?
Conceptually, we want to capture how a person appears
in all possible scenarios. In the case of famous actors,
there’s a wealth of such data available, in the form of photographic and video (film and interview) footage. If, by using this data, we could somehow synthesize footage of Tom
Hanks in any number and variety of new roles, and they all
look just like Tom Hanks, then we have arguably succeeded
in capturing his persona.
Rather than creating new roles from scratch, which
presents challenges unrelated to computer vision, we will
assume that we have video footage of one person (actor A),
and we wish to replace him with actor B, performing the
same role. More specifically, we define the following problem:
Input: 1) a photo collection of actor B, and 2) a photo
collection and a single video V of actor A
Output: a video V′ of actor B performing the same role
as actor A in V, but with B’s personality and character.
Figure 1 presents example results with Tom Hanks as actor
B, and two other celebrities (Daniel Craig and George Bush)
as actor A.
The problem of using one face to drive another is a form
of puppetry, which has been explored in the graphics literature e.g., [22, 28, 18]. The term avatar is also used sometimes to denote this concept of a puppet. What makes our
13952

