Relaxing from Vocabulary: Robust Weakly-Supervised Deep Learning for
Vocabulary-Free Image Tagging∗
Jianlong Fu1,2 , Yue Wu3 , Tao Mei2 , Jinqiao Wang1 , Hanqing Lu1 and Yong Rui2
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
3
2

Microsoft Research, Beijing, China

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China

{jianf, tmei, yongrui}@microsoft.com, 1 {jqwang, luhq}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, 3 wye@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

Input: Web Images X

Input: Label Y
bird

1. Introduction
More recently, deep learning has achieved comparable
accuracy to human beings in image categorization tasks on
the limited vocabulary [10]. However, this result is far from
many real-world applications, such as image tagging, where
we often need tens of thousands of tags to describe the various image content [5, 8]. One of the major challenges is to
acquire sufficient and high-quality training data for a large
This work was performed when Jianlong Fu and Yue Wu
were visiting Microsoft Research as research interns. The first two
authors contributed equally to this work.
∗

car

... ... ... ...

...
gradients

Deep
Networks

Deep Features

The development of deep learning has empowered machines with comparable capability of recognizing limited
image categories to human beings. However, most existing approaches heavily rely on human-curated training data, which hinders the scalability to large and unlabeled vocabularies in image tagging. In this paper, we propose
a weakly-supervised deep learning model which can be
trained from the readily available Web images to relax the
dependence on human labors and scale up to arbitrary tags
(categories). Specifically, based on the assumption that features of true samples in a category tend to be similar and
noises tend to be variant, we embed the feature map of
the last deep layer into a new affinity representation, and
further minimize the discrepancy between the affinity representation and its low-rank approximation. The discrepancy is finally transformed into the objective function to
give relevance feedback to back propagation. Experiments
show that we can achieve a performance gain of 14.0% in
terms of a semantic-based relevance metric in image tagging with 63,043 tags from the WordNet, against the typical
deep model trained on the ImageNet 1,000 vocabulary set.

BP

+

Figure 1: The illustration of the proposed model. The deep
network is trained not only by the label supervision with
loss L, but also the minimization of the discrepancy between the affinity representation Ψ(X; W) and its low-rank
approximation Ψ(X; W∗ ). Note that a traditional CNN
model only follows the flowchart of the top green part, without the feature relevance feedback indicated in the bottom
red part. Details are in Sec. 3. [Best viewed in color]

vocabulary, which is often too expensive to obtain. For
example, it took more than 25,000 AMT1 workers about
one year to construct the entire ImageNet dataset [6] (about
22,000 categories and 14.2 million images). Despite of its wide adoption in research communities, ImageNet is still
a small subset of the nouns in WordNet2 . There are huge
numbers of categories left unlabeled, making the existing
deep learning models hard to scale up. Therefore, how to
scale deep learning approaches to large and arbitrary categories without enormous human-cost appears to be a challenging yet urgent problem.
With the success of commercial image search engines,
learning from the Web has demonstrated one of the most effective solutions to collect massive training data [4, 9, 22].
1 https://www.mturk.com/mturk/welcome
2 http://wordnet.princeton.edu/

1985

