Actionness-assisted Recognition of Actions
Ye Luo, Loong-Fah Cheong, and An Tran
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore
kennyluo2008@hotmail.com

eleclf@nus.edu.sg an.tran@u.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
We elicit from a fundamental definition of action lowlevel attributes that can reveal agency and intentionality.
These descriptors are mainly trajectory-based, measuring
sudden changes, temporal synchrony, and repetitiveness.
The actionness map can be used to localize actions in a way
that is generic across action and agent types. Furthermore,
it also groups interacting regions into a useful unit of analysis, which is crucial for recognition of actions involving
interactions. We then implement an actionness-driven pooling scheme to improve action recognition performance. Experimental results on various datasets show the advantages
of our method on action detection and action recognition
comparing with other state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we wish to inquire what principles can be
employed to extract actions in a way agnostic to the underlying agent as well as the type of action itself. In other words, we hope to discover low-level cues that are hallmarks of all biological motions. Oddly enough, little works
in the action recognition area seek such precategorical cues.
To us, it is an interesting question to ask, because it appears
that human has special sensitivity to the perceptual category
of biological motions in comparison to non-biological motions, even though these category boundaries are unlikely
to be sharply deﬁned. We also feel that the very notion of
action is so intimately connected with action recognition research that it will be no digression to revisit the deﬁnition
of action, with a view to discover some attributes which are
capable of distinguishing actions.

Motion 1

Motion 2

Motion 3

Sudden Motion Change

Temporal Synchrony

Repetitive Motion

Image Saliency

A ction

A ctionness

Figure 1. Top half illustrates the movements present in a fencing sequence and which ensemble of motions should be understood as the fencing action. The bottom half illustrates how the
proposed actionness attributes contribute to the action extraction.
From left to right, the trajectories highlighted in red show respectively those with signiﬁcant sudden change in motion, repetitive
motion and temporal synchrony, with the ﬁnal panel on the right
showing the fused actionness map. Note that the two fencers have
been grouped together into a useful unit for further analysis. Best
viewed in color.

we are more concerned about the relevance of this deﬁnition
as far as discovering useful attributes of actions for computer vision is concerned. The ﬁrst thing to note in this deﬁnition is that “movement” can be interpreted very loosely,
so that it can include “movement” like standing fast and
mental acts like computing. We do not plan to tackle these
troublesome types of “movement” and so by movement, we
restrict ourselves to the bodily types of movements. Even
setting aside the non-bodily types of movements, we are
still faced with difﬁculties as far as effecting some litmus
test of intention is concerned. In general, there is no reason to expect that merely knowing some low-level trait in a

1.1. The Definitions of Action
If one consults what philosophers commonly understand
by action, one may elicit the following deﬁnition of action
— an intentional movement made by an agent. While one
may take issue with such a simplistic deﬁnition of action1 ,
1 There are other philosophical difﬁculties that we do not consider in
this paper; for instance, should we draw distinction between the primitive

actions (e.g. throwing a stone) and the actions which we refer to as consequences (e.g. breaking a window), or should we puff out the primitive
action to include the effect caused by the basic act? This difﬁculty is also
inextricably bound up with the problems caused by the notion of causality. Interested readers are referred to [10] for a more detailed discussion.
While considering the problem at this level of abstraction is an important
philosophical project, thankfully for us, most of the action datasets in the
computer vision community seem to deal with clearly primitive actions.

13244

