Lost Shopping! Monocular Localization in Large Indoor Spaces
Shenlong Wang, Sanja Fidler, Raquel Urtasun
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
{slwang, fidler, urtasun}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
In this paper we propose a novel approach to localization in very large indoor spaces (i.e., shopping malls with
over 200 stores) that takes a single image and a floor plan
of the environment as input. We formulate the localization problem as inference in a Markov random field, which
jointly reasons about text detection (localizing shop names
in the image with precise bounding boxes), shop facade
segmentation, as well as camera’s rotation and translation
within the entire shopping mall. The power of our approach is that it does not use any prior information about
appearance and instead exploits text detections corresponding to shop names as a cue for localization. This makes our
method applicable to a variety of domains and robust to
store appearance variation across countries, seasons, and
illumination conditions. We demonstrate our approach on
our new dataset spanning two very large shopping malls,
and show the power of holistic reasoning.

1. Introduction
Due to the development of cost-effective solutions such
as the global positioning system (GPS), people can easily localize, navigate and route through the city by simply
clicking on their phone. Localization in large indoor spaces
is, however, much more difficult, since GPS typically cannot communicate with the satellites inside the buildings. As
a consequence, indoor navigation is still an open, yet crucial
problem with a huge potential impact on many commercial
and public services. The goal of this paper is to perform localization in large shopping malls given only a single image
and a floor plan of the mall.
Sensor-based approaches to indoor localization have
been developed, but require either a large number of nearby
anchor points [39, 10] (e.g., WiFi access points or beacons with known positions) that are densely distributed
within the scene or pre-assume initial absolute locations [2,
1]. Most vision-based localization systems rely on a prerecorded dataset containing all places of interest, and localization involves indexing in the dataset by matching

Figure 1. Given a monocular image and a shopping mall’s floorplan, our goal is to estimate the 3D camera pose, and parse the
facades of the visible shops.

the visual appearance [18, 31, 23, 42] and/or geometry
[9, 34, 5, 30]. These approaches have the disadvantage that
requires a priori knowledge of how the world looks like
and are thus not very robust to appearance and geometric
changes. The former is particularly important in indoor scenarios such as shopping malls, where the shops vary their
display regularly to show their new seasonal products.
SfM and SLAM methods [3, 34, 13] estimate camera
pose and a map of the environment by capturing a large
collection of images. Recently, [8] proposed to localize
a car by matching the vehicle’s trajectory to cartographic
maps annotated with the road topology. This is appealing
as it does not require knowledge of the world’s appearance
and only requires the cartographic map to be up to date.
However, such an approach would likely fail in large indoor
spaces since the corridor topology is not very discriminative
as well as people move in less structured ways.
Instead, our work builds on the following observation:
Suppose you are lost somewhere inside a big shopping mall
and you need to meet your friend in Starbucks for a cup
of overpriced coffee. The most common way of finding
one’s path is to find the name of one or two of the shops
around you, and look them up in the shopping mall’s floor12695

