Learning Spatiotemporal Features with 3D Convolutional Networks
Du Tran1,2 , Lubomir Bourdev1 , Rob Fergus1 , Lorenzo Torresani2 , Manohar Paluri1
1
Facebook AI Research, 2 Dartmouth College
{dutran,lorenzo}@cs.dartmouth.edu

Abstract
We propose a simple, yet effective approach for spatiotemporal feature learning using deep 3-dimensional convolutional networks (3D ConvNets) trained on a large scale
supervised video dataset. Our findings are three-fold: 1)
3D ConvNets are more suitable for spatiotemporal feature
learning compared to 2D ConvNets; 2) A homogeneous architecture with small 3 × 3 × 3 convolution kernels in all
layers is among the best performing architectures for 3D
ConvNets; and 3) Our learned features, namely C3D (Convolutional 3D), with a simple linear classifier outperform
state-of-the-art methods on 4 different benchmarks and are
comparable with current best methods on the other 2 benchmarks. In addition, the features are compact: achieving
52.8% accuracy on UCF101 dataset with only 10 dimensions and also very efficient to compute due to the fast inference of ConvNets. Finally, they are conceptually very
simple and easy to train and use.

1. Introduction
Multimedia on the Internet is growing rapidly resulting in an increasing number of videos being shared every
minute. To combat the information explosion it is essential to understand and analyze these videos for various purposes like search, recommendation, ranking etc. The computer vision community has been working on video analysis
for decades and tackled different problems such as action
recognition [26], abnormal event detection [2], and activity
understanding [23]. Considerable progress has been made
in these individual problems by employing different specific solutions. However, there is still a growing need for
a generic video descriptor that helps in solving large-scale
video tasks in a homogeneous way.
There are four properties for an effective video descriptor: (i) it needs to be generic, so that it can represent different types of videos well while being discriminative. For example, Internet videos can be of landscapes, natural scenes,
sports, TV shows, movies, pets, food and so on; (ii) the descriptor needs to be compact: as we are working with millions of videos, a compact descriptor helps processing, stor-

{lubomir,robfergus,mano}@fb.com

ing, and retrieving tasks much more scalable; (iii) it needs to
be efficient to compute, as thousands of videos are expected
to be processed every minute in real world systems; and
(iv) it must be simple to implement. Instead of using complicated feature encoding methods and classifiers, a good
descriptor should work well even with a simple model (e.g.
linear classifier).
Inspired by the deep learning breakthroughs in the image
domain [24] where rapid progress has been made in the past
few years in feature learning, various pre-trained convolutional network (ConvNet) models [16] are made available
for extracting image features. These features are the activations of the network’s last few fully-connected layers which
perform well on transfer learning tasks [47, 48]. However,
such image based deep features are not directly suitable for
videos due to lack of motion modeling (as shown in our
experiments in sections 4,5,6). In this paper we propose
to learn spatio-temporal features using deep 3D ConvNet.
We empirically show that these learned features with a simple linear classifier can yield good performance on various
video analysis tasks. Although 3D ConvNets were proposed
before [15, 18], to our knowledge this work exploits 3D
ConvNets in the context of large-scale supervised training
datasets and modern deep architectures to achieve the best
performance on different types of video analysis tasks. The
features from these 3D ConvNets encapsulate information
related to objects, scenes and actions in a video, making
them useful for various tasks without requiring to finetune
the model for each task. C3D has the properties that a good
descriptor should have: it is generic, compact, simple and
efficient. To summarize, our contributions in this paper are:
• We experimentally show 3D convolutional deep networks are good feature learning machines that model
appearance and motion simultaneously.
• We empirically find that 3 × 3 × 3 convolution kernel
for all layers to work best among the limited set of
explored architectures.
• The proposed features with a simple linear model outperform or approach the current best methods on 4 different tasks and 6 different benchmarks (see Table 1).
They are also compact and efficient to compute.
14489

