Multi-view Domain Generalization for Visual Recognition
Li Niu1 , Wen Li2 , Dong Xu3
1
Interdisciplinary Graduate School, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
3
School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, and
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia
lniu002@ntu.edu.sg, liwen@vision.ee.ethz.ch, dongxudongxu@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new multi-view domain generalization (MVDG) approach for visual recognition, in
which we aim to use the source domain samples with multiple types of features (i.e., multi-view features) to learn robust classifiers that can generalize well to any unseen target domain. Considering the recent works show the domain
generalization capability can be enhanced by fusing multiple SVM classifiers, we build upon exemplar SVMs to learn
a set of SVM classifiers by using one positive sample and
all negative samples in the source domain each time. When
the source domain samples come from multiple latent domains, we expect the weight vectors of exemplar SVM classifiers can be organized into multiple hidden clusters. To
exploit such cluster structure, we organize the weight vectors learnt on each view as a weight matrix and seek the
low-rank representation by reconstructing this weight matrix using itself as the dictionary. To enforce the consistency of inherent cluster structures discovered from the weight
matrices learnt on different views, we introduce a new regularizer to minimize the mismatch between any two representation matrices on different views. We also develop an efficient alternating optimization algorithm and further extend
our MVDG approach for domain adaptation by exploiting
the manifold structure of unlabeled target domain samples.
Comprehensive experiments for visual recognition clearly
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approaches for domain
generalization and domain adaptation.

1. Introduction
In many visual recognition tasks, the training and testing
samples are with different data distributions. Recently, a
large number of domain adaptation methods [20, 19, 1, 17,
6, 24, 14, 13, 15, 26, 27] have been proposed to explicitly
cope with the data distribution mismatch between the train-

ing samples from the source domain and the testing samples
from the target domain. Meanwhile, the domain generalization techniques [30, 38, 31] were also developed to learn
robust classifiers that can generalize well to any unseen target domain. Please refer to Section 2 for the recent works
on domain generalization and adaptation.
In most existing domain generalization/adaptation approaches, only one type of feature is used during the training and testing process. When multiple types of features
are available for the training and testing samples, the visual recognition results can be improved by fusing multi-view
features (See Section 2 for the related works on multi-view
learning). Recently, multi-view domain adaptation methods
[3, 41, 39] were also proposed to reduce the data distribution mismatch and simultaneously fuse multi-view features.
In [3], Blitzer et al. proposed to learn the projection matrices by using Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) and
adapt the source classifiers to the target domain based on the
learnt projection matrices. In [41], the training samples are
weighted similarly as in [24], while the prediction scores on
different views are enforced to be close to each other. Yang
and Gao proposed to add the Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) based regularizer under the CCA framework in
[39]. However, these multi-view domain adaptation methods [3, 41, 39] are only applicable when the target domain
data is available.
In Section 3, we propose a multi-view domain generalization (MVDG) approach by using multi-view source domain samples to learn robust classifiers that can generalize
well to any unseen target domain. Our method is motivated
by the existing work [38] that experimentally demonstrates
the domain generalization capability can be enhanced by
fusing multiple SVM classifiers. Specifically, we build up
our work on exemplar SVMs [29], in which we learn a set
of SVM classifiers by using one positive sample and all
negative samples in the source domain each time. As in
[38, 18, 23], we also assume that the source domain samples come from multiple latent domains, so the weight vec14193

