Optimizing Expected Intersection-over-Union with Candidate-Constrained
CRFs
Faruk Ahmed
Université de Montréal

Daniel Tarlow
Microsoft Research

Dhruv Batra
Virginia Tech

faruk.ahmed@umontreal.ca

dtarlow@microsoft.com

dbatra@vt.edu

Abstract
We study the question of how to make loss-aware predictions in image segmentation settings where the evaluation
function is the Intersection-over-Union (IoU) measure that
is used widely in evaluating image segmentation systems.
Currently, there are two dominant approaches: the first
approximates the Expected-IoU (EIoU) score as ExpectedIntersection-over-Expected-Union (EIoEU); and the second
approach is to compute exact EIoU but only over a small
set of high-quality candidate solutions. We begin by asking
which approach we should favor for two typical image segmentation tasks. Studying this question leads to two new
methods that draw ideas from both existing approaches.
Our new methods use the EIoEU approximation paired with
high quality candidate solutions. Experimentally we show
that our new approaches lead to improved performance on
both image segmentation tasks.

1. Introduction
The goal of a “good” evaluation metric for a vision task is
to quantify the (dis)similarity of a proposed solution w.r.t.
the ground truth in a perceptually meaningful way. For the
task of semantic image segmentation (labeling each pixel in
an image with a class label), one popular metric is the Jaccard Index or Intersection-over-Union (IoU) measure [8],
computed between the binary masks of a predicted segmentation and ground-truth, averaged over all categories.
Motivation and Challenge. A number of works have argued [7, 8] that IoU is an evaluation metric better correlated
with human judgement than alternatives. Unfortunately, it
is a high order loss [9, 19, 23] making it difficult to train
models to optimize performance under this measure. In
general, the recourse has been to optimize a simpler loss
amenable to tractable training, such as the Hamming loss.
Recently, there has been renewed interest [13, 18, 20, 21] in
using tools from Bayesian Decision Theory (BDT). Specifically, let x be an image, y be a segmentation, P(y|x) be

the conditional probability learned by a model (e.g., a Conditional Random Field (CRF)), and ℓ(·, ·) be a loss function. BDT provides an elegant recipe for making decisions
based on the principle of minimum expected loss or Minimum Bayes Risk (MBR):
X
(1)
ℓ(ŷ, y)P(y|x) .
yMBR = argmin
ŷ∈Y

y∈Y

|

{z

}

Expected Loss / Bayes Risk

Goal. The goal of this paper is to study tractable techniques for such decision-theoretic predictions under the IoU
measure. In most models of practical interest, this task is
intractable because it requires both an enumeration and a
search over an exponentially-large output space Y (e.g., the
space of all possible segmentations of an image).
How is this done today? There are two main approaches,
each making a different set of assumptions to achieve
tractability on the summation and minimization:
1. Approximating the loss ℓ(·, ·): A recent pair of papers
[18, 21] have proposed an approximation for the IoU measure and a greedy heuristic for optimizing it 1 . The key idea
is to compute Expected-Intersection-over-Expected-Union
(EIoEU) as opposed to Expected-Intersection-over-Union
(EIoU). As we explain later, the former factorizes, while
the latter does not.
2. Approximating the distribution P(·): [20] proposed a
method for exactly optimizing Expected-IoU, but not under
P(·); instead under a delta-approximation of P(·) having
support only at a collection of appropriately chosen M candidate solutions2 . In this case, the optimization is a simple
enumeration over the candidates.
Contributions and Overview. First, we show that despite
seeming complementary and disparate on surface, the two
approximations in existence today are related under a par1 [18] propose other heuristics for optimizing EIoEU in their work, but

it was shown that the greedy heuristic was the best performing.
2 The method of [20] is actually not specific to IoU, and can be applied
to any loss function of interest.

1850

