MANTRA: Minimum Maximum Latent Structural SVM for Image
Classification and Ranking
Thibaut Durand, Nicolas Thome, Matthieu Cord
Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, CNRS, LIP6 UMR 7606, 4 place Jussieu, 75005 Paris
{thibaut.durand, nicolas.thome, matthieu.cord}@lip6.fr

Abstract
In this work, we propose a novel Weakly Supervised
Learning (WSL) framework dedicated to learn discriminative part detectors from images annotated with a global
label. Our WSL method encompasses three main contributions. Firstly, we introduce a new structured output latent variable model, Minimum mAximum lateNt sTRucturAl
SVM (MANTRA), which prediction relies on a pair of latent
variables: h+ (resp. h− ) provides positive (resp. negative) evidence for a given output y. Secondly, we instantiate
MANTRA for two different visual recognition tasks: multiclass classification and ranking. For ranking, we propose
efficient solutions to exactly solve the inference and the lossaugmented problems. Finally, extensive experiments highlight the relevance of the proposed method: MANTRA outperforms state-of-the art results on five different datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep learning with Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNN) [17] are becoming a key ingredient of visual recognition systems. Internal CNN representations trained on
large scale datasets [17] currently provide state-of-the-art
features for various tasks, e.g., image classification or object detection [24, 10]. To overcome the limited invariance
capacity of CNN, bounding box annotations are often used.
However, collecting full annotations for all images in a
large dataset is an expensive task: whereas several millions
of images annotated with a global label are nowadays available, while only thousands of accurate bounding box annotations exist [4]. This observation makes the development
of Weakly Supervised Learning (WSL) models appealing.
Regarding WSL models, one of the most famous approach is the Deformable Part Model (DPM) [9], or its
extension to structured output prediction, Latent Structural
SVM (LSSVM) [38]. Recently, several attempts have been
devoted to applying the LSSVM framework for object or
scene recognition problems [18, 25, 29, 26, 3, 33, 32, 8].

a) sl (h+ ) = 1.8 ; sl (h− ) = 0.1 b) sc (h+ ) = 1.5 ; sc (h− ) = −0.8

Figure 1. MANTRA prediction maps for library classifier sl a)
and cloister classifier sc b), for an image of class library. For each
class, MANTRA score is s(h+ )+s(h− ): h+ (red) provides localized evidence for the class, whereas h− (blue) reveals its absence.

In this paper, we tackle the WSL problem of learning
part detectors from images annotated with a global label.
To this end, we introduce a novel structured output latent
variable framework, MANTRA (Minimum mAximum lateNt sTRucturAl SVM), which incorporates a pair of latent
variables (h+ , h− ), and sum their prediction scores.
To illustrate the rationale of the approach, let us consider a multi-class classification instantiation of MANTRA,
where latent variables h correspond to part localizations.
h+ is the max scoring latent value for each class y, i.e. the
region which best represents class y. h− is the min scoring
latent value, and can thus be regarded as an indicator of the
absence of class y in the image.
To highlight the importance of the pair (h+ , h− ), we
show in Figure 1, for an image of the class library, classification scores for each latent location using (on the left)
the library classifier sl (the correct one) and (on the right)
the cloister classifier sc (a wrong one). h+ (resp. h− )
regions are boxed in red (resp. blue). As we can see,
the prediction score sl (h+ ) = 1.8 for the correct library
classifier is large, since the model finds strong local evidence h+ of its presence (bookcase), and no clear evidence
of its absence (medium score sl (h− ) = 0.1). Contrarily,
the prediction score for the cloister classifier sc is substan12713

