Person Re-Identification with Discriminatively
Trained Viewpoint Invariant Dictionaries
Srikrishna Karanam, Yang Li, Richard J. Radke
Department of Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engineering
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Troy, NY 12180
karans3@rpi.edu, yangli625@gmail.com, rjradke@ecse.rpi.edu

Abstract
This paper introduces a new approach to address the
person re-identification problem in cameras with nonoverlapping fields of view. Unlike previous approaches
that learn Mahalanobis-like distance metrics in some transformed feature space, we propose to learn a dictionary that
is capable of discriminatively and sparsely encoding features representing different people.
Our approach directly addresses two key challenges in
person re-identification: viewpoint variations and discriminability. First, to tackle viewpoint and associated appearance changes, we learn a single dictionary to represent both
gallery and probe images in the training phase. We then
discriminatively train the dictionary by enforcing explicit
constraints on the associated sparse representations of the
feature vectors. In the testing phase, we re-identify a probe
image by simply determining the gallery image that has the
closest sparse representation to that of the probe image in
the Euclidean sense.
Extensive performance evaluations on three publicly
available multi-shot re-identification datasets demonstrate
the advantages of our algorithm over several state-of-theart dictionary learning, temporal sequence matching, and
spatial appearance and metric learning based techniques.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification, or re-id, in networks of cameras
with non-overlapping fields of view is an important problem
in surveillance applications, such as airport security [15].
As can be seen from the sample images in Figure 1, re-id
This material is based upon work supported by the U.S. Department
of Homeland Security under Award Number 2013-ST-061-ED0001. The
views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors
and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of the U.S. Department of Homeland
Security.

is an extremely challenging problem due to illumination,
pose, and viewpoint changes in images of the same person
in different camera views. Due to these inter-camera variations, we cannot rely on direct matching of the appearance
features.

Figure 1: Person re-identification is a challenging problem
due to viewpoint changes, occlusions, illumination changes
and background clutter in images of the same person in
cameras with non-overlapping fields of view.
The traditional paradigm to tackle challenges
posed by these inter-camera variations is to
learn, in a supervised fashion, a distance metric
dM (y1 , y2 ) = (y1 − y2 )⊤ M(y1 − y2 ), where M is
a positive semidefinite matrix, so that the feature vectors
extracted from images of the same person are close while
those extracted from different people are far apart. While
this supervised learning process does take inter-camera

4516

