Depth-based hand pose estimation: data, methods, and challenges
James Steven Supančič III1 , Grégory Rogez2 , Yi Yang3 , Jamie Shotton4 , Deva Ramanan5
University of California at Irvine1 , Inria2 , Baidu3 , Microsoft4 , Carnegie Mellon University5

Abstract
Hand pose estimation has matured rapidly in recent
years. The introduction of commodity depth sensors and
a multitude of practical applications have spurred new advances. We provide an extensive analysis of the state-of-theart, focusing on hand pose estimation from a single depth
frame. To do so, we have implemented a considerable number of systems, and will release all software and evaluation
code. We summarize important conclusions here: (1) Pose
estimation appears roughly solved for scenes with isolated
hands. However, methods still struggle to analyze cluttered
scenes where hands may be interacting with nearby objects and surfaces. To spur further progress we introduce
a challenging new dataset with diverse, cluttered scenes.
(2) Many methods evaluate themselves with disparate criteria, making comparisons difficult. We define a consistent
evaluation criteria, rigorously motivated by human experiments. (3) We introduce a simple nearest-neighbor baseline
that outperforms most existing systems. This implies that
most systems do not generalize beyond their training sets.
This also reinforces the under-appreciated point that training data is as important as the model itself. We conclude
with directions for future progress.

1. Introduction
Human hand pose estimation empowers many practical
applications, for example sign language recognition [14],
visual interfaces [17], and driver analysis [20]. Recently
introduced consumer depth cameras have spurred a flurry
of new advances [4, 14, 15, 17, 25, 33, 36, 38, 42].
Motivation: Recent methods have demonstrated impressive results. But differing (often in-house) testsets, varying performance criteria, and annotation errors impede reliable comparisons [19]. In the field of object recognition, comprehensive benchmark evaluation has been vital
for progress [6, 8]. Our goal is to similarly diagnose the
state-of-affairs, and to suggest future strategic directions,
for depth-based hand pose estimation.
Contributions: Foremost, we contribute the most extensive evaluation of depth-based hand pose estimators to date.

Figure 1. We evaluate a broad collection of hand pose estimation
algorithms on different training and testsets under consistent criteria. Test sets which contained limited variety, in pose and range,
or which lacked complex backgrounds were notably easier. To
aid our analysis, we introduce a simple 3D exemplar (nearestneighbor) baseline that both detects and estimates pose suprisingly
well, outperforming most existing systems. We show the bestmatching detection window in (b) and the best-matching exemplar in (c). We use our baseline to rank dataset difficulty, compare
algorithms, and show the importance of training set design.

We evaluate 13 state-of-the-art hand-pose estimation systems across 4 testsets under uniform scoring criteria. Additionally, we provide a broad survey of contemporary approaches, introduce a new testset that addresses prior limitations, and propose a new baseline for pose estimation based
on nearest-neighbor (NN) exemplar volumes. Surprisingly,
we find that NN exceeds the accuracy of most existing systems (Fig. 1). We organize our discussion along three axes:
test data (Sec. 2), training data (Sec. 3), and model architectures (Sec. 4). We survey and taxonomize approaches for
each dimension, and also contribute novelty to each dimension (e.g. new data and models). After explicitly describing
our experimental protocol (Sec. 5), we end with an extensive empirical analysis (Sec. 6).
Preview: We foreshadow our conclusions here. When
hands are easily segmented or detected, current systems perform quite well. However, hand “activities” involving interactions with objects/surfaces are still challenging (motivating the introduction of our new dataset). Moreover, in such
cases even humans perform imperfectly. For reasonable er-

1868

