Example-Based Modeling of Facial Texture from Deficient Data
Arnaud Dessein1

William A. P. Smith2
Richard C. Wilson2
Edwin R. Hancock2
1
IMB / LaBRI, Université de Bordeaux, France
2
Department of Computer Science, University of York, UK

Abstract
We present an approach to modeling ear-to-ear, highquality texture from one or more partial views of a face
with possibly poor resolution and noise. Our approach is
example-based in that we reconstruct texture with patches
from a database composed of previously seen faces. A 3D
morphable model is used to establish shape correspondence
between the observed data across views and training faces.
The database is built on the mesh surface by segmenting
it into uniform overlapping patches. Texture patches are
selected by belief propagation so as to be consistent with
neighbors and with observations in an appropriate image
formation model. We also develop a variant that is insensitive to light and camera parameters, and incorporate soft
symmetry constraints. We obtain textures of higher quality
for degraded views as small as 10 pixels wide, than a standard model fitted to non-degraded data. We further show
applications to super-resolution where we substantially improve quality compared to a state-of-the-art algorithm, and
to texture completion where we fill in missing regions and
remove facial clutter in a photorealistic manner.

1. Introduction
The problem of modeling complete and high-quality facial texture from input data that is “deficient” (i.e., lowresolution, noisy and/or incomplete) has many potential applications. These include facial super-resolution, face texture completion, pre-processing for manual or automatic
face recognition, creation of fully textured avatars from
a single low-quality view, estimation of high-resolution
frontal views from low-resolution CCTV images of nonfrontal faces, or prediction of clean-shaven appearance.
Besides typical noise sources, deficient data arise in a
number of ways. The complete ear-to-ear texture of a face
is never fully visible in a single image. This is particularly
problematic for images in a non-frontal pose where as much
as half of the texture may be missing. A similar problem occurs when parts of a face are occluded by scene clutter, other
people, glasses or facial hair. When a face image is captured

by a cheap sensor, at large distance, or with heavy compression, then the resolution may be insufficient for further
processing. These deficiencies make many face processing
problems more difficult when dealing with real-world data.
The predominant approach to face modeling problems
has been statistical [6, 8, 9, 20]. Namely, learning the common modes of variation in face appearance from training
data. Such models can be used to constrain many face
processing problems. However, in the context of deficient
data, statistical models suffer from a number of drawbacks
(see Fig. 1). The state-of-the-art in face capture [4, 14]
allows measurement of very high-resolution texture and
shape information that can be used for photorealistic rendering (left). On the other hand, face modeling has failed
to keep pace with the quality of data that can be captured
from real faces (middle). The most critical weakness of existing statistical face models is their inability to accurately
approximate unseen faces. This leads to models that fail to
capture distinguishing, fine-scale details of a face. This situation is exacerbated further when such models are fitted to
2D images. Here, not only local details but global properties of identity such as gender and ethnicity are lost, even
when the input data is of relatively high quality (right).
We address the issues caused by deficient data with a
novel example-based approach to face texture modeling.
We fit a 3D morphable model for shape correspondence between training faces and input images. The 3D model is
segmented into uniform overlapping patches via farthestpoint sampling. We build a database for texture on the segmented model, and estimate the optimal patch combination
by loopy belief propagation so that the reconstructed textures best explain the data whilst ensuring local consistency.
To assemble these known ingredients in a unified framework, we also introduce several technical contributions.
First, farthest-point sampling is enhanced with an original
patch growing scheme based on geodesic projections, so as
to create uniform patches that overlap. Second, loopy belief propagation is formulated on the 3D mesh rather than
2D images via an appropriate model of image formation,
where we explicitly simulate how vertices project to the observed pixel grid. Third, we propose a texture normalization
step to make our methods insensitive to camera and lighting

3898

