Deep Multi-Patch Aggregation Network
for Image Style, Aesthetics, and Quality Estimation
Xin Lu⋆ Zhe Lin† Xiaohui Shen† Radomı́r Měch† James Z. Wang⋆
⋆
The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania
†
Adobe Research, San Jose, California
{xinlu, jwang}@psu.edu, {zlin, xshen, rmech}@adobe.com

Abstract
This paper investigates problems of image style, aesthetics, and quality estimation, which require fine-grained
details from high-resolution images, utilizing deep neural
network training approach. Existing deep convolutional
neural networks mostly extracted one patch such as a downsized crop from each image as a training example. However,
one patch may not always well represent the entire image,
which may cause ambiguity during training. We propose
a deep multi-patch aggregation network training approach,
which allows us to train models using multiple patches generated from one image. We achieve this by constructing
multiple, shared columns in the neural network and feeding
multiple patches to each of the columns. More importantly,
we propose two novel network layers (statistics and sorting)
to support aggregation of those patches. The proposed deep
multi-patch aggregation network integrates shared feature
learning and aggregation function learning into a unified
framework. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the deep
multi-patch aggregation network on the three problems, i.e.,
image style recognition, aesthetic quality categorization,
and image quality estimation. Our models trained using
the proposed networks significantly outperformed the state
of the art in all three applications.

1. Introduction
Problems of image styles, aesthetics, and quality estimation have been actively investigated over the past
decade [17, 24, 26, 18], with the goal of endow computers with the capability of perceiving aesthetics, style, and
visual quality as human vision systems. Potential usage
of methods developed for these three tasks could be foreseen towards wide applications from intelligent computer
systems to real-time, mobile applications. Unlike tasks of
image classification and object detection, the key of these
problems is to capture both the holistic information and

fine-grained high resolution details, as presented in [17]
and [24], respectively.
Deep convolutional neural network has demonstrated effectiveness for various image classification tasks, but most
of the work ignored fine-grained high resolution details in
images. Such fine-grained details has been shown highly
useful in applications such as image quality estimation [17],
image aesthetics categorization, and image style classification [24]. Learning fine-grained details is challenging, as
that information locates in original, relatively high resolution images (e.g., 1024 × 768, 2560 × 1920). Deep convolutional neural networks are often trained with 256 × 256 × 3
inputs (for color images), and training deep networks with
large-size input dimensions requires much longer training
time and a significantly larger network structure, training
dataset, and hardware memory.
To learn fine-grained details using deep network training approaches, previous studies [24, 17] represented each
image with one randomly cropped patch, and paired the
patch with the label of the image as one training example.
Such approach generates ambiguity in training examples as
aesthetics/style/quality attributes in one patch may not well
represent the fine-grained information in the entire image.
To address this issue, we formulate the learning problem
by representing an input image with a small set or bag of
patches cropped from it and associating the set with the image’s training label, and propose novel deep neural network
architectures to solve the problem. Instances in a bag are orderless and the central idea is to perform aggregation of the
instances. In this work, we propose a deep multi-patch aggregation network architecture (DMA-Net) to support finegrained details learning utilizing multiple patches cropped
from one image.
Designing an optimal network structure that supports
both feature learning and aggregation function learning simultaneously is nontrivial. In this paper, we propose two
novel layers: statistics layer and sorting layer to enable
aggregation of multiple input sources. The statistics layer
leverages common statistical functions to let the output be

990

