P-CNN: Pose-based CNN Features for Action Recognition
Guilhem Chéron∗ †

Ivan Laptev∗

Cordelia Schmid†

INRIA

Abstract
This work targets human action recognition in video.
While recent methods typically represent actions by statistics of local video features, here we argue for the importance of a representation derived from human pose. To this
end we propose a new Pose-based Convolutional Neural
Network descriptor (P-CNN) for action recognition. The
descriptor aggregates motion and appearance information
along tracks of human body parts. We investigate different schemes of temporal aggregation and experiment with
P-CNN features obtained both for automatically estimated
and manually annotated human poses. We evaluate our
method on the recent and challenging JHMDB and MPII
Cooking datasets. For both datasets our method shows consistent improvement over the state of the art.

1. Introduction
Recognition of human actions is an important step toward fully automatic understanding of dynamic scenes. Despite significant progress in recent years, action recognition
remains a difficult challenge. Common problems stem from
the strong variations of people and scenes in motion and appearance. Other factors include subtle differences of finegrained actions, for example when manipulating small objects or assessing the quality of sports actions.
The majority of recent methods recognize actions based
on statistical representations of local motion descriptors [22, 33, 41]. These approaches are very successful
in recognizing coarse action (standing up, hand-shaking,
dancing) in challenging scenes with camera motions, occlusions, multiple people, etc. Global approaches, however,
are lacking structure and may not be optimal to recognize
subtle variations, e.g. to distinguish correct and incorrect
golf swings or to recognize fine-grained cooking actions illustrated in Figure 5.
∗ WILLOW project-team, Département d’Informatique de l’École Normale Supérieure, ENS/Inria/CNRS UMR 8548, Paris, France.
† LEAR project-team, Inria Grenoble Rhône-Alpes, Laboratoire Jean
Kuntzmann, CNRS, Univ. Grenoble Alpes, France.

Fine-grained recognition in static images highlights the
importance of spatial structure and spatial alignment as a
pre-processing step. Examples include alignment of faces
for face recognition [3] as well as alignment of body parts
for recognizing species of birds [14]. In analogy to this
prior work, we believe action recognition will benefit from
the spatial and temporal detection and alignment of human
poses in videos. In fine-grained action recognition, this will,
for example, allow to better differentiate wash hands from
wash object actions.
In this work we design a new action descriptor based on
human poses. Provided with tracks of body joints over time,
our descriptor combines motion and appearance features for
body parts. Given the recent success of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) [20, 23], we explore CNN features obtained separately for each body part in each frame. We use
appearance and motion-based CNN features computed for
each track of body parts, and investigate different schemes
of temporal aggregation. The extraction of proposed Posebased Convolutional Neural Network (P-CNN) features is
illustrated in Figure 1.
Pose estimation in natural images is still a difficult
task [7, 37, 42]. In this paper we investigate P-CNN features
both for automatically estimated as well as manually annotated human poses. We report experimental results for two
challenging datasets: JHMDB [19], a subset of HMDB [21]
for which manual annotation of human pose have been provided by [19], as well as MPII Cooking Activities [29],
composed of a set of fine-grained cooking actions. Evaluation of our method on both datasets consistently outperforms the human pose-based descriptor HLPF [19]. Combination of our method with Dense trajectory features [41]
improves the state of the art for both datasets.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Related
work is discussed in Section 2. Section 3 introduces our PCNN features. We summarize state-of-the-art methods used
and compared to in our experiments in Section 4 and present
datasets in Section 5. Section 6 evaluates our method and
compares it to the state of the art. Section 7 concludes the
paper. Our implementation of P-CNN features is available
from [1].

3218

