Probabilistic Appearance Models for Segmentation and Classification
Julia Krüger

Jan Ehrhardt

Heinz Handels

{krueger,ehrhardt,handels}@imi.uni-luebeck.de

Institute of Medical Informatics, University of Lübeck, Germany

Abstract
Statistical shape and appearance models are often based
on the accurate identification of one-to-one correspondences in a training data set. At the same time, the determination of these corresponding landmarks is the most
challenging part of such methods. Hufnagel et al. developed an alternative method using correspondence probabilities for a statistical shape model. We propose the use
of probabilistic correspondences for statistical appearance
models by incorporating appearance information into the
framework. A point-based representation is employed representing the image by a set of vectors assembling position and appearances. Using probabilistic correspondences
between these multi-dimensional feature vectors eliminates
the need for extensive preprocessing to find corresponding landmarks and reduces the dependence of the generated model on the landmark positions. Then, a maximum
a-posteriori approach is used to derive a single global optimization criterion with respect to model parameters and observation dependent parameters, that directly affects shape
and appearance information of the considered structures.
Model generation and fitting can be expressed by optimizing the same criterion. The developed framework describes
the modeling process in a concise and flexible mathematical way and allows for additional constraints as topological
regularity in the modeling process. Furthermore, it eliminates the demand for costly correspondence determination.
We apply the model for segmentation and landmark identification in hand X-ray images, where segmentation information is modeled as further features in the vectorial image
representation. The results demonstrate the feasibility of the
model to reconstruct contours and landmarks for unseen
test images. Furthermore, we apply the model for tissue
classification, where a model is generated for healthy brain
tissue using 2D MRI slices. Applying the model to images of
stroke patients the probabilistic correspondences are used
to classify between healthy and pathological structures. The
results demonstrate the ability of the probabilistic model to
recognize healthy and pathological tissue automatically.

Shape independent
positions with
probabilistic
correspondences

Shape dependent
positions with
one-to-one
correspondences

mj

?

mj
si

p(si +1 ,m j )
p(si , m j )
p( si−1 , m j )
p( si +x , m j )

...

Figure 1. In classical SSMs or AAMs the sampling point positions are chosen to represent the shape and/or distinctive landmarks (left) and correct one-to-one correspondences are needed.
In our approach (right) the sampling points are distributed independently of the object shape and probabilistic correspondences
p(si |mj ) between a point mj ∈ M and all the other sampling
points si ∈ S are computed.

1. Introduction
Statistical models play an important role in image segmentation and classification [10]. Especially in medical
image analysis Statistical Models address the heterogeneous nature of anatomical structures with high variability
in shape and appearances. Cootes et al. [3] introduced a
Statistical Shape Model (SSM), where the shapes of objects
are represented by a set of landmarks describing statistical
shape properties. Classical Shape Models are generated using a principal component analysis (PCA). To determine
the mean shape and possible shape variations of the considered structure included in a training data set, the corresponding landmarks that represent the same anatomical location have to be known. A manual identification of these
points is not practical due to their large number. Therefore, automatic approaches were proposed in the literature
for the determination of one-to-one corresponding landmarks [1, 10, 17, 20]. Furthermore, it is debatable whether
the exact same anatomical landmark exists in all images at
well defined positions due to anatomical differences or different acquisition techniques for medical images.
Point-based registration approaches like the Iterative
Closest Point (ICP) algorithm encounter the same problem
of non-identical or non-existing point-pairs. Therefore, algorithms have been developed using probabilistic instead

1698

