Action Detection by Implicit Intentional Motion Clustering
Wei Chen
CSE, SUNY at Buffalo

Jason J. Corso
EECS, University of Michigan

wchen23@buffalo.edu

jjcorso@eecs.umich.edu

Abstract
Explicitly using human detection and pose estimation
has found limited success in action recognition problems.
This may be due to the complexity in the articulated motion human exhibit. Yet, we know that action requires an
actor and intention. This paper hence seeks to understand
the spatiotemporal properties of intentional movement and
how to capture such intentional movement without relying
on challenging human detection and tracking. We conduct a
quantitative analysis of intentional movement, and our findings motivate a new approach for implicit intentional movement extraction that is based on spatiotemporal trajectory
clustering by leveraging the properties of intentional movement. The intentional movement clusters are then used as
action proposals for detection. Our results on three action
detection benchmarks indicate the relevance of focusing on
intentional movement for action detection; our method significantly outperforms the state of the art on the challenging
MSR-II multi-action video benchmark.

1. Introduction
Action requires an actor; action requires intention; action requires movement [9, 6]. In short, action requires the
intentional movement, or movement to achieve some active
purpose, of an actor, such as a human or animal. Good actor detection and pose estimation can clearly lead to state
of the art computer vision systems [29]. Jhuang et al. [15],
for example, demonstrate that action-recognition representations built from accurate actor-pose (from ground-truth)
outperform low- and middle-level feature-based representations. And, various video understanding problems, such as
surveillance [13, 22], video-to-text [16, 8], and group-based
activity understanding [18, 20], depend explicitly on detecting the actors or humans in the video.
Yet, in works on individual action understanding like action recognition and action detection, the explicit use of human detection and subsequent processing seems not necessary. The highest performing methods, e.g., Peng et al.
[23], do not use any explicit human detection and instead

rely on low-level features like dense trajectories [33] or
banks of templates [26]. The use of human pose estimation and human detection as an explicit measure for understanding action in video has only minimally been used, e.g.,
[36, 31, 34]. Why?
Consider action recognition based on human-pose.
Jhuang et al’s [15] strong results rely on ground-truth pose.
When using automatic actor-pose the performance drops or
is comparative to non-pose methods: Xu et al. [36] use a
bag of pose [37] and achieve weak performance unless fusing the pose-based detector with low-level features, Brendel
and Todorovic [3] learn a sparse activity-pose codebook for
yielding then-competitive performance and Wang et al. [31]
optimize the pose estimation and integrate local-body parts
and a holistic pose representation to achieve comparative
performance. Neither of these works are evaluated on the
larger action recognition datasets like HMDB51 [17].
Human-pose estimation is hard; is performance too weak
still? Unfortunately, the picture is similar to the comparatively simpler human detection as with pose estimation for
action understanding. Aside from Wang et al. [34] who
develop dynamic-poselets for action detection successfully,
most works completely ignore human detection or find it
underperforms. For example, Chen et al. [6] achieve significantly better performance for ranking action-regions using
an ordinal random field model on top of low-level features
rather than a DPM-based human detector method [11].
Perhaps the most successful use of human detection in
action understanding to date is the improved dense trajectory work [33] in which human detection is used to filter out
trajectories on human regions when estimating inter-frame
homographies. Ironically, in that work, human detection is
not directly used to drive the recognition performance.
This thorough evidence suggest that direct use of human
detectors and pose-estimators should be avoided for action
recognition, at least until pose estimation methods improve.
A similar argument could be made for action detection: e.g.,
both early action detection methods like ST-DPM [30] and
recent Tubelets [14], do not use any explicit human detection or tracking. But the evidence is weaker as this is a
newer problem.
13298

