Matrix Backpropagation for Deep Networks with Structured Layers
Catalin Ionescu∗2,3 , Orestis Vantzos†3 , and Cristian Sminchisescu‡1,3
1

Department of Mathematics, Faculty of Engineering, Lund University
2
Institute of Mathematics of the Romanian Academy
3
Institute for Numerical Simulation, University of Bonn

Abstract
Deep neural network architectures have recently produced excellent results in a variety of areas in artificial
intelligence and visual recognition, well surpassing traditional shallow architectures trained using hand-designed
features. The power of deep networks stems both from their
ability to perform local computations followed by pointwise
non-linearities over increasingly larger receptive fields, and
from the simplicity and scalability of the gradient-descent
training procedure based on backpropagation. An open
problem is the inclusion of layers that perform global, structured matrix computations like segmentation (e.g. normalized cuts) or higher-order pooling (e.g. log-tangent space
metrics defined over the manifold of symmetric positive definite matrices) while preserving the validity and efficiency
of an end-to-end deep training framework. In this paper we
propose a sound mathematical apparatus to formally integrate global structured computation into deep computation
architectures. At the heart of our methodology is the development of the theory and practice of backpropagation
that generalizes to the calculus of adjoint matrix variations.
We perform segmentation experiments using the BSDS and
MSCOCO benchmarks and demonstrate that deep networks
relying on second-order pooling and normalized cuts layers, trained end-to-end using matrix backpropagation, outperform counterparts that do not take advantage of such
global layers.

1. Introduction
Recently, the end-to-end learning of deep architectures
using stochastic gradient descent, based on very large
datasets, has produced impressive results in realistic set∗ catalin.ionescu@ins.uni-bonn.de
† orestis.vantzos@ins.uni-bonn.de
‡ cristian.sminchisescu@math.lth.se

tings, for a variety of computer vision and machine learning
domains[25, 37, 35]. There is now a renewed enthusiasm
of creating integrated, automatic models that can handle the
diverse tasks associated with an able perceiving system.
One of the most widely used architecture is the convolutional network (ConvNet) [26, 25], a deep processing
model based on the composition of convolution and pooling with pointwise nonlinearities for efficient classification
and learning. While ConvNets are sufficiently expressive
for classification tasks, a comprehensive, deep architecture,
that uniformly covers the types of non-linearities required
for other visual calculations has not yet been established.
In turn, matrix factorization plays a central role in classical (shallow) algorithms for many different computer vision
and machine learning problems, such as image segmentation [36], feature extraction, descriptor design [18, 6], structure from motion [38], camera calibration [19], and dimensionality reduction [24, 4], among others. Singular value
decomposition (SVD) in particular, is extremely popular because of its ability to efficiently produce global solutions to
various problems.
In this paper we propose to enrich the dictionary of deep
networks with layer generalizations and fundamental matrix
function computational blocks that have proved successful
and flexible over years in vision and learning models with
global constraints. We consider layers that are explicitly
structure-aware in the sense that they preserve global invariants of the underlying problem. Our paper makes two
main mathematical contributions. The first shows how to
operate with structured layers when learning a deep network. For this purpose we outline a matrix generalization
of backpropagation that offers a rigorous, formal treatment
of global properties. Our second contribution is to further
derive and instantiate the methodology to learn convolutional networks for two different and very successful types
of structured layers: 1) second-order pooling [6] and 2) normalized cuts [36]. An illustration of the resulting deep architecture for O2 P is given in fig. 1. In challenging datasets

2965

