Efficient Solution to the Epipolar Geometry for Radially Distorted Cameras
Zuzana Kukelova1

Jan Heller2

1

Martin Bujnak3

Andrew Fitzgibbon1

2

Microsoft Research Ltd,
21 Station Road,
Cambridge CB1 2FB, UK

Czech Technical University
in Prague, 166 27 Praha 6,
Technická 2, Czech Republic

{zukuke,awf}@microsoft.com

{hellej1,pajdla}@cmp.felk.cvut.cz

3

Tomas Pajdla2

Capturing Reality s.r.o.,
Syslia 46, 821 05,
Bratislava, Slovakia

martin@capturingreality.com

Abstract
The estimation of the epipolar geometry of two cameras
from image matches is a fundamental problem of computer
vision with many applications. While the closely related
problem of estimating relative pose of two different uncalibrated cameras with radial distortion is of particular importance, none of the previously published methods is suitable for practical applications. These solutions are either
numerically unstable, sensitive to noise, based on a large
number of point correspondences, or simply too slow for
real-time applications. In this paper, we present a new efficient solution to this problem that uses 10 image correspondences. By manipulating ten input polynomial equations,
we derive a degree 10 polynomial equation in one variable.
The solutions to this equation are efficiently found using the
Sturm sequences method. In the experiments, we show that
the proposed solution is stable, noise resistant, and fast,
and as such efficiently usable in a practical Structure-fromMotion pipeline.

1. Introduction
In computer vision, estimation of the uncalibrated relative pose of two cameras from image correspondences—
also known as epipolar geometry of fundamental matrix
estimation—is a fundamental problem with many applications. It is one of the core components of all Structure-fromMotion (SfM) and 3D reconstruction pipelines [23]. In
these applications, stochastic RANSAC-style algorithms [8,
6] are often employed to find the “correct” epipolar geometries of camera pairs, i.e., geometries deemed highly probable, and at the same time to label the correspondences as
inliers or outliers (mismatches) of the model.This approach,
however, relies on the correctness of the underlying model
of the problem.
By far the most common camera model used for estimating the epipolar geometry between two cameras is the stan-

Figure 1: 3D Reconstruction of a rotunda captured by a
GoPro Hero4 camera with varying field-of-view settings.
The proposed F10 solver was used as a part of the SfM
pipeline.
dard pinhole camera model [10]. The 5-point relative pose
solver [20, 21] for completely calibrated cameras, the 6point focal length solver [22] for cameras with unknown focal length, or the well known 7-point or 8-point solvers for
uncalibrated cameras [10] are frequently used algorithms
based on the pinhole camera.
Since all of the algorithms above assume perspective
projections, they do not provide accurate estimates for image correspondences corrupted by radial distortion. This
poses a serious drawback, since virtually all projections
in real cameras involve some amount of radial distortion.
Moreover, the importance of radial distortion modeling increases with the ever growing popularity of wide field of
view cameras such as GoPro Hero, cheap smartphone cameras, or superzoom cameras. Fitzgibbon [9] showed that
ignoring the radial distortion—even for standard consumer
cameras—may lead to significant errors in camera calibration or 3D reconstruction.
One way to deal with radial distortion is to simply ignore
it in the image matching phase and to model it only in the

2309

