Improving Image Restoration with Soft-Rounding
Xing Mei1,3
Honggang Qi2
Bao-Gang Hu3
Siwei Lyu1
1
Computer Science Department, University at Albany, SUNY
2
Computer Science Department, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
xmei@albany.edu, hgqi@jdl.ac.cn, hubg@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, slyu@albany.edu

Abstract
Several important classes of images such as text, barcode
and pattern images have the property that pixels can only
take a distinct subset of values. This knowledge can benefit
the restoration of such images, but it has not been widely
considered in current restoration methods. In this work, we
describe an effective and efficient approach to incorporate
the knowledge of distinct pixel values of the pristine images
into the general regularized least squares restoration framework. We introduce a new regularizer that attains zero at the
designated pixel values and becomes a quadratic penalty
function in the intervals between them. When incorporated
into the regularized least squares restoration framework,
this regularizer leads to a simple and efficient step that resembles and extends the rounding operation, which we term
as soft-rounding. We apply the soft-rounding enhanced solution to the restoration of binary text/barcode images and
pattern images with multiple distinct pixel values. Experimental results show that soft-rounding enhanced restoration methods achieve significant improvement in both visual
quality and quantitative measures (PSNR and SSIM). Furthermore, we show that this regularizer can also benefit the
restoration of general natural images.

1. Introduction
The task of image restoration is to recover an image from
its noisy and/or blurry observation [3]. Image restoration is
an example of ill-posed inverse problems, and unique solutions can only be obtained by introducing proper regularizations and constraints on the clean images. Indeed, it is now
generally accepted that the more prior knowledge we have
about the properties of the uncorrupted images, the better
we can solve the image restoration problem [1, 9].
To date, the most widely used statistical regularities for
images are obtained from their band-pass filter responses
(such as gradients or wavelets) or mean-removed pixel
patches. Such responses have been observed to have heavy-

tailed marginal histograms, on the basis of which regularizers or priors that prefer sparse responses have been used to
attain the state-of-the-art restoration performances. Examples include regularizers in the form of the ℓ0 norm [25, 26]
and total variation [20], or prior models based on generalized Laplacian [11, 13] and Gaussian mixtures [23, 28]. In
these image restoration methods, pixel values are usually
treated as continuous variables.
However, images are captured and stored in a digital format, which poses a general constraint on pixel values. The
pixels of an image in a b-bit format can only take integer
values from the set {0, · · · , 2b − 1}. For some important
subclasses of images such as text or pattern images, their
pixels can take only a distinct set of the full range integer
values (see Fig.1(a) for an example). Furthermore, it is usually possible to obtain these values before we restore such
an image. For text and barcode images, the pixel values
are usually separated into two distinct classes of foreground
pixels and background pixels. For pattern images, image
pixels usually take multiple distinct pixel values, which can
be estimated from other images of the same type.
Knowing that the pristine image can only take some distinct pixel values provides a useful constraint for image
restoration, which can help to suppress visual artifacts and
improve the restoration performance. A straightforward approach would be to round the restored pixel values to the
nearest distinct pixel values as a post-processing step. However, such a simple solution often does more harm than
good, as the rounding step can undo the structures recovered
from the restoration step (see Fig.1(c)). On the other hand,
except in a few cases [10, 16, 18, 27], such prior information
about pixel values seems trivial and is largely overlooked by
most existing image restoration algorithms.
In this work, we describe an effective and efficient approach to incorporate the knowledge of distinct pixel values
of the pristine images into the popular regularized least
squares restoration framework. We introduce a new regularizer of the uncorrupted images in the pixel domain. This
regularizer attains zero at the designated pixel values and is

459

