Contour Guided Hierarchical Model for Shape Matching
Yuanqi Su, Yuehu Liu, Bonan Cuan, Nanning Zheng
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, Shaanxi Province, China, 710049
yuanqisu,liuyh@mail.xjtu.edu.cn,cuanbonan@gmail.com,nnzheng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
For its simplicity and effectiveness, star model is popular
in shape matching. However, it suffers from the loose geometric connections among parts. In the paper, we present
a novel algorithm that reconsiders these connections and
reduces the global matching to a set of interrelated local
matching. For the purpose, we divide the shape template
into overlapped parts and model the matching through a
part-based layered structure that uses the latent variable to
constrain parts’ deformation.
As for inference, each part is used for localizing candidates by the partial matching. Thanks to the contour fragments, the partial matching can be solved via modified dynamic programming. The overlapped regions among parts
of the template are then explored to make the candidates of
parts meet at their shared points. The process is fulfilled via
a refined procedure based on iterative dynamic programming. Results on ETHZ shape and Inria Horse datasets
demonstrate the benefits of the proposed algorithm.

1. Introduction
Matching a given shape template to an image is the
core part in many visual tasks, such as object detection
[25, 15, 16, 20], pose estimation [14], etc. Shape matching is challenging especially in cluttered scene due to occlusion, background noise, and the non-rigid deformation
of the object. Thus, how to cope with noises and non-rigid
deformations is vital for developing successful matching algorithm.
To suppress noises, recent methods [15, 20, 16] have proposed to model the contour fragment instead of the edge
points, because the former usually groups edge points of
the same object together to assist analysis. On the other
side, due to imperfect edge detection results and/or grouping rules, object boundary sometimes breaks into several
fragments, such as that shown in Fig.1(b) where the boundary of the swan is scattered in 5 segments, which is difficult
to match with a complete shape template. In addition, a
fragment may contain edge points of several objects, which

further complicates the analysis. Alternatively, [18] proposed to work from the model side by deforming the shape
template to fit the image. The limitation of [18] is that it
negelects the connections among parts.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a). The input image from the ETHZ dataset[7] and (b).
the extracted contour fragments.

In this paper, we consider the matching problem from
the image side where we attempt to search for the object
boundary that resembles a given shape template. In this
way, shape matching becomes as how to select a subset
of contour fragments to best explain the given template.
Since selecting the contour fragments involves a combinatorial optimization[15, 20] process that is usually NP-hard,
we propose to locate multiple parts of the object boundary
and then assemble them into a closed boundary. As object
boundary is usually broken, localizing local parts is obviously easier than detecting the global one. Hence we divide
the shape template into parts, and the partial template could
help to pick an involved contour fragments for the object.
In case the chosen contour fragments cannot guarantee to
be the object boundary, we let the adjacent partial templates
to share certain regions. These shared regions are shown
to be effective in bridging the gap among the chosen fragments, and finally linking them into the boundary.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. After
briefly reviewing related work in Sec.2, we formulate the
11609

