Multi-Cue Structure Preserving MRF for Unconstrained Video Segmentation
Saehoon Yi and Vladimir Pavlovic
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey
110 Frelinghuysen Road, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA
{shyi, vladimir}@cs.rutgers.edu

Abstract
Video segmentation is a stepping stone to understanding video context. Video segmentation enables one to represent a video by decomposing it into coherent regions which
comprise whole or parts of objects. However, the challenge
originates from the fact that most of the video segmentation
algorithms are based on unsupervised learning due to expensive cost of pixelwise video annotation and intra-class
variability within similar unconstrained video classes. We
propose a Markov Random Field model for unconstrained
video segmentation that relies on tight integration of multiple cues: vertices are defined from contour based superpixels, unary potentials from temporally smooth label likelihood and pairwise potentials from global structure of a
video. Multi-cue structure is a breakthrough to extracting
coherent object regions for unconstrained videos in absence
of supervision. Our experiments on VSB100 dataset show
that the proposed model significantly outperforms competing state-of-the-art algorithms. Qualitative analysis illustrates that video segmentation result of the proposed model
is consistent with human perception of objects.

1. Introduction
Video segmentation is one of the important problems in
video understanding. A video may contain a set of objects,
from stationary to those undergoing dependent or independent motion. Human understands a video by recognizing
objects and infers the video context(i.e. what is happening
in the video) by observing their motion. Depending on the
video context, parts or whole objects will have structured
motion correlation. However, there may be unrelated entities such as background or auxiliary objects which form additional structures as well. Holistic representation of a video
cannot effectively decompose and extract meaningful structure and it may increase intra-variability of a video class.
The goal of video segmentation is to obtain coherent object
regions over frames so that a video can be represented as a
set of objects and a meaningful structure can be extracted.

Ideally, the ultimate goal of video segmentation is to obtain pixelwise semantic segmentation of videos, where the
objective is not only to partition a video into object regions
but to infer object label of each region. Semantic segmentation is actively investigated in urban driving scene understanding [2, 3, 6, 25]. However, the urban scene videos
contain rigid objects such as buildings, cars or road with
typically smooth motion. In general, it is more challenging to segment and classify object regions in unconstrained
videos due to the labor cost and intra-class variability.
Another fundamental challenge in video segmentation
is that the inherent video object hierarchy may be highly
subjective. Annotations of multiple human annotators may
vary significantly. For example, one annotator may assign
a single label to the whole human body, whereas another
annotator will label torso and leg part separately. Furthermore, some objects may not have strong correlation to one
feature alone. For example, an object may have parts that
show different color patterns but move consistently. Hence,
in practice, one may induce a video segmentation with different levels of granularity from aggregated information of
multi-cue feature channels.
In this paper, we propose a novel video segmentation model which integrates temporally smooth labels with
global structure consistency with preserving object boundaries. Our contributions are as follows:
• We propose a video segmentation model that integrates
temporally smooth but potentially weak video segmentation proposals with strong static object cues and lowlevel spatio-temporal cues of color, flow, texture and
long trajectories.
• A video segmentation at different granularity levels is
inferred through the process of graph edge consistency,
which is computationally efficient compared to traditional hierarchy induction approaches.
• The proposed method infers precise coarse grained
segmentation, where a segment may represent one
whole object.

3262

