Deformable 3D Fusion:
From Partial Dynamic 3D Observations to Complete 4D Models
Weipeng Xu1,2 Mathieu Salzmann2,3 Yongtian Wang1 Yue Liu1
1
Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2
NICTA, Canberra, Australia
3
CVLab, EPFL, Switzerland
{xuwp,wyt,liuyue}@bit.edu.cn, mathieu.salzmann@epfl.ch

Abstract
Capturing the 3D motion of dynamic, non-rigid objects
has attracted significant attention in computer vision. Existing methods typically require either mostly complete 3D
volumetric observations, or a shape template. In this paper,
we introduce a template-less 4D reconstruction method that
incrementally fuses highly-incomplete 3D observations of
a deforming object, and generates a complete, temporallycoherent shape representation of the object. To this end, we
design an online algorithm that alternatively registers new
observations to the current model estimate and updates the
model. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach
at reconstructing non-rigidly moving objects from highlyincomplete measurements on both sequences of partial 3D
point clouds and Kinect videos.
Figure 1. Deformable 3D fusion.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we introduce an approach to estimating a
temporally-coherent 3D model of a non-rigid object given
a dynamic sequence of highly-incomplete 3D observations
of the object undergoing large deformations. Capturing the
3D motion of dynamic objects, or 4D reconstruction, has
been a longstanding goal of computer vision. Ultimately,
the resulting methods should yield a temporally-coherent
shape representation of the observed deformable object.
Multiview reconstruction methods have been wellstudied to address 4D reconstruction. While current methods achieve impressive results [12, 9, 6, 27, 32, 36], they
typically require well-engineered and expensive setups,
where the deforming object is captured from multiple viewpoints essentially covering its entire 3D surface. By contrast, simpler acquisition devices, such as stereo cameras or
the increasingly popular low-cost depth sensors, allow us
to acquire 3D data in a more affordable manner. Unfortunately, these devices typically only produce partial observa-

tions of the object, depicting, at best, half of its 3D surface.
In the case of rigid motion, several fusion techniques
have been proposed to combine multiple partial 3D observations [15, 28, 41]. However, when it comes to capturing a dynamically deforming object, the literature remains very sparse. More specifically, most existing methods [17, 7, 18, 35, 39, 42] rely on a pre-processing stage,
where the object undergoes (quasi-) rigid motion, to acquire
a complete 3D template of the object, which will then be deformed to match new non-rigid data.
By contrast, in this paper, we introduce a template-less
4D reconstruction method that directly estimates a complete
temporally-coherent 3D model from partial observations of
a deforming objects. In other words, as illustrated in Fig. 1,
we incrementally fuse the partial observations into a complete model while accounting for the deformations of these
observations. Ultimately, this lets us estimate the complete
shape of the deforming object in each frame of a video sequence, thus predicting the hidden parts of the object de-

2183

