A Deep Visual Correspondence Embedding Model
for Stereo Matching Costs
Zhuoyuan Chen, Xun Sun, Liang Wang,
Baidu Research – Institute of Deep Learning
{chenzhuoyuan,sunxun,wangliang18}@baidu.com

Yinan Yu, Chang Huang
Horizon Robotics
{yinan.yu,chang.huang}@horizon-robotics.com ∗

Abstract
This paper presents a data-driven matching cost for
stereo matching. A novel deep visual correspondence embedding model is trained via Convolutional Neural Network
on a large set of stereo images with ground truth disparities.
This deep embedding model leverages appearance data to
learn visual similarity relationships between corresponding
image patches, and explicitly maps intensity values into an
embedding feature space to measure pixel dissimilarities.
Experimental results on KITTI and Middlebury data sets
demonstrate the effectiveness of our model. First, we prove
that the new measure of pixel dissimilarity outperforms traditional matching costs. Furthermore, when integrated with
a global stereo framework, our method ranks top 3 among
all two-frame algorithms on the KITTI benchmark. Finally,
cross-validation results show that our model is able to make
correct predictions for unseen data which are outside of its
labeled training set.

(a) Reference image of a stereo pair

(b) Winner-takes-all result

(c) Result from an MRF-based stereo framework

1. Introduction
Stereo matching infers scene geometry by establishing
pixel correspondences across multiple images taken from
different viewpoints. Scharstein and Szeliski in their seminal taxonomy work [26] argue that stereo algorithms essentially consist of four building blocks: matching cost computation, cost aggregation, disparity computation/optimization
and refinement. According to the actual sequence of steps
taken, stereo algorithms can be broadly categorized into local and global methods. Local algorithms, where the disparity computation at a pixel depends only on intensity values within a finite support region, usually make implicit
∗ This work was done when the fourth and fifth authors were with Baidu

Research– Institute of Deep Learning.

(d) color-coded depth

Figure 1. A demonstration of our framework: (a) a left image in
the KITTI stereo sequences [13]; (b) we use Convolutional Neural Network to extract discriminative features for stereo matching,
which is then refined by a global Markov Random Field to obtain
the final result (c). Throughout our paper, we color-code all disparity maps as in (d): blue indicates far regions while white indicates
near ones.

smoothness assumptions by aggregating pixel-based matching costs. In contrast, global algorithms typically skip
the cost aggregation step by making explicit smoothness
1972

