Weakly supervised graph based semantic segmentation by learning communities
of image-parts
Niloufar Pourian, S. Karthikeyan, and B.S. Manjunath
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA
npourian@ece.ucsb.edu, karthikeyan@ece.ucsb.edu, manj@ece.ucsb.edu

Abstract
We present a weakly-supervised approach to semantic
segmentation. The goal is to assign pixel-level labels given
only partial information, for example, image-level labels.
This is an important problem in many application scenarios where it is difficult to get accurate segmentation or not
feasible to obtain detailed annotations. The proposed approach starts with an initial coarse segmentation, followed
by a spectral clustering approach that groups related image
parts into communities. A community-driven graph is then
constructed that captures spatial and feature relationships
between communities while a label graph captures correlations between image labels. Finally, mapping the image
level labels to appropriate communities is formulated as a
convex optimization problem. The proposed approach does
not require location information for image level labels and
can be trained using partially labeled datasets. Compared
to the state-of-the-art weakly supervised approaches, we
achieve a significant performance improvement of 9% on
MSRC-21 dataset and 11% on LabelMe dataset, while being more than 300 times faster.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of semantic segmentation to
predict a label for every image pixel. Semantic segmentation benefits a variety of vision applications, such as object
recognition, automatic driver assistance and 3D urban modeling. However in practice, two key factors limit the applicability of semantic segmentation: speed and scalability.
In this work we develop an effective semantic segmentation
method which addresses these issues.
Semantic segmentation approaches can be broadly categorized into fully supervised, weakly supervised and unsupervised methods. There is a wealth of published literature on fully supervised semantic segmentation that rely
on location information associated with image labels (fully
segmented training data) [3, 5, 7, 8, 9, 17, 18, 20, 23, 25,

26, 29, 31, 36, 40, 41, 42, 45, 49, 50, 55]. The aforementioned approaches require that every pixel in the training
set be manually labeled. The work in [8] considers a setting in which the training dataset is a mixture of object segments and a set of objects’ bounding boxes. Despite adding
more flexibility, [8] still depends on the manual localization of objects by a combination of regional segments and
bounding boxes. The approaches of [9, 55] focus on segmentation templates to address the problem of image labeling. Such approaches have computational advantages over
pixel-based approaches by constraining the search process,
however, they still depend on providing the ground truth of
object boundaries in training. Creating annotations is costly
and time-consuming, thus limiting the applicability of the
aforementioned approaches to small sized datasets.
In order to scale semantic segmentation to larger
datasets, weakly supervised semantic segmentation approaches have been proposed [1, 30, 44, 46, 47, 48, 52, 53].
These methods typically require fully annotated image-level
labels without relying on location information associated to
image labels. These approaches use image-level object annotations to learn priors. Although more flexible than fully
supervised methods, these techniques typically assume that
one has access to all annotations associated with the image
which still limits their practical applicability. Our work is
closely related to the weakly supervised approaches while
being applicable to both fully/partially labeled datasets.
We note that there are segmentation methods that work
with unlabeled data, for example see [51], but they tend
to be not very robust given the under-constrained nature of
the problem. Label correlation enhance the performance by
providing stronger priors and unsupervised approaches are
inherently unable to do that.
Several works have utilized multiple segmentations to
address the problem of semantic segmentation by either
changing the parameters of a bottom-up approach [19, 24],
or by using different segmentation methods [10, 21, 34].
To avoid the increased complexity associated with multiple
segmentations, our model learns image parts using a single
segmentation by jointly considering the visual and spatial
11359

