Accurate Camera Calibration Robust to Defocus using a Smartphone
Hyowon Ha

Yunsu Bok
Kyungdon Joo
Jiyoung Jung
Robotics and Computer Vision Lab., KAIST

{hwha, ysbok, kdjoo, jyjung}@rcv.kaist.ac.kr

In So Kweon

iskweon@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
We propose a novel camera calibration method for defocused images using a smartphone under the assumption
that the defocus blur is modeled as a convolution of a sharp
image with a Gaussian point spread function (PSF). In contrast to existing calibration approaches which require wellfocused images, the proposed method achieves accurate
camera calibration with severely defocused images. This robustness to defocus is due to the proposed set of unidirectional binary patterns, which simplifies 2D Gaussian deconvolution to a 1D Gaussian deconvolution problem with multiple observations. By capturing the set of patterns consecutively displayed on a smartphone, we formulate the feature
extraction as a deconvolution problem to estimate feature
point locations in sub-pixel accuracy and the blur kernel
in each location. We also compensate the error in camera
parameters due to refraction of the glass panel of the display device. We evaluate the performance of the proposed
method on synthetic and real data. Even under severe defocus, our method shows accurate camera calibration result.

1. Introduction
Camera calibration is a process to estimate the transformation between the image coordinate of a camera and the
real world coordinate. It is an essential step in computer vision ﬁelds and its accuracy highly inﬂuences the quality of
various computer vision applications such as 3D reconstruction [1, 26], depth estimation [25, 19], and robot navigation [20]. To achieve an accurate camera calibration result,
acquiring an exact set of correspondences between images
and the real world is extremely important [14, 4]. Therefore, recent researches on camera calibration have focused
on developing patterns having distinctive feature points that
can be accurately localized in the images [27, 8, 16].
Among various patterns, a planar checkerboard has been
one of the most famous patterns because of the ease of deThis research is supported by the National Research Foundation, Korea, under the NRF-ANR joint research programme (No. 2011-0031920).

Figure 1: The proposed camera calibration that is robust to
defocus using a smartphone display compared with a conventional camera calibration using a checkerboard.
tection, low cost and simple structure [27, 12, 24, 17]. A
traditional way of producing a calibration pattern is to print
out the pattern on a piece of paper and attach it on a planar
board so that the pattern maintains the plane assumption.
Recently, the calibration methods using display devices
such as monitors, tablets or smartphones have come to the
forefront. Compared to the printed patterns, the displayed
patterns have the advantages of adjustable brightness, guaranteed ﬂatness and known pixel sizes [29, 22, 11]. The devices can display programmable patterns for higher level
features such as time-coded pattern which can help the camera calibration to identify the feature location [6]. However,
since a display device is usually equipped with a glass panel
in front of the LCDs, the observed feature location in the image may deviate from the actual feature location displayed
by the LCDs due to refraction by the glass panel.
For all sorts of planar pattern based calibration methods,
printed or displayed, an important condition is required to
the images used for the calibration: All images have to be
in focus for accurate feature detection. Defocused images
yield incorrect correspondences which lead to performance
degradation of the calibration. This requirement brings natural inconveniences to the data capture process. For example, if we want to calibrate a camera focusing at a very short
distance to capture a small object, the calibration pattern
has to be small as well. On the other hand, if we mount a
camera on a vehicle to capture street views for autonomous
driving [23] or urban scene reconstruction purposes [18],
the camera is set to focus in the range from a few meters
1828

