Automatic Thumbnail Generation Based on Visual Representativeness and
Foreground Recognizability
Jingwei Huang1,2,⋆ , Huarong Chen1,2,⋆ , Bin Wang1,2 , Stephen Lin3
1

School of Software, Tsinghua University 2 Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology 3 Microsoft Research
⋆

Huarong Chen and Jingwei Huang are joint first authors. This work was done while they were visiting students at Microsoft Research.

Abstract
We present an automatic thumbnail generation technique
based on two essential considerations: how well they visually represent the original photograph, and how well the
foreground can be recognized after the cropping and downsizing steps of thumbnailing. These factors, while important
for the image indexing purpose of thumbnails, have largely
been ignored in previous methods, which instead are designed to highlight salient content while disregarding the
effects of downsizing. We propose a set of image features
for modeling these two considerations of thumbnails, and
learn how to balance their relative effects on thumbnail generation through training on image pairs composed of photographs and their corresponding thumbnails created by an
expert photographer. Experiments show the effectiveness of
this approach on a variety of images, as well as its advantages over related techniques.

1. Introduction
For efficient browsing of photo collections, a set of images is typically presented as an array of thumbnails, which
are reduced-size versions of the photographs. The reduction in size is usually quite significant to allow for many
thumbnails to be viewed at a time, and the thumbnails are
generally fixed to a uniform aspect ratio and size to facilitate orderly arrangement. Thumbnail creation involves a
combination of cropping and rescaling of the original image
as illustrated in Figure 1. Manually producing thumbnails
for large image collections can be both time-consuming and
tedious, as care is needed to ensure that each thumbnail
provides an effective visual representation of the original
photo. The practical significance of this problem has led to
much research on automatic thumbnail generation.
Previous work has focused primarily on the cropping
step of thumbnail generation. Many of them operate by
extracting a rectangular region that contains the most visually salient part of a photograph. These saliency-based

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Image thumbnail generation. (a) Original images
(viewed at low resolution). (b) Cropping (red box) and rescaling to
produce thumbnails. (c) Thumbnails viewed at actual resolution.

methods [3, 9, 23, 27, 31, 33] are effective at highlighting
foreground content. Other methods based on aesthetic quality [25, 38] instead seek a crop that is visually pleasing according to compositional assessment metrics. It has been
shown that aesthetics-based approaches often produce cropping results that are preferred by users over saliency-based
crops [38].
Although these methods produce excellent results for
image cropping, they share critical shortcomings for the
task of thumbnail generation. One is that they do not consider how well the resulting image represents the original.
Unlike a general image crop, a thumbnail serves a specific
purpose as an index that should provide the viewer an accurate impression of what the original photo looks like. If the
thumbnails of a vacation photo album exclude most of the
background, different photographs would be more difficult
to distinguish from each other based on their thumbnails.
Another shortcoming is that previous methods do not account for the effects of rescaling. The utility of a thumbnail
can be heavily affected by the amount of rescaling, since
important subjects in an image may become difficult to recognize after too much reduction in size. A proper balance
of cropping and rescaling is essential for decreasing image
size in an effective way.
In this paper, we propose an image thumbnail method

253

