Learning Where to Position Parts in 3D
Marco Pedersoli
Inria∗ †

Tinne Tuytelaars
PSI-iMinds KU Leuven, Belgium

marco.pedersoli@inria.fr

tinne.tuytelaars@esat.kuleuven.be

Abstract
A common issue in deformable object detection is finding a good way to position the parts. This issue is even more
outspoken when considering detection and pose estimation
for 3D objects, where parts should be placed in a threedimensional space. Some methods extract the 3D shape of
the object from 3D CAD models. This limits their applicability to categories for which such models are available.
Others represent the object with a pre-defined and simple
shape (e.g. a cuboid). This extends the applicability of the
model, but in many cases the pre-defined shape is too simple to properly represent the object in 3D. In this paper we
propose a new method for the detection and pose estimation of 3D objects, that does not use any 3D CAD model or
other 3D information. Starting from a simple and general
3D shape, we learn in a weakly supervised manner the 3D
part locations that best fit the training data. As this method
builds on a iterative estimation of the part locations, we
introduce several speedups to make the method fast enough
for practical experiments. We evaluate our model for the detection and pose estimation of faces and cars. Our method
obtains results comparable with the state of the art, it is
faster than most of the other approaches and does not need
any additional 3D information.

1. Introduction
For many practical applications, merely detecting the
bounding box of an object of interest is not enough. A more
precise localization of the object including also its 3D pose
is needed. For instance, think of a robotic arm that needs to
grasp an object. It needs to know not only where the object
is, but also its 3D pose. For the sake of brevity, in the rest
of the paper we use the term 3D detection to refer to object detection (i.e. find the object bounding box) and pose
estimation (i.e. find the orientation or pose of the object).
Note that this term refers to the model representation, not
∗ LEAR team, Inria Grenoble Rhone-Alpes, Laboratoire Jean Kuntzmann, CNRS, Univ. Grenoble Alpes, France.
† The author has done this work while he was with PSI/iMinds KU Leuven, Belgium

Figure 1. Our 3D model representation for the ‘face’ class. Starting from an RGB image (no depth), our model simultaneously
learns appearance and depth of each HOG part.

to the input data. We use ordinary 2D images as input, with
no depth information available during either training or test
time.
In recent years several methods for 3D detection have
been proposed. Among them, those based on extensions of
deformable part models (DPM) [3] to 3D [5, 10, 17, 19]
seem to be the best performing. However, they still have
several issues. First, the optimal part positioning in 3D is
an open issue. For the 2D case, the strategy proposed in
the original DPM [3] based on selecting the location with
higher discriminativity seems adequate. For 3D models the
problem becomes more complex because we want to associate the same object part, seen from different viewpoints,
to the same model location. For instance we would like to
recognize the wheel of a car with the same model part, independently from the view.
Two main solutions have been proposed in the literature.
Pepik et al. [17] associate parts seen from different viewpoint from 3D CAD models of the object class. It selects
a set of parts on the 3D CAD model and then it places
these on the training images using the ground truth orien1136

