Where to Buy It: Matching Street Clothing Photos in Online Shops
M. Hadi Kiapour1 , Xufeng Han1 , Svetlana Lazebnik2 , Alexander C. Berg1 , Tamara L. Berg1
1

University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
{hadi,xufeng,tlberg,aberg}@cs.unc.edu

2

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
slazebni@illinois.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we define a new task, Exact Street to Shop,
where our goal is to match a real-world example of a garment item to the same item in an online shop. This is an extremely challenging task due to visual differences between
street photos (pictures of people wearing clothing in everyday uncontrolled settings) and online shop photos (pictures of clothing items on people, mannequins, or in isolation, captured by professionals in more controlled settings). We collect a new dataset for this application containing 404,683 shop photos collected from 25 different online retailers and 20,357 street photos, providing a total of
39,479 clothing item matches between street and shop photos. We develop three different methods for Exact Street to
Shop retrieval, including two deep learning baseline methods, and a method to learn a similarity measure between
the street and shop domains. Experiments demonstrate that
our learned similarity significantly outperforms our baselines that use existing deep learning based representations.

1. Introduction
Online shopping is an exponentially growing market.
Retail sales world-wide, including both in-store and internet purchases, totaled approximately $22.5 trillion in 2014,
with $1.316 trillion of sales occurring online. By 2018,
ecommerce retail spending is projected to increase to nearly
$2.5 trillion1 . Much of this purchasing is related to shopping for clothing items. However, finding exactly what you
want from online shops is still not a solved problem.
In this paper, we look at one task related to online shopping, the street-to-shop problem. Given a real-world photo
of a clothing item, e.g. taken on the street, the goal of this
task is to find that clothing item in an online shop. This
1 http://www.emarketer.com/Article/Retail-Sales-Worldwide-Will-Top22-Trillion-This-Year/1011765

✔

Sleeve
Color
Collar
Pattern
Material

Figure 1: Our task is to find the exact clothing item, here a dress,
shown in the query. Only the first dress, in the green rectangle, would be considered correct. This is different from previous
work, e.g. [24], that considers whether retrieved items have similar
high-level features. Under that, more relaxed, evaluation all of the
dresses shown are correct. (For this query, our similarity learning
ranked the correct match first.)

is extremely challenging due to differences between depictions of clothing in real-world settings versus the clean simplicity of online shopping images. For example, clothing
will be worn on a person in street photos, whereas in online shops, clothing items may also be portrayed in isolation
or on mannequins. Shop images are professionally photographed, with cleaner backgrounds, better lighting, and
more distinctive poses than may be found in real-world,
consumer-captured photos of garments. To deal with these
challenges, we introduce a deep learning based methodology to learn a similarity measure between street and shop
photos.
The street-to-shop problem has been recently explored [24]. Previously, the goal was to find similar clothing
items in online shops, where performance is measured according to how well retrieved images match a fixed set of
attributes, e.g. color, length, material, that have been handlabeled on the query clothing items. However, finding a
similar garment item may not always correspond to what
a shopper desires. Often when a shopper wants to find an
item online, they want to find exactly that item to purchase.
Therefore, we define a new task, Exact Street to Shop,
where our goal is for a query street garment item, to find exactly the same garment in online shopping images (Fig. 1).

3343

