Synthesizing Illumination Mosaics from Internet Photo-Collections
Dinghuang Ji, Enrique Dunn, Jan-Michael Frahm
Department of Computer Science, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
{jdh,dunn,jmf}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
We propose a framework for the automatic creation of
time-lapse mosaics of a given scene. We achieve this by
leveraging the illumination variations captured in Internet
photo-collections. In order to depict and characterize the illumination spectrum of a scene, our method relies on building discrete representations of the image appearance space
through connectivity graphs defined over a pairwise image
distance function. The smooth appearance transitions are
found as the shortest path in the similarity graph among images, and robust image alignment is achieved by leveraging
scene semantics, multi-view geometry, and image warping
techniques. The attained results present an insightful and
compact visualization of the scene illuminations captured
in crowd-sourced imagery.

1. Introduction
Internet photo-collections can provide a vast sample of
the space of possible viewpoint and appearance configurations available for a given scene. This work addresses
the organization and characterization of this image space
by exploring the link between time-lapse photography and
crowd-sourced imagery. Time-lapse photography strives to
depict the evolution of a given scene as observed under
varying image capture conditions. While the aggregation of
a sequence of images into a video may be the most straightforward visualization for time-lapse photography, the integration of multiple images in the form of a mosaic provides
a descriptive 2D representation of the observed scene’s temporal variability. We denote these time-lapse mosaics as illumination mosaics and show an example in Fig. 1.
The problem of mosaic construction can be abstracted as
a three-stage process of image registration, alignment, and
aggregation. However, the representation of the appearance
dynamics introduces the qualitative challenge of producing
an aggregate mosaic that is both coherent with the original
scene content and descriptive of the fine-scale appearance
variations across time. The associated technical challenges
addressed in this work are 1) identify within an unorganized

Figure 1. Example time-lapse image of the Coliseum, the top image is automatically generated by our method, and the bottom is
manually made by a photographer (courtesy of Richard Silver).

image set an image sequence depicting the desired content
appearance transition and 2) construct an illumination mosaic that accurately depicts the observed appearance variability while mitigating scene artifacts due to changes in
scene content and capture parameters.
We address these challenges by exploring the spectrum
of capture variability available in Internet photo-collections
and propose a novel framework to obtain illumination mosaics. We briefly summarize the functionality of our processing pipeline. The input data to our framework are a
reference image depicting the desired image composition to
be used to generate the illumination mosaic and a crowdsourced image collection of the scene of interest. We initially use semantically-aware global image features characterizing an imaged scene’s composition and ambient illumination properties in order to determine the scope of the
variation to be represented in the mosaic. Then, a limited

3988

