Deep Learning Face Attributes in the Wild∗
Ziwei Liu1,3
1

Xiaogang Wang2,3

Xiaoou Tang1,3

Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong

2
3

Ping Luo3,1

Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Shenzhen Key Lab of Comp. Vis. & Pat. Rec., Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, CAS, China

1. Introduction
Face attributes are beneﬁcial for multiple applications
such as face veriﬁcation [15, 2, 24], identiﬁcation [20], and
retrieval. Predicting face attributes from images in the wild
is challenging, because of complex face variations such as
poses, lightings, and occlusions as shown in Fig.1.
Attribute recognition methods are generally categorized
into two groups: global and local methods. Global methods
extract features from the entire object, where accurate
∗ Project
http://personal.ie.cuhk.edu.hk/
page:
lz013/projects/FaceAttributes.html
˜

Smiling

Mustache

Young

true

false

false

false

true

true

true

true

true

true

5 attributes

10 attributes

(b) Our Method

Predicting face attributes in the wild is challenging due
to complex face variations. We propose a novel deep
learning framework for attribute prediction in the wild.
It cascades two CNNs, LNet and ANet, which are finetuned jointly with attribute tags, but pre-trained differently.
LNet is pre-trained by massive general object categories for
face localization, while ANet is pre-trained by massive face
identities for attribute prediction. This framework not only
outperforms the state-of-the-art with a large margin, but
also reveals valuable facts on learning face representation.
(1) It shows how the performances of face localization
(LNet) and attribute prediction (ANet) can be improved
by different pre-training strategies. (2) It reveals that
although the filters of LNet are fine-tuned only with imagelevel attribute tags, their response maps over entire images
have strong indication of face locations. This fact enables
training LNet for face localization with only image-level
annotations, but without face bounding boxes or landmarks,
which are required by all attribute recognition works. (3)
It also demonstrates that the high-level hidden neurons of
ANet automatically discover semantic concepts after pretraining with massive face identities, and such concepts are
significantly enriched after fine-tuning with attribute tags.
Each attribute can be well explained with a sparse linear
combination of these concepts.

Arched Eyebrows Receding Hairline

(c)

Abstract

(a) HOG(landmarks)+SVM

{lz013,pluo,xtang}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

20 attributes 40 attributes

Figure 1. (a) Inaccurate localization and alignment lead to prediction
errors on attributes by existing methods (b) LNet localizes face regions by
averaging the response maps of attribute ﬁlters. ANet predicts attributes
without alignment (c) Face localization with the averaged response map
when LNet is trained with different numbers of attributes. (Best viewed in
color)

locations of object parts or landmarks are not required.
They are not robust to deformations of objects [23]. Recent
local models [15, 4, 5, 2, 19, 32] ﬁrst detect object parts
and extract features from each part. These local features
are concatenated to train classiﬁers. For example, Kumar et
al. [15] predicted face attributes by extracting hand-crafted
features from ten face parts. Zhang et al. [32] recognized
human attributes by employing hundreds of poselets [4]
to align human body parts. These local methods may fail
when unconstrained face images with complex variations
are present, which makes face localization and alignment
difﬁcult. As shown in Fig.1 (a), HOG+SVM fails because
the faces or landmarks are wrongly localized or misaligned.
Thus the features are extracted at wrong positions [25].
Recent research shows that face localization and alignment
are still not well solved problems, especially in the wild
condition, although much progress has been achieved in the
past decade. It is also proved by our experimental result.

3730

