Understanding and Predicting Image Memorability at a Large Scale
Aditya Khosla
MIT

Akhil S. Raju
MIT

Antonio Torralba
MIT

Aude Oliva
MIT

khosla@mit.edu

araju@mit.edu

torralba@mit.edu

oliva@mit.edu

Abstract
Progress in estimating visual memorability has been limited by the small scale and lack of variety of benchmark
data. Here, we introduce a novel experimental procedure
to objectively measure human memory, allowing us to build
LaMem, the largest annotated image memorability dataset
to date (containing 60,000 images from diverse sources).
Using Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), we show
that fine-tuned deep features outperform all other features
by a large margin, reaching a rank correlation of 0.64, near
human consistency (0.68). Analysis of the responses of the
high-level CNN layers shows which objects and regions are
positively, and negatively, correlated with memorability, allowing us to create memorability maps for each image and
provide a concrete method to perform image memorability
manipulation. This work demonstrates that one can now robustly estimate the memorability of images from many different classes, positioning memorability and deep memorability features as prime candidates to estimate the utility of
information for cognitive systems. Our model and data are
available at: http://memorability.csail.mit.edu

1. Introduction
One hallmark of human cognition is our massive capacity for remembering lots of different images [2, 20], many
in great detail, and after only a single view. Interestingly,
we also tend to remember and forget the same pictures and
faces as each other [1, 13]. This suggests that despite different personal experiences, people naturally encode and
discard the same types of information. For example, pictures with people, salient actions and events, or central objects are more memorable to all of us than natural landscapes. Images that are consistently forgotten seem to lack
distinctiveness and a fine-grained representation in human
memory [2, 20]. These results suggest that memorable and
forgettable images have different intrinsic visual features,
making some information easier to remember than others.
Indeed, computer vision works [12, 18, 15, 7] have been
able to reliably estimate the memorability ranks of novel

pictures, or faces, accounting for half of the variance in human consistency. However, to date, experiments and models for predicting visual memorability have been limited to
very small datasets and specific image domains.
Intuitively, the question of an artificial system successfully predicting human visual memory seems out of reach.
Unlike visual classification, images that are memorable, or
forgettable, do not even look alike: an elephant, a kitchen,
an abstract painting, a face and a billboard can all share
the same level of memorability, but no visual recognition
algorithms would cluster these images together. What are
the common visual features of memorable, or forgettable,
images? How far we can we go in predicting with high accuracy which images people will remember, or not?
In this work, we demonstrate that a deep network trained
to represent the diversity of human visual experience can
reach astonishing performance in predicting visual memorability, at a near-human level, and for a large variety of images. Combining the versatility of many benchmarks and a
novel experimental method for efficiently collecting human
memory scores (about one-tenth the cost of [13]), we introduce the LaMem dataset, containing 60,000 images with
memorability scores from human observers (about 27 times
larger than the previous dataset [13]).
By fine-tuning Hybrid-CNN [37], a convolutional neural network (CNN) [23, 21] trained to classify more than
a thousand categories of objects and scenes, we show that
our model, MemNet, achieves a rank correlation of 0.64 on
novel images, reaching near human consistency rank correlation (0.68) for memorability. By visualizing the learned
representation of the layers of MemNet, we discover the
emergent representations, or diagnostic objects, that explain
what makes an image memorable or forgettable. We then
apply MemNet to overlapping image regions to produce a
memorability map. We propose a simple technique based
on non-photorealistic rendering to evaluate these memorability maps. We find a causal effect of this manipulation on
human memory performance, demonstrating that our deep
memorability network has been able to isolate the correct
components of visual memorability.
Altogether, this work stands as the first near-human per12390

