Hyperspectral Super-Resolution by Coupled Spectral Unmixing
Charis Lanaras, Emmanuel Baltsavias, Konrad Schindler
Institute of Geodesy and Photogrammetry, ETH Zürich, Switzerland
firstname.lastname@geod.baug.ethz.ch

Abstract
Hyperspectral cameras capture images with many narrow spectral channels, which densely sample the electromagnetic spectrum. The detailed spectral resolution is
useful for many image analysis problems, but it comes at
the cost of much lower spatial resolution. Hyperspectral
super-resolution addresses this problem, by fusing a lowresolution hyperspectral image and a conventional highresolution image into a product of both high spatial and
high spectral resolution. In this paper, we propose a method
which performs hyperspectral super-resolution by jointly
unmixing the two input images into the pure reflectance
spectra of the observed materials and the associated mixing coefficients. The formulation leads to a coupled matrix
factorisation problem, with a number of useful constraints
imposed by elementary physical properties of spectral mixing. In experiments with two benchmark datasets we show
that the proposed approach delivers improved hyperspectral super-resolution.

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral cameras sample the electromagnetic spectrum in many contiguous, very narrow spectral bands. Each
pixel thus observes a detailed distribution of the surface reflectance across the visible (and near infrared) spectrum,
rather than just three or four broad “colour” channels (see
Fig. 1). Each physical material has a characteristic reflectance spectrum, therefore hyperspectral sensors (a.k.a.
imaging spectrometers) can more accurately distinguish visually similar surface materials. This capability has proved
useful for visual tasks such as tracking [23] and segmentation [22], in applications including face recognition [19],
document analysis [18], food inspection [26] and earth observation [6]. However, the high spectral resolution comes
at a cost. The narrow slicing of the spectrum means that in
each band only a small fraction of the overall radiant energy
reaches the sensor. To achieve an acceptable signal-to-noise
ratio one must therefore increase the pixel size on the chip,
and consequently the pixel footprint on the surface (or one

Hyperspectral image
Super-Resolution

Conventional image

wa

v

th

ng

e
el

Figure 1. Hyperspectral images have high spectral resolution but low spatial resolution, whereas the opposite is true
for conventional images. Hyperspectral super-resolution
aims to fuse the two types of imagery.
has to increase integration time, which is impractical in the
presence of camera or object motion because of the ensuing
motion blur). Therefore hyperspectral images have significantly lower spatial resolution compared to conventional
RGB cameras (or similar broadband sensors such as nearinfrared cameras).1 Conventional cameras on the other hand
lose much of the spectral information, but by integrating the
scene radiance over broad spectral bands they achieve high
spatial resolution.
At hardware level the trade-off between detailed spatial
and spectral information is due to fundamental physical limits and will thus be difficult to overcome. A natural solution
is to instead record a hyperspectral and a conventional image, and to fuse them into a product with high spatial and
spectral resolution, as illustrated in Fig. 1. This procedure
is referred to as hyperspectral image fusion or hyperspectral
super-resolution.
1 In remote sensing, cameras with broad spectral bands are collectively

referred to as “multispectral”. Unfortunately, in other fields “multispectral” is sometimes used for images with higher spectral resolution than
RGB; we thus avoid the term.

3586

