PatchMatch-based Automatic Lattice Detection for Near-Regular Textures
Siying Liu1,2 , Tian-Tsong Ng2 , Kalyan Sunkavalli3 , Minh N. Do1,4 , Eli Shechtman3 , and Nathan Carr3
1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 2 Institute for Infocomm Research, Singapore
3
Adobe Research 4 Advanced Digital Sciences Center, Singapore

Abstract
In this work, we investigate the problem of automatically
inferring the lattice structure of near-regular textures (NRT)
in real-world images. Our technique leverages the PatchMatch algorithm for finding k-nearest-neighbor (kNN) correspondences in an image. We use these kNNs to recover an
initial estimate of the 2D wallpaper basis vectors, and seed
vertices of the texture lattice. We iteratively expand this lattice by solving an MRF optimization problem. We show that
we can discretize the space of good solutions for the MRF
using the kNNs, allowing us to efficiently and accurately
optimize the MRF energy function using the Particle Belief
Propagation algorithm. We demonstrate our technique on a
benchmark NRT dataset containing a wide range of images
with geometric and photometric variations, and show that
our method clearly outperforms the state of the art in terms
of both texel detection rate and texel localization score.

1. Introduction
From building facades to printed patterns on our clothing, texture patterns are ubiquitous in our daily lives. Texture patterns can be best understood and modeled through
symmetry detection. In particular, translational symmetry
is one of the most commonly occurring symmetries in natural and man-made structures. In this paper, we focus our
discussion on texture images that fall under the wallpaper
category, i.e., textures with translational symmetries. However, most real-world textures cannot be simply explained
by tiling a basic element regularly; they exhibit both geometric and photometric deviations from a regular congruent
tiling [11]. These are termed near-regular textures (NRT).
Understanding the regularities in such textures is an important vision and graphics problem with applications ranging from shape-from-texture (which seeks to estimate surface orientation from the geometric distortions in texture
elements [5]), to texture editing and texture-aware resiz-

Figure 1: Automatic lattice detection. Our technique works
on a wide range of textures and is robust to the photometric
and strong geometric deformations that are common in realworld images.

ing [11, 17, 8].
Detecting regularities on 2D wallpaper patterns is a challenging task because of the chicken-and-egg nature of the
problem; given the basic repeating pattern of the texture we
can infer the lattice, and vice versa. However, estimating
both automatically is very hard, especially for real-world
images with complex local variations. The notion of nearregular textures was first introduced by Liu et al. [11], who
proposed a semi-automatic lattice extraction algorithm for
texture manipulation applications. Subsequently, Hays et
al. [7] developed the first automated lattice extraction algorithm for NRTs with local distortions by casting regularity
modeling as a higher-order correspondence problem. Park
et al. [15] further improved the performance of lattice detection by solving the problem in an MRF setting. However, both these techniques rely on interest point detectors
to find repetitive patterns. As the interest points could be
sparse, they may fail to correlate with the regularity of the
texture, affecting not only the lattice model (texel) detection, but also the subsequent lattice expansion that relies on
the found texel for template matching.
We address these issues by leveraging the Generalized
PatchMatch algorithm (GPM) to a) find correspondences
between self-similar elements within the texture, and b)
make the lattice estimation efficient. First, we adapt GPM to
efficiently match transformed repeated patterns. The dense

181

