Learning Concept Embeddings with Combined Human-Machine Expertise
Michael J. Wilber1,2

Iljung S. Kwak3

David Kriegman3,4

Serge Belongie1,2

1

Department of Computer Science, Cornell University 2 Cornell Tech
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, UC San Diego 4 Dropbox

Abstract
This paper presents our work on “SNaCK,” a lowdimensional concept embedding algorithm that combines
human expertise with automatic machine similarity kernels.
Both parts are complimentary: human insight can capture
relationships that are not apparent from the object’s visual
similarity and the machine can help relieve the human from
having to exhaustively specify many constraints. We show
that our SNaCK embeddings are useful in several tasks:
distinguishing prime and nonprime numbers on MNIST,
discovering labeling mistakes in the Caltech UCSD Birds
(CUB) dataset with the help of deep-learned features, creating training datasets for bird classifiers, capturing subjective human taste on a new dataset of 10,000 foods, and qualitatively exploring an unstructured set of pictographic characters. Comparisons with the state-of-the-art in these tasks
show that SNaCK produces better concept embeddings that
require less human supervision than the leading methods.

1

Introduction

Supervised learning tasks form the backbone of many stateof-the-art computer vision applications. They help researchers classify, localize, and characterize actions and objects. However, if the researcher’s goal is instead to interactively explore the latent structure of a dataset, discover
novel categories, or find labeling mistakes, it is unclear what
kind of supervision to use. Sometimes the data does not
fall into well-defined taxonomic categories, or perhaps it
is simply too expensive to collect labels for every object.
Sometimes the expert wishes to capture a concept—some
intuitive constraint that they cannot articulate—about how
the data should be structured, but does not have the time to
specify this concept formally. If we wish to build models
that capture concepts, we need a new approach.
Our overall goal is to generate a concept embedding.
Distances within this space should correspond with a human’s intuitive idea of how similar two objects are. Many
researchers use similar embeddings to enhance the performance of classifiers [27, 9, 34], build retrieval sys-

Figure 1. Our SNaCK embeddings capture human expertise with
the help of machine similarity kernels. For example, an expert can
use this concept embedding of a subset of CUB-200 to quickly find
labeling mistakes. Red-headed Woodpeckers are visually dissimilar to Pileated Woodpeckers, but SNaCK moved a Red-headed
Woodpecker into the Pileated Woodpecker cluster because of its
appearance. This is probably a labeling mistake in CUB-200,
and this SNaCK embedding helped us discover it. The cluster
of three visually similar vireo species in the embedding center may
be another good place to look for label problems.

tems [32, 23], and create visualizations that help experts
better understand high-dimensional spaces [10, 11].
Concepts cannot always be inferred from appearance. Within the past few years, huge research advances
have begun to produce systems that are excellent at comparing images based on visual cues. For example, one
can imagine building a CNN to compare food dishes based
solely on their appearance. However, if the concept we wish
to capture is similarity in taste, the task becomes harder. Although taste and appearance are often correlated, any poor
diner who has confused guacamole and wasabi knows that
foods that taste very different may look deceptively similar
because the strongest visual cues may not be reliable. This
particular taste difference is difficult to capture without expert guidance. Similarly, when classifying birds, the goal
is often not to group similar-looking birds together, but to
group birds of the same species together. Experts know that

981

