Introducing Geometry in Active Learning for Image Segmentation
Ksenia Konyushkova
EPFL

Raphael Sznitman
University of Bern

Pascal Fua
EPFL

ksenia.konyushkova@epfl.ch

raphael.sznitman@artorg.unibe.ch

pascal.fua@epfl.ch

Abstract
We propose an Active Learning approach to training
a segmentation classifier that exploits geometric priors to
streamline the annotation process in 3D image volumes. To
this end, we use these priors not only to select voxels most
in need of annotation but to guarantee that they lie on 2D
planar patch, which makes it much easier to annotate than if
they were randomly distributed in the volume. A simplified
version of this approach is effective in natural 2D images.
We evaluated our approach on Electron Microscopy and
Magnetic Resonance image volumes, as well as on natural
images. Comparing our approach against several accepted
baselines demonstrates a marked performance increase.

larly challenging, in part because it is difficult both to develop effective interfaces to visualize the huge image data
and for users to quickly figure out what they are looking at.
In this paper, we will therefore focus on image volumes but
the techniques we will discuss are nevertheless also applicable to regular 2D images by treating them as stacks of height
one.
With this, we introduce here a novel approach to AL that
is geared towards segmenting 3D image volumes and also
applicable to ordinary 2D images. By design, it takes into
account geometric constraints to which regions should obey
and makes the annotation process convenient. Our contribution hence is twofold:
• We introduce a way to exploit geometric priors to more
effectively select the image data the expert user is asked
to annotate.

1. Introduction
Machine Learning techniques are a key component of
modern approaches to segmentation, making the need for
sufficient amounts of training data critical. As far as images of everyday scenes are concerned, this is addressed by
compiling ever larger training databases and obtaining the
ground truth via crowd-sourcing [18, 17]. By contrast, in
specialized domains such as biomedical image processing,
this is not always an option both because the images can
only be acquired using very sophisticated instruments and
because only experts whose time is scarce and precious can
annotate them reliably.
Active Learning (AL) is an established way to reduce this
labeling workload by automatically deciding which parts of
the image an annotator should label to train the system as
quickly as possible and with minimal amounts of manual
intervention. However, most AL techniques used in Computer Vision, such as [14, 13, 34, 21], are inspired by earlier
methods developed primarily for general tasks or Natural
Language Processing [32, 15]. As such, they rarely account
for the specific difficulties or exploit the opportunities that
arise when annotating individual pixels in 2D images and
3D voxels in image volumes.
More specifically, 3D stacks such as those depicted by
Fig. 1 are common in the biomedical field and are particu-

• We streamline the annotation process in 3D volumes
so that annotating them is no more cumbersome than
annotating ordinary 2D images, as depicted by Fig. 2.
In the remainder of this paper, we first review current
approaches to AL and discuss why they are not necessarily
the most effective when dealing with pixels and voxels. We
then give a short overview of our approach and discuss in
more details how we use geometric priors and simplify the
annotation process. Finally, we compare our results against
those of accepted baselines and state-of-the-art techniques.

2. Related Work and Motivation
In this paper, we are concerned with situations where
domain experts are available to annotate images. However,
their time is limited and expensive. We would therefore like
to exploit it as effectively as possible. In such a scenario,
AL [27] is a technique of choice as it tries to determine
the smallest possible set of training samples to annotate for
effective model instantiation.
In practice, almost any classification scheme can be incorporated into an AL framework. For image processing
purposes, that includes SVMs [13], Conditional Random
Fields [34], Gaussian Processes [14] and Random Forests
12974

