Lending A Hand: Detecting Hands and Recognizing
Activities in Complex Egocentric Interactions
Sven Bambach
Stefan Lee
David J. Crandall
School of Informatics and Computing
Indiana University

Chen Yu
Psychological and Brain Sciences
Indiana University

{sbambach,steflee,djcran}@indiana.edu

chenyu@indiana.edu

Abstract
Hands appear very often in egocentric video, and their
appearance and pose give important cues about what people are doing and what they are paying attention to. But
existing work in hand detection has made strong assumptions that work well in only simple scenarios, such as with
limited interaction with other people or in lab settings. We
develop methods to locate and distinguish between hands in
egocentric video using strong appearance models with Convolutional Neural Networks, and introduce a simple candidate region generation approach that outperforms existing techniques at a fraction of the computational cost. We
show how these high-quality bounding boxes can be used to
create accurate pixelwise hand regions, and as an application, we investigate the extent to which hand segmentation
alone can distinguish between different activities. We evaluate these techniques on a new dataset of 48 first-person
videos of people interacting in realistic environments, with
pixel-level ground truth for over 15,000 hand instances.

1. Introduction
Wearable cameras are starting to catch on, with devices
like Google Glass, GoPro Hero, Narrative Clip, and others
hitting the consumer market in the last few years. These
products are being used to capture the adventures of sports
enthusiasts [36], to help people suffering from memory loss
by creating visual logs of their day [7], to enhance public
safety when worn by police officers [33], to collect data on
human behavior for scientific studies [4], or just for fun.
These devices record huge volumes of images and video,
so people will need automatic techniques to help browse,
search, and visualize the egocentric imagery they collect.
We need computer vision techniques that can handle the
challenges of first-person video, including highly dynamic
camera motion and poor imaging conditions.
While egocentric video captures a huge variety of objects, activities, and situations, one specific object is om-

Dynamic Egocentric Interactions

t
puzzle solving

Hand-Type Detection

Semantic Segmentation

Activity Recognition

Figure 1: We present a CNN-based technique for detecting,
identifying, and segmenting hands in egocentric videos of
multiple people interacting with each other. To illustrate
one specific application, we show that hand segments alone
can be used for accurate activity recognition.

nipresent in nearly every frame: the hands. We use our
hands as our main channel of interaction with the physical
world, for manipulating objects, sensing the environment,
and expressing ourselves to other people. Our hands are
almost always in our field of view, and their pose and configuration reflects what we are doing and what we intend to
do next. In addition, understanding the activities and intentions of our social partners requires that we also detect their
hands, disambiguating them from our own. This means that
hand detection and tracking are fundamental problems of
egocentric vision, both for computers and people; in fact,
neuroscientists have discovered specific parts of the brain
that respond to identifying our own hands (since “feeling
of ownership of our limbs is a fundamental aspect of selfconsciousness” [8]). We believe that almost any egocentric
computer vision problem, from object detection to activity
recognition, will thus require accurate hand detection.
Recent work in egocentric computer vision on recog11949

