Adaptive Exponential Smoothing for Online Filtering of Pixel Prediction Maps
Kang Dang, Jiong Yang, Junsong Yuan
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, 639798
{dang0025, yang0374}@e.ntu.edu.sg, jsyuan@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
We propose an efficient online video filtering method, called
adaptive exponential filtering (AES) to refine pixel prediction
maps. Assuming each pixel is associated with a discriminative prediction score, the proposed AES applies exponentially decreasing
weights over time to smooth the prediction score of each pixel, similar to classic exponential smoothing. However, instead of fixing
the spatial pixel location to perform temporal filtering, we trace
each pixel in the past frames by finding the optimal path that can
bring the maximum exponential smoothing score, thus performing
adaptive and non-linear filtering. Thanks to the pixel tracing, AES
can better address object movements and avoid over-smoothing.
To enable real-time filtering, we propose a linear-complexity dynamic programming scheme that can trace all pixels simultaneously. We apply the proposed filtering method to improve both
saliency detection maps and scene parsing maps. The comparisons with average and exponential filtering, as well as state-ofthe-art methods, validate that our AES can effectively refine the
pixel prediction maps, without using the original video again.

1. Introduction
Despite the success of pixel prediction, e.g., saliency detection and parsing in individual images, its extension to
video pixel prediction remains a challenging problem due
to the spatio-temporal structure among the pixels and the
huge computations to analyze the video data. For example, when each video frame is parsed independently, the
per-pixel prediction maps are usually “flickering” due to
the spatio-temporal inconsistencies and noisy predictions,
e.g., caused by object and camera movements or low quality
videos. Thus an efficient online filtering of the pixel prediction maps is important for many streaming video analytics
applications.
To address the “flickering” effects, enforcing spatiotemporal smoothness constraints over the pixel predictions
can improve the quality of the prediction maps [25, 8, 12, 9].
However, existing methods still have difficulty in providing
a solution that is both efficient and effective. On the one
hand, despite a lot of previous works [19, 22] on real-time
video denoising, they are designed to improve the video
quality rather than its pixel prediction maps. It is worth

Figure 1: We propose a spatio-temporal filtering framework, to
refine the per-frame prediction maps from an image analysis module. Top Row: input video. Middle Row: per-frame prediction
maps. Bottom Row: refined maps by our filter.

noting that linear spatio-temporal filtering methods such as
moving average or exponential smoothing that works well
for independent additive video noises may not provide satisfactory results on the pixel prediction maps, which are usually affected by non-additive and signal dependent noises.
Thus special spatio-temporal filtering methods are required
to deal with them. On the other hand, although a few spatiotemporal filtering methods have been proposed to refine
pixel prediction maps, most of them only perform in an offline or batch mode where the whole video is required to
perform the smoothing [14, 17, 24, 2]. Although a few recent works have been developed for online video filtering,
they usually rely on extra steps, such as producing temporally consistent superpixels from a streaming video [9], or
leveraging metric learning and optical flow [25], thus are
difficult to be implemented in real-time.
To address the above limitations, in this paper we propose an efficient online video filtering method which is able
to perform online and real-time filtering. Given a sequence
of pixel prediction maps, where each pixel is associated
with a detection score or a probabilistic multi-class distribution, our goal is to provide a causal filtering that can

3209

