Actions and Attributes from Wholes and Parts
Georgia Gkioxari
UC Berkeley

Ross Girshick
Microsoft Research

Jitendra Malik
UC Berkeley

gkioxari@berkeley.edu

rbg@microsoft.com

malik@berkeley.edu

D *LYHQDQLQVWDQFH
K\SRWKHVLVZHGHWHFWSDUWV

Abstract
We investigate the importance of parts for the tasks of
action and attribute classification. We develop a part-based
approach by leveraging convolutional network features inspired by recent advances in computer vision. Our part
detectors are a deep version of poselets and capture parts
of the human body under a distinct set of poses. For the
tasks of action and attribute classification, we train holistic
convolutional neural networks and show that adding parts
leads to top-performing results for both tasks. We observe
that for deeper networks parts are less significant. In addition, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach when
we replace an oracle person detector, as is the default in the
current evaluation protocol for both tasks, with a state-ofthe-art person detection system.

1. Introduction
For the tasks of human attribute and action classification,
it is difficult to infer from the recent literature if part-based
modeling is essential or, to the contrary, obsolete. Consider
action classification. Here, the method from Oquab et al.
[21] uses a holistic CNN classifier that outperforms partbased approaches [20, 30]. Turning to attribute classification, Zhang et al.’s CNN-based PANDA system [33] shows
that parts bring dramatic improvements over a holistic CNN
model. How should we interpret these results? We aim to
bring clarity by presenting a single approach for both tasks
that shows consistent results.
We develop a part-based system, leveraging convolutional network features, and apply it to attribute and action classification. For both tasks, we find that a properly
trained holistic model matches current approaches, while
parts contribute further. Using deep CNNs we establish new
top-performing results on the standard PASCAL human attribute and action classification benchmarks.
Figure 1 gives an outline of our approach. We compute
CNN features on a set of bounding boxes associated with
the instance to classify. One of these bounding boxes corresponds to the whole instance and is either provided by an

E 7KHLQVWDQFHDQGLWVSDUWVDUH
IHGLQWRRXUFODVVLILFDWLRQHQJLQH

)LQH*UDLQHG
&ODVVLILFDWLRQ
(QJLQH

5LGLQJ+RUVH
,VPDOH
:HDUVKDW
:HDUV76KLUW

Figure 1: Schematic overview of our overall approach. (a) Given
an R-CNN person detection (red box), we detect parts using a
novel, deep version of poselets (Section 3). (b) The detected
whole-person and part bouding boxes are input into a fine-grained
classification engine to produce predictions for actions and attributes (Section 4).

oracle or comes from a person detector. The other bounding
boxes (three in our implementation) come from poselet-like
part detectors.
Our part detectors are a novel “deep” version of poselets. We define three human body parts (head, torso, and
legs) and cluster the keypoints of each part into several distinct poselets. Traditional poselets [1, 3] would then operate as sliding-window detectors on top of low-level gradient
orientation features, such as HOG [7]. Instead, we train a
sliding-window detector for each poselet on top of a deep
feature pyramid, using the implementation of [13]. Unlike
HOG-based poselets, our parts are capable of firing on difficult to detect structures, such as sitting versus standing legs.
Also, unlike recent deep parts based on bottom-up regions
[31], our sliding-window parts can span useful, but inhomogeneous regions, that are unlikely to group together through
a bottom-up process (e.g., bare arms and a t-shrit).
Another important aspect of our approach is task-specific
CNN fine-tuning. We show that a fine-tuned holistic model
(i.e., no parts) is capable of matching the attribute classification performance of the part-based PANDA system [33].
Then, when we add parts our system outperforms PANDA.
This result indicates that PANDA’s dramatic improvement
from parts comes primarily from the weak holistic classifier baseline used in their work, rather than from the parts
themselves. While we also observe an improvement from
12470

