Extraction of Virtual Baselines from Distorted Document Images
Using Curvilinear Projection
Gaofeng MENG∗† , Zuming HUANG† , Yonghong SONG‡ ,
Shiming XIANG† and Chunhong PAN†
†

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing P.R.China, 100190

Email: {gfmeng, smxiang, chpan}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, huangzuming2014@ia.ac.cn
‡

Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
Xi’an, Shaanxi Province, P.R.China 710049
Email: songyh@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
The baselines of a document page are a set of virtual
horizontal and parallel lines, to which the printed contents
of document, e.g., text lines, tables or inserted photos, are
aligned. Accurate baseline extraction is of great importance in the geometric correction of curved document images. In this paper, we propose an efficient method for accurate extraction of these virtual visual cues from a curved
document image. Our method comes from two basic observations that the baselines of documents do not intersect
with each other and that within a narrow strip, the baselines can be well approximated by linear segments. Based
upon these observations, we propose a curvilinear projection based method and model the estimation of curved baselines as a constrained sequential optimization problem. A
dynamic programming algorithm is then developed to efficiently solve the problem. The proposed method can extract
the complete baselines through each pixel of document images in a high accuracy. It is also scripts insensitive and
highly robust to image noises, non-textual objects, image
resolutions and image quality degradation like blurring and
non-uniform illumination. Extensive experiments on a number of captured document images demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
The baselines of a document page consist of a set of virtual horizontal and parallel lines, to which the printed contents of document, e.g., text lines, tables or inserted photos, are aligned. Many methods for document image anal-

Figure 1. An example of virtual baseline extraction from a curved
document image by our method. (a) the curved document image,
(b) the projection profiles along a fixed direction, (c) the estimated
virtual baselines, (d) the curvilinear projection profiles along the
estimated baselines.

ysis, for example, the recursive XY-cut method [18], often assume that the image contents are well aligned to a
group of horizontal and parallel straight baselines. However, this is often not the case when a document image gets
distorted. Estimating the baselines and realigning the image contents with them is thus an indispensable preprocessing step in many tasks of document image processing and
analysis, such as page layout segmentation, optical character recognition (OCR) and so on.
For a flat document image, its baselines are usually
straight lines. The estimation of these baselines has been extensively studied in the context of document image deskewing [17] and image perspective rectification [14, 22]. The
problem, however, gets worse when a document image is
distorted due to nonlinear page curl. This commonly happens when one captures the images of an opened thick and

3925

