Geometry-aware Deep Transform
Jiaji Huang

Qiang Qiu

Robert Calderbank
Duke University
Durham, NC, 27708

Guillermo Sapiro

{jiaji.huang, qiang.qiu, guillermo.sapiro, robert.calderbank}@duke.edu

Abstract
Many recent efforts have been devoted to designing sophisticated deep learning structures, obtaining revolutionary results on benchmark datasets. The success of these
deep learning methods mostly relies on an enormous volume of labeled training samples to learn a huge number
of parameters in a network; therefore, understanding the
generalization ability of a learned deep network cannot be
overlooked, especially when restricted to a small training
set, which is the case for many applications. In this paper, we propose a novel deep learning objective formulation that unifies both the classification and metric learning
criteria. We then introduce a geometry-aware deep transform to enable a non-linear discriminative and robust feature transform, which shows competitive performance on
small training sets for both synthetic and real-world data.
We further support the proposed framework with a formal
(K, ǫ)-robustness analysis.

1. Introduction
Many recent efforts have been devoted to learning a mapping from low-level image features, e.g., image patches [16,
17], LBP descriptors [3, 14], to high-level discriminative
representations. The learned feature mapping often increases the inter-class separation while reducing the intraclass variation. This idea dates back at least to the linear
discriminant analysis (LDA) for linear cases; however, if we
allow the feature mapping to be non-linear, e.g., deep convolutional neural network [8, 16, 15], the discriminability
of the learned representation is often significantly enhanced
compared to its linear counterpart.
Deep learning techniques achieve unprecedentedly high
precision in object and scene classification, where an enormous volume of labeled training samples are often required
to learn a rich set of parameters [6, 10, 15]. Despite
such revolutionary advances, many real-world classification
problems remain challenging, due to the large number of
non-linearly separable classes and the scarcity of training

samples. One such example is face verification [9], where
recently reported successes mostly rely on huge proprietary
training sets, e.g., 4.4 million labeled faces from 4,030 people in [17]; however, publicly available training datasets often consist of only a small set of subjects with several samples per subject. It is a notoriously difficult task to learn
from limited training samples a deep structure that can generalize well on testing data [11].
While great current attentions are paid to smart manipulation of different deep architectures for more discriminative representations [7, 16, 17], in this paper, we focus on
the generalization problem, i.e., how to encourage a mapping learned from limited training samples to generalize
well over testing data. This issue is of significant importance when the training samples are scarce, in which case
the network optimized on the training set is likely at the
risk of overfitting. We provide both analytic and experimental illustrations on the generalization errors of a learned
deep structure, under several popular objective functions.
We further propose a geometry-aware feature transformation framework, which balances between discriminability and generalization. The proposed framework encourages inter-class separation while at the same time penalizes
the distortion of intra-class structure. This also extends the
“shallow” setup in [12] to a deep architecture, also providing theoretical insights regarding robustness. In particular,
we show that constraining feature mapping functions to be
near-isometry in local sub-regions yields robust algorithms.
We first motivate our framework with a synthetic example,
and then support it through theoretical analysis. We further
validate our framework using face verification experiments
and report state-of-the-art results on the challenging LFW
face dataset .
Our main contributions are:
• proposing a novel deep learning objective that unifies
the classification and metric learning criteria.
• providing a theoretical argument showing that awareness of geometry leads to robustness;

4139

