Exploring Causal Relationships in Visual Object Tracking
Karel Lebeda
Simon Hadfield
Richard Bowden
University of Surrey, Guildford, GU2 7XH, United Kingdom
{K.Lebeda,S.Hadfield,R.Bowden}@Surrey.ac.uk

Causal relationships can often be found in visual object
tracking between the motions of the camera and that of the
tracked object. This object motion may be an effect of the
camera motion, e.g. an unsteady handheld camera. But it
may also be the cause, e.g. the cameraman framing the object. In this paper we explore these relationships, and provide statistical tools to detect and quantify them; these are
based on transfer entropy and stem from information theory. The relationships are then exploited to make predictions about the object location. The approach is shown to be
an excellent measure for describing such relationships. On
the VOT2013 dataset the prediction accuracy is increased
by 62 % over the best non-causal predictor. We show that
the location predictions are robust to camera shake and sudden motion, which is invaluable for any tracking algorithm
and demonstrate this by applying causal prediction to two
state-of-the-art trackers. Both of them benefit, Struck gaining a 7 % accuracy and 22 % robustness increase on the
VTB1.1 benchmark, becoming the new state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Causality is a relation between two events, a cause
(source) and an effect (consequence). In general terms, we
say that an event causes another event (its effect), if it precedes the effect in time and it increases the probability of the
effect happening. Although causality has been studied by
philosophers for millennia, it received little attention from
the scientific community before the twentieth century. Recently, theoretical advances have brought practical progress
in the analysis of time series in many scientific areas.
An example of a causal relationship, which can be observed (and exploited) in the area of computer vision, is the
relationship between the motions of the camera and an object in Visual Object Tracking (VOT). There are different
possible causal relationships. For instance, the motion of
the camera instantly causes motion of the object in the image frame. An abrupt movement of the camera (e.g. a shake)
can cause a tracker to fail even in otherwise simple tracking

# failed trackers

Abstract

15
10
5
0
0

50

100

150
frame #

200

250

Figure 1. Top: selected frames of the B ICYCLE sequence in the
VOT Challenge (1, 140&173). Bottom: number of trackers from
the challenge, which failed on particular frames. Notice the two
challenging moments, a strong occlusion around frame 180 and an
abrupt camera shake around frame 140.

scenarios. A particular example can be seen in the performance of all submitted trackers on the B ICYCLE sequence
in the ICCV VOT Challenge 2013 [25]. While this sequence
is relatively easy to track in general, there are two challenging moments (see Figure 1, showing the numbers of failed
trackers in the VOT Challenge). Many tracking failures are
present around frame 180, caused by a strong occlusion, and
around frame 140, stemming from an abrupt camera shake.
If these were detected and accounted for, many of the failures could be prevented, regardless of the tracker.
Another interesting causal relationship often arises when
the motion of the object causes changes of the camera motion. If there is a human in the loop, e.g. a cameraman, they
are partially tracking an object by definition. A similar conclusion would hold for an automatically-controlled camera,
tracking the object. When the object moves towards the
edge of the image, the cameraman is likely to move the
camera such that the object does not disappear from the
scene. An extreme case of this is the satirical Zero-order
Tracker [27], shown to successfully track a challenging sequence by simply returning a bounding box on a constant
location in the image. As illustrated in Figure 2, here the
cameraman kept the diver in the centre of the image frame
for almost whole sequence. However, even in less extreme
13065

