Efficient PSD Constrained Asymmetric Metric Learning
for Person Re-identification
Shengcai Liao and Stan Z. Li
Center for Biometrics and Security Research, National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
95 Zhongguancun East Road, Beijing 100190, China
{scliao,szli}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

approaches have been proposed for person re-identification
[4], which greatly advance this field.

Person re-identification is becoming a hot research topic
due to its value in both machine learning research and video
surveillance applications. For this challenging problem,
distance metric learning is shown to be effective in matching person images. However, existing approaches either require a heavy computation due to the positive semidefinite
(PSD) constraint, or ignore the PSD constraint and learn
a free distance function that makes the learned metric potentially noisy. We argue that the PSD constraint provides
a useful regularization to smooth the solution of the metric,
and hence the learned metric is more robust than without
the PSD constraint. Another problem with metric learning
algorithms is that the number of positive sample pairs is
very limited, and the learning process is largely dominated by the large amount of negative sample pairs. To address the above issues, we derive a logistic metric learning approach with the PSD constraint and an asymmetric
sample weighting strategy. Besides, we successfully apply
the accelerated proximal gradient approach to find a global minimum solution of the proposed formulation, with a
convergence rate of O(1/t2 ) where t is the number of iterations. The proposed algorithm termed MLAPG is shown
to be computationally efficient and able to perform low
rank selection. We applied the proposed method for person
re-identification, achieving state-of-the-art performance on
four challenging databases (VIPeR, QMUL GRID, CUHK
Campus, and CUHK03), compared to existing metric learning methods as well as published results.

Among existing approaches, the metric learning methods are shown to be effective in matching person images
[33, 9, 10, 13]. The Mahalanobis distance learning proposed by [27] is a relatively simple but effective approach,
which has been widely studied. This method tries to learn
a Mahalanobis distance function parameterized by a PSD
matrix to separate the positive sample pairs from the negative sample pairs. However, existing Mahalanobis metric
learning methods either require a heavy computation when
the PSD constraint is applied, or ignore the PSD constraint and learn a free distance function that makes the learned
metric potentially noisy. We argue in this paper that the PSD constraint provides a useful regularization to smooth the
solution of the metric, and hence the learned metric is more
robust than without the PSD constraint.

1. Introduction

Another issue in applying metric learning for person reidentification is that, the numbers of positive and negative
sample pairs are largely unbalanced. Especially, most existing person re-identification datasets are relatively small (e.g. VIPeR [5] and QMUL GRID [17]), resulting in
very limited number of positive sample pairs. Therefore,

Person re-identification is a technique to search a desired
person from a large set of gallery. This task is very challenging because there exist complex intra-class variations in illumination, pose or viewpoint, blur, and occlusion. Many

Alternatively, the PSD constraint can also be achieved
by representing the Mahalanobis metric with a product of
two matrices [26, 33]. However, the quadratic form makes
the objective function more complex. Besides, a rank parameter has to be given beforehand for optimization. For a
different rank, the metric has to be learned again, which is
inconvenient. What’s more, there is no principle to select
the most informative dimensions from the learned projection matrix. In practice, most existing methods apply the
Principle Component Analysis (PCA) dimension reduction
method before metric learning, of which the effect is unclear. Considering this, it is better to perform metric learning in a higher dimensional space while allowing low rank
selection with the learned metric.

3685

