Beyond Tree Structure Models: A New Occlusion Aware Graphical Model for
Human Pose Estimation
Lianrui Fu1,2,4 , Junge Zhang1,2,4 and Kaiqi Huang1,2,3,4
1
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing
2
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
4
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{lianrui.fu, jgzhang, kaiqi.huang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
 







Abstract
Occlusion is a main challenge for human pose estimation, which is largely ignored in popular tree structure models. The tree structure model is simple and convenient for
exact inference, but short in modeling the occlusion coherence especially in the case of self-occlusion. We propose
an occlusion aware graphical model which is able to model
both self-occlusion and occlusion by the other objects simultaneously. The proposed model structure can encodes
the interactions between human body parts and objects, and
hence enables it to learn occlusion coherence from data discriminatively.
We evaluate our model on several public benchmarks for human pose estimation including challenging subsets featuring significant occlusion. The experimental results
show that our method obtains comparable accuracy with
the state-of-the-arts, and is robust to occlusion for 2D human pose estimation.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation from still image is a challenging problem in computer vision. It is key to many visual
tasks, e.g., action recognition, clothes parsing and humancomputer interaction. This problem is still challenging due
to large deformation, illumination, camera viewpoint, cluttered background and occlusion.
Recent progress on human pose estimation is ascribed to
the pictorial structured model especially simple tree structure [53, 40, 44, 48]. Although these methods perform well
on images with rare occlusion, they may fail when the body
parts are occluded by some other body parts(self-occlusion)
or the other objects(other-occlusion). Fig. 1(c) depicts that
the famous ﬂexible mixtures-of-parts model(FMP) [53] fails under occlusion. The tree structured model is simple, yet
fails to model the interaction between unconnected body
parts, and the interactions between human body and object-



 



Figure 1. Occlusions in Leeds Sports dataset. (a) Visualization
of the occlusion relation matrix. The color of diagonal squares
reﬂects the probability of other-occlusion for each joint. Hotter
color means heavier occlusion. The hotness of each nondiagonal
square in row i and column j indicates the probability of joint i
being occluded by joint j. The image groups on the top are the
instances with the same self-occlusion relationship. (b) The sequence number of body joints in Leeds Sports dataset. (c) Human
pose estimation results with occlusions from FMP [53](the ﬁrst
row) and ours(second row).

s. However, these interactions are important cues for occlusion reasoning. The question is, how can we model such
interactions for occlusion reasoning?
There are mainly two types of occlusion for human pose
estimation: other-occlusion (occluded by objects) and selfocclusion (occluded by some other body parts). Otherocclusion appears when some objects block the view and
this will damage the local appearance of body parts and
cause failure detection. Take the images of the second column of Fig 1(c) for example, the FMP fails because the left
knee and hip of the rider are occluded by the horse. However, only a few body parts are frequently occluded such
as lower arms and legs while head is mostly visible(see the

1976

