Adaptively Unified Semi-Supervised Dictionary Learning with Active Points
Xiaobo Wang1,2 Xiaojie Guo1∗ Stan Z. Li2
1
State Key Laboratory of Information Security, IIE, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Center for Biometrics and Security Research & National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{xiaobo.wang, szli}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Semi-supervised dictionary learning aims to construct a
dictionary by utilizing both labeled and unlabeled data. To
enhance the discriminative capability of the learned dictionary, numerous discriminative terms have been proposed
by evaluating either the prediction loss or the class separation criterion on the coding vectors of labeled data, but with
rare consideration of the power of the coding vectors corresponding to unlabeled data. In this paper, we present a novel semi-supervised dictionary learning method, which uses
the informative coding vectors of both labeled and unlabeled data, and adaptively emphasizes the high confidence
coding vectors of unlabeled data to enhance the dictionary
discriminative capability simultaneously. By doing so, we
integrate the discrimination of dictionary, the induction of
classifier to new testing data and the transduction of labels to unlabeled data into a unified framework. To solve
the proposed problem, an effective iterative algorithm is
designed. Experimental results on a series of benchmark
databases show that our method outperforms other stateof-the-art dictionary learning methods in most cases.

1. Introduction
Semi-Supervised Dictionary Learning (SSDL) is a learning paradigm that usually suits for the situation when labeled data Xl are scarce while unlabeled data Xu are abundant. To take advantages of the abundant unlabeled data
in real-world applications such as classiﬁcation, a variety
of semi-supervised discriminative dictionary learning approaches [2, 19, 20, 27, 9] have been proposed recently, the
general model of which can be summarized as follows:
min

D,Zl ,Zu ,W

R(Xl , Xu , D, Zl , Zu )
(1)
+ λ1 S (Zl , Zu ) + λ2 D(Zl ),

xj.max.guo@gmail.com

where R(Xl , Xu , D, Zl , Zu ) denotes the reconstruction error term for both labeled and unlabeled data over the desired
dictionary D. S (Zl , Zu ) stands for the regularizer on the
coding matrix of labeled data Zl and that of unlabeled Zu .
D(Zl ) represents the discriminative term on Zl . In addition,
λ1 and λ2 are the trade-off parameters.1
From the perspective of different evaluations on the discriminative term D(Zl ), existing methods can be mainly
divided into two categories. One type of SSDL methods focuses on the class separation criterion on the coding vectors.
Speciﬁcally, Pedro et al. [9] employed the Laplacian graph
to encourage the closeness of the link counts, if two coding
vectors are connected in the graph. Shrivastava et al. [20]
used Fisher discriminant analysis on the coding vectors of
labeled data to train the semi-supervised dictionary, which,
however, very likely leads to overﬁtting due to the fact that
the number of the labeled data is typically much smaller
than that of the unlabeled. While the other type of SSDL
evaluates the prediction loss on the coding vectors. Pham
et al. [19] combined the classiﬁcation error on the coding
vectors of labeled data with the sparse reconstruction error
of both labeled and unlabeled data into a joint framework.
Zhang et al. [27] incorporated the reconstruction error, label consistency, and classiﬁcation error of the coding vectors of labeled data into a joint objective function for online
semi-supervised dictionary learning. Mohamadabadi et al.
[2] proposed a probabilistic framework for semi-supervised
dictionary learning and exploited a geometrical preserving
term on both labeled and unlabeled data. Similarly, they also added a classiﬁcation error term on the coding vectors of
labeled data.
Although the above approaches generally provide more
promising results than most discriminative Supervised Dictionary Learning (SDL) methods like [25, 10, 28], they have
two main shortcomings. 1) Due to the lack of labeled data,
only the coding vectors of labeled data to enhance the dictionary discriminative capability are insufﬁcient. 2) When
learning the dictionary by evaluating the prediction loss,
1 The speciﬁc meaning of other symbols will be described in Section 3.

∗ Corresponding Author

11787

