Removing rain from a single image via discriminative sparse coding∗
Yu Luo1,2 , Yong Xu1 , Hui Ji2
1

School of Computer Science & Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China
2
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore, Singapore 119076
{l.y97@mail.scut.edu.cn, yxu@scut.edu.cn, matjh@nus.edu.sg}

Abstract
Visual distortions on images caused by bad weather conditions can have a negative impact on the performance of
many outdoor vision systems. One often seen bad weather
is rain which causes significant yet complex local intensity fluctuations in images. The paper aims at developing an
effective algorithm to remove visual effects of rain from a
single rain image, i.e. separate the rain layer and the derained image layer from a rain image. Built upon a nonlinear generative model of rain image, namely screen blend
model, we propose a dictionary learning based algorithm
for single image de-raining. The basic idea is to sparsely
approximate the patches of two layers by very high discriminative codes over a learned dictionary with strong mutual
exclusivity property. Such discriminative sparse codes lead
to accurate separation of two layers from their non-linear
composite. The experiments show that the proposed method
outperforms the existing single image de-raining methods
on tested rain images.

1. Introduction
Most outdoor vision systems, e.g. surveillance and autonomous navigation, require accurate feature detection of
images of outdoor scenes. Under bad weather, the content
and color of images are often drastically altered or degraded [16]. Based on the size of constituent particles in atmosphere, the adverse weather can be classified into two categories [9]: steady bad weather caused by microscopic particles including fog, mist, haze, smoke [11]; and dynamic
bad weather caused by large particles including rain, snow
and hail. The impact of steady bad weather on images is
relatively spatially consistent, and usually it leads to global
loss of image contrast and color fidelity [12]. The resulting
effect is that many image details are lost or hardly visible.
∗ Project supported by National Nature Science Foundations of China

Figure 1. Left: rain image; and right: de-rained image

Under the dynamic bad weather, the large particles can be
randomly distributed and cause complex intensity fluctuations in small image regions. As a result, these significant local intensity fluctuations will have noticeable negative
impact on the reliability of image feature detection modules
of vision systems. Therefore, for the reliability of outdoor
vision systems, there is certainly such a need to develop effective methods to remove undesired visual effects caused
by bad weather from images.
In the last few decades, there has been an abundant literature on recovering outdoor images related to bad weathers, e.g. image recovery for atmospherically blurred images [25], contrast enhancement of weather degraded images [16], and removing haze from images [12]. For recovering images taken in rainy weather, most of the work
has been focusing on video or data with multiple frames
[3, 10]. As visual systems often use images from different
views for recognition tasks or the video might contains very
large movements, single image based approach for rain removal has its necessities in practice. In this paper, we are
interested in studying the image recovery problem for outdoor images taken in rainy weather, i.e., how to remove visual effects of rain from a single image; see Fig. 1 for an
illustration.
Rain image recovery. There are two sub-problems in rain
image recovery: 1) how to identify rain in images, and 2)
how to remove visual effects caused by rain from images.
Indeed both of them are problems difficult to solve.

(61273255 and 61070091), Engineering & Technology Research Center of
Guangdong Province for Big Data Analysis and Processing ([2013]15891-11) and Singapore MOE Research Grant R-146-000-178-112.

• Rain detection. It is a challenging task to accurately
detect rain streaks in a single image. The visual effects

3397

