Structured Feature Selection
Tian Gao
Ziheng Wang
Qiang Ji
Department of ECSE, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, USA
{gaot, wangz10, jiq}@rpi.edu

Abstract
Feature dimensionality reduction has been widely used
in various computer vision tasks. We explore feature selection as the dimensionality reduction technique and propose
to use a structured approach, based on the Markov Blanket (MB), to select features. We first introduce a new MB
discovery algorithm, Simultaneous Markov Blanket (STMB)
discovery, that improves the efficiency of state-of-the-art algorithms. Then we theoretically justify three advantages of
structured feature selection over traditional feature selection methods. Specifically, we show that the Markov Blanket
is the minimum feature set that retains the maximal mutual
information and also gives the lowest Bayes classification
error. Then we apply structured feature selection to two
applications: 1) We introduce a new method that enables
STMB to scale up and show the competitive performance
of our algorithms on large-scale image classification tasks.
2) We propose a method for structured feature selection to
handle hierarchical features and show the proposed method
can lead to big performance gain in facial expression and
action unit (AU) recognition tasks.

1. Introduction
Large scale computer vision problems become increasingly relevant in the age of big data. Recognition tasks in
these vision problems are often aided by large-scale features. Many such high-dimensional features, such as Fisher
Vector (FV) [33], Vector of Locally Aggregated Descriptors
(VLAD) [18], and Super Vectors [49], have been proposed
for different visual recognition and image retrieval tasks,
and they have achieved state-of-the-art performance. However, these large dimensional features significantly increase
computational complexity as well as memory requirement.
If one chooses to adopt schemes such as spatial pyramid
matching structure [5], the feature size becomes even larger.
As a result, dimensionality reduction techniques such as
feature compression [35, 13] have been widely used to alleviate the computational burden. In particular, Product
Quantization (PQ) methods [17, 27, 12] have achieved a lot

of success in the recognition tasks [6]. Other dimension
reduction techniques such as feature extraction and subspace learning [37, 26, 28, 43] are also regularly used by
the vision community. Recently, studies [48] have shown
that feature selection may perform equally well or better
for certain vision tasks, as the linear projection assumption
in feature compression methods can be easily violated in
real domains. Furthermore, for well-defined features such
as human body joint positions and facial component locations, projection-based methods would lose features’ physical meanings.
In this work, we explore feature selection as the dimensionality reduction technique and propose a structured feature selection approach based on Markov Blanket (MB) discovery. From the graph-theoretic point of view, the Markov
Blanket of a variable consists of its immediate neighbors in
a graphical model. Probabilistically, the MB has an unique
and valuable property: given the MB of a target node, all
other nodes are independent of the target node. Given this
property of the MB, feature selection for a target variable
can be formulated as finding the features that are the MB
of the target node. Feature selection can therefore be carried out as the MB discovery for the target variable such as
class labels. Unlike the traditional feature selection methods, feature selection using the MB considers the structural
information among variables. We introduce a new MB discovery algorithm that improves the efficiency over the existing MB discovery method. We also theoretically show
that the optimal Markov Blanket is the minimum feature set
that retains the maximal amount of mutual information to
the target node, and also gives the lowest Bayes classification error. We then apply the proposed MB-based method
to large-scale and hierarchical feature selection in computer
vision tasks to show its effectiveness.

2. Related Work
Feature selection have been applied in many vision tasks
such as face recognition [15], eye movement analysis [4],
medical imaging [50], image annotation [20], object and
scene recognition [34], and digit and texture classification
[7]. Their methods can be roughly divided into three dif-

4256

