3D Object Reconstruction from Hand-Object Interactions
Dimitrios Tzionas
University of Bonn
MPI for Intelligent Systems
Bonn, Germany
Tübingen, Germany
tzionas@iai.uni-bonn.de

Juergen Gall
University of Bonn,
Bonn, Germany
gall@iai.uni-bonn.de

Abstract
Recent advances have enabled 3d object reconstruction
approaches using a single off-the-shelf RGB-D camera. Although these approaches are successful for a wide range of
object classes, they rely on stable and distinctive geometric or texture features. Many objects like mechanical parts,
toys, household or decorative articles, however, are textureless and characterized by minimalistic shapes that are simple and symmetric. Existing in-hand scanning systems and
3d reconstruction techniques fail for such symmetric objects
in the absence of highly distinctive features. In this work, we
show that extracting 3d hand motion for in-hand scanning
effectively facilitates the reconstruction of even featureless
and highly symmetric objects and we present an approach
that fuses the rich additional information of hands into a
3d reconstruction pipeline, significantly contributing to the
state-of-the-art of in-hand scanning.

Figure 1. Reconstruction of a symmetric, textureless object. Both
the front and the bottom view are provided for better visualization.
Left: Existing in-hand scanning approaches fail for such objects.
Middle and right: Successful reconstruction by the proposed inhand scanning system that incorporates 3d hand motion capture.

1. Introduction
The advent of affordable RGB-D sensors has opened up
a whole new range of applications based on the 3d perception of the environment by computers, which includes
the creation of a virtual 3d representation of real objects.
A moving camera can navigate in space observing the real
world, while incrementally fusing the acquired frames into a
3d virtual model of it. Similarly, a static camera can observe
a scene and dynamically reconstruct the observed moving
objects. This domain has attracted much interest lately in
the computer vision, the graphics and the robotics (SLAM)
community, as it enables a plethora of other applications,
facilitating among others 3d object detection, augmented
reality, the internet of things, human-computer-interaction
and the interaction of robots with the real world.
The field has matured [30] since its beginning in the early
80s [19] and during the 90s [2, 3, 25, 5]. Nowadays, several
commercial solutions for 3D scanning with an off-the-shelf
RGB-D camera have appeared, e.g., Fablitec [31], Skanect1 ,

iSense2 , KScan3d3 , Shapify [16] and Kinect-Fusion [22].
Several open-source projects like KinFu address the same
problem, while other commercial solutions as MakerBotDigitizer employ a laser scanning device along with sensorimotor information from a turntable.
Instead of a turntable, an object can also be rotated by
hand in case of a static camera. This setting is very convenient for hand-sized objects since moving an object is more
practical than moving a camera with a cable. Such a setup
is also called in-hand scanning [28]. Weise et al. presented
a real-time in-hand scanning system [37] that was later augmented with online loop closure [38]. Although the results
are very convincing, the method uses the hand only as a replacement of a turntable and discards the hand information.
When the objects are textureless and contain very few geometric features, the in-hand scanning fails as illustrated in
Figure 1.
2 http://cubify.com/products/isense

1 http://skanect.occipital.com/

3 http://www.kscan3d.com/

729

