Semantic Pose using Deep Networks Trained on Synthetic RGB-D
Jeremie Papon and Markus Schoeler
Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience (BCCN)
III. Physikalisches Institut - Biophysik, Georg-August University of Göttingen
jpapon@gmail.com mschoeler@gwdg.de

Conv. 7x7

Abstract

Synthetic Input

2x2
Max Pool
Conv. 3x3
2x2
Max Pool
Conv. 1x1
Conv. 1x1

Conv. 3x3

Conv. 1x1
Conv. 5x5

DepthConcat
2x2
Max Pool
Conv. 1x1
Conv. 3x3

Conv. 1x1
Conv. 5x5

Object Proposals

Conv. 1x1

DepthConcat
FC Layer

FC Layer

FC Layer

FC Layer
SoftMax
Concat
FC Layer

Position
Output

Concat

Estimated
Semantic Pose

FC Layer

In this work we address the problem of indoor scene understanding from RGB-D images. Specifically, we propose
to find instances of common furniture classes, their spatial
extent, and their pose with respect to generalized class models. To accomplish this, we use a deep, wide, multi-output
convolutional neural network (CNN) that predicts class,
pose, and location of possible objects simultaneously. To
overcome the lack of large annotated RGB-D training sets
(especially those with pose), we use an on-the-fly rendering pipeline that generates realistic cluttered room scenes
in parallel to training. We then perform transfer learning on
the relatively small amount of publicly available annotated
RGB-D data, and find that our model is able to successfully
annotate even highly challenging real scenes. Importantly,
our trained network is able to understand noisy and sparse
observations of highly cluttered scenes with a remarkable
degree of accuracy, inferring class and pose from a very
limited set of cues. Additionally, our neural network is only
moderately deep and computes class, pose and position in
tandem, so the overall run-time is significantly faster than
existing methods, estimating all output parameters simultaneously in parallel.

MultiOutput
Deep
CNN

Rotation
Output

Class Output

Estimated Semantic Occupancy
toilet
table
sofa
nightstand
monitor
dresser
desk
chair
bed
bathtub
none

Figure 1. Overview of our approach. Normals for a scene are efficiently calculated using [7], proposals are generated using [8], and
then fed through our synthetically trained CNN. Outputs are then
consolidated using non-maximum suppression, leading to a scene
class & pose heat map and a scene rendered with generalized models.

1. Introduction
In order for autonomous systems to move out of the controlled confines of labs, they must acquire the ability to
understand the cluttered indoor environments they will inevitably encounter. While many researchers have addressed
the problems of pose estimation, object detection, semantic
segmentation, and object classification separately, comprehensive understanding of scenes remains an elusive goal.
To this end, in this work we propose an architecture which
is able to perform all of the above tasks in concert using a
single artificial neural network.
Classification in cluttered indoor scenes can be extremely challenging, especially when trying to classify instances of objects which have never been observed before.

Considering only 2D color information only compounds
this problem, as clutter can easily cause vast changes in the
visible signature of otherwise distinguishable items. 3D geometric features, on the other hand, tend to be less susceptible to clutter and have (especially for furniture) geometric
features which generalize well across the class. As such,
in this work we use 3D geometric features in addition to
standard RGB channels.
Pose estimation in-the-wild is another difficult problem,
as it requires estimating pose for object instances which
have never been observed before. For example, consider
the task of helping a human to sit down in a chair - to be of
any help, one must be able to determine pose of the back1774

