Localize Me Anywhere, Anytime: A Multi-task Point-Retrieval Approach
Guoyu Lu1 , Yan Yan2 , Li Ren1 , Jingkuan Song2 , Nicu Sebe2 , and Chandra Kambhamettu1
1

VIMS Lab, Computer and Information Science Department, University of Delaware, USA
{luguoyu,renli,chandrak}@udel.edu
2
MHUG Lab, Department of Computer Science, University of Trento, Italy
{yan.yan,jingkuan.song,niculae.sebe}@unitn.it

Abstract
Image-based localization is an essential complement to
GPS localization. Current image-based localization methods are based on either 2D-to-3D or 3D-to-2D to find the
correspondences, which ignore the real scene geometric attributes. The main contribution of our paper is that we use
a 3D model reconstructed by a short video as the query to
realize 3D-to-3D localization under a multi-task point retrieval framework. Firstly, the use of a 3D model as the
query enables us to efficiently select location candidates.
Furthermore, the reconstruction of 3D model exploits the
correlation among different images, based on the fact that
images captured from different views for SfM share information through matching features. By exploring shared information (matching features) across multiple related tasks
(images of the same scene captured from different views),
the visual feature’s view-invariance property can be improved in order to get to a higher point retrieval accuracy.
More specifically, we use multi-task point retrieval framework to explore the relationship between descriptors and
the 3D points, which extracts the discriminant points for
more accurate 3D-to-3D correspondences retrieval. We further apply multi-task learning (MTL) retrieval approach on
thermal images to prove that our MTL retrieval framework
also provides superior performance for the thermal domain.
This application is exceptionally helpful to cope with the localization problem in an environment with limited or even
no light sources.

1. Introduction
Image-based localization attempts to overcome the deficiencies of Global Positioning Satellite systems (GPS) and
some other radio-signal based methods to provide accurate
location information. Given 2D images as input, imagebased localization techniques will either search through im-

ages in a database [19, 25] or directly use a 3D reference
model [13, 22] to find a user’s location.
Current research has proven that video frames captured
by a mobile phone can build dense SfM reconstruction [33]
with slightly more than 100 video frames. In this paper,
rather than using an image as a query, we capture a short
video and reconstruct a simple SfM model as the query. We
then establish 3D-to-3D correspondences. Existing localization frameworks build correspondences between images
and 3D reconstruction models (2D-3D-2D [18, 23]), (2D3D [22]), (3D-2D [13, 11]), which ignore the geometry attributes of the query scene. It is expected that a 3D reconstructed scene will contain numerous geometrical properties
to enable localization. We integrate outdoor environments,
large indoor structures, and room environments into an
image-based localization framework to provide easy localization without the limitations of place. Although all three
environments are conceptually the same, each nevertheless
has typical objects that can largely reduce the localization
scope such as trees in outdoors, stairs in a large indoor structure, and tables in a room. Based on the spherical maps
of segmented components in a query 3D model, we can
quickly select the matching candidates in our dataset. We
further perform an accurate localization based on local features (SIFT) of the SfM model among location candidates.
State-of-the-art methods [13, 22] search correspondences
through descriptors associated with the 3D SfM model by
approximate nearest neighbor, which ignores the relationships between descriptors and points. For a given scene,
points across different views match one another to reconstruct the 3D model. Those matching features are the shared
information and can be explored to improve the query descriptor view-invariance property, which builds more accurate feature correspondences. Based on this idea, we propose the point-retrieval system through a novel multi-task
learning (MTL) framework by learning the retrieval scheme
for each discriminant point. Our MTL framework learning

2434

