Deep Networks for Image Super-Resolution with Sparse Prior
Zhaowen Wang†‡ Ding Liu† Jianchao Yang§ Wei Han† Thomas Huang†
†
Beckman Institute, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL
‡
Adobe Research, San Jose, CA § Snapchat, Venice, CA
‡

zhawang@adobe.com

†

{dingliu2, weihan3, huang}@ifp.uiuc.edu § jcyangenator@gmail.com

Abstract
Deep learning techniques have been successfully applied in many areas of computer vision, including low-level
image restoration problems. For image super-resolution,
several models based on deep neural networks have been
recently proposed and attained superior performance that
overshadows all previous handcrafted models. The question
then arises whether large-capacity and data-driven models
have become the dominant solution to the ill-posed superresolution problem. In this paper, we argue that domain
expertise represented by the conventional sparse coding
model is still valuable, and it can be combined with the key
ingredients of deep learning to achieve further improved
results. We show that a sparse coding model particularly
designed for super-resolution can be incarnated as a neural
network, and trained in a cascaded structure from end to
end. The interpretation of the network based on sparse
coding leads to much more efficient and effective training,
as well as a reduced model size. Our model is evaluated on
a wide range of images, and shows clear advantage over existing state-of-the-art methods in terms of both restoration
accuracy and human subjective quality.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SR) aims at obtaining
a high-resolution (HR) image from a low-resolution (LR)
input image by inferring all the missing high frequency
contents. With the known variables in LR images greatly
outnumbered by the unknowns in HR images, SR is a highly
ill-posed problem and the current techniques are far from
being satisfactory for many real applications [2, 21].
To regularize the solution of SR, people have exploited
various priors of natural images. Analytical priors, such as
bicubic interpolation, work well for smooth regions; while
image models based on statistics of edges [11] and gradients
[17, 1] can recover sharper structures. In the patch-based
SR methods, HR patch candidates are represented as the
sparse linear combination of dictionary atoms trained from

external databases [36, 35], or recovered from similar examples in the LR image itself at different locations and across
different scales [13, 12, 32]. A comprehensive review of
more SR methods can be found in [33].
More recently, inspired by the great success achieved by
deep learning [18, 27, 30] in other computer vision tasks,
people begin to use neural networks with deep architecture for image SR. Multiple layers of collaborative autoencoders are stacked together in [6] for robust matching of
self-similar patches. Deep convolutional neural networks
(CNN) [8] and deconvolutional networks [25] are designed
that directly learn the non-linear mapping from LR space
to HR space in a way similar to coupled sparse coding
[35]. As these deep networks allow end-to-end training
of all the model components between LR input and HR
output, significant improvements have been observed over
their shadow counterparts.
The networks in [6, 8] are built with generic architectures, which means all their knowledge about SR is learned
from training data. On the other hand, people’s domain
expertise for the SR problem, such as natural image prior
and image degradation model, is largely ignored in deep
learning based approaches. It is then worthy to investigate
whether domain expertise can be used to design better
deep model architectures, or whether deep learning can be
leveraged to improve the quality of handcrafted models.
In this paper, we extend the conventional sparse coding
model [36] using several key ideas from deep learning,
and show that domain expertise is complementary to large
learning capacity in further improving SR performance.
First, based on the learned iterative shrinkage and thresholding algorithm (LISTA) [14], we implement a feed-forward
neural network whose layers strictly correspond to each step
in the processing flow of sparse coding based image SR.
In this way, the sparse representation prior is effectively
encoded in our network structure; at the same time, all
the components of sparse coding can be trained jointly
through back-propagation. This simple model, which is
named sparse coding based network (SCN), achieves notable improvement over the generic CNN model [8] in terms
1370

