Bilinear CNN Models for Fine-grained Visual Recognition
Tsung-Yu Lin
Aruni RoyChowdhury
Subhransu Maji
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
{tsungyulin,arunirc,smaji}@cs.umass.edu

CNN stream A

Abstract
We propose bilinear models, a recognition architecture
that consists of two feature extractors whose outputs are
multiplied using outer product at each location of the image and pooled to obtain an image descriptor. This architecture can model local pairwise feature interactions in a
translationally invariant manner which is particularly useful for fine-grained categorization. It also generalizes various orderless texture descriptors such as the Fisher vector, VLAD and O2P. We present experiments with bilinear
models where the feature extractors are based on convolutional neural networks. The bilinear form simplifies gradient computation and allows end-to-end training of both
networks using image labels only. Using networks initialized from the ImageNet dataset followed by domain specific fine-tuning we obtain 84.1% accuracy of the CUB200-2011 dataset requiring only category labels at training time. We present experiments and visualizations that
analyze the effects of fine-tuning and the choice two networks on the speed and accuracy of the models. Results
show that the architecture compares favorably to the existing state of the art on a number of fine-grained datasets
while being substantially simpler and easier to train. Moreover, our most accurate model is fairly efficient running
at 8 frames/sec on a NVIDIA Tesla K40 GPU. The source
code for the complete system will be made available at
http://vis-www.cs.umass.edu/bcnn

1. Introduction
Fine-grained recognition tasks such as identifying the
species of a bird, or the model of an aircraft, are quite
challenging because the visual differences between the categories are small and can be easily overwhelmed by those
caused by factors such as pose, viewpoint, or location of the
object in the image. For example, the inter-category variation between “Ringed-beak gull” and a “California gull”
due to the differences in the pattern on their beaks is significantly smaller than the inter-category variation on a popular
fine-grained recognition dataset for birds [37].

…
chestnut!
sided!
warbler

CNN stream B

…

…
softmax

convolutional + pooling layers

bilinear vector

Figure 1. A bilinear CNN model for image classification. At
test time an image is passed through two CNNs, A and B, and
their outputs are multiplied using outer product at each location of
the image and pooled to obtain the bilinear vector. This is passed
through a classification layer to obtain predictions.

A common approach for robustness against these nuisance factors is to first localize various parts of the object
and model the appearance conditioned on their detected
locations. The parts are often defined manually and the
part detectors are trained in a supervised manner. Recently
variants of such models based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [2, 38] have been shown to significantly
improve over earlier work that relied on hand-crafted features [1, 11, 39]. A drawback of these approaches is that
annotating parts is significantly more challenging than collecting image labels. Morevoer, manually defined parts may
not be optimal for the final recognition task.
Another approach is to use a robust image representation. Traditionally these included descriptors such as
VLAD [20] or Fisher vector [28] with SIFT features [25].
By replacing SIFT by features extracted from convolutional layers of a deep network pre-trained on ImageNet [9],
these models achieve state-of-the-art results on a number
of recognition tasks [7]. These models capture local feature interactions in a translationally invariant manner which
is particularly suitable for texture and fine-grained recognition tasks. Although these models are easily applicable as
they don’t rely on part annotations, their performance is below the best part-based models, especially when objects are
small and appear in clutter. Moreover, the effect of end-toend training of such architectures has not been fully studied.
11449

