Learning Temporal Embeddings for Complex Video Analysis
Vignesh Ramanathan1
Kevin Tang2
Greg Mori3
Li Fei-Fei2
1
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University
2
Computer Science Department, Stanford University
3
School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University
vigneshr@cs.stanford.edu, kdtang@cs.stanford.edu, mori@cs.sfu.ca, feifeili@cs.stanford.edu

Embedding space
Video-2

In this paper, we propose to learn temporal embeddings
of video frames for complex video analysis. Large quantities of unlabeled video data can be easily obtained from the
Internet. These videos possess the implicit weak label that
they are sequences of temporally and semantically coherent images. We leverage this information to learn temporal embeddings for video frames by associating frames with
the temporal context that they appear in. To do this, we
propose a scheme for incorporating temporal context based
on past and future frames in videos, and compare this to
other contextual representations. In addition, we show how
data augmentation using multi-resolution samples and hard
negatives helps to significantly improve the quality of the
learned embeddings. We evaluate various design decisions
for learning temporal embeddings, and show that our embeddings can improve performance for multiple video tasks
such as retrieval, classification, and temporal order recovery in unconstrained Internet video.

Video-1

Abstract

Figure 1. The temporal context of a video frame is crucial in determining its true semantic meaning. For instance, consider the above
example where the embeddings of different semantic classes are
shown in different colors. The middle frame from the two wedding videos correspond to visually dissimilar classes of “church
ceremony” and “court ceremony”. However, by observing the
similarity in their temporal contexts we expect them to be semantically closer. Our work leverages such powerful temporal context
to learn semantically rich embeddings.

1. Introduction
Video data is plentiful and a ready source of information
– what can we glean from watching massive quantities of
videos? At a fine granularity, consecutive video frames are
visually similar due to temporal coherence. At a coarser
level, consecutive video frames are visually distinct but semantically coherent.
Learning from this semantic coherence present in video
at the coarser-level is the main focus of this paper. Purely
from unlabeled video data, we aim to learn embeddings for
video frames that capture semantic similarity by using the
temporal structure in videos. The prospect of learning a
generic embedding for video frames holds promise for a variety of applications ranging from generic retrieval and similarity measurement, video recommendation, to automatic
content creation such as summarization or collaging. In this
paper, we demonstrate the utility of our video frame embed-

dings for several tasks such as video retrieval, classification
and temporal order recovery.
The idea of leveraging sequential data to learn embeddings in an unsupervised fashion is well explored in the Natural Language Processing (NLP) community. In particular,
distributed word vector representations such as word2vec
[23] have the unique ability to encode regularities and patterns surrounding words, using large amounts of unlabeled
data. In the embedding space, this brings together words
that may be very different, but which share similar contexts
in different sentences. This is a desirable property we would
like to extend to video frames as well as shown in Fig. 1.
We would like to have a representation for frames which
captures the semantic context around the frame beyond the
visual similarity obtained from temporal coherence.
However, the task of embedding frames poses multiple
14471

