Alternating Co-Quantization for Cross-modal Hashing
Go Irie

Hiroyuki Arai

Yukinobu Taniguchi

NTT Corporation
{irie.go, arai.hiroyuki, taniguchi.yukinobu}@lab.ntt.co.jp

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of unsupervised learning of binary hash codes for efficient cross-modal retrieval.
Many unimodal hashing studies have proven that both similarity preservation of data and maintenance of quantization
quality are essential for improving retrieval performance
with binary hash codes. However, most existing crossmodal hashing methods mainly have focused on the former,
and the latter still remains almost untouched. We propose a
method to minimize the binary quantization errors, which is
tailored to cross-modal hashing. Our approach, named Alternating Co-Quantization (ACQ), alternately seeks binary
quantizers for each modality space with the help of connections to other modality data so that they give minimal
quantization errors while preserving data similarities. ACQ
can be coupled with various existing cross-modal dimension
reduction methods such as Canonical Correlation Analysis
(CCA) and substantially boosts their retrieval performance
in the Hamming space. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that ACQ can outperform several state-of-the-art methods,
even when it is combined with simple CCA.

1. Introduction
Similarity-preserving hashing is a powerful indexing
tool for efficient retrieval against massive databases. Especially, compact binary hashing has attracted much attention recently, because it can substantially reduce both query
time and storage costs by encoding high-dimensional data
into indexable compact binary codes [34, 33, 7]. Most research efforts have been made on unimodal hashing, where
a query and database entries are both assumed to be in a
homogeneous feature space [34, 33, 7, 25, 12, 9, 30, 13].
Meanwhile, in recent real-world scenarios such as Web
or social media services, image is naturally surrounded
by various side information sources such as tags, descriptions, and attributes [8, 14]. Moreover, some emerging
topics arising at the intersection of computer vision and
natural language processing such as automatic image description [17, 18] are based on matching between heterogeneous image-sentence data pairs. To enhance the efficiency
of retrieval over such multimodal data sources, some re-

cent studies have explored cross-modal hashing techniques
[2, 23, 32, 28, 37, 4, 38, 39].
The goal of cross-modal hashing is to learn hash functions that give mappings from each of two (or more number of) different modality spaces to one common binary
Hamming space, while preserving both intra- and intermodal data similarities. Previous cross-modal hashing studies mainly focus on developing effective models to preserve
data similarities. Yet in unimodal hashing studies, it has
been proven that not only similarity preservation but also binary quantization quality is crucial to improve retrieval performance with binary hash codes [7, 6, 9, 13, 19, 20, 35, 3].
Nevertheless, to the best of our knowledge, there is no
previous work that has focused on binary quantization for
cross-modal hashing.
In this paper, we propose an approach to unsupervised
learning of cross-modal binary hash codes, which aims at
minimizing the binary quantization errors. One straightforward approach may be to use CCA-ITQ [7] which can
be done by the following two-step procedure: first use
Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) to find a common
low-dimensional subspace where the inter-modal correlation is maximized, and then do Iterative Quantization (ITQ)
to minimize the binary quantization errors by rotating the
subspace1 . This two-step approach actually works well and
is even comparable to several state-of-the-art methods as
shown later in our experiments. However, one shortcoming
is that dimensions discarded in the CCA stage can never be
recovered in the ITQ stage, which may be disadvantageous
especially in cross-modal hashing scenarios – due to their
inconsistency between data distributions of different modalities, good binary quantization may not always be achieved
in a subspace chosen by CCA. One simple toy example is
shown in Figure 1. Four data points are placed in each of
two 3D ambient feature spaces whose intrinsic dimensions
are 2 and 3, respectively (Figure 1(a,b)). The 2D embedding result by CCA-ITQ shown in Figure 1(c) gives almost
perfect inter-modal matches. However, it fails to separate
four data pairs as one per each quadrant, which is the ideal
result in this setting. This is due to its suboptimal choice of
subspaces by CCA in binary quantization.
1 This procedure is exactly CCA-ITQ originally presented in [7], [7]
uses this rather to learn binary hash codes in a supervised setting, though.

1886

