Learning Deep Object Detectors from 3D Models
Xingchao Peng, Baochen Sun, Karim Ali, Kate Saenko
University of Massachusetts Lowell
{xpeng,bsun,karim,saenko}@cs.uml.edu

Abstract
Crowdsourced 3D CAD models are becoming easily accessible online, and can potentially generate an infinite
number of training images for almost any object category.
We show that augmenting the training data of contemporary
Deep Convolutional Neural Net (DCNN) models with such
synthetic data can be effective, especially when real training data is limited or not well matched to the target domain.
Most freely available CAD models capture 3D shape but are
often missing other low level cues, such as realistic object
texture, pose, or background. In a detailed analysis, we
use synthetic CAD-rendered images to probe the ability of
DCNN to learn without these cues, with surprising findings.
In particular, we show that when the DCNN is fine-tuned
on the target detection task, it exhibits a large degree of invariance to missing low-level cues, but, when pretrained on
generic ImageNet classification, it learns better when the
low-level cues are simulated. We show that our synthetic
DCNN training approach significantly outperforms previous methods on the PASCAL VOC2007 dataset when learning in the few-shot scenario and improves performance in a
domain shift scenario on the Office benchmark.

1. Introduction
Deep CNN models achieve state-of-the-art performance
on object detection, but are heavily dependent on largescale training data. Unfortunately, labeling images for detection is extremely time-consuming, as every instance of
every object must be marked with a bounding box. Even the
largest challenge datasets provide a limited number of annotated categories, e.g., 20 categories in PASCAL VOC [3]),
80 in COCO [12], and 200 in ImageNet [2]. But what if we
wanted to train a detector for a novel category? It may not
be feasible to compile and annotate an extensive training set
covering all possible intra-category variations.
We propose to bypass the expensive collection and annotation of real images by using freely available 3D CAD
models to automatically generate synthetic 2D training images (see Figure 2). Synthetic data augmentation has been

Figure 1. We propose to train few-shot object detectors for real images by augmenting the training data with synthetic images generated from freely available non-photorealistic 3D CAD models of
objects collected from 3dwarehouse.sketchup.com.

used successfully in the past to add 2D affine transformations to training images [7], recognize text [6], and even
train detectors for a handful of categories such as cars [21].
However it has not yet been demonstrated for detection of
many categories with modern DCNNs. [22] trained object detectors for 31 categories on synthetic CAD images,
but used a histogram-of-oriented (HOG) gradient model
(DPM [4]), which is significantly less powerful than DCNNs on object classification [7] and detection [19, 5, 20].
The main challenge in training with freely available
CAD models is that they capture the 3D shape of the object, but frequently lack other low-level cues, such as object
texture, background, realistic pose, lighting, etc. [22] used
a simple rendering of objects with uniform gray texture and
a white background, and showed that HOG-based models
learn well from such data, as they are invariant to color
and texture and mostly retain the overall shape of the object. However, DCNN visualizations have shown that they
retain color, texture and mid-level patterns. It is therefore
unknown if they would tolerate the lack of such low-level
cues in training images, or if a more sophisticated rendering process that simulates these cues is needed.
To investigate how missing low-level cues affect DCNNs’ ability to learn object detectors, we study the precise
nature of their “cue invariances”. For a given object category, a DCNN maps the low-level cues contained in the
image (shape, texture) to high-level category information
(cat, car) represented by top layer activations (e.g. fc7 in
AlexNet [7]). We define “cue invariance” to be the ability
of the network to extract the equivalent high-level category
11278

