FaceDirector: Continuous Control of Facial Performance in Video
Charles Malleson‡§∗ , Jean-Charles Bazin‡∗ , Oliver Wang‡ , Derek Bradley‡ , Thabo Beeler‡ ,
Adrian Hilton§ , Alexander Sorkine-Hornung‡
‡
Disney Research Zurich
§
Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing, University of Surrey, UK

We present a method to continuously blend between multiple facial performances of an actor, which can contain different facial expressions or emotional states. As an example, given sad and angry video takes of a scene, our method
empowers a movie director to specify arbitrary weighted
combinations and smooth transitions between the two takes
in post-production. Our contributions include (1) a robust
nonlinear audio-visual synchronization technique that exploits complementary properties of audio and visual cues
to automatically determine robust, dense spatio-temporal
correspondences between takes, and (2) a seamless facial
blending approach that provides the director full control to
interpolate timing, facial expression, and local appearance,
in order to generate novel performances after filming. In
contrast to most previous works, our approach operates entirely in image space, avoiding the need of 3D facial reconstruction. We demonstrate that our method can synthesize
visually believable performances with applications in emotion transition, performance correction, and timing control.

1. Introduction
In film and television production, arguably one of the
most important elements in achieving a believable and entertaining story is the performance of the actors. A key challenge lies in conveying believable emotions with appropriate facial expressions, speed and timing. As a consequence,
scenes are often shot and re-shot over and over as multiple
takes until the director is satisfied, often requiring considerable amounts of time and cost. For example, the opening
scene of the movie “The Social Network” required 99 takes,
“Gone Girl” required an average of 50 takes per scene and
one scene in “The Shining” required 127 takes1 . To help
alleviate this problem, we propose a continuous facial performance interpolation approach, enabling the director to
∗ denotes joint first authorship with equal contribution
1 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Take

Synchronize

Abstract

Blend

v0
v1

v1
v0

Figure 1: Given a pair of facial performance videos (here an
angry and a happy version of a monolog denoted v0 and v1 ,
respectively), our method automatically computes a nonlinear temporal synchronization based on facial expression and
audio cues, illustrated by the blue synchronization path. We
can then seamlessly blend between the performances both
with respect to time and expresssion and synthesize a novel
interpolated performance (see film strip) with intuitive artistic control (see green blending curve).
synthesize a wide variety of novel performances after capture, e.g., in post-production, from a much sparser set of
takes, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
A central challenge of interpolating performances is
video synchronization. Synchronization using simple constant time offsets or uniform temporal scaling of the input videos is not feasible because of the complex nonlinear local variations in timing and speed during facial performances. Difference of head pose, emotion, expression
intensity, as well as pitch, accentuation and potentially even
wording of the speech are just a few of the many difficulties.
We present an automatic, joint audio-visual synchronization
approach that first analyzes both facial expression and audio cues and then robustly determines a dense set of frame
correspondences between takes using a graph-based framework. To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first to
combine audio and facial features for achieving an optimal
nonlinear temporal alignment of performance videos.
A PCA-based facial landmark normalization is used to
cope with large variations of the landmarks with different
facial expressions and emotions. Furthermore, we show
that an important aspect for a successful automatic synchronization using cost matrices is the removal of ambiguous,
self-similar parts, which are unavoidable when using local
descriptors on highly redundant data such as facial perfor13979

