The Middle Child Problem:
Revisiting Parametric Min-cut and Seeds for Object Proposals
Ahmad Humayun †
Fuxin Li ‡ †
James M. Rehg †
† Georgia Institute of Technology
‡ Oregon State University
http://cpl.cc.gatech.edu/projects/POISE/

Abstract
Object proposals have recently fueled the progress in
detection performance. These proposals aim to provide
category-agnostic localizations for all objects in an image.
One way to generate proposals is to perform parametric
min-cuts over seed locations. This paper demonstrates that
standard parametric-cut models are ineffective in obtaining
medium-sized objects, which we refer to as the middle child
problem. We propose a new energy minimization framework
incorporating geodesic distances between segments which
solves this problem. In addition, we introduce a new superpixel merging algorithm which can generate a small set
of seeds that reliably cover a large number of objects of
all sizes. We call our method POISE— “Proposals for Objects from Improved Seeds and Energies.” POISE enables
parametric min-cuts to reach their full potential. On PAS CAL VOC it generates ∼2,640 segments with an average
overlap of 0.81, whereas the closest competing methods require more than 4,200 proposals to reach the same accuracy [24, 30]. We show detailed quantitative comparisons
against 5 state-of-the-art methods on PASCAL VOC and Microsoft COCO segmentation challenges.

1. Introduction
Figure-ground object proposal algorithms [5, 10, 24, 32,
4, 30] have recently become popular due to their successful application in object detection and semantic segmentation [16]. These methods can find the location and, possibly,
the shape of an object, helping to improve recognition.
Malisiewicz and Efros [28] were the first to suggest generating a large pool of proposals for recognition. The first
widely-used method was CPMC [5], which generates proposals by selecting a few seed regions as priors for object
support, and performing parametric min-cut (PMC) on the
MRF graph generated from each seed. More recently, alternatives to CPMC have been developed. Some of them

generate segments from energy minimization via graphcuts [19, 9, 31, 24]. Other popular methods perform agglomerative clustering [32, 4], or employ edge-based techniques [23, 30] to generate proposals.
We believe that a discrete energy minimization approach
has the potential to produce better object segments than the
current CRF models, but only if the graphical model and its
parameters are carefully designed. This fits in well with the
long history of graphical models in obtaining elegant, yet
effective solutions to hard vision problems [20].
It has been observed empirically that PMC tends to produce segments which are either comparable in size to the
seed region or extend almost to the full image (see Fig. 1
for an example). In particular, segments which are in the
middle and often correspond to particularly salient object
candidates are frequently missing, and therefore do not get
the attention that they deserve. We refer to the generation
of these missing segments as the middle child problem. We
will demonstrate that this problem is an intrinsic property of
existing PMC formulations [5, 9, 19] and cannot be solved
simply by tuning parameters or exploring breakpoints exhaustively. The middle child problem is a significant barrier
to the use of PMC to generate effective object proposals.
We propose an algorithm to solve the middle child problem using PMCs. After obtaining a segment at a particular
parameter λ, we adjust the unary potentials according to the
geodesic distance of all superpixels in the image with respect to the current segment. This facilitates the generation
of medium-sized segments by lowering their energy. The
approach is a modification of the PMC framework, thereby
maintaining the nesting property [22] of the segments produced. The resulting algorithm’s run-time is ∼3.5 seconds
when generating 1,000 proposals.1
We also introduce a new superpixel merging algorithm
for generating seeds. It utilizes an adaptive appearance
thresholding strategy to generate a hierarchy of superpixels
of varying sizes, so that more superpixels are generated in
regions that have more internal variation and less are gener1 Multi-threaded run-time on Intel i7-3930K. Code available online.

‡ This work was conducted while the 2nd author was at Georgia Tech.

11600

