Render for CNN: Viewpoint Estimation in Images
Using CNNs Trained with Rendered 3D Model Views
Hao Su∗ , Charles R. Qi∗ , Yangyan Li, Leonidas J. Guibas
Stanford University

Abstract
Object viewpoint estimation from 2D images is an
essential task in computer vision. However, two issues
hinder its progress: scarcity of training data with viewpoint
annotations, and a lack of powerful features. Inspired by the
growing availability of 3D models, we propose a framework
to address both issues by combining render-based image
synthesis and CNNs (Convolutional Neural Networks). We
believe that 3D models have the potential in generating a
large number of images of high variation, which can be
well exploited by deep CNN with a high learning capacity.
Towards this goal, we propose a scalable and overfitresistant image synthesis pipeline, together with a novel
CNN specifically tailored for the viewpoint estimation task.
Experimentally, we show that the viewpoint estimation from
our pipeline can significantly outperform state-of-the-art
methods on PASCAL 3D+ benchmark.

1. Introduction
3D recognition is a cornerstone problem in many vision applications and has been widely studied. Despite
its critical importance, existing approaches are far from
robust when applied to cluttered real-world images. We
believe that two issues have to be addressed to enable
more successful methods: scarcity of training images with
accurate viewpoint annotation, and a lack of powerful
features specifically tailored for 3D tasks.
The first issue, scarcity of images with accurate viewpoint annotation, is mostly due to the high cost of manual
annotation, and the associated inaccuracies due to human
error. Consequently, the largest 3D image dataset, PASCAL
3D+ [39], contains only ⇠22K images. As such, it is limited
in diversity and scale compared with object classification
datasets such as ImageNet, which contains millions of
images [5].
The second issue is a lack of powerful features specifically tailored for viewpoint estimation. Most 3D vision
systems rely on features such as SIFT and HoG, which were
designed primarily for classification and detection tasks.
⇤ Indicates equal contributions.

ConvoluƟonal Neural Network

Figure 1. System overview. We synthesize training images by
overlaying images rendered from large 3D model collections on
top of real images. CNN is trained to map images to the ground
truth object viewpoints. The training data is a combination of
real images and synthesized images. The learned CNN is applied
to estimate the viewpoints of objects in real images. Project
homepage is at https://shapenet.cs.stanford.edu/
projects/RenderForCNN

However, this is contrary to the recent finding — features
learned by task-specific supervision leads to much better
task performance [16, 11, 14]. Ideally, we want to learn
stronger features by deep CNN. This, however, requires
huge amount of viewpoint-annotated images.
In this paper, we propose to address both issues by combining render-based image synthesis and CNNs, enabling us
to learn discriminative features. We believe that 3D models
have the potential to generate large number of images of
high variation, which can be well exploited by deep CNN
with a high learning capacity.
The inspiration comes from our key observation: more
and more high-quality 3D CAD models are available online.
In particular, many geometric properties, such as symmetry
and joint alignment, can be efficiently and reliably estimated by algorithms with limited human effort (Sec 2). By
rendering the 3D models, we convert the rich information
carried by them into 3D annotations automatically.
To explore the idea of “Render for CNN” for 3D tasks,
we focus on the viewpoint estimation problem — for an
input RGB image and a bounding box from an off-the-shelf
detector, our goal is to estimate the viewpoint.
To prepare training data for this task, we augment real

2686

