ML-MG: Multi-label Learning with Missing Labels Using a Mixed Graph
Baoyuan Wu
KAUST
Saudi Arabia

Siwei Lyu
University at Albany, SUNY
Albany, NY, USA

Bernard Ghanem
KAUST
Saudi Arabia

baoyuan.wu@kaust.edu.sa

slyu@albany.edu

bernard.ghanem@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
This work focuses on the problem of multi-label learning
with missing labels (MLML), which aims to label each test
instance with multiple class labels given training instances
that have an incomplete/partial set of these labels (i.e. some
of their labels are missing). To handle missing labels, we
propose a uniﬁed model of label dependencies by constructing a mixed graph, which jointly incorporates (i) instancelevel similarity and class co-occurrence as undirected edges
and (ii) semantic label hierarchy as directed edges. Unlike most MLML methods, We formulate this learning problem transductively as a convex quadratic matrix optimization problem that encourages training label consistency and
encodes both types of label dependencies (i.e. undirected
and directed edges) using quadratic terms and hard linear
constraints. The alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) can be used to exactly and efﬁciently solve
this problem. To evaluate our proposed method, we consider two popular applications (image and video annotation), where the label hierarchy can be derived from Wordnet. Experimental results show that our method achieves
a signiﬁcant improvement over state-of-the-art methods in
performance and robustness to missing labels.

1. Introduction
In multi-label learning, we assume that an instance can
be assigned to multiple classes simultaneously. For example, an image can be annotated using several tags, and a
document can be associated with multiple topics. Although
many multi-label learning methods have been proposed,
many of such methods require completely labeled training
instances. In practical applications, most training instances
are only partially labeled, with some or all of the labels not
provided/missing. Let us consider the task of large-scale
image annotation, where the number of classes/tags is large
(e.g. using labels of ImageNet [12]). In this case, a human annotator can only realistically annotate each training
image with a subset of tags. Learning from such partially

Instance similarity

Input image

Class co-occurrence

Features

Semantic dependency

Animal

Plant

Horse

Grass

Animal

Plant

Dog

Grass
Labels

Figure 1: The left column includes two example images
from the ESP Game [34] dataset, and their corresponding
features and labels are shown in the right column. The solid
box denotes a provided label, while the dashed box indicates a missing label. The red (semantic hierarchy), blue
(class co-occurrence), and green (instance similarity) edges
constitute a mixed graph. For clarity, we only present the
relevant labels and edges, while other candidate labels and
edges are ignored.
labeled instances is referred to as the multi-label learning
with missing labels (MLML) problem [39, 45].
As labels are usually related by semantic meanings or
co-occurrences, the key to ﬁlling and learning from missing labels is a good model to represent label dependency.
One widely used model for label dependency is an undirected graph, through which the label information can be
propagated among different instances and among different classes. For example, the label dependency between
a pair of labels, such as instance similarity and class cooccurrence, can be represented using such a graph (see
green and blue edges in Figure 1). However, as stated in
[39, 41], class co-occurrence that is derived from training
labels can be inaccurate and even detrimental when many
missing labels exist. Li et al. [25] propose to alleviate this
limitation by using an auxiliary source (such as Wikipedia)
14157

