General Dynamic Scene Reconstruction from Multiple View Video
Armin Mustafa

Hansung Kim
Jean-Yves Guillemaut
CVSSP, University of Surrey, Guildford, United Kingdom

Adrian Hilton

a.mustafa@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper introduces a general approach to dynamic
scene reconstruction from multiple moving cameras without
prior knowledge or limiting constraints on the scene structure, appearance, or illumination. Existing techniques for
dynamic scene reconstruction from multiple wide-baseline
camera views primarily focus on accurate reconstruction in
controlled environments, where the cameras are fixed and
calibrated and background is known. These approaches
are not robust for general dynamic scenes captured with
sparse moving cameras. Previous approaches for outdoor
dynamic scene reconstruction assume prior knowledge of
the static background appearance and structure. The primary contributions of this paper are twofold: an automatic
method for initial coarse dynamic scene segmentation and
reconstruction without prior knowledge of background appearance or structure; and a general robust approach for
joint segmentation refinement and dense reconstruction of
dynamic scenes from multiple wide-baseline static or moving cameras. Evaluation is performed on a variety of indoor
and outdoor scenes with cluttered backgrounds and multiple dynamic non-rigid objects such as people. Comparison
with state-of-the-art approaches demonstrates improved accuracy in both multiple view segmentation and dense reconstruction. The proposed approach also eliminates the
requirement for prior knowledge of scene structure and appearance.

1. Introduction
Reconstruction of general dynamic scenes is motivated
by potential applications in film and broadcast production
together with the ultimate goal of automatic understanding
of real-world scenes from distributed camera networks.
Over the past decades, effective approaches have been
proposed to reconstruct dense dynamic shape from widebaseline camera views in controlled environments with
static backgrounds and illumination. A common assumption of widely used visual-hull based reconstruction
approaches is prior foreground/background segmentation,
which is commonly achieved using a uniform chroma-key
color background or background image plate. Alternatively,
multiple view stereo techniques have been developed which

Figure 1. General dynamic scene reconstruction (a) Multi-view
frames for Juggler dataset, (b) Segmentation of dynamic objects
and (c) Reconstructed mesh

require a relatively dense camera network resulting in large
numbers of cameras.
Recent research has applied multiple view dynamic
scene reconstruction techniques to less controlled outdoor
scenes. Initial research focused on reconstruction in sports
[10] exploiting known background images or the pitch color
to obtain an initial segmentation. Extension to more general outdoor scenes [1, 15, 31] uses prior reconstruction of
the static geometry from images of the empty environment.
Research has also exploited strong prior models of dynamic
scene structure such as people or used active depth sensors
to reconstruct dynamic scenes.
This paper presents an approach for unsupervised dynamic scene reconstruction from multiple wide-baseline
static or moving camera views without prior knowledge of
the scene structure or background appearance. The input
is a sparse set of synchronised multiple view videos without segmentation. Camera extrinsics are automatically calibrated using scene features. An initial coarse reconstruction and segmentation of all dynamic scene objects is obtained from sparse features matched across multiple views.
This eliminates the requirement for prior knowledge of the
background scene appearance or structure. Joint segmentation and dense reconstruction refinement is then performed
to estimate the non-rigid shape of dynamic objects at each
frame. Robust methods are introduced to handle complex
dynamic scene geometry in cluttered scenes from independently moving wide-baseline cameras views. The proposed
approach overcomes constraints of existing approaches allowing the reconstruction of more general dynamic scenes.
Results for a popular dataset, Juggler [1] captured with a
network of moving handheld cameras are shown in Figure 1. The contributions are as follows:
1900

