Local Subspace Collaborative Tracking
Lin Ma1,3 , Xiaoqin Zhang2 , Weiming Hu1 , Junliang Xing1 , Jiwen Lu3 and Jie Zhou3
1. NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2. College of Mathematics and Information Science, Wenzhou University, China
3. Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China

Abstract
Subspace models have been widely used for appearance
based object tracking. Most existing subspace based trackers employ a linear subspace to represent object appearances, which are not accurate enough to model large variations of objects. To address this, this paper presents a local
subspace collaborative tracking method for robust visual
tracking, where multiple linear and nonlinear subspaces are
learned to better model the nonlinear relationship of object
appearances. First, we retain a set of key samples and compute a set of local subspaces for each key sample. Then,
we construct a hypersphere to represent the local nonlinear subspace for each key sample. The hypersphere of one
key sample passes the local key samples and also is tangent to the local linear subspace of the specific key sample.
In this way, we are able to represent the nonlinear distribution of the key samples and also approximate the local
linear subspace near the specific key sample, so that local
distributions of the samples can be represented more accurately. Experimental results on challenging video sequences
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking plays an important role in many
vision applications such as video surveillance and motion
analysis. To build up robust trackers, many feature representation methods have been proposed to model the appearance of objects [4, 3, 31, 19, 10]. Generally, the appearance of objects is complex and may present different distributions. Subspace analysis is an effective technique to
model object appearance and has been successfully applied
to visual tracking. Principal component analysis (PCA) is
one representative subspace method, which assumes samples distribute linearly and aims to learn a low-dimensional
subspace by maximizing the variance of samples [22]. In
visual tracking, objects usually vary across time and PCA
cannot be directly employed to model object appearance.

5
2 3 4
1

6

7 8 9

10

Figure 1. hypersphere. (a) hypersphere (green circles) of 2D
(blue) points. Line 2 and Line 9 passing points 2 and 9 are local linear subspaces about point 2 and 9 respectively. The hyper
spheres are tangent to the local linear subspaces (1D). As the figure
shows, the hypersphere is able to represent the local point distributions more accurately than the local linear subspace. (b) Local
nonlinear subspace of a key sample (at the origin). The object
is divided into four object parts, i.e. left, right, bottom and top.
Here, we show the key samples of the left object part. For clarity, we show the 1D sphere (green circle) in 2D linear subspace
(the two axes). The blue points represent the object appearances.
The nonlinear distribution of the key samples is approximated with
the hypersphere. The sphere passes the key samples and is tangent to the main axis (axis 0) approximately. As the figure shows,
when the object experiences pose variation, the samples are distributed on a nonlinear hypersphere approximately. Thus, with
hypersphere, we can represent the object appearance distribution
more accurately. Also, by making the hypersphere tangent to the
corresponding axis, the local linear subspace can be approximated
by the hypersphere.

To address this, the incremental PCA method is proposed to
update the linear subspace incrementally so that the model
can well adapt to the varying appearance during tracking
[17].
Linear subspace is less likely to over-fit samples, but easily fails to represent the real sample distribution. To resolve
the nonlinear distribution problem, kernel based methods
have been proposed [21, 2]. While nonlinearities can be ad14301

