Separating Fluorescent and Reﬂective Components by Using a Single
Hyperspectral Image
Yinqiang Zheng
National Institute of Informatics

Ying Fu
The University of Tokyo

Antony Lam
Saitama University

yqzheng@nii.ac.jp

fuying@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp

antonylam@cv.ics.saitama-u.ac.jp

Imari Sato
National Institute of Informatics

Yoichi Sato
The University of Tokyo

imarik@nii.ac.jp

ysato@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
This paper introduces a novel method to separate fluorescent and reflective components in the spectral domain.
In contrast to existing methods, which require to capture
two or more images under varying illuminations, we aim
to achieve this separation task by using a single hyperspectral image. After identifying the critical hurdle in singleimage component separation, we mathematically design the
optimal illumination spectrum, which is shown to contain
substantial high-frequency components in the frequency domain. This observation, in turn, leads us to recognize a key
difference between reflectance and fluorescence in response
to the frequency modulation effect of illumination, which
fundamentally explains the feasibility of our method. On
the practical side, we successfully find an off-the-shelf lamp
as the light source, which is strong in irradiance intensity
and cheap in cost. A fast linear separation algorithm is
developed as well. Experiments using both synthetic data
and real images have confirmed the validity of the selected
illuminant and the accuracy of our separation algorithm.

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral information has proven to be useful
in such applications as high-quality color reproduction,
spectra-based material identification, computer-aided medical diagnostics and so on. A great variety of hyperspectral
imaging methods and apparatuses (see [3, 11, 14, 19] and
many others) have been developed and implemented to capture spectral reflectance of scenes.
Fluorescence is a common optical phenomenon present
in many natural objects, like coral, living organic tissues
and minerals. Fluorescent substances have also been widely
applied to paper and cloth for color augmentation, to cur-

(a) Input

(b) Reflectance

(d) Household LED

(c) Fluorescence

(e) UV

Figure 1. Given a single hyperspectral image of some rocks (a)
under the selected illuminant, our proposed algorithm can separate the fluorescent component (c) from the reflective one (b). As
reference, (d) shows the same scene under a household LED lamp,
while (e) shows the scene under a UV light. Since the fluorescent
component in these rocks can only be excited under UV irradiance,
(d) almost contains the reflective component only.

rency notes for anti-counterfeiting, as well as to biochemical dyes for molecular labeling and tracking.
When the scene contains fluorescence, existing hyperspectral reflectance estimation methods, like those in [11,
19], can not provide accurate estimation. This is because of the well-known wavelength shifting effect of fluorescence that, unlike a reflective surface, fluorescent substances would absorb incident irradiance and re-emit it at
longer wavelengths. Considering that fluorescent and reflective components interact with the illumination in quite
different ways, it is necessary to separate them from image
observations [4, 8, 9, 13, 15].
Existing works [6, 8, 15, 22, 23, 26] have addressed this
spectra separation problem, all of which require to capture
13523

