Temporal Subspace Clustering for Human Motion Segmentation
Sheng Li1
1

Kang Li1

Yun Fu1,2

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, College of Engineering
2
College of Computer and Information Science
Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA
shengli@ece.neu.edu, li.ka@husky.neu.edu, yunfu@ece.neu.edu

Abstract

Output:
Temporal segments

Input:
video sequence
Temporal Regularization

Subspace clustering is an effective technique for segmenting data drawn from multiple subspaces. However,
for time series data (e.g., human motion), exploiting temporal information is still a challenging problem. We propose a novel temporal subspace clustering (TSC) approach
in this paper. We improve the subspace clustering technique from two aspects. First, a temporal Laplacian regularization is designed, which encodes the sequential relationships in time series data. Second, to obtain expressive
codings, we learn a non-negative dictionary from data. An
efficient optimization algorithm is presented to jointly learn
the representation codings and dictionary. After constructing an affinity graph using the codings, multiple temporal
segments can be grouped via spectral clustering. Experimental results on three action and gesture datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach. In particular, TSC
significantly improves the clustering accuracy, compared to
the state-of-the-art subspace clustering methods.

1. Introduction
Subspace clustering has attracted an increasing attention
in recent years, due to its impressive performance in many
real-world applications, such as motion segmentation [17],
face clustering [3] and digit clustering [29]. The representative subspace clustering methods include sparse subspace
clustering (SSC) [3], low-rank representation (LRR) [17],
least-square regression (LSR) [21], etc. The key idea in
subspace clustering is to learn effective representation codings that are used to construct an afﬁnity matrix. Many algorithms have been proposed to enhance the performance
of subspace clustering, by enforcing different constraints
on the coefﬁcients [19], or developing scalable implementations [18, 23, 26, 32].

No. of Frame
1 2 3 4 5 … N

Frame-level
Features

Timeline

Non-negative Dictionary Representation Codings

Figure 1. Framework of the proposed approach. We ﬁrst extract
frame-level features from video sequence, and then learn a nonnegative dictionary and the representation codings, with the help
of temporal regularization. Multiple temporal segments are ﬁnally
generated via clustering on the codings.

However, with the notable exception of [27], there are
few subspace clustering methods focusing on the data with
speciﬁc properties, such as the time-series data. Generally,
existing methods assume that the data points are independently drawn from multiple subspaces. They either model
the data points independently [3] or implicitly consider the
global structural information in data [17], but neglect the
successive relationships that possibly reside in data. In
reality, time-series data like videos can be found everywhere [13, 34, 12]. Labelling or manually processing a
large amount of videos is expensive and time-consuming.
Therefore, it is necessary to devise unsupervised visual
learning algorithms to handle the time-series data.
In this paper, we propose a temporal subspace clustering (TSC) method, and apply it to the unsupervised segmentation of human motion. Figure 1 illustrates the idea of
our approach. We adopt the least-square regression based
formulation to learn effective codings for each data point.
Motivated by the well-known Laplacian regularization technique, we design a temporal Laplacian regularization func-

4453

