A Projection free method for Generalized Eigenvalue Problem
with a nonsmooth Regularizer
Seong Jae Hwanga Maxwell D. Collinsa Sathya N. Ravib Vamsi K. Ithapua
Nagesh Adlurue Sterling C. Johnsond Vikas Singhca
a

Dept. of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, WI
Dept. of Industrial and Systems Engineering, University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, WI
c
Dept. of Biostatistics and Med. Informatics, University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, WI
d
William S. Middleton VA Hospital, Madison, WI
e
Waisman Center, Madison, WI

b

Abstract
Eigenvalue problems are ubiquitous in computer vision,
covering a very broad spectrum of applications ranging
from estimation problems in multi-view geometry to image
segmentation. Few other linear algebra problems have a
more mature set of numerical routines available and many
computer vision libraries leverage such tools extensively.
However, the ability to call the underlying solver only as
a “black box” can often become restrictive. Many ‘human
in the loop’ settings in vision frequently exploit supervision
from an expert, to the extent that the user can be considered
a subroutine in the overall system. In other cases, there
is additional domain knowledge, side or even partial information that one may want to incorporate within the formulation. In general, regularizing a (generalized) eigenvalue
problem with such side information remains difficult. Motivated by these needs, this paper presents an optimization
scheme to solve generalized eigenvalue problems (GEP) involving a (nonsmooth) regularizer. We start from an alternative formulation of GEP where the feasibility set of the
model involves the Stiefel manifold. The core of this paper presents an end to end stochastic optimization scheme
for the resultant problem. We show how this general algorithm enables improved statistical analysis of brain imaging
data where the regularizer is derived from other ‘views’ of
the disease pathology, involving clinical measurements and
other image-derived representations.

1. Introduction
The explosion of photo or data sharing platforms in the
last ten years has led to large and rich datasets where deriving a single all-encompassing representation for downstream statistical inference is challenging. Images often
come with tags or user comments, and webpages can be

characterized in terms of their textual content as well as the
genre of related webpages. Even when working specifically
with images, it is common to perform different feature extractions in the hope that all aspects of the image content
are ‘covered’ by at least one feature type. Performing machine learning by fusing different views of the data is a well
studied problem [3, 4, 6, 16, 26, 33].
Independent of the specific inference question of interest, observe that once the multiple views are in hand, practitioners often utilize off-the-shelf data exploration techniques to get a better sense of the derived representations
and/or to identify reasonable parameter estimates for the
subsequent components of the processing pipeline. To this
end, spectral analysis is widely used for the evaluation of
the heterogeneity in the groups and for feature selection
[29]. In the latter setting, it is common to obtain the projection of the original distribution on the principal bases of
the covariance and proceed with analyzing the embedded
versions of the examples in the lower dimensional space
instead. Frequently this may provide nicer affinity matrices which may be more suitable for machine learning tasks.
When faced with multiple views, the above strategy can be
applied to each view one by one, and the resultant affinity (or kernel) matrices can be averaged. But various recent results suggest that there is practical value in operating
on each view separately and then enforcing consistency between the results obtained from each [24]. For example, in
co-clustering, one imposes the constraint that leading eigenvectors across multiple views should be similar [4]. In the
applied math literature, a more general version of the problems motivated from physics and engineering applications
are studied as coupled eigenvalue problems [28]. From the
perspective of the multi-view setup, this will entail solving
a set of eigenvalue problems concurrently for the “primary”
11841

