Learning a Descriptor-specific 3D Keypoint Detector
Samuele Salti
University of Bologna

Federico Tombari
University of Bologna

samuele.salti@unibo.it

federico.tombari@unibo.it

Riccardo Spezialetti
University of Bologna

Luigi Di Stefano
University of Bologna

riccardo.spezialetti@studio.unibo.it

luigi.distefano@unibo.it

Abstract
Keypoint detection represents the first stage in the majority of modern computer vision pipelines based on automatically established correspondences between local descriptors. However, no standard solution has emerged yet in the
case of 3D data such as point clouds or meshes, which exhibit high variability in level of detail and noise. More importantly, existing proposals for 3D keypoint detection rely
on geometric saliency functions that attempt to maximize
repeatability rather than distinctiveness of the selected regions, which may lead to sub-optimal performance of the
overall pipeline. To overcome these shortcomings, we cast
3D keypoint detection as a binary classification between
points whose support can be correctly matched by a predefined 3D descriptor or not, thereby learning a descriptorspecific detector that adapts seamlessly to different scenarios. Through experiments on several public datasets, we
show that this novel approach to the design of a keypoint
detector represents a flexible solution that, nonetheless, can
provide state-of-the-art descriptor matching performance.

1. Introduction
Detection of repeatable and distinctive keypoints is a
fundamental task in modern computer vision when dealing
with both images as well as 3D data. Keypoint detection
in images finds applications in image retrieval, object detection and recognition, object and camera tracking, camera
calibration and image registration, among the others. Keypoints from 3D data are useful to deal with several shape
matching tasks, such as point cloud registration, 3D object
recognition and pose estimation, shape retrieval and shape
classification.
The standard approach in 2D and 3D computer vision
involves defining keypoints by maximization of a handcrafted local saliency function [25, 13, 24]. Popular ap-

proaches for 3D keypoint detection based on such functions can be categorized into fixed-scale and adaptive-scale,
some of these methods exhibiting good repeatability as well
as the ability to identify regions that may be matched correctly by 3D descriptors [24]. For instance, among fixedscale approaches, Intrinsic Shape Signatures (ISS) [29] is
a widely used fast and effective proposal; the fixed-scale
detector proposed by Mian et al. [15] is a slower alternative, particularly robust to point density variations. Among
adaptive-scale detectors, MeshDoG [28] is an extension of
the popular Difference of Gaussian detector [14] to scalar
functions defined over a manifold approximated by a mesh;
the adaptive-scale variant proposed in [15] maximizes the
saliency function across scales to adaptively define the point
neighborhood size; [4] is also aimed at extending the DoG
operator to meshes.
However, when deploying such detectors, the saliency is
unrelated to the quality of the description to be later computed at the point. Indeed, detectors are usually designed
to maximize repeatability rather than distinctiveness of the
regions, this possibly resulting in sub-optimal matching performance that yield a reduced number of correct correspondences. However, identification of correct correspondences
is the ultimate goal of the overall detection/description process, and the importance and effectiveness of pursuing directly such goal already in the detection stage is shown,
in video tracking, by the popular work of Shi and Tomasi
[20], where ”good” features to detect are defined as those
likely to yield correct matches between consecutive frames.
Moreover, in the realm of 3D vision, diverse data acquisition modalities provide quite different levels of detail and
noise, which may require careful tuning of the detector
parameters to obtain meaningful keypoints across diverse
datasets, or may even render a detector useless when applied
to data that differ from those it was originally conceived for
(e.g. curvature based detectors are largely affected by the
amount of noise in the data).
12318

