Listening With Your Eyes: Towards a Practical Visual Speech Recognition
System Using Deep Boltzmann Machines
Chao Sui, Mohammed Bennamoun
School of Computer Science and Software Engineering
University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia
chao.sui@csse.uwa.edu.au, mohammed.bennamoun@uwa.edu.au

Roberto Togneri
School of Electrical, Electronic and Computer Engineering
University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia
roberto.togneri@uwa.edu.au

Abstract
This paper presents a novel feature learning method for
visual speech recognition using Deep Boltzmann Machines
(DBM). Unlike all existing visual feature extraction techniques which solely extract features from video sequences,
our method is able to explore both acoustic information
and visual information to learn a better visual feature representation. During the test stage, instead of using both
audio and visual signals, only the videos are used to generate the missing audio features, and both the given visual
and audio features are used to produce a joint representation. We carried out experiments on a new large scale
audio-visual corpus, and experimental results show that our
proposed techniques outperform the performance of handcrafted features and previously learned features and can be
adopted by other deep learning systems.

1. Introduction
Continuous efforts have been made towards the development of Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) systems
in the recent years, and numerous ASR systems (e.g. Apple Siri and Microsoft Cortana) have come into use in our
daily life. Although ASR research has made remarkable
progress, practical ASR systems are still prone to environmental noises. A possible solution to overcome the recognition degradation in the presence of acoustic noises is to
take advantage of the visual stream which is able to provide
complementary information to the acoustic channel. Despite the promising application prospects of Audio-Visual
Speech Recognition (AVSR), the problem on how to extract
visual features from videos still remains a difficult one. In

Figure 1. Possible application scenarios of our proposed framework. In an noisy environment, visual features are a promising
solution for automatic speech recognition.

order to improve visual feature representation techniques,
Visual Speech Recognition (VSR), also known as lipreading, have emerged as an attractive research area in the recent
years [31].
features to boost speech accuracy, another promising aspect of VSR is in its wider potential real-life applications
compared to acoustic based ASR. As shown in Fig. 1, in
many practical applications, ASR systems are exposed to
noisy environments, and the acoustic signals are almost unusable for speech recognition. On the other hand, with the
availability of front and rear cameras on most mobile devices, users can easily record facial movements to improve
speech accuracy. In these extremely noisy environments,
the visual information becomes basically the only source
that ASR systems can use for speech recognition.
Although lipreading techniques provide an effective potential solution to overcome environmental noises for ASR
systems, there are still several challenges in this area. Unlike the well-established audio features, such as the Mel
Frequency Cepstral Coefficients (MFCC), how to encode
the speech-related visual information into a compact feature
1154

