Describing Videos by Exploiting Temporal Structure
Li Yao
Université de Montréal

Atousa Torabi
Université de Montréal

Kyunghyun Cho
Université de Montréal

li.yao@umontreal.ca

atousa.torabi@umontreal.ca

kyunghyun.cho@umontreal.ca

Nicolas Ballas
Université de Montréal

Christopher Pal
École Polytechnique de Montréal

nicolas.ballas@umontreal.ca

christopher.pal@polymtl.ca

Hugo Larochelle
Université de Sherbrooke

Aaron Courville
Université de Montréal

hugo.larochelle@usherbrooke.ca

aaron.courville@umontreal.ca

Abstract
Recent progress in using recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) for image description has motivated the exploration
of their application for video description. However, while
images are static, working with videos requires modeling
their dynamic temporal structure and then properly integrating that information into a natural language description. In this context, we propose an approach that successfully takes into account both the local and global temporal
structure of videos to produce descriptions. First, our approach incorporates a spatial temporal 3-D convolutional
neural network (3-D CNN) representation of the short temporal dynamics. The 3-D CNN representation is trained on
video action recognition tasks, so as to produce a representation that is tuned to human motion and behavior. Second we propose a temporal attention mechanism that allows to go beyond local temporal modeling and learns to
automatically select the most relevant temporal segments
given the text-generating RNN. Our approach exceeds the
current state-of-art for both BLEU and METEOR metrics
on the Youtube2Text dataset. We also present results on a
new, larger and more challenging dataset of paired video
and natural language descriptions.

1. Introduction
The task of automatically describing videos containing
rich and open-domain activities poses an important challenges for computer vision and machine learning research.
It also has a variety of practical applications. For example,

...

...

A man is shooting a gun
Figure 1. High-level visualization of our approach to video description generation. We incorporate models of both the local
temporal dynamic (i.e. within blocks of a few frames) of videos,
as well as their global temporal structure. The local structure is
modeled using the temporal feature maps of a 3-D CNN, while
a temporal attention mechanism is used to combine information
across the entire video. For each generated word, the model can
focus on different temporal regions in the video. For simplicity, we
highlight only the region having the maximum attention above.

every minute, 100 hours of video are uploaded to YouTube.1
However, if a video is poorly tagged, its utility is dramatically diminished [22]. Automatic video description generation has the potential to help improve indexing and search
quality for online videos. In conjunction with speech synthesis technology, annotating video with natural language
descriptions also has the potential to benefit the visually impaired.
While image description generation is already considered a very challenging task, the automatic generation of
video description carries additional difficulties. Simply
dealing with the sheer quantity of information contained in
video data is one such challenge. Moreover, video description involves generating a sentence to characterize a video
1 https://www.youtube.com/yt/press/statistics.
html accessed on 2015-02-06.

4507

