Monocular Object Instance Segmentation and Depth Ordering with CNNs
Ziyu Zhang∗ Alexander G. Schwing∗ Sanja Fidler Raquel Urtasun
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
{zzhang, aschwing, fidler, urtasun}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
In this paper we tackle the problem of instance-level segmentation and depth ordering from a single monocular image. Towards this goal, we take advantage of convolutional
neural nets and train them to directly predict instance-level
segmentations where the instance ID encodes the depth ordering within image patches. To provide a coherent single
explanation of an image we develop a Markov random field
which takes as input the predictions of convolutional neural
nets applied at overlapping patches of different resolutions,
as well as the output of a connected component algorithm.
It aims to predict accurate instance-level segmentation and
depth ordering. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on the challenging KITTI benchmark and show good
performance on both tasks.

1. Introduction
Over the past few decades, two main tasks for parsing visual scenes have received a lot of attention: object detection
where the goal is to place bounding boxes accurately around
each object, and pixel-level labeling which aims to assign a
class label to each pixel in the image. We follow some of
the recent work [9, 39, 36, 10, 37], however we argue that
the next generation of recognition techniques should provide a more detailed parsing of a scene by labeling each
object instance in an image with an accurate segmentation,
a generic class, and 3D information such as depth ordering. This is particularly important for applications such as
driver assistance, where an ideal system needs to be aware
of each individual object and their spatial arrangements. It
is also important for, e.g., image captioning, Q&A and retrieval techniques [17, 26, 24], where describing a 3D scene
is easier and potentially more informative than describing a
soup of orderless object detections [17].
The goal of this paper is to predict an accurate pixellevel labeling of each object instance belonging to the class
of interest, as well as their depth ordering, given a single
∗ The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

Figure 1. Our approach uses a CNN to predict instance-level segmentation and depth ordering in an image patch. We sample a
stride of patches at several scales, and combine predictions into
the final labeling by solving an energy minimization problem.

monocular image. This is a very challenging problem since
it requires us to jointly solve for the class labeling of each
pixel, and their combinatorial grouping into objects. Moreover, reasoning about depth from a single image is known
to be a difficult and ill-posed problem, where object-level
priors are typically needed to resolve ambiguities [12].
In this paper, we tackle the autonomous driving scenario [6] and focus on cars which are particularly challenging in this domain. Each image typically contains many
car instances forming complex occlusion patterns. Shadows, reflectance and saturation present an additional challenge. We formulate the problem as the one of inference in
a Markov Random Field (MRF) that reasons jointly about
pixel-wise instance level segmentation and depth ordering. We build on the success of convolutional neural nets
(CNNs) to object segmentation [25, 8, 33, 3, 29, 32, 41] and
define our unary and pairwise potentials using the output of
convolutional neural networks at multiple resolutions: our
network operates on densely sampled image patches and is
trained to predict a depth-ordered instance labeling of the
patch. We refer the reader to Fig. 1 for an illustration. We
sample a stride of patches at several scales, and combine
predictions into the final labeling via the MRF. Our energy
terms encode the fact that connected components detected
within a patch should be ordered, and the affinity of neighboring pixels depends on the CNN. In contrast to the majority of existing work [36, 39, 9], no object detections are

2614

