DeepDriving: Learning Affordance for Direct Perception in Autonomous Driving
Chenyi Chen

Ari Seff Alain Kornhauser Jianxiong Xiao
Princeton University
http://deepdriving.cs.princeton.edu
Mediated Perception

Abstract
Today, there are two major paradigms for vision-based
autonomous driving systems: mediated perception approaches that parse an entire scene to make a driving decision, and behavior reflex approaches that directly map an
input image to a driving action by a regressor. In this paper,
we propose a third paradigm: a direct perception approach
to estimate the affordance for driving. We propose to map
an input image to a small number of key perception indicators that directly relate to the affordance of a road/traffic
state for driving. Our representation provides a set of compact yet complete descriptions of the scene to enable a simple controller to drive autonomously. Falling in between the
two extremes of mediated perception and behavior reflex,
we argue that our direct perception representation provides
the right level of abstraction. To demonstrate this, we train
a deep Convolutional Neural Network using recording from
12 hours of human driving in a video game and show that
our model can work well to drive a car in a very diverse
set of virtual environments. We also train a model for car
distance estimation on the KITTI dataset. Results show that
our direct perception approach can generalize well to real
driving images. Source code and data are available on our
project website.

1. Introduction
In the past decade, significant progress has been made in
autonomous driving. To date, most of these systems can be
categorized into two major paradigms: mediated perception
approaches and behavior reflex approaches.
Mediated perception approaches [19] involve multiple
sub-components for recognizing driving-relevant objects,
such as lanes, traffic signs, traffic lights, cars, pedestrians, etc. [6]. The recognition results are then combined into a consistent world representation of the car’s immediate
surroundings (Figure 1). To control the car, an AI-based
engine will take all of this information into account before
making each decision. Since only a small portion of the
detected objects are indeed relevant to driving decisions,

Input Image

Driving Control

Behavior Reflex
Direct Perception (ours)

Figure 1: Three paradigms for autonomous driving.
this level of total scene understanding may add unnecessary complexity to an already difficult task. Unlike other
robotic tasks, driving a car only requires manipulating the
direction and the speed. This final output space resides in
a very low dimension, while mediated perception computes
a high-dimensional world representation, possibly including redundant information. Instead of detecting a bounding box of a car and then using the bounding box to estimate the distance to the car, why not simply predict the
distance to a car directly? After all, the individual sub-tasks
involved in mediated perception are themselves considered
open research questions in computer vision. Although mediated perception encompasses the current state-of-the-art
approaches for autonomous driving, most of these systems
have to rely on laser range finders, GPS, radar and very accurate maps of the environment to reliably parse objects in
a scene. Requiring solutions to many open challenges for
general scene understanding in order to solve the simpler
car-controlling problem unnecessarily increases the complexity and the cost of a system.
Behavior reflex approaches construct a direct mapping
from the sensory input to a driving action. This idea dates
back to the late 1980s when [17, 18] used a neural network
to construct a direct mapping from an image to steering angles. To learn the model, a human drives the car along the
road while the system records the images and steering angles as the training data. Although this idea is very elegant,
it can struggle to deal with traffic and complicated driving
12722

