Regressive Tree Structured Model for Facial Landmark Localization
Gee-Sern (Jison) Hsu, Kai-Hsiang Chang, Shih-Chieh Huang
Artificial Vision Lab., Dept Mechanical Engineering
National Taiwan University of Science and Technology
jison@mail.ntust.edu.tw

Abstract
Although the Tree Structured Model (TSM) is proven effective for solving face detection, pose estimation and landmark localization in an unified model, its sluggish runtime
makes it unfavorable in practical applications, especially
when dealing with cases of multiple faces. We propose
the Regressive Tree Structure Model (RTSM) to improve
the run-time speed and localization accuracy. The RTSM
is composed of two component TSMs, the coarse TSM (cTSM) and the refined TSM (r-TSM), and a Bilateral Support Vector Regressor (BSVR). The c-TSM is built on the
low-resolution octaves of samples so that it provides coarse
but fast face detection. The r-TSM is built on the midresolution octaves so that it can locate the landmarks on
the face candidates given by the c-TSM and improve precision. The r-TSM based landmarks are used in the forward
BSVR as references to locate the dense set of landmarks,
which are then used in the backward BSVR to relocate the
landmarks with large localization errors. The forward and
backward regression goes on iteratively until convergence.
The performance of the RTSM is validated on three benchmark databases, the Multi-PIE, LFPW and AFW, and compared with the latest TSM to demonstrate its efficacy.

1. Introduction
Face detection with landmark localization is a challenging problem because the face can be arbitrary in pose, expression, resolution and illumination condition. The solution generally consists of two steps, initialization and fitting. The former handles face detection and landmark initial localization, and the latter searches for the best located
landmarks that minimize the model-based fitting error. One
of the most promising models is the Deformable Part Models (DPMs), and the Constrained Local Models (CLMs)
[2, 5, 1, 11] and Tree Structured Models (TSMs) [12, 3, 6]
are among the most successful approaches in the DPM family. A CLM with joint shape and texture appearance is
proposed in [2] to generate patch template detectors. The

model is fitted to a facial image in an iterative manner by
generating templates using the joint model and the current
parameter estimates, correlating the templates with the target image to generate response images and optimizing the
shape parameters so as to maximize the sum of responses.
In [5], a fitting scheme, coined the Regularized Landmark
Mean-Shift (RLMS), is proposed where the nonparametric
likelihoods of landmark locations are maximized within a
hierarchy of smoothed estimates. Because the discriminative regression-based fitting approaches have not received
much attention in the CLM framework, the Discriminative Response Map Fitting (DRMF) is proposed in [1] and
proven better than the RLMS in performance. Although the
advancement through the aforementioned and other CLMs
yields fast and accurate landmark fitting, an important issue
is the initialization, i.e., initial face detection and landmark
localization regardless of pose, illumination and other variables. It is noteworthy that quite a few CLMs use TSM for
initialization, such as those in [1, 11], because TSM outperforms many detectors handling large rotations and unbalanced illumination [12, 4].
Unlike most CLMs that concentrate on the landmark fitting accuracy, the TSM can solve three tasks, namely initial detection, landmark localization and pose estimation in
an unified framework [12]. However, the major disadvantage of the TSM is the heavy computation required at run
time, substantially impeding its capability handling practical applications. We propose the Regressive Tree Structured
Model (RTSM) for solving this speed issue and further improving accuracy. The RTSM is composed of two component TSMs, the coarse TSM (c-TSM) and the refined TSM
(r-TSM), and a Bilateral Support Vector Regressor (BSVR).
The c-TSM is built on the low-resolution octaves of samples so that it provides coarse but fast face detection. The
r-TSM is built on the mid-resolution octaves so that it can
locate the landmarks on the face candidates given by the cTSM and improve precision. The r-TSM based landmarks
are then processed using BSVR with shape traits to improve
the overall localization accuracy.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: a brief re13855

