Peeking Template Matching for Depth Extension
Simon Korman
Tel-Aviv University

Eyal Ofek
Microsoft Research

Shai Avidan
Tel-Aviv University

Abstract
We propose a method that extends a given depth image
into regions in 3D that are not visible from the point of view
of the camera. The algorithm detects repeated 3D structures in the visible scene and suggests a set of 3D extension
hypotheses, which are then combined together through a
global 3D MRF discrete optimization. The recovered global
3D surface is consistent with both the input depth map and
the hypotheses.
A key component of this work is a novel 3D template
matcher that is used to detect repeated 3D structure in the
scene and to suggest the hypotheses. A unique property of
this matcher is that it can handle depth uncertainty. This
is crucial because the matcher is required to “peek around
the corner”, as it operates at the boundaries of the visible
3D scene where depth information is missing. The proposed
matcher is fast and is guaranteed to find an approximation
to the globally optimal solution.
We demonstrate on real-world data that our algorithm is
capable of completing a full 3D scene from a single depth
image and can synthesize a full depth map from a novel
viewpoint of the scene. In addition, we report results on
an extensive synthetic set of 3D shapes, which allows us to
evaluate the method both qualitatively and quantitatively.

1. Introduction
The popularity of depth cameras, such as the Microsoft
Kinect, makes depth maps accessible to all. These depth
maps are used for a variety of applications such as gesture
recognition and 3D modeling. A depth map assigns a depth
value to each pixel, generating a 2.5D representation of the
visible scene. The resulting depth map typically lacks measurements of scene parts that are occluded from the camera
point of view. Many applications, such as path planning,
audio waves progress analysis and new view generation, to
name few, require an access to the three dimensional data
of the full scene, including the surfaces that are not visible
by the depth camera.
In this work we make an attempt at inferring the entire
invisible structure of a scene, which is an important underinvestigated problem in 3D vision. Figure 1 shows an exam-

(a) RGB (not used)

(b) depth map

(c) New view

(d) Our completion

Figure 1. The ’Spray’ new viewpoint synthesis example.
Fig. 9 for additional examples and the text for details.

See

ple of what we call a depth extension or depth outpainting
task. An input depth image (b) is rotated by 180◦ revealing
missing parts of the geometry, not seen by the camera. Our
method offers a complete solution (d) to such a scene.
Our Depth Extension algorithm follows a simple
scheme. We generate multiple volumetric hypotheses to extend the current depth map, and these hypotheses are later
all merged together. There are several unique challenges
we faced while tackling this problem, which gave rise to
the contributions of this work.
Novel 3D template matching with partial data To generate depth extension hypotheses, we rely on the existence
of repeating local 3D structures in the scene, similar to the
assumption made in 2D image inpainting. A depth camera provides us with limited information about the volumetric data, as each visible surface point occludes an unknown
amount of solid matter. Generating 3D completion hypotheses therefor involves matching data with partially unknown
values, which is an inherently ill-posed problem. To overcome this challenge, we present a novel and fast template
matching algorithm, that can match volumetric regions with
partial information, under 3D Euclidean transformations.
The matching scheme is based on a rigorous analysis of the
uncertainties that emerge due to the missing values and it
leverages both known spatial data, as well as bounds we derive on the possible errors in areas with uncertainty. This
scheme may also be applicable to other problems where
matching under partial information is necessary.
Recovery of scene geometry using 3D hypotheses This
new matching scheme enables us to detect repetitions in the
scene. These repetitions are used to map sub volumes to
target locations and generate a set of 3D hypotheses, which
represent plausible extensions of the visible geometry. We
present an optimization algorithm that recovers a full scene
geometry that is as consistent as possible with both the input
12174

