Discriminative Learning of Deep Convolutional Feature Point Descriptors
Edgar Simo-Serra∗,1,5 , Eduard Trulls∗,2,5 , Luis Ferraz3
Iasonas Kokkinos4 , Pascal Fua2 , Francesc Moreno-Noguer5
1

Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan, esimo@aoni.waseda.jp
CVLab, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland, {eduard.trulls,pascal.fua}@epfl.ch
3
Catchoom Technologies, Barcelona, Spain, luis.ferraz@catchoom.com
4
CentraleSupelec and INRIA-Saclay, Chatenay-Malabry, France, iasonas.kokkinos@ecp.fr
5
Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial (CSIC-UPC), Barcelona, Spain, {esimo,etrulls,fmoreno}@iri.upc.edu
2

Abstract
Deep learning has revolutionalized image-level tasks
such as classification, but patch-level tasks, such as
correspondence, still rely on hand-crafted features, e.g.
SIFT. In this paper we use Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to learn discriminant patch representations
and in particular train a Siamese network with pairs of
(non-)corresponding patches. We deal with the large number of potential pairs with the combination of a stochastic
sampling of the training set and an aggressive mining strategy biased towards patches that are hard to classify.
By using the L2 distance during both training and testing we develop 128-D descriptors whose euclidean distances reflect patch similarity, and which can be used as a
drop-in replacement for any task involving SIFT. We demonstrate consistent performance gains over the state of the art,
and generalize well against scaling and rotation, perspective transformation, non-rigid deformation, and illumination changes. Our descriptors are efficient to compute and
amenable to modern GPUs, and are publicly available.

(a) Data

(b) All pairs

(c) “Hard” pairs

Figure 1: To train models with Siamese networks, we need
pairs of corresponding and non-corresponding samples. (a)
We use t-SNE [30] to display ∼100 64 × 64 patches of 12
3D points from different images (see Fig. 3 for examples).
Corresponding patches are drawn with the same color. (b)
We single out the red-circled patch, belonging to the blue
point cloud, and consider all of its potential pairings. The
line length encodes the closeness between this patch and the
rest: positive matches in blue, negative in red. Most pairs
are easy to discriminate and ineffectual for training. (c) We
mine the samples to obtain the closest negative (shortest red
line) and the most distant positive (longest blue line). This
simple strategy allows us to train discriminative networks
over large datasets.

1. Introduction
Representing local image patches in an invariant and discriminative manner is a major research topic in computer
vision. While most descriptors, such as SIFT [16], rely on
hand-crafted features [1, 13, 16, 22, 27, 28, 32], there has
recently been interest in using machine learning algorithms
to learn them from large datasets [20, 23, 29].
In this paper we draw inspiration from the recent success of Deep CNNs in large-scale image classification prob∗ First two authors contributed equally.
This work was partly funded by the Spanish MINECO project RobInstruct
TIN2014-58178-R, by the ERA-Net Chistera project ViSen PCIN-2013047, by EU projects AEROARMS H2020-ICT-2014-1-644271, ISUPPORT H2020-ICT-2014-1-643666 and MOBOT FP7-ICT-2011-600796,
and by the ERC project MicroNano.

lems [14, 26] to build discriminative descriptors for local
patches. In our case discriminative training does not rely
on labels of individual patches, but rather on pairs of corresponding, or non-corresponding patches. For this we use
a Siamese network architecture [2] that employs two CNNs
with identical parameters to compare pairs of patches; treating the CNN outputs as patch descriptors, we minimize a
loss that enforces the L2 norm of their difference to be small
for corresponding patches and large otherwise.
To train this network we rely on the multi-view stereo
dataset (MVS) [3], which contains over 1.5M grayscale
64 × 64 image patches from different views of 500K 3D
points. The difficulty with such a large dataset is that it
becomes impossible to exhaustively explore all correspond-

118

