Contextual Action Recognition with R*CNN
Georgia Gkioxari
UC Berkeley

Ross Girshick
Microsoft Research

Jitendra Malik
UC Berkeley

gkioxari@berkeley.edu

rbg@microsoft.com

malik@berkeley.edu

Abstract
There are multiple cues in an image which reveal what
action a person is performing. For example, a jogger has
a pose that is characteristic for jogging, but the scene (e.g.
road, trail) and the presence of other joggers can be an additional source of information. In this work, we exploit the
simple observation that actions are accompanied by contextual cues to build a strong action recognition system. We
adapt RCNN to use more than one region for classification
while still maintaining the ability to localize the action. We
call our system R∗ CNN. The action-specific models and the
feature maps are trained jointly, allowing for action specific
representations to emerge. R∗ CNN achieves 90.2% mean
AP on the PASAL VOC Action dataset, outperforming all
other approaches in the field by a significant margin. Last,
we show that R∗ CNN is not limited to action recognition. In
particular, R∗ CNN can also be used to tackle fine-grained
tasks such as attribute classification. We validate this claim
by reporting state-of-the-art performance on the Berkeley
Attributes of People dataset.1

1. Introduction

D

E

Figure 1. Examples of people performing actions.

when making a prediction. We call our method R∗ CNN.
In R∗ CNN, we have a primary region that contains the person in question and a secondary region that automatically
discovers contextual cues.
How do we select the secondary region? In other words,
how to we decide which region contains information about
the action being performed? Inspired by multiple-instance
learning (MIL) [31, 21] and Latent SVM [9], if I is an image and r is a region in I containing the target person, we
define the score of action α as

Consider Figure 1 (a). How do we know that the person highlighted with the red box is working on a computer?
Could it be that the computer is visible in the image, is it
that the person in question has a very specific pose or is it
that he is sitting in an office environment? Likewise, how
do we know that the person in Figure 1 (b) is running? Is
it the running-specific pose of her arms and legs or do the
scene and the other people nearby also convey the action?
For the task of action recognition from still images, the
pose of the person in question, the identity of the objects
surrounding them and the way they interact with those objects and the scene are vital cues. In this work, our objective
is to use all available cues to perform activity recognition.
Formally, we adapt the Region-based Convolutional Network method (RCNN) [11] to use more than one region

where φ(r; I) is a vector of features extracted from region
r in I, while wPα and wSα are the primary and secondary
weights for action α respectively. R(r; I) defines the set of
candidates for the secondary region. For example, R(r; I)
could be the set of regions in the proximity of r, or even the
whole set of regions in I. Given scores for each action, we
use a softmax to compute the probability that the person in
r is performing action α:

1 Source code and models are available at https://github.com/
gkioxari/RstarCNN

The feature representation φ(·) and the weight vectors
wPα and wSα in Eq. 1 are learned jointly for all actions

α
score(α; I, r) = wα
P · φ(r; I) + max wS · φ(s; I), (1)
s∈R(r;I)

P (α|I, r) = P

11080

exp(score(α; I, r))
.
′
α′ ∈A exp(score(α ; I, r))

(2)

