Highly-Expressive Spaces of Well-Behaved Transformations: Keeping It Simple
Oren Freifeld
MIT CSAIL

Søren Hauberg
DTU Compute

Kayhan Batmanghelich
MIT CSAIL

John W. Fisher III
MIT CSAIL

freifeld@csail.mit.edu

sohau@dtu.dk

kayhan@csail.mit.edu

fisher@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
v θ (x)
n

n

We propose novel finite-dimensional spaces of R → R
transformations, n ∈ {1, 2, 3}, derived from (continuouslydefined) parametric stationary velocity fields. Particularly, we obtain these transformations, which are diffeomorphisms, by fast and highly-accurate integration of continuous piecewise-affine velocity fields; we also provide an exact solution for n = 1. The simple-yet-highly-expressive
proposed representation handles optional constraints (e.g.,
volume preservation) easily and supports convenient modeling choices and rapid likelihood evaluations (facilitating
tractable inference over latent transformations). Its applications include, but are not limited to: unconstrained
optimization over monotonic functions; modeling cumulative distribution functions or histograms; time warping; image registration; landmark-based warping; real-time diffeomorphic image editing. Our code is available at
https://github.com/freifeld/cpabDiffeo

1. Introduction
Spaces of well-behaved transformations, particularly diffeomorphisms, play a key role in computer vision. Unfortunately, current state-of-the-art representations of highlyexpressive diffeomorphisms are overly complicated. Thus,
despite their potential power and mathematical beauty, their
applicability is somewhat limited, especially when large
datasets are involved or when computing resources and time
are limited. Moreover, owing to their complexity, using
powerful inference tools in such spaces remains challenging. Motivated by not only the practicalities of probabilistic
modeling and statistical inference but also a desire to make
diffeomorphisms broadly accessible, we propose a representation that combines simplicity, expressiveness, and efficiency. Particularly, we propose novel spaces of transforAcknowledgement: O.F. and J.W.F. are partially supported by
U.S. Office of Naval Research MURI program, award N000141110688,
and VITALITE, which receives support from U.S. Army Research Office
MURI, award W911NF-11-1-0391. S.H. was funded by the Danish Council for Independent Research, Natural Sciences.

6
5
4
3
2
1
0
−1
−2
−3
−4
10

8

6

φθ (x; t)

t=0
t = 0.5
t = 1.0
t = 1.5
t = 8.0

4

2

0
0

2

4

6

8

10

x

(a) Ω = [0, 10] ⊂ R

(b) Ω ⊂ R2 (c) Ω ⊂ R2

Figure 1: An Ω → Ω map, φθ (·, t) : x 7→ φθ (x, t), derived
from a CPA velocity field, v θ : Ω → Rn . (a) A 1D example. Note v θ vanishes at fixed points of φθ (·, t). (b) Top:
A 2D v θ shown in select locations. Middle: Rather than
a Middlebury-style visualization, we use one emphasizing
the CPA property. The horizontal component, vhθ (left), and
the vertical component, vvθ (right), are shown as heat maps
whose colors range from blue = −λ, via green = 0, to
red = λ where λ = maxx∈Ω max(|vhθ (x)|, |vvθ (x)|). Bottom: Isrc ◦ φθ (·, 1) (where Isrc appears in Fig. 2). (c) a 2D
example with boundary and volume-preserving constraints.

mations that are based on (fast, highly-accurate) integration of Continuous Piecewise-Affine (CPA) velocity fields.
Existing spaces offer only subsets of the benefits of the
proposed spaces: 1) high expressiveness; 2) finite dimensionality; 3) ease of implementation; 4) modest mathematical preliminaries; 5) convenient modeling choices; 6) ease
of handling optional constraints; 7) fast and highly-accurate
computations that lead to fast likelihood evaluations. These
in turn facilitate the use of inference tools – typified by the
case of analysis-by-synthesis methods – that are usually too
expensive for rich transformation spaces. Possible applications are numerous, as we demonstrate with: image editing;
optimization over monotonic functions; modeling Cumulative Distribution Functions (CDFs) and histograms with
order-preserving geometry; time warps; landmark-based
image warping and animation. Another related potential application is image registration.
12911

