Understanding and Diagnosing Visual Tracking Systems
Naiyan Wang1 Jianping Shi2,3 Dit-Yan Yeung1 Jiaya Jia3
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 Linkface Group Limited
3
Chinese University of Hong Kong
winsty@gmail.com

jpshi@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Several benchmark datasets for visual tracking research
have been created in recent years. Despite their usefulness,
whether they are sufficient for understanding and diagnosing the strengths and weaknesses of different trackers remains questionable. To address this issue, we propose a
framework by breaking a tracker down into five constituent
parts, namely, motion model, feature extractor, observation
model, model updater, and ensemble post-processor. We
then conduct ablative experiments on each component to
study how it affects the overall result. Surprisingly, our
findings are discrepant with some common beliefs in the
visual tracking research community. We find that the feature extractor plays the most important role in a tracker.
On the other hand, although the observation model is the
focus of many studies, we find that it often brings no significant improvement. Moreover, the motion model and model
updater contain many details that could affect the result.
Also, the ensemble post-processor can improve the result
substantially when the constituent trackers have high diversity. Based on our findings, we put together some very
elementary building blocks to give a basic tracker which
is competitive in performance to the state-of-the-art trackers. We believe our framework can provide a solid baseline
when conducting controlled experiments for visual tracking
research.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking is an essential building block of many advanced applications in the areas such as video surveillance
and human-computer interaction. In this paper, we focus on
the most general type of visual tracking problems, namely,
short-term single-object model-free tracking [18]. We consider the most common setting for this problem: the tracker
is given a bounding box to indicate the object to be tracked.
The bounding box is either from human annotation or an automatic object detector. The tracker has no prior knowledge
of the object to be tracked such as category and shape. Then

dyyeung@cse.ust.hk

leojia@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

in the following frames, the tracker needs to identify the object as it moves around in the video. Numerous such trackers have been proposed over the past few decades, ranging
from the simple KLT tracker [20, 31] in the 1980s to the
recent deep learning trackers [34, 16] which are a lot more
complex.
Evaluating and comparing trackers has always been a
nontrivial task. For a long time, researchers usually reported
tracking results on a small number of videos based on
specific model parameters manually tuned for each video.
Since subjective bias [24] in the results can be caused by
selection of videos, this practice makes it infeasible to give
a fair comparison of different trackers. To address this fairness concern, several relatively large benchmarks [39, 18]
and evaluation metrics [6] have been proposed recently.
With the aid of these benchmarks, we have witnessed substantial advances in recent years. However, we would like
to raise this question: Is simply evaluating these trackers on
the de facto benchmarks sufficient for understanding and
diagnosing their strengths and weaknesses?
We are afraid that the answer to the above question is
not affirmative, for the following reason. Modern trackers
are usually complicated systems made up of several separate components. When a tracker is evaluated as a whole,
we cannot gain a detailed understanding of the effectiveness of each component. For illustration, suppose tracker A
uses histograms of oriented gradients (HOG) [8] as features
and the support vector machine (SVM) as the observation
model, while tracker B uses raw pixels as features and logistic regression as the observation model. If tracker A outperforms tracker B in a benchmark, can we conclude that SVM
is better than logistic regression for tracking? Obviously
drawing such a conclusion would be arbitrary since HOG
features have stronger representational power than raw pixels. This calls for a more carefully designed framework for
the evaluation and comparison of trackers.
We propose in this paper a new way to understand and
diagnose visual trackers. Note that our goal is not to create a new benchmark. Instead, our analysis will still be
based on existing benchmarks. We first break a tracker
13101

