Leveraging Datasets with Varying Annotations for Face Alignment
via Deep Regression Network

1

Jie Zhang1,2 Meina Kan1 Shiguang Shan1,3 Xilin Chen1
Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
{jie.zhang,meina.kan,shiguang.shan,xilin.chen}@vipl.ict.ac.cn
Abstract

Facial landmark detection, as a vital topic in computer vision, has been studied for many decades and lots of
datasets have been collected for evaluation. These datasets usually have different annotations, e.g., 68-landmark
markup for LFPW dataset, while 74-landmark markup for
GTAV dataset. Intuitively, it is meaningful to fuse all the
datasets to predict a union of all types of landmarks from
multiple datasets (i.e., transfer the annotations of each
dataset to all other datasets), but this problem is nontrivial due to the distribution discrepancy between datasets and
incomplete annotations of all types for each dataset. In this
work, we propose a deep regression network coupled with
sparse shape regression (DRN-SSR) to predict the union of
all types of landmarks by leveraging datasets with varying annotations, each dataset with one type of annotation.
Specifically, the deep regression network intends to predict
the union of all landmarks, and the sparse shape regression attempts to approximate those undefined landmarks on
each dataset so as to guide the learning of the deep regression network for face alignment. Extensive experiments on
two challenging datasets, IBUG and GLF, demonstrate that
our method can effectively leverage multiple datasets with
different annotations to predict the union of all landmarks.

1. Introduction
Facial landmark detection is a key component of many
computer vision tasks, such as face recognition, face animation, video editing, etc. In the past few decades, many
efforts are devoted to learn robust models for accurate
face alignment under the controlled and uncontrolled setting [10, 34, 26, 4, 29, 28, 40, 2, 12, 35, 17]. At the
same time, a lot of datasets under laboratory condition
or wild condition are published for extensive evaluations [3, 21, 40, 27, 19, 18, 23]. These datasets have abundant

Figure 1. Overview of our DRN-SSR for face alignment by leveraging datasets with varying facial landmark annotations. F denotes
the unified cascade deep regression networks which can predict a
union of all types of landmarks, by taking shape-indexed feature
φ(I, S) as input. H denotes the sparse shape regression model
which approximates those undefined landmarks for each dataset,
so as to guide the learning of deep networks F.

variations in head pose, expressions, partial occlusions, etc.
However, one dataset usually only focuses on one or several
types of variations, and besides these datasets usually have
different annotations, e.g., 68-landmark markup for LFPW [3], while 74-landmark markup for GTAV [18]. So the
face alignment model learnt from one dataset can only predict those landmarks defined on that dataset, and different
datasets can only be used independently. Naturally, it is
quite anticipating to predict the union of all types of landmarks by leveraging multiple datasets.
One straightforward solution is to train multiple detection models on each dataset, and therefore the union of all types of landmarks can be achieved by uniting the pre-

3801

