Sparse Dynamic 3D Reconstruction from Unsynchronized Videos
Enliang Zheng, Dinghuang Ji, Enrique Dunn, and Jan-Michael Frahm
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
{ezheng,jdh,dunn,jmf}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
We target the sparse 3D reconstruction of dynamic objects observed by multiple unsynchronized video cameras
with unknown temporal overlap. To this end, we develop
a framework to recover the unknown structure without sequencing information across video sequences. Our proposed compressed sensing framework poses the estimation of 3D structure as the problem of dictionary learning.
Moreover, we define our dictionary as the temporally varying 3D structure, while we define local sequencing information in terms of the sparse coefficients describing a locally
linear 3D structural interpolation. Our formulation optimizes a biconvex cost function that leverages a compressed
sensing formulation and enforces both structural dependency coherence across video streams, as well as motion
smoothness across estimates from common video sources.
Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our
approach in both synthetic data and captured imagery.

1. Introduction
Scene reconstruction from photo collections has reached
a high level of maturity due to the recent progress in structure from motion and stereo estimation [21, 28, 15]. Despite
these tremendous advances, these methods only reconstruct
the static parts of the environment captured by the photo
collections. However, most real-life videos and photos have
dynamic elements, e.g., imagery with people as the main
object of interest. Take, for example, videos captured at
music concerts, sports events, etc. It is these dynamic objects that we often aim to capture as they bring the static
scenes to life. The reconstruction of the dynamic objects
in these scenes using videos or photos currently falls far
behind the maturity for reconstruction of static scene elements. There are some early approaches towards reconstructing dynamic scene elements from ad-hoc capture scenarios [17, 20]. However, there are significant challenges
ahead in order to leverage uncontrolled video capture such
as those available in crowd sourced video collections.
In this paper, we specifically target the reconstruction

Front
View

Side
View

Top
View

Figure 1: (left) Example frame from the multiple videos
capturing a performance serving as input to our method,
with overlaid structure (points), and (right three) different
views of the reconstructed 3D points. Note that our method
only estimates the 3D points but no topology. The skeleton
lines are only added for visualization purposes.

of the shape of dynamic objects captured by a variety of
unsynchronized video cameras (See Fig. 2). This setup is
encountered, for example, when several people capture an
event, such as people dancing, each using their own cameras. In that case, all videos capture the same event, but
since the cameras are not synchronized, the temporal order
of the frames is only known within each video sequence.
Hence, we propose a solution to determining 3D dynamic
structure without inter-sequence temporal information, accounting for the potentially different and unknown frame
rates of the cameras. Fig. 1 shows one sample output of our
approach.
Despite its high relevance to real-life video collections,
there are currently no methods that can successfully address this problem. Existing methods for shape reconstruction [19, 23] inherently require temporally ordered image
sequences (sequencing information) to reconstruct the 3D
points of the dynamic objects. As explained above, with
independently captured videos, it is challenging to provide
this sequencing information. Zheng et al. [29] recently proposed to jointly estimate the photo sequencing and 3D point
estimation based on object detections by solving a general-

4435

