Detailed Full-Body Reconstructions of Moving People
from Monocular RGB-D Sequences
Federica Bogo1
Michael J. Black1
Matthew Loper1,2
Javier Romero1
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
2
Industrial Light & Magic, San Francisco, CA

Figure 1: From a monocular RGB-D sequence (background), we estimate a low-dimensional parametric model of body shape
(left), detailed 3D shape (middle), and a high-resolution texture map (right).

Abstract
We accurately estimate the 3D geometry and appearance
of the human body from a monocular RGB-D sequence of a
user moving freely in front of the sensor. Range data in each
frame is first brought into alignment with a multi-resolution
3D body model in a coarse-to-fine process. The method
then uses geometry and image texture over time to obtain
accurate shape, pose, and appearance information despite
unconstrained motion, partial views, varying resolution, occlusion, and soft tissue deformation. Our novel body model
has variable shape detail, allowing it to capture faces with
a high-resolution deformable head model and body shape
with lower-resolution. Finally we combine range data from
an entire sequence to estimate a high-resolution displacement map that captures fine shape details. We compare our
recovered models with high-resolution scans from a professional system and with avatars created by a commercial
product. We extract accurate 3D avatars from challenging
motion sequences and even capture soft tissue dynamics.

1. Introduction
Accurate 3D body shape and appearance capture is useful for applications ranging from special effects, to fashion,
to medicine. High-resolution scanners can capture human
body shape and texture in great detail but these are bulky

and expensive. In contrast, inexpensive RGB-D sensors are
proliferating but are of much lower resolution. Scanning a
full body from multiple partial views requires that the subject stands still or that the system precisely registers deforming point clouds captured from a non-rigid and articulated
body. We propose a novel method that estimates body shape
with the realism of a high-resolution body scanner by allowing a user to move freely in front of a single commodity
RGB-D sensor.
Several previous methods have been proposed for 3D
full-body scanning using range data [9, 10, 21, 23, 28, 30,
32, 34], but our method provides a significant increase in
detail, realism, and ease of use as illustrated in Fig. 1. We
work with RGB-D sequences from a single camera (Fig. 1,
background). We exploit both depth and color data to combine information across an entire sequence to accurately estimate pose and shape from noisy sensor measurements. By
allowing people to move relative to the sensor, we obtain
data of varying spatial resolution. This lets us estimate a
high-resolution detail for regions such as the face. By tracking the person we are able to cope with large portions of the
body being outside the sensor’s field of view.
To achieve this, we develop a new parametric 3D body
model, called Delta, that is based on SCAPE [6] but contains several important innovations. First, we define a parametric shape model at multiple resolutions that enables the
estimation of body shape and pose in a coarse-to-fine process. Second, we define a variable-detail shape model that

2300

