Personalized Age Progression with Aging Dictionary
Xiangbo Shu‡ § † , Jinhui Tang‡ ∗ , Hanjiang Lai§ , Luoqi Liu§ , and Shuicheng Yan§
‡

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
§
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore

{shuxb104,laihanj}@gmail.com, jinhuitang@njust.edu.cn, {liuluoqi, eleyans}@nus.edu.sg
x0.15
x0.27

x0.15
x0.27
x0.20
x0.38

x0.20
x0.38

+

...

=

...

Aging layer

=

Personalized
layer

Input (age 14)

Aging layer

+

11-15

16-20

Age-group
specific dictionary

21-30

31-40

41-50

51-60

61-80
aging pattern

Aging dictionary

=

Personalized
layer

Output (age 61-80)

Figure 1. A personalized aging face by the proposed method. The personalized aging face contains the aging layer (e.g.,
wrinkles) and the personalized layer (e.g., mole). The former can be seen as the corresponding face in a linear combination
of the aging patterns, while the latter is invariant in the aging process. For better view, please see ×3 original color PDF.

Abstract
In this paper, we aim to automatically render aging faces
in a personalized way. Basically, a set of age-group specific
dictionaries are learned, where the dictionary bases corresponding to the same index yet from different dictionaries form a particular aging process pattern cross different
age groups, and a linear combination of these patterns expresses a particular personalized aging process. Moreover,
two factors are taken into consideration in the dictionary
learning process. First, beyond the aging dictionaries, each
subject may have extra personalized facial characteristics,
e.g. mole, which are invariant in the aging process. Second, it is challenging or even impossible to collect faces
of all age groups for a particular subject, yet much easier and more practical to get face pairs from neighboring
age groups. Thus a personality-aware coupled reconstruction loss is utilized to learn the dictionaries based on face
pairs from neighboring age groups. Extensive experiments
well demonstrate the advantages of our proposed solution
over other state-of-the-arts in term of personalized aging
progression, as well as the performance gain for cross-age
face verification by synthesizing aging faces.

† This work was performed when X. Shu was visiting National University of Singapore.
∗ Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
Age progression, also called age synthesis [6] or face aging [33], is deﬁned as aesthetically rendering a face image
with natural aging and rejuvenating effects for an individual face. It has found application in some domains such as
cross-age face analysis [19], authentication systems, ﬁnding
lost children, and entertainment. There are two main categories of solutions to the age progression task: prototypingbased age progression [13, 36, 7] and modeling-based age
progression [33, 35, 17]. Prototyping-based age progression transfers the differences between two prototypes (e.g.,
average faces) of the pre-divided source age group and target age group into the input individual face, of which its age
belongs to the source age group. Modeling-based age progression models the facial parameters for the shape/texture
synthesis with the actual age (range).
Intuitively, the natural aging process of a speciﬁc human
usually follows the general rules in the aging process of all
humans, but this speciﬁc process should also contain some
personalized facial characteristics, e.g., mole, birthmark,
etc., which are almost invariant with time. Prototypingbased age progression methods cannot well preserve this
personality of an individual face, since they are based on
the general rules in the human aging process for a relatively
large population. Modeling-based age progression methods
do not specially consider these personalized details. Moreover, they require dense long-term (e.g. age span exceeds
20 years) face aging sequences for building the complex
models. However, collecting these dense long-term face
4321
3970

