Hot or Not: Exploring Correlations Between Appearance and Temperature
Daniel Glasner
Harvard University

Pascal Fua
EPFL

Todd Zickler
Harvard University

Lihi Zelnik-Manor
Jacobs-Technion-Cornell

Abstract
In this paper we explore interactions between the appearance of an outdoor scene and the ambient temperature. By studying statistical correlations between image sequences from outdoor cameras and temperature measurements we identify two interesting interactions. First, semantically meaningful regions such as foliage and reflective
oriented surfaces are often highly indicative of the temperature. Second, small camera motions are correlated with
the temperature in some scenes. We propose simple scenespecific temperature prediction algorithms which can be
used to turn a camera into a crude temperature sensor. We
find that for this task, simple features such as local pixel intensities outperform sophisticated, global features such as
from a semantically-trained convolutional neural network.

(a) Claude Monet, ‘Grainstacks at (b) Claude Monet, ‘Grainstacks,
the End of Summer, Morning Effect’ Snow Effect’

(c) hot...

(d) or not...

Figure 1: How do we perceive temperature differences?

1. Introduction
Great painters are able to convey properties of the environment through their artistic expression. Monet’s painting1
in Figure 1a conveys a sense of summer, whereas the one in
Figure 1b captures the essence of winter. While most of us
cannot produce such wonderful paintings, we do share the
ability to perceive the temperature differences. We can also
do this easily with natural images, such as those shown in
Figures 1c, 1d. This paper explores which visual aspects
of an outdoor scene correlate with the ambient temperature.
Changing the temperature in a controlled laboratory environment will usually not have a direct, easily measurable, effect on the appearance of an object. However, ambient temperature and the appearance of an outdoor scene
are highly correlated through multiple complex interactions.
For example, the presence or absence of clouds, the angle
of the sun, precipitation, and the color of leaves are examples of visually measurable attributes which offer indications about which temperatures are more or less likely.
Our focus in this paper is on understanding interactions
between visual elements and the temperature. We adopt
a statistical approach and study correlations between image

sequences captured by static outdoor cameras over periods
of time and temperature measurements from their vicinity.
In Section 3 we identify aspects of the image sequences,
which are more indicative of temperature. As a way to assess the utility of such correlations in Section 4, we develop
and test a number of predictive models. These models are
trained in a supervised fashion from a time-lapse sequence
of a scene, and they are tested according to their ability to
predict temperatures from images of the same scene that are
captured months or years later. The algorithms we compare
make assumptions which would prevent them from working “in the wild”. They are not meant to be competitive, but
rather to lend insight into the problem.
Image sequences from statically mounted outdoor cameras usually exhibit some motion. In order to study these
sequences we had to compute transformations to align and
stabilize them . Stabilizing the sequences led us to an unexpected observation, in some sequences there is significant
correlation between the motion of the camera and the temperature. We conjecture that these correlations can be explained by contraction and expansion of the camera mount.
To summarize, our contributions are:
• An analysis of correlations between image sequences

1 Public domain Monet images from www.wikiart.org.

3997

