Learning Discriminative Reconstructions for Unsupervised Outlier Removal
Yan Xia1

Xudong Cao2
Fang Wen2
Gang Hua2
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Microsoft Research

Outliers

Abstract
We study the problem of automatically removing outliers
from noisy data, with application for removing outlier images from an image collection. We address this problem
by utilizing the reconstruction errors of an autoencoder.
We observe that when data are reconstructed from lowdimensional representations, the inliers and the outliers can
be well separated according to their reconstruction errors.
Based on this basic observation, we gradually inject discriminative information in the learning process of autoencoder to make the inliers and the outliers more separable.
Experiments on a variety of image datasets validate our approach.

1. Introduction
Building large training datasets has become critical for
many computer vision tasks, especially with the rapid development of deep learning, which is data-hungry. Retrieving images from search engines [22, 5, 14, 25] is one of the
most effective solutions. However, retrieved results often
contain many outliers that are irrelevant to the query intent,
as shown in Fig. 1. Therefore, automatically removing outliers can greatly help us to construct large scale datasets, or
at least significantly reduce the required labeling cost.
Automatically removing outliers from unlabeled data operates in an unsupervised mode. For this problem, methods in literature explicitly or implicitly make an assumption that inliers are located in dense areas while outliers
are not. The dense areas can be estimated by statistical
methods [6, 27, 11], neighbor-based methods [17, 3, 7], and
reconstruction-based methods [23, 26]. For example, the
methods in [23, 26] compute PCA projections on data, and
those having large projection variances are determined as
outliers. Since PCA can be interpreted as minimizing the
reconstruction error of training data, we treat the methods in
[23, 26] as reconstruction-based methods for unsupervised
outlier removal.
In this paper, we also use reconstruction error to infer underlying dense areas of data. But different from [23, 26], we

Jian Sun2

Query
“clownfish”

Positives

Figure 1. Example images returned by an image search engine
when querying “clownfish”. Those consist of positive images (relevant to the query intent) and outliers.

adopt the autoencoder [2, 18] to learn reconstructions. Note
that there exists works [10, 16, 20] that use autoencoder for
a similar but fundamentally different task — novelty detection (or anomaly detection). In novelty detection, training
data are all positive, and it is straightforward to train a normal profile using autoencoder. Our work is inspired by but
different from these works, since in the problem of unsupervised outlier removal, training data are unlabeled, and it is
more challenging to learn models from noisy data.
As the first step of our work, we find the autoencoder
itself is a simple yet effective tool for unsupervised outlier
removal. We observe that when data are compressed into
low-dimensional representations and then reconstructed by
an autoencoder, the inliers (also called positive examples)
tend to have smaller reconstruction errors than the outliers.
Based on this, one can conveniently identify the images
with large reconstruction errors as outliers. We were both
surprised and excited in finding that simply thresholding the
reconstruction errors can lead to competitive results with
most existing methods.
Based on this finding, we further make the reconstruction error even more discriminative. This is achieved by
introducing self-learned discriminative information during
the learning procedure of an autoencoder. Instead of minimizing the reconstruction errors of all data, our idea is to
minimize the reconstruction errors only from the positives.
By doing so, the reconstruction errors of positive data are
even smaller while those of outliers are not.
11511

