SALICON: Reducing the Semantic Gap in Saliency Prediction
by Adapting Deep Neural Networks
Xun Huang1,2† Chengyao Shen1 Xavier Boix1,3 Qi Zhao1∗
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
3
CBMM, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

xunhuang1995@gmail.com scyscyao@gmail.com elexbb@nus.edu.sg eleqiz@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Saliency in Context (SALICON) is an ongoing effort that
aims at understanding and predicting visual attention. Conventional saliency models typically rely on low-level image statistics to predict human fixations. While these models perform significantly better than chance, there is still a
large gap between model prediction and human behavior.
This gap is largely due to the limited capability of models in predicting eye fixations with strong semantic content,
the so-called semantic gap. This paper presents a focused
study to narrow the semantic gap with an architecture based
on Deep Neural Network (DNN). It leverages the representational power of high-level semantics encoded in DNNs
pretrained for object recognition. Two key components are
fine-tuning the DNNs with an objective function based on
the saliency evaluation metrics, and integrating information at different image scales. We compare our method
with 14 saliency models on 6 public eye tracking benchmark
datasets. Results demonstrate that our DNNs can automatically learn features for saliency prediction that surpass by
a big margin the state-of-the-art. In addition, our model
ranks top to date under all seven metrics on the MIT300
challenge set.

1. Introduction
Saliency models predict the probability distribution of
the location of the eye fixations over the image, i.e. the
saliency map. Emulating the way that human observers
look at an image has attracted much interest, since it may
give new insights about the human attentional mechanisms,
† This work was done when Xun Huang was a visiting student at National University of Singapore
∗ Corresponding author.

and allow for new artificial intelligence applications.
The pioneering theory of feature integration served as
the basis for many of the initial saliency models [37]. The
seminal works by Koch and Ullman [22] and Itti et al. [18]
introduced the first computational architecture of saliency
prediction based on the feature integration theory. Since
then, numerous computational models have been proposed.
For example, Harel et al. [14] extracted multi-scale lowlevel features including intensity, color and orientation,
and predicted saliency based on graph algorithms. Bruce
and Tsotsos [2] represented images with Gabor-like features learned from independent component analysis and estimated saliency as self-information. The recent Boolean
Map Saliency (BMS) model by Zhang and Sclaroff [42]
used color as features and computed saliency based on
Boolean maps that are generated by randomly thresholding
feature maps.
While effective, it is widely accepted that these models
might not be complete in modeling visual attention due to
the lack of features to represent semantic objects of interest [17]. In fact, object detectors have been shown to play
an important role in improving saliency prediction [40],
and several computational models have successfully incorporated object detectors into saliency models [4, 21, 44].
However, these detectors are specifically trained for each
category, which makes it difficult to scale. This begs the
question whether the models can be designed to automatically learn the cues from the raw images.
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) allow the automatic
learning of image representations, and recently achieved astonishing results in many computer vision tasks, e.g. [23,
10]. In saliency prediction, the multi-layer sparse network [33] and Ensemble of Deep Networks (eDN) [39] are
both early architectures that automatically learn the representations for saliency prediction. Since the amount of data
1262

