Interactive Visual Hull Refinement for Specular and Transparent Object Surface
Reconstruction

†

Xinxin Zuo†,‡ , Chao Du‡ , Sen Wang†,‡ , Jiangbin Zheng† and Ruigang Yang‡
‡
Northwestern Polytechnical University, P.R.China
University of Kentucky, USA
{xinxin.zuo,chao.du,sen.wang}@uky.edu, zhengjb@nwpu.edu.cn, ryang@cs.uky.edu

Abstract
In this paper we present a method of using standard
multi-view images for 3D surface reconstruction of nonLambertian objects. We extend the original visual hull concept to incorporate 3D cues presented by internal occluding contours, i.e., occluding contours that are inside the
object’s silhouettes. We discovered that these internal contours, which are results of convex parts on an object’s surface, can lead to a tighter fit than the original visual hull.
We formulated a new visual hull refinement scheme – Locally Convex Carving that can completely reconstruct concavity caused by two or more intersecting convex surfaces.
In addition we develop a novel approach for contour
tracking given labeled contours in sparse key frames. It
is designed specifically for highly specular or transparent
objects, for which assumptions made in traditional contour detection/tracking methods, such as highest gradient
and stationary texture edges, are no longer valid. It is formulated as an energy minimization function where several
novel terms are developed to increase robustness.
Based on the two core algorithms, we have developed
an interactive system for 3D modeling. We have validated
our system, both quantitatively and qualitatively, with four
datasets of different object materials. Results show that we
are able to generate visually pleasing models for very challenging cases.

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction of specular or transparent objects is
still a challenging problem in computer vision. Due to
their non-Lambertian surface reflectance properties, establishing correspondences – a fundamental requirement for
many 3D reconstruction algorithms – becomes difficult or
even impossible. Therefore existing methods on reconstructing these difficult objects typically use additional constraints such as active illumination or known reference objects (e.g.,[12, 25, 8, 21, 31]).
In this paper we aim to reconstruct highly specular surfaces like glass sculptures and glossy trophies (such as these

Figure 1: The reconstructed models for glossy trophy and
glass sculpture. The left column shows the capture object;
the middle column shows the reconstructed 3D model using
visual hull; and the right column presents the reconstructed
surface using our proposed method.
shown in Figure 1), from a multi-view images set casually
captured with a hand-held camera, without using active illumination or reference objects (except a few markers for
pose estimation). Naturally we decide to use a visual hullbased approach that does not require pixel correspondences.
The fundamental limitation of the visual hull representation
is that it is unable to model concavity. Through careful geometric analysis, we show that some type of concavity can
actually be removed by using the internal occluding contours, i.e., occluding contours that are inside the object’s silhouette. Based on that we present a new visual hull refinement method, which we refer to as Locally Convex Carving
(LCC).
In addition we present a novel contour tracking algorithm designed specifically for highly specular/transparent
objects. Different from most contour tracking algorithms
that are based mainly on image gradient, we use the color
statistics along contour to make the tracking more robust.
12237

