From Facial Parts Responses to Face Detection: A Deep Learning Approach
Shuo Yang1,2
1
2

Ping Luo2,1

Chen Change Loy1,2

Xiaoou Tang1,2

Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Shenzhen Key Lab of Comp. Vis. & Pat. Rec., Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, CAS, China
{ys014, pluo, ccloy, xtang}@ie.cuhk,edu.hk

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel deep convolutional
network (DCN) that achieves outstanding performance on
FDDB, PASCAL Face, and AFW. Specifically, our method
achieves a high recall rate of 90.99% on the challenging FDDB benchmark, outperforming the state-of-the-art
method [23] by a large margin of 2.91%. Importantly, we
consider finding faces from a new perspective through scoring facial parts responses by their spatial structure and arrangement. The scoring mechanism is carefully formulated
considering challenging cases where faces are only partially visible. This consideration allows our network to detect faces under severe occlusion and unconstrained pose
variation, which are the main difficulty and bottleneck of
most existing face detection approaches. We show that despite the use of DCN, our network can achieve practical
runtime speed.

1. Introduction
Neural network based methods were once widely applied
for localizing faces [33, 26, 7, 25], but they were soon replaced by various non-neural network-based face detectors,
which are based on cascade structure [3, 9, 20, 34] and deformable part models (DPM) [23, 36, 40] detectors. Deep
convolutional networks (DCN) have recently achieved remarkable performance in many computer vision tasks, such
as object detection, object classification, and face recognition. Given the recent advances of deep learning and graphical processing units (GPUs), it is worthwhile to revisit the
face detection problem from the neural network perspective.
In this study, we wish to design a deep convolutional network for face detection, with the aim of not only exploiting the representation learning capacity of DCN, but also
formulating a novel way for handling the severe occlusion
issue, which has been a bottleneck in face detection. To
this end, we design a new deep convolutional network with
the following appealing properties: (1) It is robust to severe
occlusion. As depicted in Fig. 1, our method can detect

Figure 1. (a) We propose a deep convolutional network for face
detection, which achieves high recall of faces even under severe
occlusions and head pose variations. The key to the success of our
approach is the new mechanism for scoring face likeliness based
on deep network responses on local facial parts. (b) The part-level
response maps (we call it ‘partness’ map) generated by our deep
network given a full image without prior face detection. All these
occluded faces are difficult to handle by conventional approach.

faces even more than half of the face region is occluded;
(2) it is capable of detecting faces with large pose variation,
e.g. profile view without training separate models under different viewpoints; (3) it accepts full image of arbitrary size
and the faces of different scales can appear anywhere in the
image.
All the aforementioned properties, which are challenging
to achieve with conventional approaches, are made possible
with the following considerations:

3676

