Motion Trajectory Segmentation via Minimum Cost Multicuts
Margret Keuper1 , Bjoern Andres2 , and Thomas Brox1
1

2

Computer Vision Group, University of Freiburg, Germany
Max-Planck-Institute of Informatics, Saarbruecken, Germany

Abstract
For the segmentation of moving objects in videos, the
analysis of long-term point trajectories has been very popular recently. In this paper, we formulate the segmentation of
a video sequence based on point trajectories as a minimum
cost multicut problem. Unlike the commonly used spectral
clustering formulation, the minimum cost multicut formulation gives natural rise to optimize not only for a cluster assignment but also for the number of clusters while
allowing for varying cluster sizes. In this setup, we provide a method to create a long-term point trajectory graph
with attractive and repulsive binary terms and outperform
state-of-the-art methods based on spectral clustering on the
FBMS-59 dataset and on the motion subtask of the VSB100
dataset.

1. Introduction
Point trajectories are an informative intermediate representation for the motion of object parts or whole objects. They have been the key component in quite a number of works on video segmentation [7, 15, 25, 16, 29, 30,
41]. Most of these methods rely on the spectral clustering paradigm, where eigenvectors of the normalized graph
Laplacian are used to generate segmentations that approximate the optimal normalized cut [35]. The underlying assumption is that objects in the scene have a certain size such
that, for example, single trajectories do not end up being
segmented as objects. However, a closer look at ground
truth segmentations (compare Figure 1) shows that objects
vary strongly in size and very small segments can be very
reasonable. The minimum cost multicut [10, 12] framework
allows to formulate the trajectory segmentation as an unbalanced grouping problem - allowing for very small but reasonable segments to be retrieved. If the problem is cast correctly, even the number of segments can be inferred, making
the additional model selection step obsolete, that is usually
needed for spectral clustering based methods.
Besides the balancing effect, spectral clustering meth-

Image 10 from cars9 sequence

Ground Truth

Sparse segmentation from [30]

Proposed

Figure 1. The objects visible in the FBMS-59 sequences are very
unbalanced in size. Our method based on minimum cost multicuts without any balancing criterion outperforms the state-of-theart spectral clustering based method [30].

ods have one further limitation: they are well defined only
for non-negative affinities between trajectories. In practice,
this means that it is easy to specify which trajectories should
certainly end up in the same segment but impossible to impose that they should be separated. In the example given in
Figure 1, the motion of the car (dark red label in our segmentation) differs clearly from the rest in all frames such
that it can be segmented very robustly. However, the van
next to it does not move for the first 30 frames and some
trajectories within it already end before the motion starts.
These trajectories have strong affinities to the background,
hampering the van to be segmented correctly.
In this paper, we introduce a formulation of the motion
trajectory segmentation as minimum cost multicut problem
on a trajectory graph. In this graph, positive and negative
edge weights are computed from motion, position and color
cues. Positive and negative weights allow to optimize for
the correct number of moving objects including small objects that show discriminative motion in a small number
13271

