Dynamic Texture Recognition via Orthogonal Tensor Dictionary Learning
Yuhui Quan1 , Yan Huang2 , Hui Ji1
1

2

Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore, Singapore 119076
School of Computer Science & Engineering, South China University of Technology, China 510006
{matquan@nus.edu.sg, yyfeiyanzi@gmail.com, matjh@nus.edu.sg}

Abstract
Dynamic textures (DTs) are video sequences with stationary properties, which exhibit repetitive patterns over
space and time. This paper aims at investigating the sparse
coding based approach to characterizing local DT patterns
for recognition. Owing to the high dimensionality of DT
sequences, existing dictionary learning algorithms are not
suitable for our purpose due to their high computational
costs as well as poor scalability. To overcome these obstacles, we proposed a structured tensor dictionary learning
method for sparse coding, which learns a dictionary structured with orthogonality and separability. The proposed
method is very fast and more scalable to high-dimensional
data than the existing ones. In addition, based on the proposed dictionary learning method, a DT descriptor is developed, which has better adaptivity, discriminability and
scalability than the existing approaches. These advantages
are demonstrated by the experiments on multiple datasets.

1. Introduction
Dynamic texture (DT) refers to texture with motion [38],
and DT sequences are often regarded as video sequences of
moving scenes that possess certain stationary properties in
both space domain and time domain [12]. People see DT
in familiar forms like video clips of boiling water, bursting
flame, windblown vegetation, meandering coastlines, growing crystals, and swirling galaxies. The automatic recognition on DT sequences has a broad spectrum of applications,
such as scene classification, video segmentation, emergency
detection, facial expression analysis, biometrics, and astronomical phenomena prediction; see e.g. [13, 21, 37, 46].
Plenty of existing methods for DT recognition, e.g. [14,
18, 26, 39], quantitatively model the underlying physical
dynamic systems that generate DT sequences, whose difficulty lies in the construction of universal models that are
able to cover a wide range of DT sequences [42] (e.g. linear
models [38, 35] could not be well generalized to the DTs
generated by nonlinear processes). A promising alternative

is to compute some invariant statistics of local features over
a DT sequence. However, the development of local features
is challenging, as both the discriminability and the reliability should be granted in designing local features. While
handcrafted features have been exploited in many previous
studies [46, 19, 10, 44], adaptive features learned from data
have yielded better performance [39, 31]. In this paper, we
focus on investigating feature learning for DT recognition.
It is observed that there exist strong spatial homogeneity
and temporal periodicity in DT [28, 8, 17, 6], which implies
that local DT patterns are repetitive and could be sparsely
represented under some suitable dictionary. This motivates
us to develop a sparse coding based framework for DT
recognition, i.e. representing repetitive local DT patterns as
sparse linear combinations of learned spatio-temporal primitives. Many existing sparse dictionary learning methods
have been proposed to deal with data of low dimensionality, e.g. K-SVD [1]. However, a direct call of these methods would be computationally infeasible when scaling to
high-dimensional data such as DT sequences. In addition,
most of these methods handle visual data by vectorization,
which is likely to destroy the inherent ordering information
in data [24, 36] and reduce both the discriminability and the
expressibility of the resulting representation [45, 48].
Aiming at tackling the computational challenges when
applying sparse coding to tensor data processing, we propose a tensor dictionary learning approach which learns a
dictionary structured with separability and orthonomality.
The separability of dictionary atoms makes the resulting
method highly scalable. The orthonomality among dictionary atoms leads to very efficient sparse coding computation, as each sub-problem encountered during the iterations
for solving the resulting optimization problem has a simple closed-form solution. These two characteristics, i.e. the
computational efficiency and scalability, make the proposed
method very suitable for processing tensor data.
Based on the proposed dictionary learning method, we
develop a powerful descriptor for DT classification, which
is constructed by regarding the distribution of sparse codes
generated from DT sequences under the learned dictionary.

73

