Naive Bayes Super-Resolution Forest
Jordi Salvador
Eduardo Pérez-Pellitero
Technicolor R&I Hannover
{jordi.salvador,eduardo.perezpellitero}@technicolor.com

Abstract

32.5

NBSRF

32.4

1. Introduction
Ongoing research on example-based super resolution has
recently provided large performance improvements in terms
of accuracy and efficiency thanks to the introduction of the
latest machine learning approaches. One possible strategy
is internal learning [10, 8, 29], where the cross-scale selfsimilarity property of small (square) natural image patches
is exploited to regress the appearance of high-resolution
patches. Despite the nice properties of these methods,
e.g. their implicit adaptivity to the image contents, an important practical drawback is the computational cost induced by the required nearest-neighbor search.
In order to alleviate this problem, one possibility is to exploit the latest and efficient approximate nearest-neighbor
search algorithms [2, 13, 11, 22, 25]. The alternative is the
progressive reduction of the search range for similar patches
presented by the latest best performing internal learning
methods [8, 29]. The evolution from the work of Glasner et
al. [10] to that of Yang et al. [29] is remarkable: The search

32.3

PSNR (dB)

This paper presents a fast, high-performance method for
super resolution with external learning. The first contribution leading to the excellent performance is a bimodal
tree for clustering, which successfully exploits the antipodal invariance of the coarse-to-high-res mapping of natural
image patches and provides scalability to finer partitions
of the underlying coarse patch space. During training an
ensemble of such bimodal trees is computed, providing different linearizations of the mapping. The second and main
contribution is a fast inference algorithm, which selects the
most suitable mapping function within the tree ensemble
for each patch by adopting a Local Naive Bayes formulation. The experimental validation shows promising scalability properties that reflect the suitability of the proposed
model, which may also be generalized to other tasks. The
resulting method is beyond one order of magnitude faster
and performs objectively and subjectively better than the
current state of the art.

ASRF
A+

32.2

SRCNN
32.1
32
31.9

Zeyde et al.
31.8
101

ANR
100

Slower <---

10-1

Running time (s)

10-2

--->Faster

Figure 1. The proposed Naive Bayes Super-Resolution Forest
clearly improves PSNR and runtime in comparison to the state of
the art. (SRCNN uses the public slower implementation.)

on the entire multi-scale pyramid of each intermediate image towards the desired scale in the former is reduced to an
iterated in-place example selection (one of just 9 possible
patches in the immediately lower scale) in the latter thanks
to the incorporation of additional prior knowledge from offline training. The exploitation of this additional prior also
requires a search, which is common to most external learning approaches as we observe below. An additional limitation in internal learning methods exploiting cross-scale
self-similarity is that the processing must be iteratively applied in small scaling factors to fullfill the self-similarity
assumption, which translates into a costlier processing.
In contrast, recent external learning approaches [23, 19,
24, 20] cast the super-resolution problem as a mapping from
either low-res or coarse (upscaled by interpolation) patches
to high-res ones in a single step. Since the mapping function is non-linear, it is beneficious to properly split it into
locally linear mapping functions. During an offline training
stage, low-res or coarse patches can be clustered (e.g. extracting centroids with K-SVD [1]) under the assumption of
mapping function linearity close to each centroid. This approach, which contrasts with former efforts in costly sparse
coding-based regression [30, 31, 18], provides a streamlined online inference: (1) determine the best cluster (linearization) for each patch; (2) apply the precomputed linear
mapping function; and (3) reconstruct by patch overlapping.

325

