A Wavefront Marching Method for Solving the Eikonal Equation on Cartesian
Grids
B. Cancela, M. Ortega, M. G. Penedo
VARPA Group, Universidade da Coruña
{brais.cancela, mortega, mgpenedo}@udc.es

Abstract
This paper presents a new wavefront propagation
method for dealing with the classic Eikonal equation. While
classic Dijkstra-like graph-based techniques achieve the solution in O(M log M ), they do not approximate the unique
physically relevant solution very well. Fast Marching Methods (FMM) were created to efficiently solve the continuous problem. The proposed approximation tries to maintain
the complexity, in order to make the algorithm useful in a
wide range of contexts. The key idea behind our method is
the creation of ’mini wave-fronts’, which are combined to
propagate the solution. Experimental results show the improvement in the accuracy with respect to the state of the
art, while the average computational speed is maintained
in O(M log M ), similar to the FMM techniques.

1. Introduction
In computer vision, a large number of applications require the definition of a method for solving the optimaltrajectory problem. In early stages, graph-search algorithms
were used to solve the issue. For instance, A* and F* algorithms were applied to compute distance maps [4] or road
detection [17]. Both methods suffer from ’metrication errors’, since these algorithms consider the image as a graph,
where each pixel is a node. As Cohen and Kimmel [8]
clearly demonstrate, these methods always cause an error
in some direction, that will be invariant to the grid resolution.
To overcome this issue, Cohen and Kimmel [8] proposed to deal with the continuous optimal trajectory problem, whose motion is governed by a partial differential
equation known as the Hamilton-Jacobi equation. In computer vision, when dealing with path planning, a HamiltonJacobi formula called the Eikonal equation is found to be
very useful. It is a first-order nonlinear PDE whose solution tracks the motion of a monotonically advancing front.
Several methods have been proposed to solve this equation,

being the Fast Marching Method (FMM), the Fast Sweeping Method (FSM) and their variants the most stable and
consistent ones.
More complex algorithms can solve a more general
equation, the static Hamilton-Jacobi equation. That is the
case of the Ordered Upwind Method [22], or, more recently,
by the works of Bornemann et al. [5] and Mirebeau [18].
This equation introduces the concept of anisotropic forces,
where the direction of the motion is taken into account. Although recent approaches in medical imaging deals with
this problem [14, 19, 16, 3], they deal with a simplified version.
Eikonal Equation Solvers: The FMM introduced by
Sethian [20] defines a wavefront propagation method that
is consistent with the continuous case, while introducing
order in the propagation causes this one-pass algorithm
to maintain the classic graph search algorithm complexity,
O(M log M ), being M the number of nodes in the model.
Several approaches improve either the complexity (O(M )
in [15, 23]) or the accuracy of the model [21, 7, 10, 9, 13, 1].
The Fast Sweeping Method (FSM) [25] was also introduced to solve the Eikonal equation. It is an iterative algorithm that removes the FMM one-pass condition. The algorithm finds the numerical solution by alternating sweepings
in predetermined directions, while computing the solution
using a nonlinear upwinding method. Similar to the FMM,
it is possible to increase its accuracy by introducing high
order schemes into the finite difference upwinding scheme
[24].
Both FMM and FSM solve the Eikonal equation using
the same upwinding procedure, providing the same results.
They only differ in the technique used to decide which node
should be updated. According to [13], the main advantage
of using the FMM over existing techniques is that the technique keeps order in the selection of which point should be
computed next.
In this paper we present a new front propagation method
to solve the optimal-trajectory problem in cartesian grids.
Based in the idea of front-propagation techniques, we
11832

