Detection and Segmentation of 2D Curved Reﬂection Symmetric Structures
Ching L. Teo

Cornelia Fermüller

Yiannis Aloimonos

cteo@cs.umd.edu

fer@umiacs.umd.edu

yiannis@cs.umd.edu

Computer Vision Lab, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA

Abstract
Symmetry, as one of the key components of Gestalt theory, provides an important mid-level cue that serves as input to higher visual processes such as segmentation. In this
work, we propose a complete approach that links the detection of curved reflection symmetries to produce symmetryconstrained segments of structures/regions in real images
with clutter. For curved reflection symmetry detection,
we leverage on patch-based symmetric features to train
a Structured Random Forest classifier that detects multiscaled curved symmetries in 2D images. Next, using
these curved symmetries, we modulate a novel symmetryconstrained foreground-background segmentation by their
symmetry scores so that we enforce global symmetrical consistency in the final segmentation. This is achieved by imposing a pairwise symmetry prior that encourages symmetric pixels to have the same labels over a MRF-based representation of the input image edges, and the final segmentation is obtained via graph-cuts. Experimental results over
four publicly available datasets containing annotated symmetric structures: 1) SYMMAX-300 [38], 2) BSD-Parts, 3)
Weizmann Horse (both from [18]) and 4) NY-roads [35]
demonstrate the approach’s applicability to different environments with state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
The world that we see abounds in several different kinds
of regularities and invariants that computer vision have long
attempted to capture. These invariants include: geometry [29], shape [5], scale [24] and motion [12]. The goal
of capturing such invariants from low-level visual signals
is to ultimately simplify the representations that feed into
higher-level visual tasks: e.g. segmentation, recognition,
tracking etc. In this work, we focus on extracting symmetry, a ubiquitous and very common shape-based regularity,
from real images containing clutter (Fig. 1 (left)) and use
the detected symmetries to extract symmetry-constrained
segments/regions that support the symmetry axes (Fig. 1

Figure 1. (Left) Detected curved reflection symmetries with red
denoting stronger symmetries. (Right) Selected symmetry axes (I)
and their corresponding symmetry-constrained segmentations (II).

(right)). Such a view is shared by Gestalt psychology, which
considers symmetry as one of the key grouping or mid-level
cues for explaining human visual perception. From a biological viewpoint, it is well-known that humans are extremely sensitive to reflection symmetry [39], and its detection facilitates early visual processes such as figure-ground
segmentation [7]. Specifically, we detect curved reflection
symmetries [17]. The concept is known in the literature
as ridges, ribbons or centerlines [21, 35], and is related to
the classical Medial Axis Transform of Blum [2]. Such approximate symmetries are much more prevalent in nature
than rigid reflection symmetry, which many previous works
[31, 25, 28] have addressed on simpler images with less
clutter. Detecting and segmenting such structures is also important in the related domain of biomedical imaging, where
most works have focused on the detection and segmentation
of tubular structures [16, 9, 35], such as blood vessels, ax11644

