Adaptive Spatial-Spectral Dictionary Learning for
Hyperspectral Image Denoising

1

Ying Fu1 , Antony Lam2 , Imari Sato3 , Yoichi Sato1
The University of Tokyo 2 Saitama University 3 National Institute of Informatics

Abstract
Hyperspectral imaging is beneficial in a diverse range
of applications from diagnostic medicine, to agriculture, to
surveillance to name a few. However, hyperspectral images
often times suffer from degradation due to the limited light,
which introduces noise into the imaging process. In this paper, we propose an effective model for hyperspectral image
(HSI) denoising that considers underlying characteristics of
HSIs: sparsity across the spatial-spectral domain, high correlation across spectra, and non-local self-similarity over
space. We first exploit high correlation across spectra and
non-local self-similarity over space in the noisy HSI to
learn an adaptive spatial-spectral dictionary. Then, we employ the local and non-local sparsity of the HSI under the
learned spatial-spectral dictionary to design an HSI denoising model, which can be effectively solved by an iterative
numerical algorithm with parameters that are adaptively
adjusted for different clusters and different noise levels. Experimental results on HSI denoising show that the proposed
method can provide substantial improvements over the current state-of-the-art HSI denoising methods in terms of both
objective metric and subjective visual quality.

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral imaging is the process of capturing images of a scene over multiple bands of the electromagnetic
spectrum. When captured, a hyperspectral image (HSI)
can be thought of as a set of 2D spatially organized “pixels” where each pixel contains an entire spectral distribution over wavelengths. This allows us to see the spectral
distribution of any given surface point in a scene and has
led to numerous applications in remote sensing [1], classification and detection [2, 3], diagnostic medicine [4], surveillance [5], biometrics [6], and more. However, conventional
hyperspectral imaging suffers from issues such as limited
light in individual bands, which introduces noise into the
imaging process. The degradation of HSIs not only influences the visual appearance of these images but also limits the performance of classification and detection methods.

Therefore, HSI denoising is a critical step in HSI based system pipelines.
Recently, sparse representation based models have
shown their popularity and effectiveness in image restoration. The success of sparse representation models owes to
the development of l1 -norm optimization techniques [7, 8,
9, 10] and the finding that natural images are intrinsically
sparse in many domains [11]. These domains can be represented by a dictionary, which can be constructed from basis
functions (e.g. DCT, wavelet) and adaptive learning (e.g.
K-SVD [12], stochastic approximations [13]). In addition,
due to natural images containing self-repeating patterns, the
concept of non-local self-similarity in images is introduced
in many papers on topics such as denoising [14, 15], demosaicing [16], super-resolution[17, 18], and frame rate upconversion [19].
Dong et al. [20, 21] was able to combine both sparse representation and non-local self-similarity to restore grayscale
natural images to great effect. However, their grayscale image approach is not ideally suited to HSIs since the relationship between bands is not considered. On the other hand,
Lam et al. [22] showed that spectral domain statistics can
help HSI denoising. This suggests there is rich information in the spectral domain that can be utilized. Therefore,
the potential use of sparse representation, non-local selfsimilarity, and spectral domain statistics jointly should be
studied.
In this paper, we propose a novel HSI denoising method
based on adaptive spatial-spectral dictionary learning. We
first adaptively learn a spatial-spectral dictionary for each
overlapping cubic patch of the noisy HSI, which can
sparsely represent its own cubic patches across both spatial and spectral domains as well as consider the non-local
self-similarity in of the HSI. In the dictionary learning process, the cubic patches are clustered into groups in terms
of the their similarity across the full HSI. The dictionary is
then learned for each group. In addition, we exploit the the
local and non-local sparsity of the HSI to design a denoising model for it. We show that this model can be effectively
solved by a numerical algorithm with its regularization parameters, adaptively adjusted for different clusters and dif1343

