On Linear Structure from Motion for Light Field Cameras
Ole Johannsen, Antonin Sulc and Bastian Goldluecke
University of Konstanz, Germany

Abstract
We present a novel approach to relative pose estimation which is tailored to 4D light field cameras. From the
relationships between scene geometry and light field structure and an analysis of the light field projection in terms
of Plücker ray coordinates, we deduce a set of linear constraints on ray space correspondences between a pair of
light field cameras. These can be applied to infer relative
pose of the light field cameras and thus obtain a point cloud
reconstruction of the scene. While the proposed method has
interesting relationships to pose estimation for generalized
cameras based on ray-to-ray correspondence, our experiments demonstrate that our approach is both more accurate
and computationally more efficient. It also compares favorably to direct linear pose estimation based on aligning
the 3D point clouds obtained by reconstructing depth for
each individual light field. To further validate the method,
we employ the pose estimates to merge light fields captured
with hand-held consumer light field cameras into refocusable panoramas.

1. Introduction
While the concept of light field cameras has been known
since the beginning of the 20th century [19, 10], only recent progress in sensor technology and computing power
paved the way to implementations in the form of marketready digital cameras [21, 23, 31]. In contrast to conventional cameras, a light field camera records both spatial as
well as angular information about incident light. This enables sophisticated post-processing, and one can for example virtually change focus or perspective [21], or estimate
depth maps from a single shot [32, 14].
Given this emerging paradigm for digital photography, it
is interesting to compare the alignment problem for traditional 2D images and 4D light fields. Per-pixel alignment
of 2D images requires per-pixel depth, and it is impossible
to find the complete 2D to 2D image transformation from
sparse feature correspondence alone. In contrast, it is easy
This work was supported by the ERC Starting Grant “Light Field
Imaging and Analysis” (LIA 336978, FP7-2014).

Figure 1. One application of the proposed method is efficient alignment of light fields obtained with a hand-held consumer plenoptic
camera into a common light field panorama. Given enough views,
high-quality refocusing of the panorama is possible.

to see that the individual rays in a light field can be transformed into the ray space of a second light field using only
information about relative pose, see figure 3. Not only will
this allow for particularly robust pose estimation, but creating refocusable light field panoramas is also an excellent
visual verification of the accuracy of the pose estimate.
Work on plenoptic camera calibration was so far mostly
devoted to obtaining a calibration of the intrinsic parameters, which assigns recorded luminance information to actual rays in 3D space [6, 12, 2]. In this work, we will thus assume to have an internal calibration performed. While after
calibration, camera pose with respect to a fixed camera coordinate system is usually known, the problem of computing light field camera pose given two arbitrary light fields of
the same scene has so far not been dealt with explicitly. For
small motion, tracking camera pose for visual odometry via
the plenoptic flow was discussed in [5], while our approach
is also suitable for wide-angle matching.
Nevertheless, a lot of previous work on structure-frommotion still applies to our scenario as well. We will give a
short outline of the most relevant methods now, and delve
into their technical details in the main part of the paper.
Related work on structure-from-motion. Techniques
for estimating camera motion and scene structure from
multiple images have been perfected over the past three
decades [8, 25], up to the point that it now works on large

720

