Multi-task Recurrent Neural Network for Immediacy Prediction
Xiao Chu Wanli Ouyang Wei Yang Xiaogang Wang
Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
xchu@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

wlouyang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
In this paper, we propose to predict immediacy for interacting persons from still images. A complete immediacy
set includes interactions, relative distance, body leaning direction and standing orientation. These measures are found
to be related to the attitude, social relationship, social interaction, action, nationality, and religion of the communicators. 1 A large-scale dataset with 10, 000 images is
constructed, in which all the immediacy cues and the human poses are annotated. We propose a rich set of immediacy representations that help to predict immediacy from
imperfect 1-person and 2-person pose estimation results. A
multi-task deep recurrent neural network is constructed to
take the proposed rich immediacy representations as the input and learn the complex relationship among immediacy
predictions through multiple steps of refinement. The effectiveness of the proposed approach is proved through extensive experiments on the large-scale dataset.

1. Introduction
The concept of immediacy was first introduced by
Mehrabian [18] to rate the nonverbal behaviors that have
been found to be significant indicators of communicators’
attitude toward addressees. In [18], several typical immediacy cues were defined: touching, relative distance,
body leaning direction, eye contact and standing orientation (listed in the order of importance). A complete set of
immediacy cues defined in this work are shown in Fig. 1.
These cues are important attributes found to be related to
the inter-person attitude, social relationship, and religion
of the communicators [17, 36, 12]. Immediacy cues report the communicators’ attitude which is useful in building up social networks. With vast data available from social
networking sites, connections among people can be built
up automatically by analyzing immediacy cues from visual
data. Second, these immediacy cues are useful for existing vision tasks, such as human pose estimation [38, 32],
social relationship, social role [27], and action recognition
1 The dataset can be found at http://www.ee.cuhk.edu.hk/
xgwang/projectpage_immediacy.html
˜

(a) Interaction

Holding
from
behind

Shoulder
To
shoulder

(b) Relative distance

Adjacent

Far

Holdinghands

Hug

High five

(c) Leaning direction

<-10°

[-10° 10°]

Arm
in
arm

Arm over
the
shoulder

(d) Orientation

>10°

Examples of immediacy

(e)

(f)

(g)

Figure 1. The tasks of immediacy prediction and three examples.
Detailed definitions of immediacy cues can be found in Sec. 3

[16]. The immediacy cue “touch-code” is the same as interaction recognition and has been recognized by our society [37, 13, 23] for a long time. However, a complete
dataset providing all the immediacy cues is absent. In addition, there is only little research on immediacy analysis
from the computer vision point of view.
In order to predict immediacy, it is natural to use the information from 1-person pose estimation [38] and 2-person
pose estimation, which was called touch-code in [37]. However, touch-code and single person pose estimation are imperfect. Especially, when people have interaction, interocclusion, limb ambiguities, and large pose variation inevitably occur. These cause the difficulty in immediacy prediction. On the other hand, interacting persons provide extra
representations that motivate our work.
First, there are extra information sources unexplored
when persons interact. Since both 1-person or 2-person
pose estimation are imperfect, extra information sources,
i.e., overlap of body parts, body location relative to two
persons’ center, and consistency between 1-person and 2person estimation, are helpful for immediacy prediction as
well as addressing pose estimation errors. As an example
for overlap of body parts, when all of person A and person
13352

