Aligning Books and Movies: Towards Story-like Visual Explanations by
Watching Movies and Reading Books
Yukun Zhu ∗,1 Ryan Kiros*,1 Richard Zemel1 Ruslan Salakhutdinov1
Raquel Urtasun1 Antonio Torralba2 Sanja Fidler1
1
University of Toronto 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{yukun,rkiros,zemel,rsalakhu,urtasun,fidler}@cs.toronto.edu, torralba@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
Books are a rich source of both fine-grained information,
how a character, an object or a scene looks like, as well as
high-level semantics, what someone is thinking, feeling and
how these states evolve through a story. This paper aims to
align books to their movie releases in order to provide rich
descriptive explanations for visual content that go semantically far beyond the captions available in current datasets.
To align movies and books we exploit a neural sentence
embedding that is trained in an unsupervised way from a
large corpus of books, as well as a video-text neural embedding for computing similarities between movie clips and
sentences in the book. We propose a context-aware CNN
to combine information from multiple sources. We demonstrate good quantitative performance for movie/book alignment and show several qualitative examples that showcase
the diversity of tasks our model can be used for.

1. Introduction
A truly intelligent machine needs to not only parse the
surrounding 3D environment, but also understand why people take certain actions, what they will do next, what they
could possibly be thinking, and even try to empathize with
them. In this quest, language will play a crucial role in
grounding visual information to high-level semantic concepts. Only a few words in a sentence may convey really
rich semantic information. Language also represents a natural means of interaction between a naive user and our vision
algorithms, which is particularly important for applications
such as social robotics or assistive driving.
Combining images or videos with language has gotten
significant attention in the past year, partly due to the creation of CoCo [20], Microsoft’s large-scale captioned image dataset. The field has tackled a diverse set of tasks such
as captioning [15, 13, 40, 39, 24], alignment [13, 17, 38],
Q&A [22, 21], visual model learning from textual descriptions [9, 29], and semantic visual search with natural multisentence queries [19].
∗ Denotes equal contribution

Figure 1: Shot from the movie Gone Girl, along with the subtitle,
aligned with the book. We reason about the visual and dialog (text)
alignment between the movie and a book.
Books provide us with very descriptive text that conveys
both fine-grained visual details (how things look like) as
well as high-level semantics (what people think, feel, and
how their states evolve through a story). This source of
knowledge, however, does not come with associated visual
information that would enable us to ground it with natural
language. Grounding descriptions in books to vision would
allow us to get textual explanations or stories about the visual world rather than short captions available in current
datasets. It could also provide us with a very large amount
of data (with tens of thousands books available online).
In this paper, we exploit the fact that many books have
been turned into movies. Books and their movie releases
have a lot of common knowledge as well as they are complementary in many ways. For instance, books provide detailed descriptions about the intentions and mental states of
the characters, while movies are better at capturing visual
aspects of the settings.
The first challenge we need to address, and the focus of
this paper, is to align books with their movie releases in order to obtain rich descriptions for the visual content. We
aim to align the two sources with two types of information:
visual, where the goal is to link a movie shot to a book paragraph, and dialog, where we want to find correspondences
between sentences in the movie’s subtitle and sentences in
the book (Fig. 1). We introduce a novel sentence similarity
measure based on a neural sentence embedding trained on
millions of sentences from a large corpus of books. On the
visual side, we extend the neural image-sentence embeddings to the video domain and train the model on DVS descriptions of movie clips. Our approach combines different
similarity measures and takes into account contextual infor1 19

