Learning Data-driven Reflectance Priors
for Intrinsic Image Decomposition
Tinghui Zhou
UC Berkeley

Philipp Krähenbühl
UC Berkeley

Alexei A. Efros
UC Berkeley

Abstract
We propose a data-driven approach for intrinsic image
decomposition, which is the process of inferring the confounding factors of reflectance and shading in an image.
We pose this as a two-stage learning problem. First, we
train a model to predict relative reflectance ordering between image patches (‘brighter’, ‘darker’, ‘same’) from
large-scale human annotations, producing a data-driven reflectance prior. Second, we show how to naturally integrate
this learned prior into existing energy minimization frameworks for intrinsic image decomposition. We compare our
method to the state-of-the-art approach of Bell et al. [7]
on both decomposition and image relighting tasks, demonstrating the benefits of the simple relative reflectance prior,
especially for scenes under challenging lighting conditions.

X

Y

(a) Original image

1. Introduction
The human visual system is remarkable in its ability to
decompose the jumbled mess of confounds that is our visual world into simpler underlying factors. Nowhere is this
more apparent than in our impressive ability, even from a
single still image, to tease apart the effects of surface reflectance vs. scene illumination. Consider the mini-sofa in
Figure 1(a): on one hand, we can see that its seat (point
X) is much brighter than its frontal face (point Y ), but at
the same time, we can also clearly tell that they are both
“made of the same stuff” and have the same surface reflectance. This is remarkable because, by the time the light
has bounced off the sofa toward the eye (or the camera),
the contributions of reflectance and illumination have been
hopelessly entangled, which the brain then needs to undo.
In computer vision, the decomposition of an image into
reflectance (albedo) and illumination (shading) maps is usually, if somewhat inaccurately, referred to as the intrinsic
image decomposition [6]1 . The intrinsic image model states
1 The original formulation of Barrow and Tenenbaum [6] also includes
other factors, such as depth, orientation, occlusion, transparency, etc

(b) Decomposition by Bell et al.

(c) Our decomposition

Figure 1: Given an image (a), people have no trouble disentangling the confounding factors of reflectance and shading:
we can see that X is much brighter than Y , but at the same
time, we can also clearly tell that they are both “made of the
same stuff” and have the same surface reflectance. Our algorithm (c) automatically decomposes (a) into a reflectance
image (c,top) and a shading image (c,bottom). Note how the
mini-sofa is a uniform red in our reflectance image, compared to (b) state-of-the-art algorithm of Bell et al. [7].
that the observed luminance image is the product of the reflectance image times the shading image. Clearly, the inverse problem of inferring the underlying reflectance and
shading images is ill-posed and under-constrained in this
pure form since any given pixel intensity could be explained
equally well by reflectance or shading [2]. To address this,
13469

