Convolutional Sparse Coding for Image Super-resolution
Shuhang Gu1 , Wangmeng Zuo2 , Qi Xie3 , Deyu Meng3 , Xiangchu Feng4 , Lei Zhang1,∗
1
Dept. of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China
3
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi′ an Jiaotong University, Xi′ an, China
4
Dept. of Applied Mathematics, Xidian University, Xi, an, China
{cssgu, cslzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk, cswmzuo@gmail.com,
qixie.liwu@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, dymeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, xcfeng@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Most of the previous sparse coding (SC) based super resolution (SR) methods partition the image into overlapped
patches, and process each patch separately. These methods, however, ignore the consistency of pixels in overlapped
patches, which is a strong constraint for image reconstruction. In this paper, we propose a convolutional sparse coding (CSC) based SR (CSC-SR) method to address the consistency issue. Our CSC-SR involves three groups of parameters to be learned: (i) a set of filters to decompose the
low resolution (LR) image into LR sparse feature maps; (ii)
a mapping function to predict the high resolution (HR) feature maps from the LR ones; and (iii) a set of filters to reconstruct the HR images from the predicted HR feature maps
via simple convolution operations. By working directly on
the whole image, the proposed CSC-SR algorithm does not
need to divide the image into overlapped patches, and can
exploit the image global correlation to produce more robust reconstruction of image local structures. Experimental
results clearly validate the advantages of CSC over patch
based SC in SR application. Compared with state-of-the-art
SR methods, the proposed CSC-SR method achieves highly
competitive PSNR results, while demonstrating better edge
and texture preservation performance.

1. Introduction
The purpose of super-resolution (SR) is to reconstruct a
high resolution (HR) image from a single low resolution (LR) image or a sequence of LR images. SR provides a way
to overcome the inherent resolution limitations of low-cost
imaging sensors, and it also offers a solution to enhance the
existing images which were generated by old type imaging
equipment. Compared with SR from a sequence of images,
∗ Corresponding author.

single image SR (SISR) is more ill-posed because less information is provided. A key issue of single image SR is
to build the relationship between the LR image and the HR
image. Since information was lost in the down-sampling
procedure, prior knowledge is needed to provide extra information for estimating the HR image. In the early years
of studies, some simple smooth assumptions were utilized
to estimate the missing pixels of the HR image, and different analytical interpolation methods have been proposed
to zoom up LR images. However, such kind of simple smooth assumptions are far from enough for reconstructing
complex structures in natural images.
The pioneer work in [8] proposed to use an external
dataset and Markov random field (MRF) to model the image priors. Inspired by [8], many methods have been developed to model prior knowledge on local structures or
patches using natural images [4, 7, 19, 29]. Methods in
[7, 18, 19] learn the gradient distribution from high quality natural images to guide the HR estimation in the testing
phase. Considering that natural images are complex and locally structured, instead of modeling the prior on the entire
image, most SISR methods utilize the prior knowledge on
image patches, which can be further grouped into three categories: example-based, mapping-based, and sparse codingbased methods. For example-based methods, both the external [3, 8, 27] dataset and internal cross-scale relationship
[9] can be employed to provide examples of the LR and HR
patch pairs. For mapping-based methods, mapping function between the LR and HR images is directly learned using the LR/HR patch pairs to implicitly incorporate prior
knowledge [5, 6, 26, 11]. For sparse coding-based methods,
motivated by the progress of sparse coding and dictionary
learning, a couple of dictionaries are trained for LR and HR
image patches, and several approaches have been suggested
to model the relationship between the LR and HR patches
in the coding vector domain [12, 22, 29].
Although patch based methods can greatly reduce the
11823

