Unsupervised Visual Representation Learning by Context Prediction
Carl Doersch1,2
1

School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University

Abhinav Gupta1
2

Alexei A. Efros2

Dept. of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
University of California, Berkeley

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recently, new computer vision methods have leveraged
large datasets of millions of labeled examples to learn rich,
high-performance visual representations [29]. Yet efforts
to scale these methods to truly Internet-scale datasets (i.e.
hundreds of billions of images) are hampered by the sheer
expense of the human annotation required. A natural way
to address this difficulty would be to employ unsupervised
learning, which aims to use data without any annotation.
Unfortunately, despite several decades of sustained effort,
unsupervised methods have not yet been shown to extract
useful information from large collections of full-sized, real
images. After all, without labels, it is not even clear what
should be represented. How can one write an objective
function to encourage a representation to capture, for example, objects, if none of the objects are labeled?
Interestingly, in the text domain, context has proven to
be a powerful source of automatic supervisory signal for
learning representations [3, 38, 9, 37]. Given a large text
corpus, the idea is to train a model that maps each word
to a feature vector, such that it is easy to predict the words

Question 1:

Question 2:

_?

_?

Figure 1. Our task for learning patch representations involves randomly sampling a patch (blue) and then one of eight possible
neighbors (red). Can you guess the spatial configuration for the
two pairs of patches? Note that the task is much easier once you
have recognized the object!
Answer key: Q1: Bottom right Q2: Top center

This work explores the use of spatial context as a source
of free and plentiful supervisory signal for training a rich
visual representation. Given only a large, unlabeled image
collection, we extract random pairs of patches from each
image and train a convolutional neural net to predict the position of the second patch relative to the first. We argue that
doing well on this task requires the model to learn to recognize objects and their parts. We demonstrate that the feature representation learned using this within-image context
indeed captures visual similarity across images. For example, this representation allows us to perform unsupervised
visual discovery of objects like cats, people, and even birds
from the Pascal VOC 2011 detection dataset. Furthermore,
we show that the learned ConvNet can be used in the RCNN framework [19] and provides a significant boost over
a randomly-initialized ConvNet, resulting in state-of-theart performance among algorithms which use only Pascalprovided training set annotations.

Example:

in the context (i.e., a few words before and/or after) given
the vector. This converts an apparently unsupervised problem (finding a good similarity metric between words) into
a “self-supervised” one: learning a function from a given
word to the words surrounding it. Here the context prediction task is just a “pretext” to force the model to learn a
good word embedding, which, in turn, has been shown to
be useful in a number of real tasks, such as semantic word
similarity [37].
Our paper aims to provide a similar “self-supervised”
formulation for image data: a supervised task involving predicting the context for a patch. Our task is illustrated in Figures 1 and 2. We sample random pairs of patches in one of
eight spatial configurations, and present each pair to a machine learner, providing no information about the patches’
original position within the image. The algorithm must then
guess the position of one patch relative to the other. Our
underlying hypothesis is that doing well on this task requires understanding scenes and objects, i.e. a good visual
representation for this task will need to extract objects and
their parts in order to reason about their relative spatial location. “Objects,” after all, consist of multiple parts that
can be detected independently of one another, and which
11422

