Scalable Person Re-identification: A Benchmark
Liang Zheng†‡∗ , Liyue Shen†∗ , Lu Tian†∗ , Shengjin Wang† , Jingdong Wang§ , Qi Tian‡
†

Tsinghua University

§

Microsoft Research

Abstract
This paper contributes a new high quality dataset for
person re-identification, named “Market-1501”. Generally, current datasets: 1) are limited in scale; 2) consist of
hand-drawn bboxes, which are unavailable under realistic
settings; 3) have only one ground truth and one query image for each identity (close environment). To tackle these
problems, the proposed Market-1501 dataset is featured in
three aspects. First, it contains over 32,000 annotated bboxes, plus a distractor set of over 500K images, making
it the largest person re-id dataset to date. Second, images in Market-1501 dataset are produced using the Deformable Part Model (DPM) as pedestrian detector. Third,
our dataset is collected in an open system, where each identity has multiple images under each camera.
As a minor contribution, inspired by recent advances
in large-scale image search, this paper proposes an unsupervised Bag-of-Words descriptor. We view person reidentification as a special task of image search. In experiment, we show that the proposed descriptor yields competitive accuracy on VIPeR, CUHK03, and Market-1501
datasets, and is scalable on the large-scale 500k dataset.

1. Introduction
This paper considers the task of person re-identification.
Given a probe image (query), our task is to search in a
gallery (database) for images that contain the same person.
Our work is motivated by two aspects. First, most existing person re-identification datasets [10, 44, 4, 13, 22, 19]
are flawed either in the dataset scale or data richness.
Specifically, the number of identities is often confined in
several hundred. This makes it infeasible to test the robustness of algorithms under large-scale data. Moreover, images of the same identity are usually captured by two cam* Three authors contribute equally to this work.
Dataset and code are available at http://www.liangzheng.com.cn.

‡

University of Texas at San Antonio

eras; each identity has one image under each camera, so the
number of queries and relevant images is very limited. Furthermore, in most datasets, pedestrians are well-aligned by
hand-drawn bboxes (bboxes). But in reality, when pedestrian detectors are used, the detected persons may undergo
misalignment or part missing (Fig. 1). On the other hand,
pedestrian detectors, while producing true positive bboxes, also yield false alarms caused by complex background
or occlusion (Fig. 1). These distractors may exert nonignorable influence on recognition accuracy. As a result,
current methods may be biased toward ideal settings and
their effectiveness may be impaired once the ideal dataset
meets reality. To address this problem, it is important to
introduce datasets that reach closer to realistic settings.
Second, local feature based approaches [11, 40, 38, 3]
are proven to be effective in person re-identification. Considering the “query-search” mode, this is potentially compatible with image search based on the Bag-of-Words
(BoW) model. Nevertheless, some state-of-the-art methods in person re-identification rely on brute-force featurefeature matching [39, 38]. Although good recognition rate
is achieved, this line of methods suffer from low computational efficiency, which limits its potential in large-scale
applications. In the BoW model, local features are quantized to visual words using a pretrained codebook. An image is thus represented by a visual word histogram weighted
by TF-IDF scheme. Instead of performing exhaustive visual matching among images [39], in the BoW model, local
features are aggregated into a global vector.
Considering the above two issues, this paper makes two contributions. The main contribution is the collection of
a new person re-identification dataset, named the “Market1501” (Fig. 1). It contains 1,501 identities collected by 6
cameras. We further add a distractor set composed of 500K
irrelevant images. To our knowledge, Market-1501 is the
largest person re-id dataset featured by 32,668+500K bboxes and 3,368 query images. It is distinguished from existing datasets in three aspects: DPM detected bboxes, the inclusion of distractor images, and multi-query, multi-ground
truth per identity. This dataset thus provides a more real-

1116

