Learning Deconvolution Network for Semantic Segmentation
Hyeonwoo Noh
Seunghoon Hong
Bohyung Han
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, POSTECH, Korea
{hyeonwoonoh ,maga33,bhhan}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract

car

car

car
person
bicycle

We propose a novel semantic segmentation algorithm by
learning a deep deconvolution network. We learn the network on top of the convolutional layers adopted from VGG
16-layer net. The deconvolution network is composed of
deconvolution and unpooling layers, which identify pixelwise class labels and predict segmentation masks. We apply the trained network to each proposal in an input image, and construct the final semantic segmentation map by
combining the results from all proposals in a simple manner. The proposed algorithm mitigates the limitations of the
existing methods based on fully convolutional networks by
integrating deep deconvolution network and proposal-wise
prediction; our segmentation method typically identifies detailed structures and handles objects in multiple scales naturally. Our network demonstrates outstanding performance
in PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset, and we achieve the best accuracy (72.5%) among the methods trained without using
Microsoft COCO dataset through ensemble with the fully
convolutional network.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are widely used
in various visual recognition problems such as image classification [17, 24, 25], object detection [8, 10], semantic segmentation [7, 20], visual tracking [13], and action recognition [15, 23]. The representation power of CNNs leads
to successful results; a combination of feature descriptors
extracted from CNNs and simple off-the-shelf classifiers
works very well in practice. Encouraged by the success
in classification problems, researchers start to apply CNNs
to structured prediction problems, i.e., semantic segmentation [19, 1], human pose estimation [18], and so on.
Recent semantic segmentation algorithms are often formulated to solve structured pixel-wise labeling problems
based on CNN [1, 19]. They convert an existing CNN architecture constructed for classification to a fully convolutional network (FCN). They obtain a coarse label map from
the network by classifying every local region in image, and

boat

train

bus
bus

(a) Inconsistent labels due to large object size

person

person

(b) Missing labels due to small object size

Figure 1. Limitations of semantic segmentation algorithms based
on fully convolutional network. (Left) original image. (Center)
ground-truth annotation. (Right) segmentations by [19]

perform a simple deconvolution, which is implemented as
bilinear interpolation, for pixel-level labeling. Conditional
random field (CRF) is optionally applied to the output map
for fine segmentation [16]. The main advantage of the methods based on FCN is that the network accepts a whole image
as an input and performs fast and accurate inference.
Semantic segmentation based on FCNs [1, 19] have a
couple of critical limitations. First, the network has a predefined fixed-size receptive field. Therefore, the object that
is substantially larger or smaller than the receptive field may
be fragmented or mislabeled. In other words, label prediction is done with only local information for large objects and
the pixels that belong to the same object may have inconsistent labels as shown in Figure 1(a). Also, small objects are
often ignored and classified as background, which is illustrated in Figure 1(b). Although [19] attempts to sidestep this
limitation using skip architecture, this is not a fundamental solution since there is inherent trade-off between boundary details and semantics. Second, the detailed structures
of an object are often lost or smoothed because the label
11520

