Robust RGB-D Odometry Using Point and Line Features
Yan Lu
Dezhen Song
Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA
{ylu, dzsong}@cs.tamu.edu ∗

Abstract
Lighting variation and uneven feature distribution are
main challenges for indoor RGB-D visual odometry where
color information is often combined with depth information. To meet the challenges, we fuse point and line features to form a robust odometry algorithm. Line features
are abundant indoors and less sensitive to lighting change
than points. We extract 3D points and lines from RGB-D
data, analyze their measurement uncertainties, and compute camera motion using maximum likelihood estimation.
We prove that fusing points and lines produces smaller
motion estimate uncertainty than using either feature type
alone. In experiments we compare our method with state-ofthe-art methods including a keypoint-based approach and a
dense visual odometry algorithm. Our method outperforms
the counterparts under both constant and varying lighting
conditions. Specifically, our method achieves an average
translational error that is 34.9% smaller than the counterparts, when tested using public datasets.

1. Introduction
For GPS-denied indoor environments, visual odometry
is an attractive, low-cost alternative to laser-based robot localization approaches. The recent emergence of RGB-D
cameras (e.g. Kinect) significantly enhances visual odometry performance by providing pixel-wise depth measurements. Besides the relative short range and the limited accuracy of existing RGB-D technologies, the main challenges
come from large lighting condition variations and uneven
feature distributions. The former directly hinders direct approaches (e.g. the dense method in [12]) which are based on
the photo-consistency assumption. The latter often corrupts
feature tracking quality in feature-based approaches.
Building on feature-based approaches and with the challenges in mind, we propose a robust RGB-D odometry
method by fusing point and line features (see Figure 1).
Line features are abundant indoors and less sensitive to
lighting variation than points. On the other hand, points pro∗ This work was supported in part by National Science Foundation un-

der IIS-1318638, NRI-1426752, and NRI-1526200, and in part by TxDot
0-6869.

Color
images

Depth
images

P1) 2D point detection

L1) 2D line segment
detection

P2) Back-project to 3D

L2) Sample &
back-project to 3D

P3) Compute 3D
point covariances

P4) Putative
point matching

L4) Putative
line matching

L3) Detect 3D lines &
compute covariances

5) RANSAC-based
motion estimation
6) Motion estimation
refinement

Figure 1: System diagram.
vide less position ambiguity than that of lines if sufficient
observations are available. Effectively combining those desirable properties would increase both accuracy and robustness for an odometry method. We extract 3D points and
lines from RGB-D data and analyze their measurement uncertainties. We provide a framework that seamlessly fuses
points and lines by adopting a RANSAC-based motion estimation, followed by a maximum likelihood estimation
(MLE)-based motion refinement. Under Gaussian noise assumption, we prove that fusing points and lines results in
smaller uncertainty in motion estimation than using either
feature type alone.
Our method has been evaluated on real-world data in
experiments. We compare its performance with state-ofthe-art methods including a keypoint-based approach and a
dense visual odometry algorithm. Our method outperforms
the counterparts under both constant and varying lighting
conditions. Specifically, our method achieves an average
translational error that is 34.9% smaller than the counterparts, when tested using public datasets.

2. Related work
Our work belongs to visual odometry, which estimates
camera trajectories (or poses) from a sequence of images.
Visual odometry is considered as a subproblem of visual

3934

