A Multiscale Variable-grouping Framework for MRF Energy Minimization
Omer Meir

Meirav Galun Stav Yagev Ronen Basri
Weizmann Institute of Science
Rehovot, Israel

{omerm, meirav.galun, stav, ronen.basri}@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
We present a multiscale approach for minimizing the energy associated with Markov Random Fields (MRFs) with
energy functions that include arbitrary pairwise potentials.
The MRF is represented on a hierarchy of successively
coarser scales, where the problem on each scale is itself
an MRF with suitably defined potentials. These representations are used to construct an efficient multiscale algorithm
that seeks a minimal-energy solution to the original problem. The algorithm is iterative and features a bidirectional
crosstalk between fine and coarse representations. We use
consistency criteria to guarantee that the energy is nonincreasing throughout the iterative process. The algorithm
is evaluated on real-world datasets, achieving competitive
performance in relatively short run-times.

1. Introduction
In recent years Markov random fields (MRFs) have become an increasingly popular tool for image modeling, with
applications ranging from image denoising, inpainting and
segmentation, to stereo matching and optical flow estimation, and many more. An MRF is commonly constructed by
modeling the pixels (or regional “superpixels”) of an image
as variables that take values in a discrete label space, and by
formulating an energy function that suits the application.
An expressive model used often is the pairwise model,
which is specified by an energy function E : X → R,
X
X
φv (xv ) +
φuv (xu , xv ),
(1)
E(x) =
v∈V

(u,v)∈E

where x ∈ X is a label assignment of all variables v ∈ V.
The first term in this function is the sum of unary potentials,
φv (xv ), which reflect the cost of assigning label xv to variable v. The second term is the sum of pairwise potentials,
This research was supported in part by the Israel Science Foundation
Grant No. 1265/14.

Irad Yavneh
Technion
Haifa, Israel
irad@cs.technion.ac.il

φuv (xu , xv ), which model the interaction between pairs of
variables by reflecting the cost of assigning labels xu , xv to
variables u, v, respectively. Here V denotes the set of variables and E is the set of pairs of interacting variables. The
inference task then is to find a label assignment that minimizes the energy.
Considerable research has been reported in the literature
on approximating (1) in a coarse-to-fine framework [4, 6, 9,
11, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18]. Coarse-to-fine methods have been
shown to be beneficial in terms of running time [6, 9, 16,
18]. Furthermore, it is generally agreed that coarse-to-fine
schemes are less sensitive to local minima and can produce
higher-quality label assignments [4, 11, 16]. These benefits
follow from the fact that, although only local interactions
are encoded, the model is global in nature, and by working
at multiple scales information is propagated more efficiently
[9, 16].
Until recently, coarse-to-fine schemes were confined to
geometric structures, i.e., grouping together square patches
of variables in a grid [9, 11]. Recent works [4, 14] suggest
to group variables which are likely to end up with the same
label in the minimum energy solution, rather than by adhering to a geometric structure. Such grouping may lead to
over-smoothing [6, 15]. Methods for dealing with the problem of over-smoothing include applying a multi-resolution
scheme in areas around boundaries at a segmentation task
[15, 18], or pruning the label space of fine scales with a
pre-trained classifier [6].
In this paper we present a multiscale framework for solving MRFs with multi-label arbitrary pairwise potentials.
The algorithm has been designed with the intention of optimizing “hard” energies which may arise, for example, when
the parameters of the model are learned from data or when
the model accounts for negative affinities between neighboring variables. Our approach uses existing inference algorithms together with a variable grouping procedure referred to as coarsening, which is aimed at producing a hierarchy of successively coarser representations of the MRF
problem, in order to efficiently explore relevant subsets of
the space of possible label assignments. Our method is it-

1805

