Fast and Accurate Head Pose Estimation via Random Projection Forests
Donghoon Lee1 , Ming-Hsuan Yang2 , and Songhwai Oh1
1
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Korea
2
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California at Merced
donghoon.lee@cpslab.snu.ac.kr, mhyang@ucmerced.edu, songhwai@snu.ac.kr
Abstract
In this paper, we consider the problem of estimating the
gaze direction of a person from a low-resolution image. Under this condition, reliably extracting facial features is very
difficult. We propose a novel head pose estimation algorithm based on compressive sensing. Head image patches
are mapped to a large feature space using the proposed extensive, yet efficient filter bank. The filter bank is designed
to generate sparse responses of color and gradient information, which can be compressed using random projection,
and classified by a random forest. Extensive experiments
on challenging datasets show that the proposed algorithm
performs favorably against the state-of-the-art methods on
head pose estimation in low-resolution images degraded by
noise, occlusion, and blurring.

1. Introduction
The gaze of a person is important for a number of applications such as surveillance, human-computer interaction,
and psychophysical studies, to name a few. In a surveillance
system, the gaze of a person can be used to study interaction
between people and characterize objects of interest [29].
Gaze information has been used in human-computer interaction for controlling smart devices and helping collaboration between humans and robots [26].
In this paper, we consider the problem of estimating the
gaze of a moving person in a crowded scene, where head
images are assumed to be obtained from a tracking or detection algorithm. As the image resolution is usually low,
e.g., 50 × 50 pixels, it is especially challenging to estimate a
person’s gaze using their head image. A wide range of variations in skin color, hair styles, and head shapes exacerbate
the problem [27]. The problem is further complicated since
useful facial features cannot be reliably extracted from lowresolution images. An efficient gaze estimation algorithm
is of great interest for practical applications, e.g., surveillance and human-computer interaction. However, it is difficult, if not impossible, to infer gaze estimation from a lowresolution image. Therefore, this problem, in practice, is

Figure 1. The proposed random projection forest algorithm. The
responses of the designed filter bank are sparse and contains the
color and gradient information of an image. Each node of a random forest compresses the responses by random projection. An
SVM is trained using the compressed responses to split the data.
The head pose is estimated by merging the distribution of leaf
nodes.

posed as a head pose estimation task due to the high correlation of these visual cues. In this paper, we estimate the
head pose in the discrete and continuous domains with classification and regression schemes.
In this work, we address the aforementioned challenging
problems by exploiting expressive representation of compressive features and effective classification and regression
of the proposed random projection forest as shown in Figure 1. To obtain compressive features, we first design an
efficient filter bank that generates sparse high dimensional
responses. The filter bank contains multi-channel, multiscale, and multi-orientation box filters that capture color
and gradient properties from an image. Then, the highdimensional responses are compressed using random projection, preserving essential information of an image.
The random projection forest algorithm is based on the
compressive features and a random forest [4]. The compressive features alone are not discriminative descriptors due to
the generative framework of compressive sensing. When
a random forest is constructed with compressive features
where each node chooses the best random projection matrix based on the impurity measure (e.g., information gain),
the whole classifier is likely to be more discriminative. In
addition, when the random projection matrix satisfies the
restricted isometry property (RIP) condition [8], the infor-

11958

