Projection onto the Manifold of Elongated
Structures for Accurate Extraction

1

Amos Sironi1∗
Vincent Lepetit1,2
Pascal Fua1
CVLab, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland, {firstname.lastname}@epfl.ch
2
TU Graz, Graz, Austria, lepetit@icg.tugraz.at

Abstract
Detection of elongated structures in 2D images and 3D
image stacks is a critical prerequisite in many applications and Machine Learning-based approaches have recently been shown to deliver superior performance. However, these methods essentially classify individual locations
and do not explicitly model the strong relationship that exists between neighboring ones. As a result, isolated erroneous responses, discontinuities, and topological errors are
present in the resulting score maps.
We solve this problem by projecting patches of the score
map to their nearest neighbors in a set of ground truth training patches. Our algorithm induces global spatial consistency on the classifier score map and returns results that are
provably geometrically consistent. We apply our algorithm
to challenging datasets in four different domains and show
that it compares favorably to state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Reliably extracting boundaries from images is a longstanding open Computer Vision problem and finding 3D
membranes, their equivalent in biomedical image stacks,
while difficult is often a prerequisite to their segmentation.
Similarly in both regular images and image stacks, reconstructing the centerline of linear structures is a critical first
step in many applications, ranging from road delineation in
2D aerial images to modeling neurites and blood vessels in
3D biomedical image stacks.
These problems are all similar in that they involve finding elongated structures of codimension 1 or 2 given very
noisy data. In all these cases, classification- and regressionbased approaches [9, 38, 39] have recently proved to yield
better performance than those that rely on hand-designed
filters. This success is attributable to the representations
used by powerful machine learning techniques [23, 43] operating on large training datasets.
However, these methods essentially classify individual
∗ This work was supported in part by the EU ERC project MicroNano.

(a) Image

(b) [40]

(c) Ours

Figure 1. Pixel-wise classifiers reach state-of-the-art performance
in several computer vision tasks. However, the response of such
methods does not take into account the very particular structure
and the spatial relation present in the ground truth images. (a)
An aerial road image. For this problem the ground truth is composed by a continuous 1-D curve. (b) Output of a state-of-the-art
method [40]. Since this method is based on pixel-wise regression,
its output presents discontinuities on the centerlines and isolated
responses on the background. (c) The output of our method is obtained by projecting the patches of the score image of (b) into the
closest ground truth patches from the training images. In this way
the structure of the ground truth patches is transferred to the score
image, resulting in a provably correct global spatial structure.

pixels or voxels and do not explicitly model the strong relationship that exists between neighboring ones. As a result,
isolated erroneous responses, discontinuities, and topological errors are not uncommon in the resulting score maps
they produce, as illustrated by Fig. 1. Up to a point, these
problems can be mitigated by using Auto-context like techniques [43], as in [40], or relying on structured learning to
model correlations between neighbors, as in [12].
In this paper, we show that an even better way is to
first compute a score map using an appropriately trained
regressor and then systematically replace pixel neighborhoods by their nearest neighbors in a set of ground truth
training patches.

316

