Deep Fried Convnets
Zichao Yang1 Marcin Moczulski2 Misha Denil2,5
Nando de Freitas2,5,6 Alex Smola1,4 Le Song3 Ziyu Wang2,5
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 University of Oxford, 3 Georgia Institute of Technology
4
Google, 5 Google DeepMind, 6 Canadian Institute for Advanced Research
zichaoy@cs.cmu.edu, marcin.moczulski@stcatz.ox.ac.uk,
mdenil@google.com, nandodefreitas@google.com,
alex@smola.org, lsong@cc.gatech.edu, ziyu@google.com

Abstract
The fully- connected layers of deep convolutional neural
networks typically contain over 90% of the network parameters. Reducing the number of parameters while preserving
predictive performance is critically important for training
big models in distributed systems and for deployment in embedded devices.
In this paper, we introduce a novel Adaptive Fastfood
transform to reparameterize the matrix-vector multiplication of fully connected layers. Reparameterizing a fully
connected layer with d inputs and n outputs with the Adaptive Fastfood transform reduces the storage and computational costs costs from O(nd) to O(n) and O(n log d) respectively. Using the Adaptive Fastfood transform in convolutional networks results in what we call a deep fried convnet. These convnets are end-to-end trainable, and enable
us to attain substantial reductions in the number of parameters without affecting prediction accuracy on the MNIST
and ImageNet datasets.

1. Introduction
In recent years we have witnessed an explosion of applications of convolutional neural networks with millions
and billions of parameters. Reducing this vast number of
parameters would improve the efficiency of training in distributed architectures. It would also allow for the deployment of state-of-the-art convolutional neural networks on
embedded mobile applications. These train and test time
considerations are both of great importance.
A standard convolutional network is composed of two
types of layers, each with very different properties. Convolutional layers, which contain a small fraction of the network parameters, represent most of the computational effort. In contrast, fully connected layers contain the vast
majority of the parameters but are comparatively cheap to

evaluate [21].
This imbalance between memory and computation suggests that the efficiency of these two types of layers should
be addressed in different ways. [12] and [18] both describe
methods for minimizing computational cost of evaluating
a network at test time by approximating the learned convolutional filters with separable approximations. These approaches realize speed gains at test time but do not address
the issue of training, since the approximations are made after the network has been fully trained. Additionally, neither approach achieves a substantial reduction in the number of parameters, since they both work with approximations of the convolutional layers, which represent only a
small portion of the total number of parameters. Many other
works have addressed the computational efficiency of convolutional networks in more specialized settings [13, 24].
In contrast to the above approaches, [11] shows that there
is significant redundancy in the parameterization of several
deep learning models, and exploits this to reduce the number of parameters. More specifically, their method represents the parameter matrix as a product of two low rank
factors, and the training algorithm fixes one factor (called
static parameters) and only updates the other factor (called
dynamic parameters). [33] uses low-rank matrix factorization to reduce the size of the fully connected layers at train
time. They demonstrate large improvements in reducing the
number of parameters of the output softmax layer, but only
modest improvements for the hidden fully connected layers. [37] implements low-rank factorizations using the SVD
after training the full model. In contrast, the methods advanced in [33] and this paper apply both at train and test
time.
In this paper we show how the number of parameters
required to represent a deep convolutional neural network
can be substantially reduced without sacrificing predictive
performance. Our approach works by replacing the fully
11476

