Self-Occlusion and Disocclusion in Causal Video Object Segmentation
Yanchao Yang1 , Ganesh Sundaramoorthi2 , and Stefano Soatto1
1

University of California, Los Angeles, USA

2

King Abdullah University of Science & Technology (KAUST), Saudi Arabia

yyc8912@g.ucla.edu, ganesh.sundaramoorthi@kaust.edu.sa, soatto@ucla.edu

Abstract
We propose a method to detect disocclusion in video sequences of three-dimensional scenes and to partition the
disoccluded regions into objects, defined by coherent deformation corresponding to surfaces in the scene. Our method
infers deformation fields that are piecewise smooth by construction without the need for an explicit regularizer and
the associated choice of weight. It then partitions the disoccluded region and groups its components with objects by
leveraging on the complementarity of motion and appearance cues: Where appearance changes within an object,
motion can usually be reliably inferred and used for grouping. Where appearance is close to constant, it can be used
for grouping directly. We integrate both cues in an energy
minimization framework, incorporate prior assumptions explicitly into the energy, and propose a numerical scheme.

1. Introduction
Persistent tracking of three-dimensional (3D) objects in
video presents long-standing challenges unless they are flat
[33], or the video is short [25]. As surfaces move in 3D relative to the viewer, previously unseen portions of the scene
become visible and will have to be attributed to different
objects to maintain tracking. Such disocclusion phenomena
are the focus of our investigation.
Consider a camera rotating around a box in Fig 1: Both
the occluded and disoccluded regions involve portions of
different objects, in this case just the box and the “background.” Occlusions have been addressed by [29, 1]. We
focus on disocclusions, by determining the disoccluded area
(Sect. 2), partitioning it and grouping each portion with an
object (Sect. 3).
Grouping unseen portions of the scene into different objects requires prior assumptions on their properties. One
could assume that the “appearance” or “texture” of objects
is homogeneous (i.e., their reflectance exhibits spatially stationary statistics) and leverage on the similarity of image
color histograms to partition and group disoccluded regions.
However, this assumption often fails, as in Fig. 1. Alterna-

Figure 1. Relative motion between a three-dimensional scene and
the camera (here rotating around the box) causes disocclusion, i.e.,
regions of the image domain where previously unseen portions of
the scene project to. Unless objects in the scene are flat, the disocclusion include portions of different objects. Persistent tracking
requires detecting the disocclusion and attributing their components to different objects.

tively, one could assume that the “apparent motion” of objects is homogeneous (i.e., the deformation undergone by
the image domain is smooth within objects, and discontinuous across). However, when objects exhibit “textureless”
surfaces (i.e., constant reflectance), such a deformation is
undetermined, and cannot be used for grouping.
Fortunately, motion and appearance cues are complementary: When one fails to be informative, the other may
be. Leveraging such complementarity is central to this paper. When the disoccluded region exhibits complex appearance, motion can be reliably inferred and exploited for
grouping. Otherwise, when the disoccluded region is textureless, photometric statistics are spatially homogeneous
and can be reliably used for grouping. Of course, both cues
can fail if an object has piecewise constant appearance, and
the transition happens right at the disocclusion (Fig. 2).
However, these are accidental phenomena that do not persist
in long temporal sequences.
For us, objects are layouts of piecewise smooth and
smoothly deforming surfaces in 3D supporting Lambertian reflection seen under constant illumination throughout
a video sequence. There can be multiple objects moving
independently, in addition to viewer (or equivalently background) motion. Under these assumptions, the domain of
a video image of a scene can be partitioned into two types
of regions: Those that are co-visible, that under the stated
assumptions are a smooth deformation of regions in the pre14408

