Robust Model-based 3D Head Pose Estimation
Gregory P. Meyer1,2
Shalini Gupta2
Iuri Frosio2
Dikpal Reddy2
1 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
2 NVIDIA

Abstract
We introduce a method for accurate three dimensional
head pose estimation using a commodity depth camera. We
perform pose estimation by registering a morphable face
model to the measured depth data, using a combination of
particle swarm optimization (PSO) and the iterative closest
point (ICP) algorithm, which minimizes a cost function that
includes a 3D registration and a 2D overlap term. The pose
is estimated on the fly without requiring an explicit initialization or training phase. Our method handles large pose
angles and partial occlusions by dynamically adapting to
the reliable visible parts of the face. It is robust and generalizes to different depth sensors without modification. On the
Biwi Kinect dataset, we achieve best-in-class performance,
with average angular errors of 2.1, 2.1 and 2.4 degrees for
yaw, pitch, and roll, respectively, and an average translational error of 5.9 mm, while running at 6 fps on a graphics
processing unit.

1. Introduction
Estimating the three dimensional (3D) pose (rotation and
position) of the head is an important problem with applications in facial motion capture, human-computer interaction
and video conferencing. It is a pre-requisite to gaze tracking,
face recognition, and facial expression analysis. Head pose
estimation has traditionally been performed on RGB images
with rotation-specific classifiers or facial features [21], or
by registering images to 3D templates [30, 9]. However,
RGB-based head pose estimation is difficult when illumination variations, shadows, and occlusions are present. With
the emergence of inexpensive commodity depth cameras,
promising 3D techniques for body [29], hand [22], and head
[15] pose estimation have been proposed.
We present an algorithm for accurate 3D head pose estimation for data acquired with commodity depth cameras.
Our approach uses only 3D information, no manual intervention or training, and generalizes well to different 3D sensors.
On the benchmark Biwi Kinect dataset [15], we achieve average angular errors of 2.1◦ , 2.1◦ and 2.4◦ for yaw, pitch,
and roll, respectively, and an average translational error of

Jan Kautz2

5.9 mm, while running at 6 fps on a graphics processing unit
(GPU). To our knowledge, this is the best accuracy reported
on this dataset up to now.
We achieve this high accuracy by combining a number of
concepts together in an effective manner. We first detect the
head using an adaptive 3D matched filter. Then, we register a
morphable face model [6] to the measured facial data through
a combination of particle swarm optimization (PSO) and the
iterative closest point (ICP) algorithm. We demonstrate that
together PSO and ICP simultaneously improve robustness,
accuracy, and computational efficiency. Instead of creating
a person-specific model during an initialization phase, we
continuously adapt a morphable model to fit the subject’s
face on the fly. Additionally, we dynamically weight the
vertices of the morphable model to give more importance to
the useful visible parts of the face, and thus handle extreme
poses and partial occlusions effectively.

2. Related Work
Notable techniques for 3D head pose estimation employ
features, pose-specific classifiers, or registration to reference
3D head models.
Sun and Yin locate facial features using curvature properties to infer the head pose to within 5◦ [31]. Breitenstein et
al. use the orientation of the nose as an initial estimate for
head pose and refine it by comparing against pre-rendered
depth images of an average face model in various poses 6◦
apart [7]. Papazov et al. introduce a triangular surface patch
(TSP) descriptor to match facial point clouds to a gallery of
synthetic faces and to infer their pose [24]. Feature-based
techniques fail when the features cannot be detected, e.g. in
the case of extreme rotations or partial occlusions.
Among the classifier-based techniques is the work of
Seemann et al. where they detect faces in RGB images and
estimate the head pose from the disparity map of a stereo
camera using a neural network for each rotation [28]. Fanelli
et al. train random classification and regression forests with
range image patches for head detection and pose estimation
[15]. Their technique achieves good accuracy on high and
low quality depth data [14, 15]. Tulyakov et al. [32] use
cascaded tree classifiers and achieve higher accuracies than
Fanelli et al. Classifier-based techniques require extensive

3649

