Beyond Gauss: Image-Set Matching on the Riemannian Manifold of PDFs
Mehrtash Harandi1 , Mathieu Salzmann1,2 , and Mahsa Baktashmotlagh3
1

NICTA∗ and Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
2
CVLab, EPFL, Switzerland
3
Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia

Abstract
State-of-the-art image-set matching techniques typically
implicitly model each image-set with a Gaussian distribution. Here, we propose to go beyond these representations
and model image-sets as probability distribution functions
(PDFs) using kernel density estimators. To compare and
match image-sets, we exploit Csiszár f -divergences, which
bear strong connections to the geodesic distance defined
on the space of PDFs, i.e., the statistical manifold. Furthermore, we introduce valid positive definite kernels on the
statistical manifold, which let us make use of more powerful classification schemes to match image-sets. Finally, we
introduce a supervised dimensionality reduction technique
that learns a latent space where f -divergences reflect the
class labels of the data. Our experiments on diverse problems, such as video-based face recognition and dynamic
texture classification, evidence the benefits of our approach
over the state-of-the-art image-set matching methods.

1. Introduction
This paper tackles the problem of image-set matching
by comparing probability distribution functions (PDFs) using Csiszár f -divergences [9, 2]. Image-set matching, i.e.
matching unordered sets of images, exploits the richer information contained in multiple images to perform recognition. With the growth of camera networks, video data,
hyper-spectral imaging technologies, etc., image-sets are
becoming ubiquitous in our everyday lives.
State-of-the-art image-set matching methods [16, 43, 18,
24] typically model image-sets using geometrical structures, e.g., Riemannian manifolds. The two most popular
such structures are Grassmann manifolds [1] and the man∗ NICTA is funded by the Australian Government as represented by the
Department of Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy and
the ARC through the ICT Centre of Excellence program.

ifold of Symmetric Positive Definite (SPD) matrices [35].
From a different perspective, these representations can be
related to modeling an image-set with a single multivariate Gaussian distribution. Indeed, in the case of the SPD
manifold [43], an image-set is represented as the covariance
matrix of the features extracted in each image of the set,
which therefore essentially encodes a zero-mean Gaussian
distribution of the image features. For Grassmann manifolds, where an image-set is represented by a subspace of its
image features, several distances between subspaces were
shown to be related to distances between multivariate Gaussian distributions [17]. While both manifolds have been
shown to provide representations that are robust to varying
imaging conditions, intuitively, modeling an image-set with
a single Gaussian distribution seems restrictive.
In this paper, we therefore propose to make use of better probabilistic models to represent an image-set and study
different ways to compare such models for the task of
image-set matching. To this end, we model the PDF of an
image-set using a non-parametric, data-driven kernel density estimator. Since PDFs form a Riemannian manifold,
i.e., the statistical manifold, the geodesic distance on the
manifold comes as a natural choice to measure the similarity between two image-sets. Unfortunately, the geodesic
distance is impractical to compute for general distributions.
Therefore, we propose to exploit Csiszár f -divergences [9],
which bear strong connections to the geodesic distance. In
particular, we study two specific f -divergences and discuss
how robust empirical estimates of these divergences can be
obtained.
From a recognition perspective, f -divergences can be directly employed in a nearest neighbor classifier to match
image-sets. However, for complex recognition tasks, a nearest neighbor classifier may have limited power. To address
this issue, we therefore study the positive definiteness of
kernels induced by these f -divergences.
In [25], Jaakkola and Haussler introduced a general form
of positive definite kernels on statistical manifolds. How14112

