Wide baseline stereo matching with convex bounded distortion constraints
Meirav Galun∗ §

Tal Amir∗ §

Tal Hassner‡

Abstract
Finding correspondences in wide baseline setups is a
challenging problem. Existing approaches have focused
largely on developing better feature descriptors for correspondence and on accurate recovery of epipolar line constraints. This paper focuses on the challenging problem
of finding correspondences once approximate epipolar constraints are given. We introduce a novel method that integrates a deformation model. Specifically, we formulate
the problem as finding the largest number of corresponding
points related by a bounded distortion map that obeys the
given epipolar constraints. We show that, while the set of
bounded distortion maps is not convex, the subset of maps
that obey the epipolar line constraints is convex, allowing
us to introduce an efficient algorithm for matching. We further utilize a robust cost function for matching and employ
majorization-minimization for its optimization. Our experiments indicate that our method finds significantly more accurate maps than existing approaches.

1. Introduction
Finding point correspondences in image pairs of a static
scene is a classical problem in stereo and structure from
motion (SFM). Finding correspondences in wide baseline
setups, i.e., when the cameras’ focal centers are distant, is
particularly challenging. Images obtained in such setups are
generally subject to significant distortion and their content
may differ substantially also due to occlusion.
The problem of wide baseline stereo matching has received significant attention in recent years (see a brief review in Section 2). Existing approaches have focused
largely on developing better feature descriptors for correspondence and on accurate recovery of epipolar line constraints. However, although challenging, the problem of
finding correspondences once the epipolar geometry has
been estimated has not yet received sufficient attention.
In this paper we introduce a novel method for finding
correspondences in wide baseline image pairs of a static
scene. Noting that matching is often ambiguous even when
∗ Equal contributors
§ The Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel
‡ The Open University, Israel

Ronen Basri§

Yaron Lipman§

epipolar constraints are taken into account, we propose to
address the problem by using deformation maps to model
geometric changes along epipolar lines. Specifically, given
two images and an estimated fundamental matrix, our algorithm seeks to compute a geometric map that relates the
images and satisfies two requirements; First, it should respect the epipolar constraints, and, secondly, we bound the
amount of distortion that the mapping can exert locally. We
refer to such a map by epipolar consistent bounded distortion (EBD) map. Our core theoretical contribution is
in showing that, while the set of maps whose distortion is
bounded is non-convex, its intersection with maps that satisfy the epipolar constraints (with an ordering assumption
[2]) is convex, allowing us to introduce an efficient matching algorithm.
Bounded distortion (BD) maps are continuous, locally
injective transformations whose conformal distortion at every point (defined as the condition number of their Jacobian matrices) is bounded. Intuitively, the conformal distortion measures how different the local map is from a similarity transformation, i.e., how much the local aspect ratio
is changed. Bounding the conformal distortion is motivated
by the following observation. Suppose two cameras are set
so that their image planes are parallel (including as special
case rectified setups). For any fronto-parallel plane it can
be readily verified that its projections onto the two image
planes are related by a similarity transformation. Therefore
such projections undergo no distortion. Bounding the distortion in these setups therefore limits the slant and tilt of
the recovered planes.
To formulate our solution we define a cost function that
seeks an EBD map that maximizes the number of matches.
We optimize this robust objective using majorizationminimization. The use of a robust objective allows us to
recover when certain portions of the images are distorted
beyond the bounds allowed by our algorithm or when the
set of initial correspondences include outliers. We note that
our algorithm both discards outliers from the set of input
matches and constructs a dense continuous map that determines the motion of every pixel.
We have tested our method on datasets containing pairs
of images with ground truth matches and compared it to
several state-of-the-art methods. Our method consistently
outperformed these methods.
12228

