Learning Query and Image Similarities
with Ranking Canonical Correlation Analysis
Ting Yao † , Tao Mei † , and Chong-Wah Ngo ‡
†
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
‡
City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong
{tiyao, tmei}@microsoft.com, cscwngo@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
One of the fundamental problems in image search is
to learn the ranking functions, i.e., similarity between the
query and image. The research on this topic has evolved
through two paradigms: feature-based vector model and
image ranker learning. The former relies on the image surrounding texts, while the latter learns a ranker based on
human labeled query-image pairs. Each of the paradigms has its own limitation. The vector model is sensitive to
the quality of text descriptions, and the learning paradigm is difficult to be scaled up as human labeling is always
too expensive to obtain. We demonstrate in this paper that
the above two limitations can be well mitigated by jointly
exploring subspace learning and the use of click-through
data. Specifically, we propose a novel Ranking Canonical
Correlation Analysis (RCCA) for learning query and image similarities. RCCA initially finds a common subspace
between query and image views by maximizing their correlations, and further simultaneously learns a bilinear queryimage similarity function and adjusts the subspace to preserve the preference relations implicit in the click-through
data. Once the subspace is finalized, query-image similarity
can be computed by the bilinear similarity function on their
mappings in this subspace. On a large-scale click-based
image dataset with 11.7 million queries and one million images, RCCA is shown to be powerful for image search with
superior performance over several state-of-the-art methods
on both keyword-based and query-by-example tasks.

1. Introduction
Similarity function plays a key role in Web image search.
Given a textual query, the objective is to retrieve the most
relevant images and rank them by their degrees of relevance
to the query. The relevance between the query and image
can be viewed as a kind of similarity.
As textual queries and images are of two different views,

they cannot be directly compared. As a result, existing
search engines to date highly rely on the surrounding texts
associated with images. The similarity between a query and
an image is then defined based on their textual feature vectors. The relevance models, including Vector Space Model
[24], BM25 [21], and Language Models [28], can all be
used as similarity functions. However, the text description may not precisely describe salient visual content, not
to mention that some images do not even associate with any
text. Consequently, the similarity from the feature-based
vector model may suffer from robustness problem. Another
solution of similarity measure is to learn image rankers on
query-image pairs which are usually labeled by human experts. However, human labeling is always too expensive to
obtain, making it hard to scale up. Even so called “experts”
often find it hard to judge query-image relevance, resulting
in noisy labeled training data.
Our similarity learning method addresses the aforementioned two issues. First, we consider the cross-view (i.e.,
text to image) similarity by learning a common latent subspace that allows direct comparison of textual queries and
visual images in a low-dimensional space. The image representations are visual features extracted directly from the
images, rather than textual features. By learning two linear mappings, the similarity between queries and images in
the original two incomparable different spaces can be directly computed in the shared subspace. Moreover, the dimensionality of the latent subspace is significantly reduced
compared with that of any original views, leading to saving
in memory cost for search systems.
Second, the click-through data, which can be viewed as
the footprints of user searching behavior, is explored as an
effective means of understanding both the query and the user’s intent for image search [12]. As most image search engines display results as thumbnails, the user can browse the
entire image search results before clicking on a specific image. As such, users predominantly tend to click on images
that are relevant to their query. Therefore, the click-through
data can serve as a reliable and implicit feedback for im-

28

