Spatial Semantic Regularisation for Large Scale Object Detection
Damian Mrowca1, 2 , Marcus Rohrbach1, 3 , Judy Hoffman1 , Ronghang Hu1 , Kate Saenko4 , Trevor Darrell1
1
UC Berkeley, USA; 2 TU Muenchen, Germany; 3 ICSI, Berkeley, USA; 4 UMass Lowell, USA

Abstract
Large scale object detection with thousands of classes
introduces the problem of many contradicting false positive
detections, which have to be suppressed. Class-independent
non-maximum suppression has traditionally been used for
this step, but it does not scale well as the number of classes
grows. Traditional non-maximum suppression does not
consider label- and instance-level relationships nor does it
allow an exploitation of the spatial layout of detection proposals. We propose a new multi-class spatial semantic regularisation method based on affinity propagation clustering [8, 22], which simultaneously optimises across all categories and all proposed locations in the image, to improve
both the localisation and categorisation of selected detection proposals. Constraints are shared across the labels
through the semantic WordNet hierarchy. Our approach
proves to be especially useful in large scale settings with
thousands of classes, where spatial and semantic interactions are very frequent and only weakly supervised detectors can be built due to a lack of bounding box annotations.
Detection experiments are conducted on the ImageNet and
COCO dataset, and in settings with thousands of detected
categories. Our method provides a significant precision improvement by reducing false positives, while simultaneously
improving the recall.

1. Introduction
Human assistance technologies or question answering
require a precise and detailed object recognition of a visual
scene. Recently, large scale detection approaches have been
proposed which aim to distinguish hundreds or thousands
of object categories [1, 3, 11, 12, 23]. While impressive
progress has been shown, they suffer from competing object
category candidate detections as can be seen in Figure 1 (a).
Commonly, non-maximum suppression (NMS) is used to
select the bounding boxes with the highest detection score
for each category. This method is not globally optimal as
only locally overlapping boxes are suppressed by the highest scoring box. Further, in the multi-class case, it does not
take semantic relations between objects into account, e.g.

1. Angora cat
2. Angora cat
3. doggy bag
4. Pembroke
5. cat box
6. lapdog
7. kitty
8. settee
9. kitten
10. kitten
11. mouser
12. mouser
13. jird
14. beanbag
15. tabby
16. Angora rabbit
17. in-basket
18. tortoiseshell-cat
19. Manx cat
20. pet
21. pet
22. footstool
23. Persian cat
24. Persian cat
25. couch

(a) Competing box proposals from different categories

(b) Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS)

26. Eames chair
27. clothes hamper
28. love seat
29. Shetland sheepdog
30. shoebox
31. Boarfish
32. tabby cat
33. tabby cat
34. pufferfish
35. couch
36. giant squid
37. stray
38. ottoman
39. wire matrix printer
40. covered couch
41. papillon
42. Blenheim spaniel
43. Russian wolfhound
44. tamarisk gerbil
45. Cardigan Welsh corgi
46. Pekinese
47. Pomeranian
48. sand cat
49. reclining chair
50. water bed

(c) MAPC (ours)

Figure 1. Raw and spatially regularised detection of 7,404 classes
using the LSDA extension [12] of the R-CNN method [9]. (a)
Top 50 scoring candidate detections and associated categories are
listed: all proposals which support the depicted cat are green, for
chair blue. Black entries do not describe any object in this picture.
(b) NMS clusters boxes only according to their overlap not according to their class leading to multiple detections of different finegrained classes for the same object. (c) Our approach (MAPC)
exploits category relationships, clustering overlapping boxes with
similar classes together which results in less false positives on the
same object and enables to detect classes which are suppressed by
NMS because of their overlap.

the couch, floorstool and beanbag proposals should support
the settee candidate detection box in Figure 1, such that it is
not suppressed by doggy bag as in Figure 1(b).
With thousands of different object categories, semantic
relationships become a valuable source of information. Using semantics, consistency can be ensured across different
detections. Hence, this work examines the benefit of a semantic hierarchy to object detection of thousands of object
categories. We show that in such a large scale setting semantic constraints significantly improve detection.

2003

