A Linear Generalized Camera Calibration
from Three Intersecting Reference Planes
Mai Nishimura∗
Shohei Nobuhara
Takashi Matsuyama
Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University, Japan
{nisimura,nob,tm}@vision.kuee.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Shinya Shimizu
Kensaku Fujii
NTT Media Intelligence Laboratories, NTT Corporation, Japan
{shimizu.shinya,fujii.kensaku}@lab.ntt.co.jp

Abstract
Water Tank

Camera 4

This paper presents a new generalized (or ray-pixel,
raxel) camera calibration algorithm for camera systems
involving distortions by unknown refraction and reflection
processes. The key idea is use of intersections of calibration planes, while conventional methods utilized collinearity constraints of points on the planes. We show that intersections of calibration planes can realize a simple linear algorithm, and that our method can be applied to any
ray-distributions while conventional methods require knowing the ray-distribution class in advance. Evaluations using
synthesized and real datasets demonstrate the performance
of our method quantitatively and qualitatively.

1. Introduction
3D analysis and motion measurement of underwater objects enable various applications such as discovering the
process of fertilized egg development and kinematic analysis of fish motion, etc. Such applications are expected to
contribute for bioinformatics or other industrial fields, however, there have been no general techniques which can handle complicated refraction, reflection, and attenuation of underwater environments. We therefore aim at establishing a
new general technique and realizing multi-view camera system for underwater environment.
In computer vision, real cameras do not exactly follow
ideal projection models such as perspective or orthographic
projections, and captured images always show geometric
distortions. For some special camera systems, such distortions can be modeled by displacements on the imaging
plane[4, 1] in practice. However, such distortion models
∗ Presently with NTT Software Innovation Center, NTT Corporation,
Japan

Camera 5
object
Camera 3

Reference Camera

Camera 1

Camera 2

Figure 1. Multi-view camera system for underwater object capture

cannot fit with general cases such as distortions by catadioptric systems or refractive housings of unknown geometry as
shown in Figure 1.
To handle such general cases involving unknown distortions, Grossberg and Nayer[3] have proposed the concept
of generalized (or ray-pixel, raxel) camera model in which
each pixel is associated with a 3D ray outside of the system
as shown in Figure 2, and realized 3D ray modeling in the
target space without modeling the refraction and/or reflection processes explicitly.
However, conventional methods for such 3D ray modeling require either calibration objects whose global 3D positions are given, or prior knowledge on the ray-distribution
class (e.g. axial, central, etc.) of the system in order to
switch the algorithm to be applied.
The goal of this paper is to propose a new linear calibration algorithm that can overcome these limitations, and the
key idea on realizing such algorithm is use of intersections
of calibration planes.
Our contribution is twofold: (1) a new linear calibration of generalized camera model that utilizes intersections

2354

