External Patch Prior Guided Internal Clustering for Image Denoising
Fei Chen1 , Lei Zhang2 , and Huimin Yu3
1

College of Mathematics and Computer Science, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, China
Dept. of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
3
College of Information Science & Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, China
3
State Key Laboratory of CAD & CG, China
2

chenfei314@fzu.edu.cn,cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk,yhm2005@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Natural image modeling plays a key role in many vision
problems such as image denoising. Image priors are widely
used to regularize the denoising process, which is an illposed inverse problem. One category of denoising methods
exploit the priors (e.g., TV, sparsity) learned from external
clean images to reconstruct the given noisy image, while
another category of methods exploit the internal prior (e.g.,
self-similarity) to reconstruct the latent image. Though the
internal prior based methods have achieved impressive denoising results, the improvement of visual quality will become very difficult with the increase of noise level. In this
paper, we propose to exploit image external patch prior and
internal self-similarity prior jointly, and develop an external patch prior guided internal clustering algorithm for image denoising. It is known that natural image patches form
multiple subspaces. By utilizing Gaussian mixture models
(GMMs) learning, image similar patches can be clustered
and the subspaces can be learned. The learned GMMs from
clean images are then used to guide the clustering of noisypatches of the input noisy images, followed by a low-rank
approximation process to estimate the latent subspace for
image recovery. Numerical experiments show that the proposed method outperforms many state-of-the-art denoising
algorithms such as BM3D and WNNM.

1. Introduction
Image denoising aims to restore the latent clean image
x from its noise-corrupted version y = x + v, where v is
commonly assumed to be additive white Gaussian noise of
standard deviation σ. As a classical and fundamental problem in low level vision, image denoising has been widely studied [28, 29, 6, 25, 19, 20, 8]. From a probabilitybased perspective, denoising could be treated as a Bayesian

posterior estimation problem: p(x|y) = p(y|x)p(x)/p(y),
where p(y) is a constant once y is given. The conditional
probability p(y|x) is called the data model, which can be
written as


ky − xk22
.
(1)
p(y|x) ∝ exp −
σ2
The distribution of probability p(x) is called the prior
model since it specifies a priori bias among the targeted
patterns and is independent of data observation. The classic total variation (TV) [28] method actually assumes that
natural image gradients exhibit heavy-tailed distributions,
which can be fitted by Laplacian or hyper-Laplacian models [17, 34]. Many statistical models of wavelet coefficients
have also been proposed, such as generalized Gaussian [12]
and Gaussian scale mixture [25] models, etc.
The seminal work of nonlocal means (NLM) brings a
new era of denoising by finding nonlocal similar patches
within the image [2]. Such an internal self-similarity prior is
widely exploited in patch-based denoising methods and has
achieved a great success [7, 22, 15, 30]. A typical example
is the so-called BM3D algorithm [10], which uses collaborative filtering in transformed domain by grouping nonlocal
similar patches. The BM3D algorithm is very effective and
it has been a benchmark in image denoising. Based on the
principle of sparse and redundant representations, another
effective category of denoising methods is the dictionarybased models. Largely owe to the success of the seminal
work of KSVD [1], learning dictionaries from natural image patches has become a hot topic in image processing and
computer vision [27, 21, 7].
Since image denoising is a typical ill-posed problem, the
use of external natural patch priors to regularize the denoising process has proved to be very successful. Chatterjee
and Milanfar [9] learned denoising bounds based on clustered natural patch database. Zoran and Weiss [33] learned

603

