Learning The Structure of Deep Convolutional Networks
Jiashi Feng
Department of EECS & ICSI
UC Berkeley

Trevor Darrell
Department of EECS & ICSI
UC Berkeley

jshfeng@berkeley.edu

trevor@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Training data

In this work, we develop a novel method for automatically learning aspects of the structure of a deep model in
order to improve its performance, especially when labeled
training data are scarce. We propose a new convolutional
neural network model with the Indian Buffet Process (IBP)
prior, termed ibpCNN. The ibpCNN automatically adapts
its structure to provided training data, achieves an optimal
balance among model complexity, data ﬁdelity and training
loss, and thus offers better generalization performance.
The proposed ibpCNN captures complex data distribution in an unsupervised generative way. Therefore, ibpCNN
can exploit unlabeled data – which can be collected at low
cost – to learn its structure. After determining the structure,
ibpCNN further learns its parameters according to speciﬁed tasks, in an end-to-end fashion, and produces discriminative yet compact representations.
We evaluate the performance of ibpCNN, on fully- and
semi-supervised image classiﬁcation tasks; ibpCNN surpasses standard CNN models on benchmark datasets with
much smaller size and higher efﬁciency.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models, and in particular convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) [17], have achieved very good performance in a number of benchmarks [15, 8, 10]. The performance gain brought by deep models arguably lies in their
end-to-end learning strategy, multi-layer architecture and
the availability of sufﬁciently large training datasets.
Several recent works [22, 24] suggest when they grow
larger, the networks will achieve better performance. However, a very large neural network, which thus has great complexity, generally demands signiﬁcantly more training data
for learning its free parameters in order to obtain satisfactory generalization performance. Therefore, in the absence
of sufﬁcient training data, a complicated network model
may not perform comparably well as a simpler model for
some tasks [18]. Hence, choosing an appropriate and com-

ŝďƉCNN

Feature

polar bear

polar bear

Extra data

Figure 1. The number of ﬁlters in each layer of the proposed
ibpCNN model is adaptive to the complexity of training data: an
ibpCNN trained on a relatively small dataset (top panel) has a
smaller size than the one trained on a lager dataset including some
extra data (bottom panel). Thus the output representations grow in
complexity with input data.

pact structure for a network, which involves making an optimal trade-off between the amount of available training data
and model complexity, is desirable for obtaining good practical performance.
In this work, we propose a novel Convolutional Neural Network model equipped with an Indian Buffet Process
prior [9], called ibpCNN, to solve this important problem.
As shown in Figure 1, the ibpCNN systematically evolves
from a simplest network, driven by the provided training
data and any speciﬁed task, and ﬁnally converges to a compact model of an appropriate structure. During the evolution the ibpCNN only requires training data along with loss
functional characterizing the targeted task as inputs, and
does not require explicitly trying multiple different structures via cross-validation.
Automatically learning the structure of a deep model is
a difﬁcult task, due to the huge search space of possible
models. Fortunately, model structure learning has been elegantly explored by several generative model priors, such
as the Indian Buffet Process (IBP) [9, 1] or Beta Process
(BP) [21]. These priors provide a systematic and principled
approach to search the model space. In this work, we also
12749

