Robust Image Segmentation Using Contour-guided Color Palettes
Xiang Fu1 , Chien-Yi Wang1 , Chen Chen1 , Changhu Wang2∗, C.-C. Jay Kuo1
1
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA
2
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
{xiangfu, chienyiw, chen80}@usc.edu, chw@microsoft.com, cckuo@sipi.usc.edu

Abstract
The contour-guided color palette (CCP) 1 is proposed
for robust image segmentation. It efficiently integrates contour and color cues of an image. To find representative
colors of an image, color samples along long contours between regions, similar in spirit to machine learning methodology that focus on samples near decision boundaries, are
collected followed by the mean-shift (MS) algorithm in the
sampled color space to achieve an image-dependent color
palette. This color palette provides a preliminary segmentation in the spatial domain, which is further fine-tuned by
post-processing techniques such as leakage avoidance, fake
boundary removal, and small region mergence. Segmentation performances of CCP and MS are compared and analyzed. While CCP offers an acceptable standalone segmentation result, it can be further integrated into the framework of layered spectral segmentation to produce a more
robust segmentation. The superior performance of CCPbased segmentation algorithm is demonstrated by experiments on the Berkeley Segmentation Dataset.

1. Introduction
Automatic image segmentation is a fundamental problem in computer vision. It plays an important role in diverse applications, such as object detection, scene parsing,
and image retrieval. It partitions an image into a small number of disjointed coherent regions with low-level features,
with the goal of minimizing intra-variance and maximizing
inter-variance among regions. It is desired that the segmentation result is close to human semantic understanding and
not sensitive to parameter setting and/or image content.
To segment an image, pixel (or superpixel) grouping in
the spatial and spectral domains were performed in the literature. Typically, spatial-domain pixel grouping is guided
by contours [2, 7] while spectral-domain pixel grouping is
∗ Corresponding Author
1 The MATLAB code of CCP Segmentation can be downloaded at
https://github.com/fuxiang87/MCL_CCP.

achieved by clustering in a color space [17, 4, 5, 8, 11, 12,
18]. Thus, contours and colors are two widely used features
in image segmentation, yet each of them has its own limitations. For example, contours are not reliable if they are short
and fragmented. They might fail to separate two regions if
parts of their common boundaries are blurred and/or with
a low contrast. The color feature is not effective to handle regions with textures or gradual color transition, leading to over-segmentation. One common challenge in these
methods is the selection of proper parameters, such as the
color clustering bandwidth. In general, these optimal parameters are image dependent and difficult to determine. In
this work, we integrate contour and color cues under one
unified framework, and propose the contour-guided color
palette (CCP) for robust image segmentation. That is, it has
only one key parameter and its performance is stable when
the parameter lies in a suitable range.
The basic idea of CCP is described as follows. To find
representative colors of a given image, we collect color
samples from both sides of long contours, and conduct the
mean-shift (MS) algorithm [4] in the sampled color space to
define an image-specific color palette. This scheme reduces
color complexity of the original image, yet keeps a sufficient number of representative colors to separate distinctive
regions and yield a preliminary segmentation. This result
is further refined by post-processing techniques in the spatial domain, which leads to a robust standalone segmentation. The CCP result can be applied to any superpixel-based
segmentation algorithm by replacing the over-segmentation
layer, such as mean-shift (MS) [4], Felzenszwalb and Huttenlocher’s graph-based (FH) [8], and SLIC [1] superpixels. Furthermore, it can be integrated into the layered spectral segmentation framework, such as multi-layer spectral
segmentation (MLSS) [11] and segmentation by aggregating superpixels (SAS) [12], and used as a coarse layer in
this context for a more robust segmentation. The superior performance of CCP-based segmentation algorithms
are demonstrated in the experiments on the Berkeley Segmentation Dataset (BSDS) [13].
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Related
11618

