Top Rank Supervised Binary Coding for Visual Search
Dongjin Song∗
Department of ECE
UC San Diego

Wei Liu∗
School of Electronic Engineering
Xidian University

dosong@ucsd.edu

wliu@ee.columbia.edu

Rongrong Ji
School of Information Science
and Engineering
Xiamen University
rrji@xmu.edu.cn

David A. Meyer
Department of Mathematics
UC San Diego

John R. Smith
IBM T. J. Watson
Research Center

dmeyer@math.ucsd.edu

jsmith@us.ibm.com

Abstract
In recent years, binary coding techniques are becoming
increasingly popular because of their high efficiency in handling large-scale computer vision applications. It has been
demonstrated that supervised binary coding techniques that
leverage supervised information can significantly enhance
the coding quality, and hence greatly benefit visual search
tasks. Typically, a modern binary coding method seeks
to learn a group of coding functions which compress data
samples into binary codes. However, few methods pursued
the coding functions such that the precision at the top of
a ranking list according to Hamming distances of the generated binary codes is optimized. In this paper, we propose a novel supervised binary coding approach, namely
Top Rank Supervised Binary Coding (Top-RSBC), which
explicitly focuses on optimizing the precision of top positions in a Hamming-distance ranking list towards preserving the supervision information. The core idea is to train
the disciplined coding functions, by which the mistakes at
the top of a Hamming-distance ranking list are penalized
more than those at the bottom. To solve such coding functions, we relax the original discrete optimization objective
with a continuous surrogate, and derive a stochastic gradient descent to optimize the surrogate objective. To further reduce the training time cost, we also design an online
learning algorithm to optimize the surrogate objective more
efficiently. Empirical studies based upon three benchmark
image datasets demonstrate that the proposed binary coding approach achieves superior image search accuracy over
the state-of-the-arts.

∗ Wei Liu was with IBM Research when this work was conducted.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of massive image collections
such as Facebook, Instagram, and Flickr, how to search for
visually relevant images effectively and efﬁciently has become overwhelmingly important. Instead of exhaustively
searching for the most similar images with respect to a
query in one high-dimensional feature space, binary coding
techniques encode images with binary codes via proper coding functions and perform efﬁcient searches in the generated
low-dimensional code space (i.e., Hamming space), therefore drastically accelerating search procedures and also saving storage. During the past few years, binary coding
(also known as hashing [26] in the literature) techniques
have been widely used in a variety of computer vision and
machine learning applications, including object recognition [23, 24, 21], scene classiﬁcation [22], image retrieval
[9, 14, 8, 33, 34, 20], linear classiﬁer training [10, 11], active learning [15], multi-task learning [28], etc.
Conceptually, a typical binary
coding method

r exploits
a group of coding functions hk : Rd → H k=1 to map
data samples from a d-dimensional data space Rd to an rdimensional Hamming space Hr , such that original samples
are represented as binary codes of length r. Early explorations in binary coding, such as Locality-Sensitive Hashing
(LSH) [2] and Min-wise Hashing (MinHash) [3], construct
coding functions with random permutations or projections.
These randomized binary coding methods, however, require
long code lengths (r ≥ 1, 000) to meet search requirements,
and usually incur inferior search accuracy for large-scale
image search [13].
Unlike the early randomized binary coding methods that
are independent of data, a great number of data-dependent
binary coding techniques have been proposed during the

1922

