Higher-Order Inference for Multi-class Log-supermodular Models
Jian Zhang, Josip Djolonga and Andreas Krause
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
jizhang@student.ethz.ch {josipd,krausea}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Higher-order models have been shown to be very useful
for a plethora of computer vision tasks. However, existing
techniques have focused mainly on MAP inference. In this
paper, we present the first efficient approach towards approximate Bayesian marginal inference in a general class
of high-order, multi-label attractive models, where previous
techniques slow down exponentially with the order (clique
size). We formalize this task as performing inference in
log-supermodular models under partition constraints, and
present an efficient variational inference technique. The resulting optimization problems are convex and yield bounds
on the partition function. We also obtain a fully factorized
approximation to the posterior, which can be used in lieu of
the true complicated distribution. We empirically demonstrate the performance of our approach by comparing it to
traditional inference methods on a challenging high-fidelity
multi-label image segmentation dataset. We obtain stateof-the-art classification accuracy for MAP inference, and
substantially improved ROC curves using the approximate
marginals.

1. Introduction
Dealing with uncertainty is a central challenge in computer vision and pattern recognition. Probabilistic modeling
and inference have consequently received much attention in
these fields. However, general purpose approximate inference algorithms such as belief propagation, mean-field [1]
and variants slow down exponentially with the size of the
largest interaction (number of variables per clique) in the
model. Hence, their application has been mostly restricted
to low-order models of limited expressive power. For the
purpose of MAP (Maximum A Posteriori) inference, capturing richly parameterized interactions between large sets of
variables has been shown to be very beneficial to computer
vision tasks, e.g., in semantic segmentation [2]. The resulting energy minimization problems – even though involving large cliques – remain tractable, as long as the energy
functions are submodular. The downside of MAP inference

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 1: Results on a sample image. (a) Original image. (b,c)
Two superpixel layers that are used to define the higher-order potentials. (d) The MAP estimate using our formulation. (e) Entropy
of the approximated marginals. (f) Ground truth. Note that our
MAP estimate closely matches the ground truth, while capturing
uncertainty in difficult regions.

is that all uncertainty is collapsed into a single configuration. A variety of scenarios, such as computing gradients
for conditional random field training, integrating estimation
into more complex probabilistic models and quantifying the
uncertainty in estimations, require (approximated) marginal
inference. Given that submodularity has profound implications for MAP inference, what are its consequences for
marginal inference?

Related work. Most methods for inference in high-order
models focus on MAP inference. For example, Kohli et
al. [2] show how to minimize the energy of robust P n potentials by move-making using graph cuts. Tarlow et al. [3]
demonstrate how to compute the max-product messages for
a family of potentials. Zhang et al. [4] utilize parallelization
to achieve constant acceleration for both MAP and marginal
inference, but with exponential complexity in terms of model order. A recent primal-dual method [5] employs movemaking-like MAP inference for arbitrary higher-order potentials while the iteration-wise complexity is still pro11859

