DeepProposal: Hunting Objects by Cascading Deep Convolutional Layers
Amir Ghodrati1∗, Ali Diba1∗, Marco Pedersoli2†‡, Tinne Tuytelaars1 , Luc Van Gool1,3
1
2
3
KU Leuven, ESAT-PSI, iMinds
Inria
CVL, ETH Zurich
1

2

firstname.lastname@esat.kuleuven.be

marco.pedersoli@inria.fr

Abstract
In this paper we evaluate the quality of the activation
layers of a convolutional neural network (CNN) for the generation of object proposals. We generate hypotheses in a
sliding-window fashion over different activation layers and
show that the final convolutional layers can find the object
of interest with high recall but poor localization due to the
coarseness of the feature maps. Instead, the first layers of
the network can better localize the object of interest but with
a reduced recall. Based on this observation we design a
method for proposing object locations that is based on CNN
features and that combines the best of both worlds. We build
an inverse cascade that, going from the final to the initial
convolutional layers of the CNN, selects the most promising
object locations and refines their boxes in a coarse-to-fine
manner. The method is efficient, because i) it uses the same
features extracted for detection, ii) it aggregates features
using integral images, and iii) it avoids a dense evaluation
of the proposals due to the inverse coarse-to-fine cascade.
The method is also accurate; it outperforms most of the
previously proposed object proposals approaches and when
plugged into a CNN-based detector produces state-of-theart detection performance.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the paradigm of generating a reduced
set of object location hypotheses (or window candidates)
to be evaluated with a powerful classifier has become very
popular in object detection. Most of the recent state-ofthe-art detection methods [6, 12, 14, 25] are based on such
proposals. Using limited number of these proposals also
helps with weakly supervised learning, in particular learning to localize objects without any bounding box annotations [7, 22]. This approach can be seen as a two-stage
cascade: First, selection of a reduced set of promising and
∗ A. Ghodrati and A.Diba contributed equally to this work
† This work was carried out while he was in KU Leuven ESAT-PSI.
‡ LEAR project, Inria Grenoble Rhone-Alpes, LJK, CNRS, Univ.
Grenoble Alpes, France.

Figure 1: DeepProposal object proposal framework. Our
method uses deep convolutional layers features in a
coarse-to-fine inverse cascading to obtain possible object
proposals in an image. Starting from dense proposal sampling from the last convolutional layer (layer 5) we gradually filter irrelevant boxes until the initial layers of the
net (layer 2). In the last stage we use contours extracted
from layer 2, to refine the proposals. Finally the generated
boxes can be used within an object detection pipeline.

class-independent hypotheses and second, a class-specific
classification of each hypothesis. This pipeline has the advantage that, similarly to sliding window, it casts the detection problem to a classification problem. However, in contrast to sliding window, more powerful and time consuming
detectors can be employed as the number of candidate windows is reduced.
Methods for the generation of the window candidates are
based on two very different approaches. The first approach
uses bottom-up cues like image segmentation [3, 23], object
edges and contours [28] for window generation. The second
approach is based on top-down cues which learn to separate
correct object hypotheses from other possible window locations [1, 5]. So far, the latter strategy seems to have inferior
performance. In this paper we show that, with the proper
features, accurate and fast top-down window proposals can
be generated.
We consider for this task the convolutional neural network (CNN) “feature maps” extracted from the intermediate convolutional layers of the Alexnet [18] trained on 1000
classes of ImageNet. In the first part of this work we present
a performance analysis of different CNN layers for gener-

2578

