Contractive Rectifier Networks for Nonlinear Maximum Margin Classification
Senjian An1 , Munawar Hayat1,4 , Salman H. Khan1
Mohammed Bennamoun1 , Farid Boussaid2 , Ferdous Sohel1,3
1

School of Computer Science and Software Engineering
The University of Western Australia, Crawley WA 6009, Australia
2
School of Electrical, Electronic and Computer Engineering,
The University of Western Australia, Crawley WA 6009, Australia
3
School of Engineering and Information Technology, Murdoch University, Australia
4
IBM Research Australia

Abstract
To find the optimal nonlinear separating boundary with
maximum margin in the input data space, this paper proposes Contractive Rectifier Networks (CRNs), wherein the
hidden-layer transformations are restricted to be contraction mappings. The contractive constraints ensure that the
achieved separating margin in the input space is larger than
or equal to the separating margin in the output layer. The
training of the proposed CRNs is formulated as a linear support vector machine (SVM) in the output layer, combined
with two or more contractive hidden layers. Effective algorithms have been proposed to address the optimization
challenges arising from contraction constraints. Experimental results on MNIST, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and MIT67 datasets demonstrate that the proposed contractive rectifier networks consistently outperform their conventional
unconstrained rectifier network counterparts.

1. Introduction
Deep learning networks have achieved great successes
in recent years and have become one of the most attractive research topics in machine learning, computer vision
and speech recognition. Rectiﬁer max{0, x} is one of the
most popular nonlinear activation functions in modern deep
learning networks. The advantages of deep rectiﬁer networks are not only shown in their excellent empirical performance in object recognition [18, 20, 13], face veriﬁcation [38, 37], speech recognition ([32, 14, 7] and handwritten digit recognition [5], but also justiﬁed by a number of theoretical works on their superior expressive powers [6, 28, 27] and their metric preserving properties [1] in
transforming linearly inseparable pattern sets into linearly
separable sets. It was shown that any disjoint pattern sets

can be transformed to be linearly separable by two hidden
layers while the distance distortions are controlled within a
factor in the range [0.5, 1] [1]. This nearly isometric property of the nonlinear transformation can be used to design
nonlinear maximum margin classiﬁers through the applications of linear support vector machines (SVMs) in the output layer. However, in order to preserve metrics in hidden
layer transforms, [1] requires the number of neurons in the
ﬁrst hidden layer to be at least twice the data dimension.
In addition, it requires the number of neurons of the higher
hidden layers to be at least twice the number of neurons
of their preceding hidden layers. This requirement is impractical for deep rectiﬁer networks with deep hidden layers and/or with high dimensional data. Motivated by the fact
that the solution of an SVM is fully determined by their support vectors (usually a small subset of the training patterns),
this paper proposes Contractive Rectiﬁer Networks (CRNs)
whose hidden layers are not designed to preserve the distances of any two arbitrary input vectors but are trained to
best preserve only the distances of the support vectors. The
proposed CRNs consists of a linear SVM in the output layer
and two or more hidden layers each restricted to be a contraction mapping, that is, the distance between the outputs
of the hidden layer for any two inputs (of this layer) is not
enlarged. In this paper, we show that contraction constraints
do not sacriﬁce the capacity of rectiﬁer networks in achieving maximum margin classiﬁcation (i.e., the optimal nonlinear separating margin achievable by unconstrained rectiﬁer
networks (URNs) can also be achieved by CRNs). Although
they have equal theoretical capacity for nonlinear maximum
classiﬁcation, CRN is superior in practical training. The
training of CRNs, with a linear SVM in the output layer,
optimizes the weights to maximize the separating margin in
the output layer while ensuring that the separating margin
in the input space is larger than or equal to that in the output

2515

