Learning Ensembles of Potential Functions for Structured Prediction with
Latent Variables
Hossein Hajimirsadeghi and Greg Mori
School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University, Canada
hosseinh@sfu.ca, mori@cs.sfu.ca

Abstract

Activity Label

Hidden Variables

Many visual recognition tasks involve modeling variables which are structurally related. Hidden conditional
random fields (HCRFs) are a powerful class of models
for encoding structure in weakly supervised training examples. This paper presents HCRF-Boost, a novel and general
framework for learning HCRFs in functional space. An algorithm is proposed to learn the potential functions of an
HCRF as a combination of abstract nonlinear feature functions, expressed by regression models. Consequently, the
resulting latent structured model is not restricted to traditional log-linear potential functions or any explicit parameterization. Further, functional optimization helps to avoid
direct interactions with the possibly large parameter space
of nonlinear models and improves efficiency. As a result, a
complex and flexible ensemble method is achieved for structured prediction which can be successfully used in a variety
of applications. We validate the effectiveness of this method
on tasks such as group activity recognition, human action
recognition, and multi-instance learning of video events.

1. Introduction
Challenging structured vision problems necessitate the
use of high-capacity models. Examples include problems
such as modeling group activities or temporal dynamics in
human action recognition and internet video analysis. Recently, visual recognition has made great strides using deep
models. Deep learning has been successfully applied to image classification [18, 29] and object detection [12]. This
success arises from large-scale training of highly non-linear
functions which can induce complex models and learn powerful abstract feature representations. However, learning
non-linear functions for structured vision problems remains
an open challenge. In this paper, we present a general
method for learning non-linear representations for structured models.
Our method works within a graphical model framework,
building an HCRF to model structure, as depicted in Fig. 1.

…

…

wait

queue
walk

talk
,

,

Inputs

…

(

+

cross
+…+

)

,

…

Figure 1. The proposed method learns non-linear potential functions in a latent structured model. An example model for group
activity is shown. Potential functions relate input image regions
to variables such as body pose or action/activity. Each potential
function is learned as a combination of non-linear models leading
to a high-capacity model. The colored ribbon-like lines visualize
the decision boundaries obtained by nonlinear potential functions.

Recent efforts in this vein [32, 3, 28] have attempted to design unified deep structured models by equipping Markov
random fields (MRFs) with the representational power of
convolutional neural networks (CNNs). These methods
jointly train an MRF and a CNN by maximizing likelihood
via back-propagation and stochastic gradient descent. However, all these methods are defined for fully observed output
variables and cannot incorporate or infer dependencies on
unlabeled variables in the case of weak supervision. Full
annotation of all output variables in MRFs is very costly for
many visual recognition tasks, and hence many variables
remain latent, unobserved, in training.
The standard learning algorithms for latent structured
models (e.g. latent SVM [9] or HCRF [26]) are restricted
to simple log-linear models, where the potential functions
are parameterized by linear combination of the input features. Thus, they lack the non-linearity and feature abstraction power of deep models. In this work, we alleviate this
problem by proposing a general framework to learn latent
structured models with arbitrary potential functions in func14059

