Semantic Segmentation of RGBD Images with Mutex Constraints
Zhuo Deng
Temple University
Philadelphia, USA

Sinisa Todorovic
Oregon State University
Corvallis, USA

Longin Jan Latecki
Temple University
Philadelphia, USA

zhuo.deng@temple.edu

sinisa@eecs.oregonstate.edu

latecki@temple.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problem of semantic scene
segmentation of RGB-D images of indoor scenes. We propose a novel image region labeling method which augments
CRF formulation with hard mutual exclusion (mutex) constraints. This way our approach can make use of rich and
accurate 3D geometric structure coming from Kinect in a
principled manner. The final labeling result must satisfy
all mutex constraints, which allows us to eliminate configurations that violate common sense physics laws like placing a floor above a night stand. Three classes of mutex constraints are proposed: global object co-occurrence
constraint, relative height relationship constraint, and local support relationship constraint. We evaluate our approach on the NYU-Depth V2 dataset, which consists of
1449 cluttered indoor scenes, and also test generalization
of our model trained on NYU-Depth V2 dataset directly on
a recent SUN3D dataset without any new training. The experimental results show that we significantly outperform the
state-of-the-art methods in scene labeling on both datasets.

1. Introduction
This paper addresses the fundamental problem of semantic scene segmentation of indoor scenes. Assigning class
labels to every pixel in real-world images is challenging, as
objects may be heavily occluded, appear in a wide range
of configurations, and viewed from different camera viewpoints and distances. In addition, indoor scenes typically
consist of a relatively large number of alike objects that are
often cluttered and in disorder, reflecting various lifestyles.
Our goal is to partition the image by identifying subimage
ownership among occurrences of distinct object classes.
The recent advent of Microsoft Kinect alleviated some
of these challenges, and thus enabled an exciting new
direction of approaches to semantic scene segmentation
[1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 11, 12, 17]. Equipped with an active infrared
structured light sensor, Kinect is able to provide the depth

information of objects in the scene which is aligned synchronously with their color images. Since indoor scenes are
typically characterized by large planar surfaces (e.g., floor,
walls, table tops), and objects can often be interpreted in relation to those surfaces, semantic scene segmentation can be
largely facilitated by properly integrating visual cues with
detailed and accurate geometric structure of the scene surfaces provided by Kinect.
Recent work has demonstrated that the depth information can be readily used to leverage rich geometric structure of indoor scenes toward their robust semantic segmentation. The SLAM technology was used to merge multiple
RGBD images into a single point cloud and densely label
it with Markov Random Field (MRF) [17]. Scenes were labeled by incorporating SIFT features and 3D location priors
into a Conditional Random Field (CRF) [4]. A CRF with
higher order cliques was used to encourage all regions in
them to take the dominant label [11]. [1] extended the Kernel Descriptors (KDES) [18] by introducing depth gradient
and spin normal descriptors, and labeled scenes by combining MRF with segmentation tree. In [3], geometric features
were integrated with traditional visual features through support vector machines, or with high level features from object
detection [12]. Instead of designing hand crafted features, a
multiscale convolutional network was used to learn features
directly from RGBD images [9].
Although designing distinct features from RGBD images
has achieved much progress for indoor semantic segmentation, how to jointly model local and long range object spatial configurations by taking advantage of available geometric structure of indoor scenes is not fully explored. We find
that there is still room for improvement.
In this paper, we propose a holistic framework for
reasoning about object classes and their co-occurrences,
and spatial layouts based on geometric structure of indoor
scenes as well as on common sense knowledge. We model
the scene by a CRF grounded to regions of the low-level
generalized gPb-UCM segmenter [3]. Geometric and visual
information of objects are integrated into unary potentials.
The pairwise potentials encode local object configurations

1733

