Unsupervised Cross-modal Synthesis of Subject-specific Scans
Raviteja Vemulapalli
Center for Automation Research, UMIACS
University of Maryland, College Park

Hien Van Nguyen, Shaohua Kevin Zhou
Siemens Healthcare Technology Center
Princeton, New Jersey

raviteja@umd.edu

{hien.nguyen, shaohua.zhou}@siemens.com

Abstract
Recently, cross-modal synthesis of subject-specific scans
has been receiving significant attention from the medical
imaging community. Though various synthesis approaches
have been introduced in the recent past, most of them are
either tailored to a specific application or proposed for the
supervised setting, i.e., they assume the availability of training data from the same set of subjects in both source and
target modalities. But, collecting multiple scans from each
subject is undesirable. Hence, to address this issue, we propose a general unsupervised cross-modal medical image
synthesis approach that works without paired training data.
Given a source modality image of a subject, we first generate multiple target modality candidate values for each voxel
independently using cross-modal nearest neighbor search.
Then, we select the best candidate values jointly for all
the voxels by simultaneously maximizing a global mutual
information cost function and a local spatial consistency
cost function. Finally, we use coupled sparse representation
for further refinement of synthesized images. Our experiments on generating T1-MRI brain scans from T2-MRI and
vice versa demonstrate that the synthesis capability of the
proposed unsupervised approach is comparable to various
state-of-the-art supervised approaches in the literature.

1. Introduction
Currently, a multitude of imaging modalities such as
Computed Tomography, T1-weighted and T2-weighted
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), X-ray, Ultrasound,
Diffusion MRI, etc., are being used for medical imaging
research. Each of these modalities captures different characteristics of the underlying anatomy, and the relationship
between any two modalities is highly nonlinear.
Due to variations in the image characteristics across
modalities, medical image analysis algorithms trained with
data from one modality may not work well when applied
to data from a different modality. A straightforward way to
address this issue is to collect a large amount of training

data in each modality. But, this is impractical since collecting medical images is both time consuming and expensive.
Hence, it is highly desirable to have a general cross-modal
synthesis approach that generates subject-specific scans in
the desired target modality from the given source modality
images. The ability to synthesize medical images without
real acquisitions has many potential applications like superresolution [13, 26, 32], building virtual models [20], atlas
construction [7], multimodal registration [5, 23, 24, 28],
segmentation [12, 25] and virtual enhancement [18].
Though various cross-modal medical image synthesis
approaches have been proposed in the recent past, most
of them work under supervised setting, requiring training
data in both source and target modalities from the same set
of subjects. For example, a coupled sparse representationbased image synthesis approach was proposed in [5], which
used paired training data to learn coupled dictionaries in
source and target modalities. Various regression-based synthesis approaches were proposed in [14, 17], which used
paired training data to train either regression forests [14]
or deep networks [17]. Recently, various supervised approaches [25, 31] based on image analogies [10] and label
propagation [22] have also been proposed.
Though some recent supervised approaches have shown
promising synthesis capabilities, the availability of paired
data from source and target modalities is limited in many
cases. Also, collecting multiple scans from each subject is
not desirable. Hence, to address these issues, we introduce
an unsupervised cross-modal image synthesis approach that
can generate subject-specific target modality scans without
using paired training data. Given a source modality image
from a subject, the proposed approach generates the corresponding target modality image by using the target modality
images from a different set of subjects. Since the proposed
approach does not use any supervision, i.e., paired training
data, for learning a mapping between the modalities, we call
it unsupervised.
Since synthesizing a full medical image (that may have
millions of voxels) is a fairly complex task, we propose a
novel two-step synthesis approach in this paper. In the first

630

