Learning Image and User Features for Recommendation in Social Networks
Xue Geng
Hanwang Zhang
Jingwen Bian
Tat-Seng Chua
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
snownus@gmail.com hanwangzhang@gmail.com {bian jingwen, chuats}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Sports

Good representations of data do help in many machine
learning tasks such as recommendation. It is often a great
challenge for traditional recommender systems to learn representative features of both users and images in large social
networks, in particular, social curation networks, which are
characterized as the extremely sparse links between users
and images, and the extremely diverse visual contents of
images. To address the challenges, we propose a novel
deep model which learns the unified feature representations
for both users and images. This is done by transforming
the heterogeneous user-image networks into homogeneous
low-dimensional representations, which facilitate a recommender to trivially recommend images to users by feature
similarity. We also develop a fast online algorithm that can
be easily scaled up to large networks in an asynchronously
parallel way. We conduct extensive experiments on a representative subset of Pinterest, containing 1,456,540 images
and 1,000,000 users. Results of image recommendation experiments demonstrate that our feature learning approach
significantly outperforms other state-of-the-art recommendation methods.

1. Introduction
The nature of social networks has gradually been shifted
from the conventional user-centric networks such as Facebook (i.e., friendship based) and Twitter (i.e., followerfollowee based), to content-centric social curation networks
such as Pinterest and Delicious. As a new concept different from user-centric social networks, the development of
social curation networks originates from users’ emerging
need —a pure interest-based social service to explore and
collect interesting contents (such as images, videos and topics), through which to communicate with people (mostly
strangers) who share similar interest. In addition to creating contents, social curation encourages users to involve
in an information ﬁltering process to identify, collect and
aggregate images into their own stories [33]. Today, over
73% of social media marketing efforts exploit social cura-

Travel

Animals

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Illustrations of the two extremes in a typical social curation network, e.g., Pinterest. (a) The power-law distribution of the
number of images pinned by users. It means that the user-image
connections are long-tailed and very sparse. (b) Some exemplar
images of three interest categories. The contents of images in the
same category are very diverse.

tion as sources of marketing contents [27]. However, the
traditional recommender systems are not designed to function effectively in this new era of social curation marketing
due to the following challenges: 1) The extreme sparsity of
network structure (cf. Figure 1(a)). For instance, in Pinterest, an ordinary user often curates around 100 images
which is only one in a million as compared to the whole
Pinterest image collection. That is to say, it is hardly possible to infer the similarity between users based on the shared
images. Clearly, this will render collaborative ﬁltering ineffective. 2) The extreme diversity of the multimedia contents
(cf. Figure 1(b)). Different from products that can be easily categorized (such as those in Amazon), the categories of
multimedia contents are usually hard to be identiﬁed automatically, causing difﬁculties for content-based recommender systems to infer accurate user interest from the curated contents, with the problem of over-speciﬁcation [1].
In this paper, we introduce a novel feature learning approach for recommendation that aims to tackle the above
two extreme challenges in social curation. Different from
conventional recommenders that indirectly rank images for
users, we directly measure the similarity between users and
images through a compact, low-dimensional vector space,
spanned by “interest”, which is the core motive of any social curation network. Our algorithm takes a social curation

4274

