Differential Recurrent Neural Networks for Action Recognition
Vivek Veeriah, Naifan Zhuang, Guo-Jun Qi∗
University of Central Florida
4000 Central Florida Blvd, Orlando, FL 32816
{vivekveeriah,zhuangnaifan}@knights.ucf.edu, guojun.qi@ucf.edu

Abstract
The long short-term memory (LSTM) neural network is
capable of processing complex sequential information since
it utilizes special gating schemes for learning representations from long input sequences. It has the potential to
model any sequential time-series data, where the current
hidden state has to be considered in the context of the past
hidden states. This property makes LSTM an ideal choice
to learn the complex dynamics of various actions. Unfortunately, the conventional LSTMs do not consider the impact of spatio-temporal dynamics corresponding to the given salient motion patterns, when they gate the information
that ought to be memorized through time. To address this
problem, we propose a differential gating scheme for the LSTM neural network, which emphasizes on the change in
information gain caused by the salient motions between the
successive frames. This change in information gain is quantiﬁed by Derivative of States (DoS), and thus the proposed
LSTM model is termed as differential Recurrent Neural Network (dRNN). We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed model by automatically recognizing actions from the
real-world 2D and 3D human action datasets. Our study is
one of the ﬁrst works towards demonstrating the potential of
learning complex time-series representations via high-order
derivatives of states.

1. Introduction
Recently, Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [28], especially Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) model [14],
have gained signiﬁcant attention in solving many challenging problems involving time-series data, such as action
recognition [12, 8, 13], multilingual machine translation
[30, 4], multimodal translation between videos and sentences [34], robot control [21] and time-series alignment
[32]. In these applications, learning an appropriate representation of sequences is an important step in achieving ar∗ Corresponding author

tiﬁcial intelligence.
Compared with many existing spatio-temporal features
[17, 29, 5, 24] from the time-series data, RNNs use either a
hidden layer [28] or a memory cell [14] to learn the timeevolving states which models the underlying dynamics of
the input sequence. For example, [2, 8] have used LSTMs
to model the video sequences to learn their long short-term
dynamics. In contrast to the conventional RNN, the major
component of LSTM is the memory cell which is modulated by three gates - input, output and forget gates. These
gates determine the amount of dynamic information entering/leaving the memory cell. The memory cell has a set of
internal states, which store the information obtained over
time. In this context, these internal states constitute a representation of an input sequence learned over time.
In many recent works, the LSTMs have shown tremendous potential in action recognition tasks [2, 13, 8]. The existing LSTM model represents a video by integrating over
time all the available information from each frame. However, we observed that for an action recognition task, not all
frames contain salient spatio-temporal information which
are discriminative to different classes of actions. Many
frames contain non-salient motions which are irrelevant to
the performed action.
This inspired us to develop a new family of LSTM model that automatically learns the dynamic saliency of the actions performed. The conventional LSTM fails to capture
the salient dynamic patterns, since the gate units do not explicitly consider whether a frame contains salient motion
information when they modulate the input and output of the
memory cells. Thus the model is insensitive to the dynamic evolution of the hidden states given the input video sequences. To address this problem, we propose the differential RNN (dRNN) model that learns these salient spatiotemporal representations of actions.
Speciﬁcally, dRNN models the dynamics of actions by
computing different-orders of Derivative of State (DoS) that
are sensitive to the spatio-temporal structure of input sequence. In other words, depending on the DoS, the gate
units can learn the appropriate information that should be
14041

