Understanding Everyday Hands in Action from RGB-D Images
Grégory Rogez
Inria Rhône-Alpes

James S. Supančič III
University of California, Irvine

Deva Ramanan
Carnegie Mellon University

gregory.rogez@inria.fr

jsupanci@ics.uci.edu

deva@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We analyze functional manipulations of handheld objects, formalizing the problem as one of fine-grained grasp
classification. To do so, we make use of a recently developed
fine-grained taxonomy of human-object grasps. We introduce a large dataset of 12000 RGB-D images covering 71
everyday grasps in natural interactions. Our dataset is different from past work (typically addressed from a robotics
perspective) in terms of its scale, diversity, and combination
of RGB and depth data. From a computer-vision perspective, our dataset allows for exploration of contact and force
prediction (crucial concepts in functional grasp analysis)
from perceptual cues. We present extensive experimental
results with state-of-the-art baselines, illustrating the role
of segmentation, object context, and 3D-understanding in
functional grasp analysis. We demonstrate a near 2X improvement over prior work and a naive deep baseline, while
pointing out important directions for improvement.

1. Introduction
Humans can interact with objects in complex ways, including grasping, pushing, or bending them. In this work,
we address the perceptual problem of parsing such interactions, with a focus on handheld, manipulatable objects.
Much previous work on hand analysis tends to focus on
kinematic pose estimation [17, 12]. Interestingly, the same
kinematic pose can be used for dramatically different functional manipulations (Fig. 1), where differences are manifested in terms of distinct contact points and force vectors.
Thus, contact points and forces play a crucial role when
parsing such interactions from a functional perspective.
Problem setup: Importantly, we wish to analyze
human-object interactions in situ. To do so, we make use of
wearable depth cameras to ensure that recordings are mobile (allowing one to capture diverse scenes [33, 7]) and
passive (avoiding the need for specialized pressure sensors/gloves [6, 24]). We make no explicit assumption about
the environment, such as known geometry [32]. However,
we do make explicit use of depth cues, motivated by the fact

Figure 1. Same kinematic pose, but different functions: We
show 3 images of near-identical kinematic hand pose, but very
different functional manipulations, including a wide-object grasp
(a), a precision grasp (b), and a finger extension (c). Contact regions (green) and force vectors (red), visualized below each image,
appear to define such manipulations. This work (1) introduces a
large-scale dataset for predicting pose+contacts+forces from images and (2) proposes an initial method based on fine-grained
grasp classification.

that humans make use of depth for near-field analysis [15].
Our problem formulation is thus: given a first-person RGBD image of a hand-object interaction, predict the 3D kinematic hand pose, contact points, and force vectors.
Motivation: We see several motivating scenarios and
applications. Our long-term goal is to produce a truly
functional description of a scene that is useful for an autonomous robot. When faced with a novel object, it will be
useful to know how if it can be pushed or grasped, and what
forces and contacts are necessary to do so [40]. A practical application of our work is imitation learning or learning
by demonstration for robotics [3, 16], where a robot can
be taught a task by observing humans performing it. Finally, our problem formulation has direct implications for
assistive technology. Clinicians watch and evaluate patients
performing everyday hand-object interactions for diagnosis
and evaluation [2]. A patient-wearable camera that enabled
automated parsing of object manipulations would allow for
long-term monitoring.
Why is this hard? Estimating forces from visual signals
typically requires knowledge of object mass and velocity,
which is difficult to reliably infer from a single image or

3889

