Simpler non-parametric methods provide as good or better results to
multiple-instance learning.
Ragav Venkatesan, Parag Shridhar Chandakkar and Baoxin Li
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA
ragav.venkatesan@asu.edu, pchandak@asu.edu, baoxin.li@asu.edu

Abstract
Multiple-instance learning (MIL) is a unique learning
problem in which training data labels are available only for
collections of objects (called bags) instead of individual objects (called instances). A plethora of approaches have been
developed to solve this problem in the past years. Popular
methods include the diverse density, MILIS and DD-SVM.
While having been widely used, these methods, particularly
those in computer vision have attempted fairly sophisticated
solutions to solve certain unique and particular configurations of the MIL space.
In this paper, we analyze the MIL feature space using
modified versions of traditional non-parametric techniques
like the Parzen window and k-nearest-neighbour, and develop a learning approach employing distances to k-nearest
neighbours of a point in the feature space. We show that
these methods work as well, if not better than most recently
published methods on benchmark datasets. We compare
and contrast our analysis with the well-established diversedensity approach and its variants in recent literature, using benchmark datasets including the Musk, Andrews’ and
Corel datasets, along with a diabetic retinopathy pathology
diagnosis dataset. Experimental results demonstrate that,
while enjoying an intuitive interpretation and supporting
fast learning, these method have the potential of delivering
improved performance even for complex data arising from
real-world applications.

1. Introduction
Multiple-instance learning (MIL) is a setting where labels are provided only for a collection of instances called
bags. There are two types of instances: negative instances,
which are found in either negative bags or positive bags, and
positive instances, which are found only in positive bags.
While a positive bag must contain at least one inherently
positive instance, a negative bag must not contain any positive instances. In MIL, labels are not available at the in-

Figure 1. DR image classification as a MIL problem.

stance level. It is interesting to note however that the labelspace is the same for both at the bag level and at the instance
level. One may attempt to learn instance-level labels during
the training stage, thus reducing the problem to an instancelevel supervised classification. Alternatively, one may also
localize and prototype the positive instances in the feature
space and rely on the proximity to these prototypes for subsequent classification.
MIL is an ideal set-up for many computer vision tasks
and examples of its application include object tracking [4],
image categorization [9] [26] [28] [12], scene categorization [20] and content-based image retrieval [36]. In particular, MIL can be an especially suitable model for medical
image-based pathology classification and lesion detectionlocalization, where an image is labeled pathological just because of one or a few lesions localized to small portions of
the image. Medical images collected in a clinical setting
may readily have an image-level label (either normal or various levels of pathology) while lacking the exact location of
the lesion(s). Figure 1 illustrates such an example: colour
fundus images of eyes affected with different pathologies
of diabetic retinopathy (DR). It is easy to notice that, although majority of the image looks normal, a small retinal
landmark is enough to alter the label of the image from normal to pathological. In a MIL formulation for this problem,
each image can be considered a bag and patches of images
can be considered instances.
Over the years, many methods have been proposed to
solve the MIL problem [10] [29] [8] [2]. The most fun-

2605

