Learning Visual Clothing Style with Heterogeneous Dyadic Co-occurrences
Andreas Veit∗ 1 , Balazs Kovacs∗ 1 , Sean Bell1 , Julian McAuley3 , Kavita Bala1 , Serge Belongie1,2
1

Department of Computer Science, Cornell University 2 Cornell Tech
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, UC San Diego

Abstract
With the rapid proliferation of smart mobile devices,
users now take millions of photos every day. These include
large numbers of clothing and accessory images. We would
like to answer questions like ‘What outfit goes well with this
pair of shoes?’ To answer these types of questions, one has
to go beyond learning visual similarity and learn a visual
notion of compatibility across categories. In this paper, we
propose a novel learning framework to help answer these
types of questions. The main idea of this framework is to
learn a feature transformation from images of items into a
latent space that expresses compatibility. For the feature
transformation, we use a Siamese Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN) architecture, where training examples are
pairs of items that are either compatible or incompatible.
We model compatibility based on co-occurrence in largescale user behavior data; in particular co-purchase data
from Amazon.com. To learn cross-category fit, we introduce
a strategic method to sample training data, where pairs of
items are heterogeneous dyads, i.e., the two elements of a
pair belong to different high-level categories. While this approach is applicable to a wide variety of settings, we focus
on the representative problem of learning compatible clothing style. Our results indicate that the proposed framework
is capable of learning semantic information about visual
style and is able to generate outfits of clothes, with items
from different categories, that go well together.

1. Introduction
Smart mobile devices have become an important part of
our lives and people use them to take and upload millions
of photos every day. Among these photos we can find large
numbers of clothing and food images. Naturally, we would
like to answer questions like “What outfit matches this pair
of shoes?” or “What desserts would go well along this
entrée?” A straightforward approach to answer this type
∗ These two authors contributed equally; the order is picked at random.

Figure 1: Example similar and dissimilar items predicted by
our model. Each row shows a pair of clusters; items on the
same side belong to the same clothing category and cluster. (a): each row shows two clusters that are stylistically
compatible; (b): each row shows incompatible clusters.

of questions would be to use fine grained recognition of
subcategories and attributes, e.g., “slim dark formal pants,”
with a graph that informs which subcategories match together. However, these approaches require significant domain knowledge and do not generalize well to the intro14642

