Parsimonious Labeling
Puneet K. Dokania
CentraleSupélec and INRIA Saclay

M. Pawan Kumar
CentraleSupélec and INRIA Saclay

puneet.kumar@inria.fr

pawan.kumar@ecp.fr

Abstract
We propose a new family of discrete energy minimization problems, which we call parsimonious labeling. Our
energy function consists of unary potentials and high-order
clique potentials. While the unary potentials are arbitrary,
the clique potentials are proportional to the diversity of
the set of unique labels assigned to the clique. Intuitively,
our energy function encourages the labeling to be parsimonious, that is, use as few labels as possible. This in turn
allows us to capture useful cues for important computer vision applications such as stereo correspondence and image
denoising. Furthermore, we propose an efficient graph-cuts
based algorithm for the parsimonious labeling problem that
provides strong theoretical guarantees on the quality of the
solution. Our algorithm consists of three steps. First, we
approximate a given diversity using a mixture of a novel
hierarchical P n Potts model. Second, we use a divide-andconquer approach for each mixture component, where each
subproblem is solved using an efficient α-expansion algorithm. This provides us with a small number of putative labelings, one for each mixture component. Third, we choose
the best putative labeling in terms of the energy value. Using both synthetic and standard real datasets, we show that
our algorithm significantly outperforms other graph-cuts
based approaches.

1. Introduction
The labeling problem provides an intuitive formulation
for several tasks in computer vision and related areas.
Briefly, the labeling problem is defined using a set of random variables, each of which can take a value from a finite
and discrete label set. The assignment of values to all the
variables is referred to as a labeling. In order to quantitatively distinguish between the large number of putative labelings, we are provided with an energy function that maps
a labeling to a real number. The energy function consists of
two types of terms: (i) the unary potential, which depends
on the label assigned to one random variable; and (ii) the
clique potential, which depends on the labels assigned to a
subset of random variables. The goal of the labeling problem is to obtain the labeling that minimizes the energy.

A well-studied special case of the labeling problem is
metric labeling [2, 16]. Here, the unary potentials are arbitrary. However, the clique potentials are specified by
a user-defined metric distance function of the label space.
Specifically, the clique potentials satisfy the following two
properties: (i) each clique potential depends on two random variables; and (ii) the value of the clique potential (also
referred to as the pairwise potential) is proportional to the
metric distance between the labels assigned to the two random variables. Metric labeling has been used to formulate
several problems in low-level computer vision, where the
random variables correspond to image pixels. In such scenarios, it is natural to encourage two random variables that
correspond to two nearby pixels in the image to take similar labels. However, by restricting the size of the cliques to
two, metric labeling fails to capture more informative highorder cues. For example, it cannot encourage an arbitrary
sized set of similar pixels (such as pixels that define a homogeneous superpixel) to take similar labels.
We propose a natural generalization of the metric labeling problem for high-order potentials, which we call parsimonious labeling. Similar to metric labeling, our energy
function consists of arbitrary unary potentials. However, the
clique potentials can be defined on any subset of random
variables, and their value depends on the set of unique labels assigned to the random variables in the clique. In more
detail, the clique potential is defined using the recently proposed notion of a diversity [3, 4], which generalizes metric
distance functions to all subsets of the label set. By minimizing the diversity, our energy function encourages the
labeling to be parsimonious, that is, use as few labels as
possible. This in turn allows us to capture useful cues for
important low-level computer vision applications.
In order to be practically useful, we require a computationally feasible solution for parsimonious labeling. To this
end, we design a novel three step algorithm that uses an efficient graph cuts based method as its key ingredient. The
first step of our algorithm approximates a given diversity as
a mixture of a novel hierarchical P n Potts model (a generalization of the P n Potts model [17]). The second step
of our algorithm solves the labeling problem correspond-

1760

