Registering Images to Untextured Geometry using Average Shading Gradients
Tobias Plötz
Stefan Roth
Department of Computer Science, TU Darmstadt

Abstract
Many existing approaches for image-to-geometry registration assume that either a textured 3D model or a good
initial guess of the 3D pose is available to bootstrap the registration process. In this paper we consider the registration
of photographs to 3D models even when no texture information is available. This is very challenging as we cannot rely
on texture gradients, and even shading gradients are hard
to estimate since the lighting conditions are unknown. To
that end, we propose average shading gradients, a rendering technique that estimates the average gradient magnitude over all lighting directions under Lambertian shading.
We use this gradient representation as the building block of
a registration pipeline based on matching sparse features.
To cope with inevitable false matches due to the missing
texture information and to increase robustness, the pose of
the 3D model is estimated in two stages. Coarse pose hypotheses are first obtained from a single correct match each,
subsequently refined using SIFT flow, and finally verified.
We apply our algorithm to registering images of real-world
objects to untextured 3D meshes of limited accuracy.

1. Introduction
Registering images to 3D models of real-world objects
or places is an important prerequisite for transferring information between images and a 3D model of the scene [6, 26].
For example, color information from images can be used to
texture a 3D model that was previously acquired using range
scans. More broadly speaking, the 2D image may provide
diverse information that can be used to annotate, or possibly even update [24], the 3D model. Going in the opposite
direction, it is possible to annotate images with information
from the corresponding part of the 3D scene, once we know
the camera pose from which the image was taken.
In this paper, we introduce a method for registering individual photographs to 3D models even in the absence
of any information on the texture of the object. This is
in contrast to many existing image-to-geometry registration approaches [14, 16, 17] that rely on pre-registered
images to which a newly arriving photograph is aligned

Untextured
Model

Average shading
gradients
Coarse pose
estimates

Photograph

Refined pose
estimates

Gradient image

Figure 1. Registration pipeline using average shading gradients.

through matching of features. Such pre-registered images
are available, for example, when the 3D geometry is acquired through multi-view stereo [1]. However, this scenario is not always applicable, e.g. when acquiring a 3D
model by non-photometric methods, such as range scans.
Although some range scanners are able to measure the reflectance of a surface point, this color information is not
very reliable and only available if the scanning is performed
during daytime. However, it is not unusual that scanning
campaigns are required to take place at night; thus we need
to work with the raw geometry information only [5].
Our method estimates the pose of the depicted 3D model
by searching for sparse correspondences between features
found on the photograph and image features found on renderings of the 3D model. Existing methods, in contrast, typically aim to maximize the statistical dependency between
the photograph and a rendering [6]. The resulting registration criterion is dense, but leads to a highly non-convex
optimization problem with many local optima, necessitating good initialization. Therefore, dense registration methods are by and large bootstrapped with user interaction or
some other prior information on the camera pose. While
this may be suitable for smaller scanning campaigns, this
does not scale to registering a continuous incoming stream
of images to a geometric model of the scene. Our work is
complementary to these dense methods in that it automatically provides registration hypotheses, which can be further
refined, if needed, without requiring user interaction.
Gradients are the most common building block for many
image features, e.g. [7, 23]. Since we cannot hope to recover
the texture gradients in renderings of the 3D model, we need

2030

