Pose Induction for Novel Object Categories
Shubham Tulsiani, João Carreira and Jitendra Malik
University of California, Berkeley
{shubhtuls,carreira,malik}@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
We address the task of predicting pose for objects of
unannotated object categories from a small seed set of annotated object classes. We present a generalized classifier
that can reliably induce pose given a single instance of a
novel category. In case of availability of a large collection
of novel instances, our approach then jointly reasons over
all instances to improve the initial estimates. We empirically validate the various components of our algorithm and
quantitatively show that our method produces reliable pose
estimates. We also show qualitative results on a diverse set
of classes and further demonstrate the applicability of our
system for learning shape models of novel object classes.

1. Introduction
Class-based processing significantly simplifies tasks
such as object segmentation [17, 4], reconstruction [6, 21,
38] and, more generally, the propagation of knowledge from
class objects we have seen before to those we are seeing
for the first time. Looking at the lion in Figure 1 humans
can not only easily perceive its shape, but also tell that it is
strong and dangerous, get an estimate of its weight and dimensions and even approximate age and gender. We get to
know all of this because it is a lion like others we have seen
before and that we know many facts about.
Despite its many virtues, class-based processing does not
scale well. Learning predictors for all variables of interest –
figure-ground segmentation, pose, shape – requires expensive manual annotations to be collected for at least dozens
of examples per class and there are millions of classes. Consider again Figure 1 but now look at object A. The underlying structure in our visual world allows us to perceive a
rich representation of this object despite encountering it for
the first time. We can infer that it is probably hair that covers its surfaces – we have seen plenty of hair-like materials
before – and that it has parts and determine their configuration by analogy with our own parts or with other animals. We are able to achieve this remarkable feat by leverOur implementations and trained models are available at https://
github.com/shubhtuls/poseInduction

Figure 1. Inductive pose inference for novel objects. Right : Novel
object A. Left : instances from previously seen classes having similar pose as object A.

aging commonalities across object categories via generalizable abstractions – not only can we perceive that all the
other animals in Figure 1 are “right-facing”, we can also
transfer this notion to object A. This type of cross-category
knowledge transfer has been successfully demonstrated before for properties such as materials [37, 8], parts [35, 10]
and attributes [22, 13].
In this paper we define and attack the problem of predicting object poses across categories – we call this pose
induction. The first step of our approach, as highlighted
in Figure 2, is to learn a generalizable pose prediction system from the given set of annotated object categories. Our
main intuition is that most objects have appearance and
shape traits that can be associated with a generalized notion of pose. For example, the sentences “I am in front of
a car” or “in front of a bus” or “in front of a lion” are clear
about where“I” am with respect to those objects. The reason for this may be that there is something generic in the
way“frontality” manifests itself visually across different object classes – e.g.“fronts” usually exhibit an axis of bilateral
symmetry. Pushing this observation further leads to our solution: to align all the objects in a small seed set of classes,
by endowing them with set of 3D rotations in a consistent
reference frame, then training pose predictors that generalize in a meaningful way to novel object classes.
This idea expands the current range of inferences that
can be performed in a class-independent manner and allows
us to reason about pose for every object without tediously
collecting pose annotations. Such pose based reasoning can
then inform a system about which directions objects are
most likely to move in (usually “front” or “back”) and hence
1 64

