Robust Optimization for Deep Regression
Vasileios Belagiannis1,2 , Christian Rupprecht1,3 , Gustavo Carneiro4 , and Nassir Navab1,3
1

2

Computer Aided Medical Procedures, Technische Universität München
Visual Geometry Group, Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
3
Johns Hopkins University
4
Australian Centre for Visual Technologies, University of Adelaide
vb@robots.ox.ac.uk, {christian.rupprecht, navab}@in.tum.de, gustavo.carneiro@adelaide.edu.au

Convergence

Abstract

L2 loss
Tukey's biweight loss

70

50
40
30
20
10
0

PARSE

LSP

Football

Volleyball

Dataset
Error

8

L2 loss
Tukey's biweight loss

7

Mean Pixel Error (MPE)

Convolutional Neural Networks (ConvNets) have successfully contributed to improve the accuracy of regressionbased methods for computer vision tasks such as human
pose estimation, landmark localization, and object detection. The network optimization has been usually performed
with L2 loss and without considering the impact of outliers on the training process, where an outlier in this context is defined by a sample estimation that lies at an abnormal distance from the other training sample estimations
in the objective space. In this work, we propose a regression model with ConvNets that achieves robustness to
such outliers by minimizing Tukey’s biweight function, an
M-estimator robust to outliers, as the loss function for the
ConvNet. In addition to the robust loss, we introduce a
coarse-to-fine model, which processes input images of progressively higher resolutions for improving the accuracy of
the regressed values. In our experiments, we demonstrate
faster convergence and better generalization of our robust
loss function for the tasks of human pose estimation and age
estimation from face images. We also show that the combination of the robust loss function with the coarse-to-fine
model produces comparable or better results than current
state-of-the-art approaches in four publicly available human pose estimation datasets.

Number of Epochs

60

6
5
4
3
2
PARSE

LSP

Football

Volleyball

Dataset

Figure 1: Comparison of L2 and T ukey ′ s biweight loss functions: We compare our results (Tukey’s biweight loss) with the
standard L2 loss function on the problem of 2D human pose estimation (PARSE [48], LSP [19], Football [20] and Volleyball [3]
datasets). On top, the convergence of L2 and Tukey’s biweight
loss functions is presented, while on the bottom, the graph shows
the mean pixel error (MPE) comparison for the two loss functions.
For the convergence computation, we choose as reference error,
the smallest error using L2 loss (blue bars in bottom graph). Then,
we look for the epoch with the closest error in the training using
Tukey’s biweight loss function.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has played an important role in the computer vision field in the last few years. In particular, several
methods have been proposed for challenging tasks, such
as classification [22], detection [15], categorization [49],
segmentation [27], feature extraction [38] and pose estimation [9]. State-of-the-art results in these tasks have been
achieved with the use of Convolutional Neural Networks
(ConvNets) trained with backpropagation [24]. Moreover,

the majority of the tasks above are defined as classification
problems, where the ConvNet is trained to minimize a softmax loss function [9, 22]. Besides classification, ConvNets
have been also trained for regression tasks such as human
pose estimation [26, 44], object detection [42], facial landmark detection [41] and depth prediction [11]. In regression problems, the training procedure usually optimizes an
L2 loss function plus a regularization term, where the goal

2830

