Intrinsic Scene Decomposition from RGB-D images
Mohammed Hachama

Bernard Ghanem

Peter Wonka

hachamam@gmail.com

Bernard.Ghanem@kaust.edu.sa

pwonka@gmail.com

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
Thuwal, Saudi Arabia

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problem of computing an
intrinsic decomposition of the colors of a surface into an
albedo and a shading term. The surface is reconstructed
from a single or multiple RGB-D images of a static scene
obtained from different views. We thereby extend and improve existing works in the area of intrinsic image decomposition. In a variational framework, we formulate the problem as a minimization of an energy composed of two terms:
a data term and a regularity term. The first term is related to
the image formation process and expresses the relation between the albedo, the surface normals, and the incident illumination. We use an affine shading model, a combination
of a Lambertian model, and an ambient lighting term. This
model is relevant for Lambertian surfaces. When available,
multiple views can be used to handle view-dependent nonLambertian reflections. The second term contains an efficient combination of ℓ2 and ℓ1 -regularizers on the illumination vector field and albedo respectively. Unlike most previous approaches, especially Retinex-like techniques, these
terms do not depend on the image gradient or texture, thus
reducing the mixing shading/reflectance artifacts and leading to better results. The obtained non-linear optimization problem is efficiently solved using a cyclic block coordinate descent algorithm. Our method outperforms a
range of state-of-the-art algorithms on a popular benchmark dataset.

1. Introduction
Intrinsic image decomposition is the process of decomposing a given image into shading and reflectance components. Such decomposition can be used in multiple applications such as image editing, 3D shape reconstruction, and
object recognition.
While intrinsic decomposition has been studied since the
1970’s, it still remains a challenging problem. It is a highly
under-constrained problem in which two unknowns (shad-

ing and reflectance) are to be estimated for each observation
(image color) that is available. To overcome the fundamental ill-posedness, several approaches have been introduced
utilizing additional information such as user interaction[6],
priors [10, 2], multiple images [28], videos [30, 14] and
depth cues [2, 8].

1.1. Related work
One of the earliest works addressing intrinsic image decomposition was the Retinex algorithm [16, 20]. This technique relies on the simple heuristic of associating strong
edge gradients with reflectance changes and small gradients
with illumination changes. Based on the same assumption,
many approaches have been then proposed, using different
strategies such as image gradient thresholding [13, 18] or
learning gradient variations [27, 26]. A major drawback
of these approaches is that the decomposition is analyzed
within a small window. To extend beyond local analysis, several works use additional global consistency terms
based on textures [24, 31], reflectance clustering [10, 4], and
sparsity priors [10, 25]. Nevertheless, the problem remains
severely under-constrained. The performance of existing algorithms on complex real-world images remains limited.
Depth cues have also been used in intrinsic decomposition of RGB-D images to further constrain the solution and
improve the results. In [3], Barron and Malik present a unified model for a joint estimation of a smoothed depth map,
chromatic spatially-varying illumination, and reflectance
from a single RGB-D image. They constrain the solution
by learning novel priors on albedo local smoothness and
global sparsity, and on absolute color. They also introduce
generic Gaussian priors on the illumination environment
represented using spherical harmonics.
Chen and Koltun [8] showed that high quality decomposition results can be obtained by properly constraining
shading components using surface normals. To constrain
the albdeo, they use a non-local term that penalizes pairwise
albedo differences between image pixels. A set of nearest
neighbors for each pixel is defined based on their spatial positions and normals; the shading component of each pixel is
1810

