Simultaneous foreground detection and classification with hybrid features
Jaemyun Kim† , Adı́n Ramı́rez Rivera‡ , Byungyong Ryu† , Oksam Chae†∗
†
Dept. of Computer Engineering, Kyung Hee University, Gyeonggi-do, South Korea
‡
Escuela Informática y Telecomunicaciones, Universidad Diego Portales, Santiago, Chile
sense21c@khu.ac.kr, adin.ramirez@mail.udp.cl, read100nm@khu.ac.kr, oschae@khu.ac.kr

Abstract
...

In this paper, we propose a hybrid background model
that relies on edge and non-edge features of the image to
produce the model. We encode these features into a coding
scheme, that we called Local Hybrid Pattern (LHP), that selectively models edges and non-edges features of each pixel.
Furthermore, we model each pixel with an adaptive code
dictionary to represent the background dynamism, and update it by adding stable codes and discarding unstable ones.
We weight each code in the dictionary to enhance its description of the pixel it models. The foreground is detected
as the incoming codes that deviate from the dictionary. We
can detect (as foreground or background) and classify (as
edge or inner region) each pixel simultaneously. We tested
our proposed method in existing databases with promising
results.

1. Introduction
In these days, the number of video-based surveillance
systems is increasing due to its use in several applications,
such as vision-based traffic system [4], video segmentation [13, 15], or human behavior analysis [1]. Most methods for video-based surveillance rely on moving object detection. One popular approach to implement the latter is
background subtraction. Although background modeling
has been widely studied, there remain many unsolved challenges. Several methods [4, 9, 13, 14, 17, 18, 21, 27, 28] have
tried to solve problems from global and local illumination
changes, dynamic background (such as trees waving and
rippling water), background changes (new background appearance, birth and death), and shadow effects as shown in
Fig. 1. We classify traditional background modeling methods as pixel- and edge-based methods. Nonetheless, recent
surveys [3, 26] present a complete view of the field.
Pixel-based methods use the information of pixels, such
as intensity or color, to represent consecutive frames [17,
18, 27, 28]. These methods are robust to changes in loca∗ Corresponding author

...

Figure 1. Examples for the background variations, such as global
and local illumination, dynamic background, shadows effect from
moving objects, and background changing (birth and death).

tion and orientation of background objects. However, they
are sensitive to pixel-value changes, such as global and local illumination changes. Single modal representation was
used [18, 28] (e.g., median, average, or single Gaussian),
but background variation from illumination is not well represented by a single model. To overcome this limitation,
mixture of Gaussians (MoG) are used to generate a stable background [27]. In this type of methods, each pixel
has k Gaussian models with weights representing their priority. Nevertheless, these methods depend on the correct
number of background variation k, as well as an accurate
update ratio for foreground with slow motion. Heikkilä and
Pietikäinen [7] proposed a mixture of histograms that are
based on local binary patterns (LBP) to model the background. They borrowed ideas from the MoG methods, and
changed the way of modeling the distributions. Other methods [25] that model the background based on LBP has been
proposed too. Also, codebook-based methods are used for
background modeling [6, 17]. These approaches use codewords with variable size to represent pixel variation instead
of using Gaussians for each pixel distribution. The automatic generation of codewords, however, in changing environments may produce a large number of codewords. On
the other hand, there are non-parametric methods, such as
the method proposed by Hoffman et al. [8] or previously
proposed ViBe [2], that do not assume a shape on the distributions but rather use a history of samples to make decisions
about the foreground.

3307

