Unsupervised Synchrony Discovery in Human Interaction
Wen-Sheng Chu1 Jiabei Zeng2 Fernando De la Torre1 Jeffrey F. Cohn1,3 Daniel S. Messinger4
1
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University 3 University of Pittsburgh, USA
2
4
Beihang University, Beijing, China
University of Miami, USA

Abstract
People are inherently social. Social interaction plays
an important and natural role in human behavior. Most
computational methods focus on individuals alone rather
than in social context. They also require labelled training
data. We present an unsupervised approach to discover
interpersonal synchrony, referred as to two or more persons
preforming common actions in overlapping video frames
or segments. For computational efficiency, we develop a
branch-and-bound (B&B) approach that affords exhaustive
search while guaranteeing a globally optimal solution. The
proposed method is entirely general. It takes from two or
more videos any multi-dimensional signal that can be represented as a histogram. We derive three novel bounding
functions and provide efficient extensions, including multisynchrony detection and accelerated search, using a warmstart strategy and parallelism. We evaluate the effectiveness
of our approach in multiple databases, including human
actions using the CMU Mocap dataset [1], spontaneous
facial behaviors using group-formation task dataset [37]
and parent-infant interaction dataset [28].

1. Introduction
Humans are inherently social. Accessing human social
interaction, especially synchrony, provides a better understanding of human behavior. Synchrony refers to the temporal structure of behaviors among interactive partners [13].
The close connection between synchrony and interaction
provides researchers promising perspectives to build social
interfaces [34], robots [6] or conversational agents [18].
However, a lack of automatic tools for synchrony discovery
limits the exploration in interactive abilities.
Most prior art emphasizes on learning individual behaviors, and thus requires adequate labeled training data. Successful instances encompass a number of applications, such
as action recognition [15, 21, 35], facial expression analysis [12, 14, 24, 26, 40] and sign language interpretation
[10]. However, these methods focus on single individuals
without considering social behaviors that can be triggered
by the perception of actions in others. E.g., during faceto-face interaction between mothers and their infants, they

#1715

#2255

#2574

infant
mother

1500

2000

2500

#frame

Figure 1. An illustration of unsupervised synchrony discovery in
mother-infant interaction. Our method automatically discovers
dyadic synchronies from multi-dimensional signals. Red bold
boxes indicate the engagement in mutual smiles between the infant
and the mother. The gray thin box indicate a randomly picked
moment, showing an event without synchrony.

tend to match each other’s affective states within lags of
seconds. This synchrony improves the infant’s experience
of social connection during early development. Studying
human interaction is crucial, but currently, to the best of our
knowledge, no commonly accepted method exists for discovering synchrony among interactive partners.
This paper presents an unsupervised approach to discover interpersonal synchrony that requires no training data.
We term it unsupervised synchrony discovery (USD). Fig. 1
illustrates our main idea in a scenario of mother-infant interaction: Given a two synchronized videos represented as
multi-dimensional signals, we aim to find their synchrony
within a temporal window. For each behavior produced by
one partner, the synchrony is defined as overlapped video
frames or segments for the other partner(s) to produce a
common behavior. As can be seen, two synchronies were
discovered by our approach, where the mother and infant
exhibits mutual engagement of smiles.
In specific, USD models the coordination among individuals as a global optimization problem. Unlike a naive
approach that exhaustively evaluates temporal regions with

3146

