Multi-View Subspace Clustering
Hongchang Gao
Computer Science and Engineering
University of Texas at Arlington
Arlington, TX, 76019, USA

Feiping Nie
Computer Science and Engineering
University of Texas at Arlington
Arlington, TX, 76019, USA

hongchanggao@gmail.com

feipingnie@gmail.com

Xuelong Li
Center for OPTIMAL, XIOPM
Chinese Academy of Sciences
Xi’an, 710119, China

Heng Huang∗
Computer Science and Engineering
University of Texas at Arlington
Arlington, TX, 76019, USA

xuelong li@opt.ac.cn

heng@uta.edu

Abstract
For many computer vision applications, the data sets distribute on certain low-dimensional subspaces. Subspace
clustering is to find such underlying subspaces and cluster the data points correctly. In this paper, we propose
a novel multi-view subspace clustering method. The proposed method performs clustering on the subspace representation of each view simultaneously. Meanwhile, we propose to use a common cluster structure to guarantee the
consistence among different views. In addition, an efficient
algorithm is proposed to solve the problem. Experiments on
four benchmark data sets have been performed to validate
our proposed method. The promising results demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
In recent years, subspace clustering has been explored
extensively. It assumes that the data points are drawn from
multiple low-dimensional subspaces. Therefore, many subspace clustering models have been proposed to uncover
such underlying subspaces such that all data points can be
segmented correctly and each group fits into one of the lowdimensional subspaces.
A number of subspace clustering approaches have been
developed in recent years. For instance, the iteration based
methods such as [21] and [11], the factorization based methods such as [5] and [12], statistical approaches such as [20],
∗ Corresponding Author. HG, FN, HH were supported by U.S. NSF-IIS
1117965, NSF-IIS 1302675, NSF-IIS 1344152, NSF-DBI 1356628, NIH
1R01AG049371-01A1.

and spectral clustering based approaches such as [25] and
[10]. Besides, sparse subspace clustering (SSC) has been
proposed in [8] to find a sparse representation corresponding to the data points from the same subspace. After obtaining the representation of the subspace, the spectral clustering can be performed on such new representation. The lowrank subspace segmentation (LRR) was proposed in [16]
to find the subspace structure with a low-rank representation. Additionally, [18] proposed another subspace discovery method, which is to discover the number of the subspace, its dimension and the data points in each subspace.
However, these methods mostly focus on the features from
single source rather than multiple ones. In this paper, we
will apply the subspace clustering on the data set with multiview features to uncover the subspace structure of the data
set and perform clustering on it.
Many problems in computer vision are concerned with
the data set represented by multiple distinct feature sets.
Different feature sets characterize different and partly independent information about the data set. For instance, an
image can be described by the color, texture, shapes and so
on. As another example, in multi-lingual information retrieval, a document is simultaneously described by several
different languages. These different features can provide
useful information from different views so as to improve
the clustering performance.
The multi-view clustering is to integrate these multiple
feature sets together to perform clustering. Much progress
has been made in developing effective multi-view clustering method. The multi-view spectral clustering model
was proposed in [3] to integrate heterogeneous visual descriptors for image categorizations. The co-regularized
multi-view spectral clustering was introduced in [13] to
14238

