Integrating Dashcam Views through Inter-Video Mapping
Hsin-I Chen

Yi-Ling Chen
Wei-Tse Lee
Fan Wang
National Taiwan University

Bing-Yu Chen

{fensi,yiling,wlee,fan,robin}@cmlab.csie.ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
In this paper, an inter-video mapping approach is proposed to integrate video footages from two dashcams installed on a preceding and its following vehicle to provide
the illusion that the driver of the following vehicle can seethrough the preceding one. The key challenge is to adapt
the perspectives of the two videos based on a small number of common features since a large portion of the common region in the video captured by the following vehicle
is occluded by the preceding one. Inspired by the observation that images with the most similar viewpoints yield
dense and high-quality matches, the proposed inter-video
mapping estimates spatially-varying motions across the two
videos utilizing images of very similar contents. Specifically, we estimate frame-to-frame motions of each two consecutive images and incrementally add new views to form
long-range motion representation. On the other hand, we
dynamically infer spatial-varying motions across the two
videos that propagated from local feature correspondences
to trajectories. In this way, the observed perspective discrepancy between the two videos can be well approximated
by our motion estimation. Once the inter-video mapping
is established, the correspondences can be updated incrementally, so the proposed method is suitable for on-line applications. Experiments with real-world challenging videos
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.

1. Introduction
It is quite common that a driver’s view is obscured by
a large preceding truck, resulting in increased reaction time
due to poor visibility . Although dashcams (dashboard cameras) have achieved massive popularity, and future vehicles
may be enabled with vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) communication to access the videos feed from the preceding vehicles [9], superimposing the videos without adjustment for
fitting the driver’s viewpoint leads to visually misaligned
views, which may cause more distraction to the driver.
The problem of transforming views with great perspective variations between two different dashcams installed on

a preceding vehicle and its following vehicle was first investigated by Chen et al. [3]. Under this environment,
a practical solution needs to tackle at least the following
three challenges: (1) It must model the foreshortening effect induced by arbitrary time-shifts between the two dashcams; (2) It must model the parallax owning to different
camera locations; (3) It must maintain the temporal coherence for stable and comfortable viewing experience. Ideally, a faithful novel view can be generated if we have
dense 3D structures of the scene. However, obtaining such
a dense reconstruction from 2D images is extremely challenging in terms of both accuracy and efficiency. In [3],
perspective discrepancy and parallax are dealt with by estimating spatially-varying warping functions from feature
trajectories. However, obtaining long trajectories is particularly hard in driving scenarios due to large textureless regions, and the tracked points are sparsely distributed, leaving large image regions without close and relevant warping
constraints. Besides, their work naı̈vely extended an image
stitching method [23] to videos, which leads to temporal
incoherence, causing flickering and waving artifacts.
In this paper, a novel inter-video mapping framework is
proposed to integrate video footages from two dashcams installed on a preceding and its following vehicle to provide
the illusion that the driver of the following vehicle can seethrough the preceding one, as shown in Figure 1. This is
quite challenging because the concurrent views of the two
videos have large perspective change and share only a small
number of common features since the video captured by
the following vehicle is partially occluded by the preceding one. To establish the correspondences between the two
videos, we first find a bridge frame in the reference (preceding) video that looks similar with the current frame of the
target (following) video, so that the correspondences can
be established through the relationships between the bridge
frame and the current reference and target frames, respectively.
Hence, there are two major procedures in the proposed
approach. In the first procedure, perspective adaptation
is performed to locally and adaptively alter the projected
shape within the reference (preceding) video. Inspired by
4321
3110

