Globally Optimal 2D-3D Registration from Points or Lines Without
Correspondences
Mark Brown1 , David Windridge1,2 , and Jean-Yves Guillemaut1
1

2

CVSSP, University of Surrey, Guildford, GU2 7XH, United Kingdom
School of Science and Technology, Middlesex University, London, NW4 4BT, United Kingdom

Abstract
We present a novel approach to 2D-3D registration from
points or lines without correspondences. While there exist established solutions in the case where correspondences
are known, there are many situations where it is not possible
to reliably extract such correspondences across modalities,
thus requiring the use of a correspondence-free registration
algorithm. Existing correspondence-free methods rely on
local search strategies and consequently have no guarantee of finding the optimal solution. In contrast, we present
the first globally optimal approach to 2D-3D registration
without correspondences, achieved by a Branch-and-Bound
algorithm. Furthermore, a deterministic annealing procedure is proposed to speed up the nested branch-and-bound
algorithm used. The theoretical and practical advantages
this brings are demonstrated on a range of synthetic and
real data where it is observed that the proposed approach
is significantly more robust to high proportions of outliers
compared to existing approaches.

1. Introduction
In this paper we present a globally optimal solution to
the 2D-3D registration problem with points or lines when
no correspondences between features are known, and in the
presence of outliers. It is an integral part of the more general 2D-3D registration problem: given an image taken by a
calibrated camera and a 3D model, the objective is to determine the pose of the camera with respect to the model. This
finds use in a range of applications, e.g. motion segmentation [26], and object localisation and recognition [17].
The general 2D-3D registration problem is challenging
since, while there exist techniques to extract features between 2D and 3D (e.g. corners [14], salient features [6] or
lines [13, 29]), it is an open problem to automatically establish correspondences between them. This may be due to
a variety of reasons. In the case of lines, there are many

scenes where it is difficult to establish correspondences
based on appearance, for example in highly repetitive manmade scenes or where low-width structures are present [16].
Furthermore, feature appearance can vary dramatically between 3D and its 2D projection due to the non-linear nature
of the transformation; a 3D feature may be projected from a
large range of viewpoints and perspective distortion may occur. More generally however, correspondences of any feature type are particularly difficult to hypothesize when the
3D model is untextured, as is often the case if it is obtained
by a laser range scanner.
The lack of feature correspondences renders traditional
hypothesize-and-test approaches (e.g. RANSAC [12]) practically obsolete due to the very high computational complexity of the problem. Whilst some progress has been
made to compute solutions more efficiently [10, 25], existing approaches all suffer from the same limitations: they
only search for local maxima and hence require a good initialisation with no guarantee of optimality given.
The paper makes the following contributions. Firstly, we
propose the first globally optimal solution to this problem,
achieved via a Branch-and-Bound (BnB) strategy. Its formulation readily allows for either point or line features to
be used, allowing it to be applicable to a broader range of
scenes. Secondly, we propose a novel deterministic annealing parameter that allows for the speed-up of nested BnB
algorithms while preserving the global optimality of the solution. Finally, the approach is evaluated against state-ofthe-art where significant improvements are demonstrated:
our approach is more accurate and significantly more robust
to high rates of outliers compared to existing approaches.
The structure of this paper is as follows: in Section 2 an
overview of related work is given. In Section 3 the scope
of the problem is formally defined and in Section 4 the
Branch-and-Bound approach is detailed, including derivations required for this problem and our novel deterministic
annealing strategy. In Section 5 results are presented for
points and lines on synthetic and real data. Finally, conclusions and future work are presented in Section 6.

2111

