Partial Person Re-identiﬁcation
Wei-Shi Zheng1 , Xiang Li1 , Tao Xiang2 , Shengcai Liao3 , Jianhuang Lai∗1 , and Shaogang Gong2
1
School of Information Science and Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science, Queen Mary University of London, UK
3
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China.
wszheng@ieee.org, lixiang651@gmail.com, t.xiang@qmul.ac.uk, scliao@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
stsljh@mail.sysu.edu.cn, s.gong@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
We address a new partial person re-identiﬁcation (reid) problem, where only a partial observation of a person
is available for matching across different non-overlapping
camera views. This differs significantly from the conventional person re-id setting where it is assumed that the
full body of a person is detected and aligned. To solve
this more challenging and realistic re-id problem without
the implicit assumption of manual body-parts alignment,
we propose a matching framework consisting of 1) a local patch-level matching model based on a novel sparse
representation classification formulation with explicit patch
ambiguity modelling, and 2) a global part-based matching
model providing complementary spatial layout information.
Our framework is evaluated on a new partial person re-id
dataset as well as two existing datasets modified to include
partial person images. The results show that the proposed
method outperforms significantly existing re-id methods as
well as other partial visual matching methods.

1. Introduction
Person re-identiﬁcation (re-id) has been studied extensively in the past ﬁve years [5, 30, 4, 37, 10, 20, 36]. It aims
to re-identify a target person in a new view after he/she disappears from another view in a large public space covered
by multiple non-overlapping (disjoint) cameras. Solving the
re-id problem has many applications in video surveillance
for public security and safety.
To match a person across views, one has to deal with
large appearance changes of the person caused by a variety
of condition changes including lighting, view angle, pose,
and occlusion. Among these challenges, occlusion is one
of the hardest to tackle because the information loss is irreversible. Occlusions are commonplace in a crowded public
∗ Corresponding author

Surveillance operator
annotates the patch
containing the upper
body

Matching
who?

Who is that
guy stealing ?

Figure 1. An illustration of the partial person re-id problem. Here,
an operator wishes to know who the person is stealing in an ofﬁce.
The only visible cue is the upper body clothing. The operator may
crop manually the visible parts and uses an automated re-id system
to match against a set of observations from elsewhere.

space with background clutters, where they can be caused
by other people in the scene, or static obstacles such as walls/pillars. Sometimes occlusions can be caused deliberately.
For example, when a crime has been reported, the police
or CCTV operator who examines the surveillance footage
often discovers that only partial body of the suspect is visible at the crime scene because one deliberately tried to hide
one’s appearance (see Fig. 1). The goal is to ﬁnd the same
person in full body appearance in other camera views given
only a partial probe image. We call this the partial person
re-identification problem.
There are two computational challenges for solving the
partial person re-id problem (see examples in Fig. 2). First,
with only partial information it is less discriminative thus
more likely to be mismatched to the wrong person. For example if only a pair of blue jeans are visible, it is difﬁcult
to use them to distinguish people as so many other people
may also wear similar jeans, whilst other more distinct body
parts were occluded. Second, it is difﬁcult to determine against which part of the full body the partial observation
should be matched. The partial appearance can be a random part of a person and which body part it belongs to can

4678

