A Versatile Scene Model with Differentiable Visibility
Applied to Generative Pose Estimation
Helge Rhodin1 Nadia Robertini1, 2 Christian Richardt1, 2 Hans-Peter Seidel1 Christian Theobalt1
1

MPI Informatik

2

Intel Visual Computing Institute

Abstract
Generative reconstruction methods compute the 3D configuration (such as pose and/or geometry) of a shape by optimizing the overlap of the projected 3D shape model with
images. Proper handling of occlusions is a big challenge,
since the visibility function that indicates if a surface point
is seen from a camera can often not be formulated in closed
form, and is in general discrete and non-differentiable at occlusion boundaries. We present a new scene representation
that enables an analytically differentiable closed-form formulation of surface visibility. In contrast to previous methods, this yields smooth, analytically differentiable, and efficient to optimize pose similarity energies with rigorous occlusion handling, fewer local minima, and experimentally
verified improved convergence of numerical optimization.
The underlying idea is a new image formation model that
represents opaque objects by a translucent medium with a
smooth Gaussian density distribution which turns visibility
into a smooth phenomenon. We demonstrate the advantages
of our versatile scene model in several generative pose estimation problems, namely marker-less multi-object pose estimation, marker-less human motion capture with few cameras, and image-based 3D geometry estimation.

ically well-behaved, i.e. smooth. Many approaches already
fail to satisfy the first condition and use similarity functions
that cannot be expressed or differentiated analytically. This
necessitates the use of computationally expensive particlebased optimization methods or numerical gradient approximations that may cause instability and inaccuracy.
A major difficulty in achieving the above properties is
the handling of occlusions when projecting from 3D to
2D. Only those parts of a 3D model visible from a camera view should contribute to the similarity. In general, this
can be handled by using a visibility function V(θ) in the
similarity measure that describes the visibility of a surface
point in pose θ when viewed from a certain direction. For
many shape representations, this function is unfortunately
not only hard to formulate explicitly, but it is also binary for
solid objects, and hence non-differentiable at points along
occlusion boundaries. This renders the similarity function
non-differentiable.
In this paper, we introduce a 3D scene representation and
image formation model that holistically addresses visibility
within a generative similarity energy. It is the first model
that satisfies all the following properties:
1. It enables an analytic, continuous and smooth visibility
function that is differentiable everywhere in the scene.
2. It enables similarity energies with rigorous visibility handling that are differentiable everywhere in the
model and camera parameters.

1. Introduction
Many vision algorithms employ a generative approach to
estimate the configuration θ of a 3D shape that optimizes a
function measuring the similarity of the projected 3D model
with one or more input camera views of a scene. In rigid
object tracking, for example, θ models the global pose and
orientation of an object, whereas in generative marker-less
human motion capture, θ instead models the skeleton pose,
and optionally surface geometry and appearance.
The ideal objective function for optimizing similarity has
several desirable properties that are often difficult to satisfy: it should have analytic form, analytic derivative, exhibit few local minima, be efficient to evaluate, and numer-

3. It enables similarity energies that can be optimized
efficiently with gradient-based techniques, and which
exhibit favorable and more robust convergence in cases
where previous visibility approximations fail, such as
disocclusions or multiple nearby occlusion boundaries.
Our method approximates opaque objects by a translucent
medium with a smooth density distribution defined via a
collection of Gaussian functions. This turns occlusion and
visibility into smooth phenomena. Based on this representation, we derive a new rigorous image formation model that
1765

