Two Birds, One Stone: Jointly Learning Binary Code for
Large-scale Face Image Retrieval and Attributes Prediction
Yan Li1,2 , Ruiping Wang1 , Haomiao Liu1,2 , Huajie Jiang1,3 , Shiguang Shan1 , Xilin Chen1
1 Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
3 School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, 200031, China
{yan.li, haomiao.liu, huajie.jiang}@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {wangruiping, sgshan, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
We address the challenging large-scale content-based
face image retrieval problem, intended as searching images
based on the presence of specific subject, given one face
image of him/her. To this end, one natural demand is a supervised binary code learning method. While the learned
codes might be discriminating, people often have a further
expectation that whether some semantic message (e.g., visual attributes) can be read from the human-incomprehensible
codes. For this purpose, we propose a novel binary code
learning framework by jointly encoding identity discriminability and a number of facial attributes into unified binary code. In this way, the learned binary codes can be applied to not only fine-grained face image retrieval, but also
facial attributes prediction, which is the very innovation of
this work, just like killing two birds with one stone. To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed method, extensive experiments are conducted on a new purified large-scale web
celebrity database, named CFW 60K, with abundant manual identity and attributes annotation, and experimental results exhibit the superiority of our method over state-of-theart.

1. Introduction
Content-based face image retrieval is concerned with automatic computer retrieval of face images of a given subject
from a large-scale database with discriminative features. It
emerges as a promising research direction with increasing
demands, especially in the era of Internet multimedia involving huge body of face images. Imagine that people always wish to retrieve as many photos of a specific celebrity
as possible, given one photo containing him/her as query;
and it is also very helpful for police to search and locate
a criminal suspect among a huge number of images captured by city surveillance system with a photo of him/her
taken at the crime scene via CCTV. Both scenarios are ex-

tremely challenging, and the challenges mainly lie in two
aspects: a) faces, especially the ones captured in the wild
unconstrained environments always contain lots of variations, such as illumination, head pose, facial expression,
occlusion, and sometimes heavy make-up, thus forming a
phenomenon that the within-class variance is even larger
than the between-class variance; b) the scale of database
is in most cases so large that compact face representation
becomes an urgent demand in order to reduce the storage
cost and matching complexity.
For the first aspect, a number of methods have been proposed [29, 6, 1, 18] for conducting discriminant face representation. In [29] it utilizes different color spaces and standard PCA to extract discriminant facial representation for
retrieval; in [6] a robust face retrieval approach is presented
using structural and spatial point correspondence where the
directional corner points (DCPs) are generated for efficient
face coding; in [1] face image retrieval is conducted under
a sparse coding based semi-supervised learning framework;
in [18] it chooses Gabor-LBP histogram as facial representation followed by a sparse representation classifier for retrieval. While these works have achieved certain success
mostly in well-controlled databases, they all have their face
representation to be high-dimensional real-valued, which
will inevitably limit their scalability to large-scale realistic
retrieval scenario, which typically requires not only accurate but also compact representation for fast search. YES,
binary code is a natural solution.
For the second aspect of the challenges, various binary code learning (a.k.a, hash learning) methods, have been
proposed [7, 3, 13, 25, 37, 8, 11, 34, 26, 21], because binary codes are quite efficient to match with sub-linear time
complexity, and are able to index a huge size of images with
very short code length [22]. The basic idea of hashing is to
learn similarity preserving binary codes for data representation, i.e., each data point will be hashed into a compact

3819

