Piecewise Flat Embedding for Image Segmentation
Yizhou Yu†
Chaowei Fang†‡
Zicheng Liao‡
†
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong
‡
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University

Figure 1. Given an input image (left), our piecewise flat embedding transforms the original color image into a set of embedding images
(middle left to middle right), each capturing a subset of the characteristics of the input image. These characteristic images are similar to
the results of other embedding methods, such as Laplacian Eigenmaps, with a main distinction that our embedding tends to be piecewise
flat. This property facilitates more robust image segmentation. On the right we show a segmentation result using our embedding.

Abstract
Image segmentation is a critical step in many computer vision tasks, including high-level visual recognition
and scene understanding as well as low-level photo and
video processing. In this paper, we propose a new nonlinear embedding, called piecewise flat embedding, for image segmentation. Based on the theory of sparse signal recovery, piecewise flat embedding attempts to identify segment boundaries while significantly suppressing variations
within segments. We adopt an L1 -regularized energy term
in the formulation to promote sparse solutions. We further
devise an effective two-stage numerical algorithm based
on Bregman iterations to solve the proposed embedding.
Piecewise flat embedding can be easily integrated into existing image segmentation frameworks, including segmentation based on spectral clustering and hierarchical segmentation based on contour detection. Experiments on
BSDS500 indicate that segmentation algorithms incorporating this embedding can achieve significantly improved
results in both frameworks.

1. Introduction
Image segmentation remains a critical step in many computer vision tasks, which not only include high-level visual recognition and scene understanding tasks, but also
low-level photo and video processing operations, such as
localized photo/video editing, enhancement and compositing. Superpixels, small image regions resulted from oversegmentation, are also valuable for accelerating a variety of
computer vision and image processing algorithms.

Many mainstream image segmentation methods measure
the similarity between pairs of pixels or regions before determining the boundaries of image segments. Both of these
steps are highly nontrivial. An important reason is that pixel
attributes (with high-frequency textures suppressed) could
have smooth but relatively large variations over a single object surface due to a variety of factors including spatially
varying illumination and shading. In the event of neighboring pixels sharing similar attributes, small differences
between neighboring pixels can accumulate and give rise
to significant differences between distant pixels even when
they perceptually belong to the same object. As a result,
differences between distant pixels on the same object could
exceed the differences between nearby pixels on different
objects, making it hard to decide where the object boundary
should be.
To tackle the aforementioned challenges, a common
practice computes an embedding to map pixels to a new
feature space, where pixels with similar attributes are positioned closer to each other than those with dissimilar attributes. Grouping pixels in this new feature space often
gives rise to improved segmentation results. Nevertheless,
existing methods typically generate smooth embeddings,
making it not easy to have clear-cut decisions on object
boundaries. Ideally, pixel grouping would be made much
easier if an embedding could map original pixels on the
same object to a point cloud tightly distributed around a
single point in the new feature space while points corresponding to pixels on different objects are kept apart from

1368

