A Supervised Low-rank Method for Learning Invariant Subspaces
Farzad Siyahjani

Ranya Almohsen Sinan Sabri
West Virginia University
Morgantown, WV 26508

Gianfranco Doretto

{fsiyahja, ralmohse, sisabri, gidoretto}@mix.wvu.edu

Abstract
Sparse representation and low-rank matrix decomposition approaches have been successfully applied to several
computer vision problems. They build a generative representation of the data, which often requires complex training
as well as testing to be robust against data variations induced by nuisance factors. We introduce the invariant components, a discriminative representation invariant to nuisance factors, because it spans subspaces orthogonal to the
space where nuisance factors are defined. This allows developing a framework based on geometry that ensures a uniform inter-class separation, and a very efficient and robust
classification based on simple nearest neighbor. In addition, we show how the approach is equivalent to a local
metric learning, where the local metrics (one for each class)
are learned jointly, rather than independently, thus avoiding
the risk of overfitting without the need for additional regularization. We evaluated the approach for face recognition
with highly corrupted training and testing data, obtaining
very promising results.

1. Introduction
Recent approaches based on sparse representation [44]
and low-rank matrix decomposition [5] have demonstrated
great potential for addressing the problem of human identification, based on matching face images. Sparse coding
has led to impressive performance even for image classification [30, 12]. Similarly, low-rank methods, after being applied to domains such as segmentation and grouping [7], tracking [49], and 3D visual recovery [26], are
now also being used for classification [50]. For face recognition the sparse representation-based classification (SRC)
method [44] has shown robustness with respect to a high
degree of noise and occlusions in the test images. At the
same time, sparse coding dictionary learning was shown to
be sensitive to training samples corrupted by structural nuisance factors, such as occlusions, disguise, pose, lighting
variations, and so on. This has motivated the development

of low-rank matrix decomposition approaches [5, 6, 48, 39],
which have the ability to learn a representational dictionary even in presence of corrupted data. Those approaches
build a generative representation of the data that focusses on
capturing all the information descriptive of an entity. This
leads to complex training and testing for building robustness against, and filtering out unwanted data variations due
to nuisance factors.
In this work we introduce a low-rank modeling framework that gives up capturing all the descriptive information of an entity (referred to as the sufficient component),
and focusses on learning a representation that is invariant
to nuisance factors (referred to as the invariant component).
The main advantage of this approach is a fast procedure for
computing and comparing invariant components for recognition. Indeed, we will see that this can be achieved by a
simple matrix multiplication. On the other hand, the main
challenge of this approach is that different entities may originate the same invariant component, thus preventing their
discrimination. We will show that the proposed framework
not only learns different invariant representations for different entities, but such representations promote a uniform
inter-class separation.
The approach couples simple geometry tools with recent
advances in low-rank matrix recovery theory [5], and develops a supervised model for learning the proposed invariant
representation, which spans an invariant subspace. Such
subspace has to be orthogonal to the variation subspace,
generated by data variation induced by nuisance factors on
all the entities. We make the assumption that the variation
subspace is low-rank. Although this is an approximation,
we empirically verify that it leads to very promising results for face recognition when training and testing data are
highly corrupted, which is typical in video surveillance applications.
While the framework is grounded on geometry, we will
show how it relates to metric learning [36, 9, 34, 4], typically used for improving nearest neighbor (NN) classification based on the Euclidean distance. We will show that
learning the invariant components is equivalent to learn-

4220

