Massively Parallel Multiview Stereopsis by Surface Normal Diffusion
Silvano Galliani

Katrin Lasinger

Konrad Schindler

Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, ETH Zurich

Abstract
We present a new, massively parallel method for highquality multiview matching. Our work builds on the Patchmatch idea: starting from randomly generated 3D planes
in scene space, the best-fitting planes are iteratively propagated and refined to obtain a 3D depth and normal field per
view, such that a robust photo-consistency measure over all
images is maximized. Our main novelties are on the one
hand to formulate Patchmatch in scene space, which makes
it possible to aggregate image similarity across multiple
views and obtain more accurate depth maps. And on the
other hand a modified, diffusion-like propagation scheme
that can be massively parallelized and delivers dense multiview correspondence over ten 1.9-Megapixel images in
3 seconds, on a consumer-grade GPU. Our method uses
a slanted support window and thus has no fronto-parallel
bias; it is completely local and parallel, such that computation time scales linearly with image size, and inversely
proportional to the number of parallel threads. Furthermore, it has low memory footprint (four values per pixel,
independent of the depth range). It therefore scales exceptionally well and can handle multiple large images at high
depth resolution. Experiments on the DTU and Middlebury
multiview datasets as well as oblique aerial images show
that our method achieves very competitive results with high
accuracy and completeness, across a range of different scenarios.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing dense 3D shape from multiple images
has been a topic of interest in computer vision for many
years. Since camera pose estimation and multiview triangulation can be considered solved (at least for images that
are suitable for subsequent dense reconstruction), the problem boils down to the fundamental task of image matching, i.e. establishing dense correspondence between images.
The majority of the literature deals with the basic stereo
setup with two images, e.g. [20, 23, 33, 31, 32]. It is evident that using more than two viewpoints will improve both

Figure 1: Results on one of the 80 evaluated objects on
the DTU benchmark [22]. Top left: Ground truth point
cloud; top right: reconstructed point cloud with texture;
bottom left: color-coded surface normals; bottom right: reconstructed surface.

the accuracy of the reconstructed 3D points (by triangulating from more rays) and the robustness against grossly
wrong matches (by checking the coherence of redundant
observations). Moreover, using more than two viewpoints
alleviates the occlusion problem, and can reconstruct objects more completely, e.g. [7, 12]. On the other hand, the
multiview setup exacerbates the problem that already many
successful stereo methods do not scale up to realistic image sizes of several million pixels. Nevertheless, guided
by the quality metrics used in standard benchmarks such
as KITTI and Middlebury, most authors concentrate on accuracy and pay limited attention to scalability and runtime
performance. Many existing algorithms become impractical when moving to larger sets of high-resolution images.
In this work we present a multiview matching method
that delivers dense, accurate 3D point clouds while at the
same time being efficient enough to handle large images.
Our goal is a fast matcher which is nevertheless very accurate. On the recent DTU benchmark, our method reaches
the best compromise between accuracy and completeness

873

