Multi-Task Learning with Low Rank Attribute Embedding for Person
Re-identification

1

Chi Su1∗ Fan Yang2∗ Shiliang Zhang1 Qi Tian3
Peking University 2 University of Maryland College Park

Abstract
We propose a novel Multi-Task Learning with Low Rank
Attribute Embedding (MTL-LORAE) framework for person
re-identification. Re-identifications from multiple cameras
are regarded as related tasks to exploit shared information
to improve re-identification accuracy. Both low level features and semantic/data-driven attributes are utilized. Since
attributes are generally correlated, we introduce a low rank
attribute embedding into the MTL formulation to embed
original binary attributes to a continuous attribute space,
where incorrect and incomplete attributes are rectified and
recovered to better describe people. The learning objective
function consists of a quadratic loss regarding class labels
and an attribute embedding error, which is solved by an alternating optimization procedure. Experiments on four person re-identification datasets have demonstrated that MTLLORAE outperforms existing approaches by a large margin
and produces promising results.

1. Introduction
The aim of person re-identification is to identify a person
in a probe image/video by searching for the most similar instances from a gallery set. Although one can take advantage
of increasing amounts of surveillance data to obtain more
information to improve re-identification accuracy, it is nontrivial to design an effective re-identification algorithm due
to large appearance, pose and illumination changes across
images. Additionally, images are usually from multiple
cameras with different parameters and viewpoints, making
accurate and efficient person re-identification even harder.
Nevertheless, even though the appearance of a person
greatly changes, high-level semantic concepts with respect
to the person are relatively stable and consistent across different cameras. Such semantic concepts, referred to as attributes, have been widely applied to various vision applications, such as image classification and object detection,
and shown promising results. When we describe an image
or object by attributes, we obtain a vector in which each
* indicates equal contribution.

Larry S. Davis2 Wen Gao1
University of Texas at San Antonio

3

dimension indicates whether the corresponding attribute is
present or not (or, more generally, its likelihood). In addition, it is intuitive that some attributes frequently co-occur,
leading to a few subsets which contain related attributes
while are mutually independent. For example, the attribute
female is likely to be highly related to the attribute long hair
rather than short hair. We show that by utilizing correlations of attributes, attributes of the same person from different cameras can be embedded into a low rank space, where
embedded attributes are more accurate and informative for
matching. Through the low rank attribute space, we can
better match samples of the same person from one camera
to another. Additionally, using this low rank embedding,
we can prune noisy attributes and recover missing attributes
that are introduced by inaccurate human annotation.
Nevertheless, it is computationally expensive to infer attribute correlations using pairs of cameras, which also ignores the relationship of more than two cameras. To utilize
relationships of features and attributes more efficiently for
matching instances across cameras, we employ the MultiTask Learning (MTL) [5] algorithm, where one jointly
learns solutions to multiple related tasks which benefit each
other. MTL has been shown successful in discovering latent
relationships among tasks, which cannot be found by learning each task independently. It has been widely applied to
machine learning [2, 44] and computer vision [45, 24]. In
addition, MTL is particularly suitable for the situation in
which only a limited amount of training data is available
for each task. By considering re-identifications from multiple cameras as tasks, the MTL framework can be naturally
adapted to exploit features and attributes shared across cameras by learning from multiple cameras simultaneously.
In the remainder of the paper we will present a
Multi-Task Learning algorithm with LOw Rank Attribute
Embedding (MTL-LORAE) for person re-identification.
We aim to discover shared information amongst cameras
that are treated as related tasks. Given images of people
from multiple cameras, we learn a discriminative model using MTL, so that the relationships among images from these
cameras can be utilized to improve the quality of the learned
model. Both low level features and attributes are used in our

3739

