Flickr30k Entities: Collecting Region-to-Phrase Correspondences
for Richer Image-to-Sentence Models
Bryan A. Plummer†

Liwei Wang†

Chris M. Cervantes†

Julia Hockenmaier†
Univ. of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Juan C. Caicedo∗

Svetlana Lazebnik†
Fundación Univ. Konrad Lorenz

∗

†

[bplumme2,lwang97,ccervan2,juliahmr,slazebni]@illinois.edu
juanc.caicedor@konradlorenz.edu.co

Abstract
The Flickr30k dataset has become a standard benchmark
for sentence-based image description. This paper presents
Flickr30k Entities, which augments the 158k captions from
Flickr30k with 244k coreference chains linking mentions of
the same entities in images, as well as 276k manually annotated bounding boxes corresponding to each entity. Such
annotation is essential for continued progress in automatic
image description and grounded language understanding.
We present experiments demonstrating the usefulness of our
annotations for text-to-image reference resolution, or the
task of localizing textual entity mentions in an image, and
for bidirectional image-sentence retrieval. These experiments confirm that we can further improve the accuracy of
state-of-the-art retrieval methods by training with explicit
region-to-phrase correspondence, but at the same time, they
show that accurately inferring this correspondence given an
image and a caption remains really challenging.

1. Introduction
We are interested in understanding language grounded
in visual content, and using language to better interpret images. The task of sentence-based image description, which
combines both of these goals, has received a lot of attention in both computer vision and natural language processing communities [1, 4, 6, 7, 12, 16, 19, 20, 22, 23, 25, 28, 37,
39]. Existing datasets for this task pair each image with one
or more captions [11, 12, 24, 31, 40]. Unfortunately, none
of these datasets provide an explicit grounding of where the
entities mentioned in the captions appear in the image. As a
consequence, most approaches to automatic image description either learn global associations between images and
sentences without any explicit attempt to detect or localize the mentioned entities [1, 4, 12, 19, 20, 23, 25, 37], or
rely on detectors that were trained for different purposes

[7, 22, 28, 39]. A number of recent works have taken a
more conceptually satisfying approach of inducing mappings of image regions to words or phrases in the captions [6, 17, 16, 38], but have had to treat these mappings
as latent. It is reasonable to believe the accuracy of the latter methods would be enhanced by having explicit supervision at training time. At test time, ground-truth regionto-text correspondence could help evaluate how accurately
methods associate phrases with specific image locations.
Indeed, there is evidence that state-of-the-art caption generation methods tend to reproduce generic captions from
the training data and do not perform well on compositionally novel images [2]. To overcome such weaknesses and
develop richer compositional image-sentence models, we
need large-scale supervision and new benchmarks.
The main contribution of this paper is providing the
first large-scale comprehensive dataset of region-to-phrase
correspondences for image description. We build on the
Flickr30k dataset [40], a popular benchmark for caption
generation and retrieval [1, 4, 6, 10, 17, 16, 19, 20, 23, 25,
37, 38]. Flickr30k contains 31,783 images focusing mainly
on people and animals, and 158,915 English captions (five
per image). In this work, we introduce Flickr30k Entities,
which augments the original dataset by identifying which
mentions among the captions of the same image refer to the
same set of entities, resulting in 244,035 coreference chains,
and which image regions depict the mentioned entities, resulting in 275,775 bounding boxes. Figure 1 illustrates the
structure of our annotations on three sample images.
The largest existing dataset with both captions and
region-level annotations is Microsoft Common Objects in
Context (MSCOCO) [24], containing over 300k images
with over 2.5m labeled object instances from 80 pre-defined
categories, and five captions per image. However, the
MSCOCO region-level annotations were produced independently from its captions, and phrases in the captions are
not linked to these regions or to each other in any way. Thus,
while MSCOCO is an order of magnitude larger, unlike our

2641

