An MRF-Poselets Model for Detecting Highly Articulated Humans
Duc Thanh Nguyen1 , Minh-Khoi Tran2 , and Sai-Kit Yeung3
Singapore University of Technology and Design
{1 ducthanh nguyen,3 saikit}@sutd.edu.sg, 2 minhkhoi tran@mymail.sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Detecting highly articulated objects such as humans is
a challenging problem. This paper proposes a novel partbased model built upon poselets, a notion of parts, and
Markov Random Field (MRF) for modelling the human
body structure under the variation of human poses and
viewpoints. The problem of human detection is then formulated as maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimation in the
MRF model. Variational mean field method, a robust statistical inference, is adopted to approximate the MAP estimation. The proposed method was evaluated and compared
with existing methods on different test sets including H3D
and PASCAL VOC 2007-2009. Experimental results have
favourbly shown the robustness of the proposed method in
comparison to the state-of-the-art.

which the human object image (detection window) is represented in a regular grid of blocks. Features, e.g. histograms
of oriented gradients (HOG) [11], are then extracted from
the blocks and concatenated to form a feature vector describing the whole human object. The success of this approach has been confirmed in detecting human objects with
less variation of poses and viewpoints, e.g. pedestrians.
On the other hand, local methods model the human object as a set of parts, e.g. [25, 7, 1, 15, 37, 38, 19, 8, 20].
Compared with the global approach, the local approach is
more robust to model the high articulation of the human
body. However, the performance of local methods significantly depends on detecting parts and modelling the configuration of the human body based on parts. In heavy deformations, e.g. articulated actions of athletes in sport videos,
a part appears differently in different poses and viewpoints;
and the spatial distribution of parts also much varies.

1. Introduction

1.1. Related Work

Human detection is an active topic in Computer Vision due to its variety of applications such as image/video
retrieval, video-based surveillance, driving assistance systems, human-computer interaction in intelligent systems,
etc. The problem is also well-known for its challenges including the variation of the human poses, viewpoints, and
the occurrence of occlusions.
Literature has shown extensive studies in human detection during a decade [13, 5, 31] and the focuses of the stateof-the-art have been mainly on features and object representation models. Well-known features used in human detection include Haar-like features [34], histogram of oriented
gradients (HOG) [11, 16, 7, 6], local binary patterns (LBP)
[21], channel features [3, 4, 12], and combination of those
features [40, 10]. Recently, deep neural networks [18, 8, 20]
have been used for automatic learning of higher-level features. They obtain good results but require specific knowledge and experience to design the network architecture.
Given the features, a detection method represents a human object using global or local models. Global models
represent the human object as a whole. The most common representation scheme is the model proposed in [11] in

In general, the parts in a part-based model can be detected simultaneously [1, 16, 15, 37] or independently
[25, 33, 27, 7, 6, 38, 19, 8, 20] in different processes. The
most prominent part-based model detecting parts simultaneously is the deformable part model (DPM) proposed by
Felzenszwalb et al. [16, 15]. In this model, HOG was used
to describe the appearance of the body parts while the placements of the parts were encoded by latent variables of a latent SVM. The parts were detected so as to maximise the
appearance score and at the same time minimise the deformation cost. The DPM was then extended in [37] in which
more small and rigid parts were used and the appearance
consistency between parts was considered. However, the
DPM approach requires that the number of parts and part
types (e.g. head, torso, legs) must be determined in advance. In fact, due to the variation of poses and viewpoints,
the number of parts and part’s appearance vary significantly.
For example, one arm may not be visible when the human
object is in a profile view and the face is not observable in
a back-facing pose. In addition, the legs in a running and
walking pose have different appearance.
When the parts are detected independently, the existence
11967

