On the Equivalence of Moving Entrance Pupil and Radial Distortion for Camera
Calibration
Avinash Kumar and Narendra Ahuja
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, 61801, IL, USA
{avinash,n-ahuja}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Radial distortion for ordinary (non-fisheye) camera
lenses has traditionally been modeled as an infinite series
function of radial location of an image pixel from the image
center. While there has been enough empirical evidence to
show that such a model is accurate and sufficient for radial distortion calibration, there has not been much analysis
on the geometric/physical understanding of radial distortion from a camera calibration perspective. In this paper,
we show using a thick-lens imaging model, that the variation of entrance pupil location as a function of incident
image ray angle is directly responsible for radial distortion
in captured images. Thus, unlike as proposed in the current
state-of-the-art in camera calibration, radial distortion and
entrance pupil movement are equivalent and need not be
modeled together.
By modeling only entrance pupil motion instead of radial
distortion, we achieve two main benefits; first, we obtain
comparable if not better pixel re-projection error than traditional methods; second, and more importantly, we directly
back-project a radially distorted image pixel along the true
image ray which formed it. Using a thick-lens setting, we
show that such a back-projection is more accurate than the
two-step method of undistorting an image pixel and then
back-projecting it. We have applied this calibration method
to the problem of generative depth-from-focus using focal
stack to get accurate depth estimates.

dinary (non-fisheye) camera lenses whose image formation can be described as ideal perspective projection followed by small deviations/distortions. These distortions
cause straight lines in the scene to be imaged as curved
lines. In calibration, image distortion has been modeled
as a combination of radial distortion [3] to model radially
outward movement of ideal image points and decentering
distortion to model keystone like distortions owing to small
lens-sensor misalignment [14, 4]. Both of these distortion
models are in the form of an infinite series function of ideal
image coordinates [14, 16, 7]. Since, they are not physically motivated, these models are only approximate in nature. Previously, Kumar and Ahuja [10] have proposed a
physical model for decentering distortion via a rotation matrix to encode the lens-sensor tilt. In this paper, we show
that the physical motion of the entrance pupil as a function
of the incident ray angle is the cause of radial distortion in
images. Based on this analysis, we propose a new camera
calibration method which features a pupil-centric imaging
model [10] (more accurate than traditional pin-hole model),
rotation-based image sensor misalignment [10, 5] (to model
decentering effects) and moving entrance pupil model (to
model radial distortion) to achieve lower pixel re-projection
errors. Moreover, our calibration allows for accurate backprojection of image rays directly from distorted image pixels. Our analysis shows that the combined modeling of entrance pupil motion and radial distortion [14] as done in the
current state-of-the-art in camera calibration [5] is redundant. Thus, our main contributions in this paper are:
1. In a pupil-centric imaging framework, we show that
the physical motion of entrance pupil along the optic
axis causes radial bending of image rays thus resulting
in radial distortion of image pixels (Sec. 2).

1. Introduction
Camera calibration entails estimation of intrinsic and extrinsic parameters of a camera given a set of known world
points and their measured image coordinates on the image
plane [3, 13, 14, 7, 16]. The intrinsic parameters model the
geometric properties of the image sensor and the extrinsic
properties model the pose of the camera in a known coordinate system.
Camera calibration depends on the imaging model that
governs the camera optics. In this paper, we focus on or-

2. We propose a new pupil-centric calibration algorithm
based on these ideas and obtain less pixel re-projection
error compared to prior calibration methods (Sec. 3)
and show accurate pixel ray back-projection (Sec. 5).
3. We present a categorization of various prior calibration
algorithms based on their underlying assumptions and
12345

