The One Triangle Three Parallelograms Sampling Strategy and Its Application
in Shape Regression
Mikael Nilsson
Centre of Mathematical Sciences
Lund University, Lund, Sweden
mikael.nilsson@math.lth.se

Abstract
The purpose of this paper is threefold. Firstly, the paper
introduces the One Triangle Three Parallelograms (OTTP)
sampling strategy, which can be viewed as a way to index
pixels from a given shape and image. Secondly, a framework for cascaded shape regression, including the OTTP
sampling, is presented. In short, this framework involves
binary pixel tests for appearance features combined with
shape features followed by a large linear system for each
regression stage in the cascade. The proposed solution is
found to produce state-of-the-art results on the task of facial
landmark estimation. Thirdly, the dependence of accuracy
of the landmark predictions and the placement of the mean
shape within the detection box is discussed and a method to
visualize it is presented.

1. Introduction
Registration of shape landmarks in an image is an essential step in many computer vision applications. Early work
on shape landmark estimations commonly resorted to the
Active Appearance Model (AAM) [8, 4]. More recently,
Cascaded Pose Regression (CPR) [7] and Supervised Descent Methods (SDM) [21] have shown state-of-the-art results in shape estimation. Variants of CPR and SDM are
currently the focus in state-of-the-art facial landmark estimation frameworks [16, 2, 1, 15, 19]. A key element
in these shape regression approaches is that they predict
shapes in a cascaded manner. That is, starting with an initial shape, this shape is progressively refined by estimating
a shape increment stage-by-stage. At each stage a regressor
is learned on some features, these features are often variants
of shape-indexed features [10]. The way pixels are indexed
can, for example, be by using local coordinates around each
landmark [2] or indexing between two landmarks [1]. The
learning method in the cascade can involve several methods,
for example, gradient boosting, regression trees and linear

Figure 1. Top row are examples of OTTP shapes. Middle row
left is a shape of three points on a face; right and left eye and
the mouth, and right presents an OTTP placed on those three
points. Bottom row left demonstrates a shape with many points
and right are example of OTTPs created and placed on several chosen triplets of points.

regression [19, 15, 1, 21, 14].
In this work, a new way to index pixels in a shape is
proposed. Furthermore, a cascaded shape regression framework is presented with novel parts. The general principle in
the work builds on ideas found in recent research in shape
alignment [7, 16, 2, 21, 12, 1, 15, 19].
The main contributions of this work are:
1. The One Triangle Three Parallelogram (OTTP) sample
strategy. This is covered in section 2.
2. A novel cascaded shape regression framework involv-

1538

