Learning a Discriminative Model for the Perception of Realism
in Composite Images
Jun-Yan Zhu
UC Berkeley

Philipp Krähenbühl
UC Berkeley

Eli Shechtman
Adobe Research

Alexei A. Efros
UC Berkeley

Abstract
What makes an image appear realistic? In this work, we
are looking at this question from a data-driven perspective,
by learning the perception of visual realism directly from
large amounts of unlabeled data. In particular, we train
a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) model that distinguishes natural photographs from automatically generated
composite images. The model learns to predict visual realism of a scene in terms of color, lighting and texture compatibility, without any human annotations pertaining to it. Our
model outperforms previous works that rely on hand-crafted
heuristics for the task of classifying realistic vs. unrealistic
photos. Furthermore, we apply our learned model to compute optimal parameters of a compositing method, to maximize the visual realism score predicted by our CNN model.
We demonstrate its advantage against existing methods via
a human perception study.

1. Introduction
The human ability to very quickly decide whether a
given image is “realistic”, i.e. a likely sample from our visual world, is very impressive. Indeed, this is what makes
good computer graphics and photographic editing so difficult. So many things must be “just right” for a human to
perceive an image as realistic, while a single thing going
wrong will likely hurtle the image down into the Uncanny
Valley [18].
Computers, on the other hand, find distinguishing between “realistic” and “artificial” images incredibly hard.
Much heated online discussion was generated by recent results suggesting that image classifiers based on Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) are easily fooled by random
noise images [19,29]. But in truth, no existing method (deep
or not) has been shown to reliably tell whether a given image resides on the manifold of natural images. This is because the spectrum of unrealistic images is much larger than
the spectrum of natural ones. Indeed, if this was not the
case, photo-realistic computer graphics would have been
solved long ago.

Composite Images
Natural Images

Figure 1: We train a discriminative model to distinguish
natural images (top left) and automatically generated image composites (bottom right). The red boundary illustrates
the decision boundary between two. Our model is able to
predict the degree of perceived visual realism of a photo,
whether it’s an actual natural photo, or a synthesized composite. For example, the composites close to the boundary
appear more realistic.
In this paper, we are taking a small step in the direction
of characterizing the space of natural images. We restrict
the problem setting by choosing to ignore the issues of image layout, scene geometry, and semantics and focus purely
on appearance. For this, we use a large dataset of automatically generated image composites, which are created
by swapping similarly-shaped object segments of the same
object category between two natural images [15]. This way,
the semantics and scene layout of the resulting composites
are kept constant, only the object appearance changes. Our
goal is to predict whether a given image composite will be
perceived as realistic by a human observer. While this is
admittedly a limited domain, we believe the problem still
reveals the complexity and richness of our vast visual space,
and therefore can give us insights about the structure of the
13943

