Unsupervised Trajectory Clustering via Adaptive Multi-Kernel-based Shrinkage
Hongteng Xu1,2 , Yang Zhou3 , Weiyao Lin3 , Hongyuan Zha1
1
College of Computing, 2 School of EE, Georgia Tech
3
Department of EE, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
hxu42@gatech.edu, zhz128ly@sjtu.edu.cn, wylin@sjtu.edu.cn, zha@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
This paper proposes a shrinkage-based framework for
unsupervised trajectory clustering. Facing to the challenges of trajectory clustering, e.g., large variations within
a cluster and ambiguities across clusters, we first introduce an adaptive multi-kernel-based estimation process to
estimate the ‘shrunk’ positions and speeds of trajectories’
points. This kernel-based estimation effectively leverages
both multiple structural information within a trajectory and
the local motion patterns across multiple trajectories, such
that the discrimination of the shrunk point can be properly increased. We further introduce a speed-regularized
optimization process, which utilizes the estimated speeds
to regularize the optimal shrunk points, so as to guarantee the smoothness and the discriminative pattern of the final shrunk trajectory. Using our approach, the variations
among similar trajectories can be reduced while the boundaries between different clusters are enlarged. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach is superior to the
state-of-art approaches on both clustering accuracy and robustness. Besides, additional experiments reveal the effectiveness of our approach when applied to trajectory analysis applications, e.g., anomaly detection and route analysis.

1. Introduction
Trajectory clustering is fundamental in many applications including behavior analysis [25, 1, 24, 20], scene analysis [32, 22, 27, 28], and video surveillance [17, 11]. In
many scenarios, due to the existence of large amount of
trajectories and trajectory patterns, automatically clustering
trajectories into suitable pattern groups without manually
labeled data (i.e., unsupervised clustering) becomes essential [17, 11, 28].
Although trajectory itself records positions of object
over time and contains significant information for clustering, directly perform clustering over these positions often
creates poor results. Two reasons lead to the failure of the

(a) Variations within a cluster

(b) Ambiguities across clusters

(c) The shrinkage result of (a)

(d) The shrinkage result of (b)

Figure 1. (a, b) The illustration of the challenges of trajectory clustering. (c, d) The shrunk trajectories and the clustering results obtained by our approach.

simple strategy. 1) Variations within a cluster: Due to the
uncertain nature of object motion or the inaccuracy of trajectory extraction, trajectories from the same cluster may
have large variations (e.g., the red trajectories in Fig. 1(a)1 ).
This variation greatly decreases the similarity between trajectories in a cluster. 2) Ambiguities across clusters: In
many scenarios, trajectories with similar shapes and close
positions may belong to different clusters due to their underly semantic difference. For example, in Fig. 1(b), similar traffic trajectories belong to different clusters (labeled
by red and green) since they are on different traffic lanes.
As a result, the information of position is ambiguous on the
boundary between clusters.
To overcome the problems above, we propose a
shrinkage-based framework for unsupervised trajectory
clustering. The proposed approach introduces an adaptive multi-kernel-based estimation process to estimate the
shrunk positions and speeds of trajectory points, so as to
reduce the variations of similar trajectories and enlarge the
boundaries between different clusters. In order to maintain
the information of the original trajectories, we further introduce a speed-regularized optimization process which lever1 All the figures in this paper are best viewed in color.

14328

