A Unified Multiplicative Framework for Attribute Learning
Kongming Liang1,2 , Hong Chang1 , Shiguang Shan1 , Xilin Chen1
1
Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
{kongming.liang, hong.chang, shiguang.shan, xilin.chen}@vipl.ict.ac.cn
Abstract
Attributes are mid-level semantic properties of objects.
Recent research has shown that visual attributes can benefit many traditional learning problems in computer vision
community. However, attribute learning is still a challenging problem as the attributes may not always be predictable
directly from input images and the variation of visual attributes is sometimes large across categories. In this paper, we propose a unified multiplicative framework for attribute learning, which tackles the key problems. Specifically, images and category information are jointly projected into a shared feature space, where the latent factors are disentangled and multiplied for attribute prediction. The resulting attribute classifier is category-specific
instead of being shared by all categories. Moreover, our
method can leverage auxiliary data to enhance the predictive ability of attribute classifiers, reducing the effort
of instance-level attribute annotation to some extent. Experimental results show that our method achieves superior performance on both instance-level and category-level
attribute prediction. For zero-shot learning based on attributes, our method significantly improves the state-of-theart performance on AwA dataset and achieves comparable
performance on CUB dataset.

lems (e.g., image search [15], object recognition [22] and
face verification [16]). Moreover, they provide a proper way
to address zero-shot classification [17] by transferring from
seen classes to unseen classes.
Direct attribute prediction methods [8, 17] train a group
of binary classifiers from image-attribute pairs, one individually for each attribute. Fig. 1 (a) illustrates the direct
attribute learning method. During test stage, the learned
classifiers are applied to predict which subset of attributes
the input image may have. Though these methods achieve a
relatively good performance in predicting attribute and recognizing unseen categories, there are some obvious limitations as following:
1. Correlation between attributes are ignored. Naturally, attribute as properties of objects are correlated with
each other, therefore it is more appropriate to learn all
the attributes jointly, such as sharing attribute-specific
parameters or common semantic representations.
2. Some attributes are hard or even unable to predict
based on visual appearances. For example, it is impossible to infer color-relevant attribute from an gray
image input or predict whether an animal is fast or slow
based on an still image.
3. Negative attribute correlation between object and
scene. For weakly supervised attribute learning[17],
the input image contains both object and scene. It happens sometimes that the scene has some attributes that
are negatively related to object attributes. For example, traditional attribute classifier may predict a polar
bear swimming in the ocean to have blue attribute.

1. Introduction
Attributes are namable properties of objects which are
observable from visual images. They can be annotated
in either instance-level or category-level (e.g. images belongs to the same category share common attribute annotation). Beyond traditional object recognition, learning attributes can provide fine-grained descriptions, such as the
holistic perception (e.g., color, shape, etc.) and presence or
absence of local parts for images. As a mid-level semantic cue, they can bridge the gap between low-level features
and high-level categorization. Recent research has verified
that attributes can benefit many traditional learning prob-

4. Different visual attribute manifestations vary across
categories. For example, the same attribute concept
“fluffy” varies considerably between dog and towel[6].
Some methods have been proposed to tackle the above
problems to some extent. Lampert et al. [17] propose
a method to indirectly predict attributes by transferring

2506

