Procedural Editing of 3D Building Point Clouds
İlke Demir
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA

Daniel G. Aliaga
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA

Bedrich Benes
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA

idemir@purdue.edu

aliaga@purdue.edu

bbenes@purdue.edu

Figure 1: Pipeline. An input point cloud (a) is semi-automatically segmented (b), the segments are used for completion with
consensus models (c), and placed in a tree. Then, the tree is parsed and rules are discovered to enable procedural editing (d).

Abstract
Thanks to the recent advances in computational photography and remote sensing, point clouds of buildings are becoming increasingly available, yet their processing poses
various challenges. In our work, we tackle the problem
of point cloud completion and editing and we approach it
via inverse procedural modeling. Contrary to the previous work, our approach operates directly on the point cloud
without an intermediate triangulation. Our approach consists of 1) semi-automatic segmentation of the input point
cloud with segment comparison and template matching to
detect repeating structures, 2) a consensus-based voting
schema and a pattern extraction algorithm to discover completed terminal geometry and their patterns of usage, all
encoded into a context-free grammar, and 3) an interactive
editing tool where the user can create new point clouds by
using procedural copy and paste operations, and smart resizing. We demonstrate our approach on editing of building
models with up to 1.8M points. In our implementation, preprocessing takes up to several minutes and a single editing
operation needs from one second to one minute depending
on the model size and the operation type.

1. Introduction
Recently, there has been a significant increase in the
availability of 3D point cloud datasets of buildings and other
urban structures. This data can be obtained from different
sources such as Li-DAR scans, laser scans, time-of-flight

cameras or reconstruction from photographs. The proliferation has supported widespread GIS services, such as those
offered by Google Earth and Microsoft Bing Maps, as well
as tools for urban planning and design. Although becoming very common, this data representation often lacks highlevel grouping or segmentation information. This lack hinders (i) directly and intuitively editing such point cloud
building models, (ii) creating novel polygonal/point-based
models preserving style of the original model, and (iii) obtaining complete building models (e.g., filling-in surfaces
that were not fully sampled).
Previous work has focused on some of the aforementioned problems. Some methods have centered on segmenting the point cloud into components (e.g., [12, 16, 30]).
Others provided 3D polygonal urban reconstructions from
point data (e.g., [18, 35]), explored point editing tools (e.g.,
[3, 22]), or addressed model completion (e.g., [7, 24]).
In contrast, our key motivation is to directly inspect
the point cloud in order to segment and organize repeating structures into a hierarchical representation and then to
enable directly performing a set of “what if” urban design
and planning operations. Our method discovers (and organizes) repetition improving both completeness and quality
of sampled structures. Further, the improvements are carried forward during editing, hence improving subsequent
surface triangulations of novel structures as well as preserving the original structure. Our method discovers structure
(Figure 1b), completes the structure (Figure 1c), enables
intuitive editing (Figure 1d) and subsequent triangulation
(e.g., Figure 3) yielding results superior to direct triangu12147

