FASText: Efficient Unconstrained Scene Text Detector
Michal Bušta, Lukáš Neumann, Jiřı́ Matas
Centre for Machine Perception, Department of Cybernetics
Czech Technical University, Prague, Czech Republic
bustam@fel.cvut.cz, neumalu1@cmp.felk.cvut.cz, matas@cmp.felk.cvut.cz

Abstract
We propose a novel easy-to-implement stroke detector
based on an efﬁcient pixel intensity comparison to surrounding pixels. Stroke-speciﬁc keypoints are efﬁciently detected and text fragments are subsequently extracted by local thresholding guided by keypoint properties. Classiﬁcation based on effectively calculated features then eliminates
non-text regions.
The stroke-speciﬁc keypoints produce 2 times less region
segmentations and still detect 25% more characters than
the commonly exploited MSER detector and the process is
4 times faster. After a novel efﬁcient classiﬁcation step, the
number of regions is reduced to 7 times less than the standard method and is still almost 3 times faster.
All stages of the proposed pipeline are scale- and
rotation-invariant and support a wide variety of scripts
(Latin, Hebrew, Chinese, etc.) and fonts. When the proposed detector is plugged into a scene text localization and
recognition pipeline, a state-of-the-art text localization accuracy is maintained whilst the processing time is signiﬁcantly reduced.

1. Introduction
Scene text localization and recognition, a.k.a. the textin-the-wild problem, is a key component of potential applications such as automated translation, image/video database
indexing or assistance to the visually impaired. So far, unlike printed document OCR, no method has reached sufﬁcient accuracy and speed for a practical exploitation.
We propose a novel easy-to-implement stroke detector
which is signiﬁcantly faster and produces signiﬁcantly less
false detections than the detectors commonly used by scene
text localization methods. Following the observation that
text in virtually any script is formed of strokes, stroke keypoints are efﬁciently detected (see Figure 1) and then exploited to obtain stroke segmentations (see Figure 2).
As the second contribution, we propose an efﬁcient classiﬁcation step to eliminate regions which do not correspond

Figure 1: The FASText detector output. Stroke End Keypoints (SEK) marked red, Stroke Bend Keypoints (SBK)
marked blue.
to text fragments. Text fragment can be a single character,
a group of characters, a whole word or a part of a character.
The classiﬁer exploits features already calculated in the detection phase and an effectively approximated “strokeness”
feature, which plays an important role in the discrimination
between text fragments and a background clutter.
Last but not least, an efﬁcient text clustering algorithm
based on text direction voting is proposed, in order to aggregate detected regions into text line structures and to allow processing by subsequent stages (e.g. an OCR module). When the proposed detector is plugged into a scene
text localization and recognition pipeline, the state-of-theart text localization results are maintained whilst the processing time is signiﬁcantly reduced.
The proposed detector has an application potential for
example in real-time scene text detection in a video stream
on mobile phones and embedded systems since a straightforward, single-thread non-optimized version of the algorithm runs in near real-time. Since all stages are scale- and
rotation- invariant and they are not script-speciﬁc, a wide
variety of fonts and scripts such as Latin, Hebrew, and Chinese can be detected - see Figure 11.
11206

