MAP Disparity Estimation using Hidden Markov Trees
Eric T. Psota J˛edrzej Kowalczuk Mateusz Mittek Lance C. Pérez
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering
University of Nebraska-Lincoln
{epsota, jkowalczuk, mmittek, lperez}@unl.edu

Abstract
A new method is introduced for stereo matching that operates on minimum spanning trees (MSTs) generated from
the images. Disparity maps are represented as a collection
of hidden states on MSTs, and each MST is modeled as a
hidden Markov tree. An efficient recursive message-passing
scheme designed to operate on hidden Markov trees, known
as the upward-downward algorithm, is used to compute the
maximum a posteriori (MAP) disparity estimate at each
pixel. The messages processed by the upward-downward algorithm involve two types of probabilities: the probability of
a pixel having a particular disparity given a set of per-pixel
matching costs, and the probability of a disparity transition
between a pair of connected pixels given their similarity.
The distributions of these probabilities are modeled from a
collection of images with ground truth disparities. Performance evaluation using the Middlebury stereo benchmark
version 3 demonstrates that the proposed method ranks second and third in terms of overall accuracy when evaluated
on the training and test image sets, respectively.

1. Introduction
Stereo matching, used to extract the positional offsets
relating corresponding points in two views of a scene, remains one of the most studied problems in computer vision. These offsets, otherwise known as disparities, can be
easily converted to per-pixel depths representing the threedimensional properties of the scene. Depth information
is critical in applications such as robotic navigation, augmented reality, image-based rendering, advanced humancomputer interfaces, and visual metrology.
As an inverse computer vision problem that aims to recover depth from two-dimensional projections of the scene,
stereo matching must overcome a variety of challenges resulting from both scene properties and the image acquisition
process. The challenges associated with scene properties include reflections, occlusions, and repeating patterns; while
those arising from the image acquisition process include the

effects of quantization, noise, and image blur. Furthermore,
since increasing the product of the image dimensions and
the number of disparity hypotheses causes a proportional
increase in the complexity of matching, devising efficient
algorithms is an ongoing challenge that has become even
more difficult due to increasing video and image resolutions.
The process of stereo matching generally includes the
following four steps: computation of per-pixel matching
costs, spatial aggregation of costs, disparity assignment, and
refinement of disparities. Scharstein and Szeliski [20] recognized that stereo matching algorithms can be classified as
either local or global, depending on how the cost aggregation and disparity assignment steps are performed. Local
algorithms choose disparities that minimize the dissimilarity between small regions in the images, while global algorithms attempt to minimize an energy function that explicitly enforces pixel similarity and smoothness over the
entire image. While region-based methods allow for efficient matching, their inherent locality makes them unsuitable for large textureless regions. Global algorithms are capable of overcoming these limitations, however they often
rely on computationally complex optimization schemes. To
reduce computational complexity, recent methods have exploited tree structures in order to accelerate the process of
cost aggregation [9, 25, 3]. Rather than operating on traditional four-connected image grids, like early global algorithms, these methods reduce the computational complexity
by efficiently passing messages between nodes in a tree.
Here, a global stereo matching method is proposed
that performs cost aggregation through message passing
within the minimum spanning tree (MST). Unlike traditional graph-based approaches that define and minimize
global energy functions, the proposed method performs
maximum a posteriori (MAP) disparity estimation using
statistics that are generated from a wide range of ground
truth data. Specifically, the proposed method uses the recently released Middlebury stereo benchmark version 3 image set [18]. This set includes 30 high-resolution image
pairs and ground truth disparity maps, making it possible
12219

