Thin Structure Estimation with Curvature Regularization
Dmitrii Marin∗ , Yuchen Zhong∗ , Maria Drangova∗† , Yuri Boykov∗
∗
University of Western Ontario, Canada
†
Robarts Research Institute, Canada
dmitrii.a.marin@gmail.com yzhong.cs@gmail.com mdrangova@robarts.ca yuri@csd.uwo.ca

Abstract
Many applications in vision require estimation of thin
structures such as boundary edges, surfaces, roads, blood
vessels, neurons, etc. Unlike most previous approaches,
we simultaneously detect and delineate thin structures with
sub-pixel localization and real-valued orientation estimation. This is an ill-posed problem that requires regularization. We propose an objective function combining detection
likelihoods with a prior minimizing curvature of the centerlines or surfaces. Unlike simple block-coordinate descent,
we develop a novel algorithm that is able to perform joint
optimization of location and detection variables more effectively. Our lower bound optimization algorithm applies
to quadratic or absolute curvature. The proposed early vision framework is sufficiently general and it can be used in
many higher-level applications. We illustrate the advantage
of our approach on a range of 2D and 3D examples.

1. Introduction
A large amount of work in computer vision is devoted to
estimation of structures like edges, center-lines, or surfaces
for fitting thin objects such as intensity boundaries, blood
vessels, neural axons, roads, or point clouds. This paper
is focused on the general concept of a center-line, which
could be defined in different ways. For example, Canny
approach to edge detection implicitly defines a center-line
as a “ridge” of intensity gradients [6]. Standard methods
for shape skeletons define medial axis as singularities of a
distance map from a given object boundary [35, 34]. In the
context of thin objects like edges, vessels, etc, we consider
a center-line to be a smooth curve minimizing orthogonal
projection errors for the points of the thin structure.
We study curvature of the center-line as a regularization
criteria for its inference. In general, curvature is actively
discussed in the context of thin structures. For example, it
is well known that curvature of the object boundary has significant effect on the medial axis [17, 35]. In contrast, we
are directly concerned with curvature of the center-line, not

Figure 1. Edge detection. The result of our algorithm for squared
(on the left) and absolute (on the right) curvature approximations. Green and black lines correspond to edges with high and
medium confidence measure correspondingly. Note the strong bias
to straight lines on the right: the energy prefers a small number of
sharp corners rather than many smooth corners like on the left.

the curvature of the object boundary. Moreover, we do not
assume that the boundary of a thin structure (e.g. vessel or
road) is given. Detection variables are estimated simultaneously with the center-line. This paper proposes a general
energy formulation and an optimization algorithm for detection and subpixel delineation of thin structures based on
curvature regularization.
Curvature is a natural regularizer for thin structures and
it has been widely explored in the past. In the context of
image segmentation with second-order smoothness it was
studied by [31, 37, 32, 5, 14, 28, 25]. It is also a popular
second-order prior in stereo or multi-view-reconstruction
[20, 27, 40]. Curvature has been used inside connectivity
measures for analysis of diffusion MRI [24]. Curvature
is also widely used for inpainting [3, 7] and edge completion [13, 39, 2]. For example, stochastic completion
field technique in [39, 24] estimates probability that a completed/extrapolated curve passes any given point assuming
it is a random walk with bias to straight paths. Note that
common edge completion methods use existing edge detectors as an input for the algorithm.
In contrast to these prior works, this paper proposes a

397

