BodyPrint: Pose Invariant 3D Shape Matching of Human Bodies
Jiangping Wang1∗, Kai Ma2 , Vivek Kumar Singh2 , Thomas Huang1 , Terrence Chen2
1
Beckman Institute, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, USA
2
Medical Imaging Technologies, Siemens Healthcare, Princeton, NJ, USA
1

{jwang63,huang}@ifp.uiuc.edu, 2 {kai.ma,vivek-singh,terrence.chen}@siemens.com

Abstract
3D human body shape matching has substantial potential in many real world applications, especially with recent
advances in 3D range sensing technology. We address this
problem by proposing a novel holistic human body shape
descriptor called BodyPrint. To compute the bodyprint for
a given body scan, we fit a deformable human body mesh,
and project the mesh parameters to a low-dimensional subspace which improves discriminability across different persons. Experiments are carried out on three real-world human body datasets to demonstrate that BodyPrint is robust
to pose variation as well as missing information and sensor
noise. It improves the matching accuracy significantly compared to conventional 3D shape matching techniques using
local features. To facilitate practical applications where the
shape database may grow over time, we also extend our
learning framework to handle online updates.

1. Introduction
Non-rigid 3D shape matching is a fundamental problem
that has been widely studied in computer vision and graphics. Given a database of 3D shapes (often represented as
meshes), shape matching algorithms return shapes that are
similar to the query object. This research area has become
particularly active over the last decade due to the availability of low cost 3D acquisition device, such as Microsoft
Kinect [2]. The pose-invariant matching of human body
shapes is of particular interest, as it finds applications in
people re-identification in surveillance [6, 23], biometric
authentication and information retrieval in medical imaging [32, 33]. However, human body shape matching is quite
challenging as it requires invariance to human body articulations while simultaneously capturing subtle variations of
the body shape across different individuals. Furthermore,
to enable the aforementioned applications, the matching
∗ This work was carried out during the author’s internship at Medical
Imaging Technologies, Siemens Healthcare.

Figure 1. Human body meshes and corresponding BodyPrint descriptors (shown as bar chart). (a) and (b) are meshes from the
same person in a different pose. (b) and (c) are meshes from different persons in a similar pose. Notice that the bodyprint for (a)
is more similar to (b) in comparison to (c).

should be performed rapidly over a large database. Although there have been recent advances[25], this problem
is still widely unresolved to the best of our knowledge.
In this paper we introduce a novel framework for time
efficient matching of 3D human body shapes which is invariant to body pose articulations. We also perform extensive experiments to demonstrate that our approach achieves
state-of-the-art performance over different datasets. In general, the proposed framework uses a parameterized deformable mesh (PDM) template that can be deformed to fit
any human body scans. Based on the mesh parameters (vertices and edges), we derive a compact body shape descriptor that captures the holistic shape information of the human
body; we refer to this as BodyPrint. The derivation involves
a projection of the mesh parameters to a low-dimensional
manifold such that the distance between meshes from different persons/categories is maximized, while minimizing the
distance between meshes from same person/category. This
projection matrix is obtained using a novel ranking based
distance metric learning algorithm. Figure 1 shows an example of body scans and their corresponding BodyPrint signatures.
11591

