Learning Binary Codes for Maximum Inner Product Search
Fumin Shen† , Wei Liu♯ , Shaoting Zhang‡ , Yang Yang† and Heng Tao Shen†§ ∗
†
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, ♯ Xidian University
‡
University of North Carolina at Charlotte, § The University of Queensland

Abstract
Binary coding or hashing techniques are recognized to
accomplish efficient near neighbor search, and have thus
attracted broad interests in the recent vision and learning
studies. However, such studies have rarely been dedicated
to Maximum Inner Product Search (MIPS), which plays a
critical role in various vision applications. In this paper,
we investigate learning binary codes to exclusively handle the MIPS problem. Inspired by the latest advance in
asymmetric hashing schemes, we propose an asymmetric
binary code learning framework based on inner product fitting. Specifically, two sets of coding functions are learned
such that the inner products between their generated binary
codes can reveal the inner products between original data
vectors. We also propose an alternative simpler objective
which maximizes the correlations between the inner products of the produced binary codes and raw data vectors.
In both objectives, the binary codes and coding functions
are simultaneously learned without continuous relaxations,
which is the key to achieving high-quality binary codes. We
evaluate the proposed method, dubbed Asymmetric Innerproduct Binary Coding (AIBC), relying on the two objectives on several large-scale image datasets. Both of them
are superior to the state-of-the-art binary coding and hashing methods in performing MIPS tasks.

1. Introduction
In the recent years, binary coding (also known as hashing) has become a very popular research subject in computer vision [19, 22, 33], machine learning [16, 37], information retrieval [7, 21, 23], and related areas [42]. After
encoding high-dimensional feature vectors of documents,
images, videos, or other types of data to compact binary
codes, an effective binary coding or hashing method is expected to accomplish efficient similarity search while preserving the similarities among original data to some extent.
As a result, using binary codes to represent and search in
∗ Correspondence
should be addressed to Fumin
(fumin.shen@gmail.com) or Wei Liu(wliu.cu@gmail.com).

Shen

massive data is a promising solution to handle large-scale
vision tasks, because of not only the storage efficiency (typically several hundred binary bits per data item) but also the
high time efficiency of pairwise distance computations in
a binary Hamming space. Besides hashing, vector quantization (VQ) [2, 6, 10, 27, 40, 41] is another promising direction for large-scale search problems in high-dimensional
space. However, VQ and hashing are two very different
techniques, especially in the search step. In this work, we
focus on the latter one.
The binary coding or hashing techniques can be roughly divided into two major categories: data-independent
and data-dependent methods. Locality-Sensitive Hashing
(LSH) [7] is one of the most popular data-independent
methods, which generates randomized hash functions via random projections. The LSH family has been continuously developed to accommodate a variety of distance and
similarity measures, such as Euclidean distance, p-norm
distance [3], Mahalanobis distance [15], kernel similarity
[14, 28]. Although LSH is ensured to have high collision
probability for similar data items, in practice LSH usually needs long hash bits and multiple hash tables to achieve
both high precision and recall. The huge storage overhead
may restrict its applications.
The other category, data-dependent methods (or
learning-based methods in the literature), has witnessed a
rapid development in the most recent years. The literature was comprehensive reviewed in [35] recently. Its emergence is due to the benefit that learned compact binary codes can effectively and efficiently index and organize
massive data. Different from LSH, data-dependent binary
coding methods aim to generate short binary codes using
available training data. Among them, linear coding functions formed by a set of learned hyperplanes are mostly
adopted, since they are computationally simple and easy to
connect to traditional dimensionality reduction techniques.
A number of algorithms in this category have been proposed, including unsupervised PCA Hashing [33], Iterative
Quantization (ITQ) [8], Isotropic Hashing (IsoHash) [12],
etc., and supervised Minimal Loss Hashing (MLH) [25, 26],
Semi-Supervised Hashing (SSH) [33], Ranking-Based Su-

4148

