Learning Nonlinear Spectral Filters for Color Image Reconstruction
Michael Moeller1 , Julia Diebold1 , Guy Gilboa2 and Daniel Cremers1
1

2

TU Munich, Germany∗

Technion - IIT, Israel

Abstract
This paper presents the idea of learning optimal filters
for color image reconstruction based on a novel concept
of nonlinear spectral image decompositions recently proposed by Guy Gilboa. We use a multiscale image decomposition approach based on total variation regularization
and Bregman iterations to represent the input data as the
sum of image layers containing features at different scales.
Filtered images can be obtained by weighted linear combinations of the different frequency layers. We introduce
the idea of learning optimal filters for the task of image
denoising, and propose the idea of mixing high frequency
components of different color channels. Our numerical experiments demonstrate that learning the optimal weights
can significantly improve the results in comparison to the
standard variational approach, and achieves state-of-theart image denoising results.

1. Introduction
The great success of linear spectral decomposition methods such as the Fourier transform (FT) is based on their ability to represent the input data at different scales. The FT for
instance represents a signal as the superposition of sine and
cosine of different frequencies, such that one can enhance,
damp, or eliminate certain frequencies differently by the design of Fourier filters. While this theory and its applications
like high-pass, low-pass, band-pass, or band-stop filterings
is well understood for linear transformations, recent works
have extended such concepts to nonlinear variational techniques.
In [16, 17] Guy Gilboa proposed to use the total variation (TV) gradient flow to define a notion of nonlinear spectral representations of images. Burger et al. generalized this
concept to arbitrary one-homogeneous regularizations in [4]
and considered three different possible definitions of nonlinear spectral representations.
In all of the above works, the general idea of nonlinear
spectral representations is to define a function ψ(t) called
∗ This work was supported by the ERC Starting Grant ‘ConvexVision’.

a) Original

b) Noisy (PSNR 9.51) c) BM3D (PSNR 16.84)

1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
−0.2
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

k

d) Trained weights for green-channel

e) Proposed (PSNR 20.30)

Figure 1. Learned spectral filtering. Enhancing low and filtering
high frequencies of a spectral total variation image decomposition
according to the learned filters shown in d), yields the denoised
image in e), which compares favorably to the BM3D algorithm c)
at high noise levels.

the frequency representation of the input data f , such that
Z ∞
ψ(t) dt.
f=
0

Similar to the notion of the frequency in classical methods
such as the FT, the size of the features in ψ(t) decreases as t
increases. The latter motivates the definition of filters ω(t)
in the frequency domain to reconstruct a filtered version
Z ∞
ω(t)ψ(t) dt
(1)
uω =
0

of the input data. The above approach has the flexibility
to enhance (ω(t) > 1), damp (ω(t) < 1), or eliminate
(ω(t) = 0) different frequencies, where the meaning of the
frequency depends on the particular type of decomposition.
In this paper we consider the application of nonlinear
spectral image decompositions to color image denoising,
i.e. the task of separating the input data f into the sum of a
clean signal û and undesirable noise n. In particular, we
propose to learn optimal filters ω in (1) on training data
sets. To account for inter-channel correlations, we learn
the natural spectral relation between different color chan-

289

