Hyperspectral Compressive Sensing Using Manifold-Structured Sparsity Prior
Lei Zhang† , Wei Wei∗† , Yanning Zhang† , Fei Li† , Chunhua Shen‡ , Qinfeng Shi‡
†
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, 710072, China
‡
School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide, Australia
† zhanglei211@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, † {weiweinwpu,

ynzhang}@nwpu.edu.cn, ‡ {chunhua.shen,javen.shi}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract

0.13

0.6

0.12

0.5

0.11
0.4

0.1
0.3

To reconstruct hyperspectral image (HSI) accurately
from a few noisy compressive measurements, we present a
novel manifold-structured sparsity prior based hyperspectral compressive sensing (HCS) method in this study. A matrix based hierarchical prior is first proposed to represent
the spectral structured sparsity and spatial unknown manifold structure of HSI simultaneously. Then, a latent variable
Bayes model is introduced to learn the sparsity prior and
estimate the noise jointly from measurements. The learned
prior can fully represent the inherent 3D structure of HSI
and regulate its shape based on the estimated noise level.
Thus, with this learned prior, the proposed method improves
the reconstruction accuracy significantly and shows strong
robustness to unknown noise in HCS. Experiments on four
real hyperspectral datasets show that the proposed method
outperforms several state-of-the-art methods on the reconstruction accuracy of HSI.

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral image (HSI) is a 3D data cube which contains a series of 2D spatial images over continuous spectral
bands and each pixel has a spectrum [5]. Its abundant spectral information is helpful for object identification, which
facilitates a variety of applications on HSI [22, 1]. However,
the high cost on imaging, storage and transmission incurred
by the huge volume of HSI limits its application.
Recently, compressive sensing (CS) provides a brandnew framework for image acquisition and compression. It
has been proved that a sparse signal can be recovered from a
few compressive measurements under some mild conditions [12]. Thus only a few measurements need to be captured
during the imaging procedure, which greatly reduces the resource expense on imaging. Since HSI can be converted into a sparse signal by transformation [16] or unmixing [23]
strategies, hyperspectral compressive sensing (HCS) meth∗ The corresponding author.

0.09
0.2

0.08
0.1

0.07
0

0.06

-0.1

0.05
0

(a)

5

10

15

(b)

20

25

30

35

0

5

10

15

20

(c)

25

30

35

40

(d)

Figure 1. Illustration of spectral sparsity and spatial correlation in
the wavelet transformation of HSI. (a) HSI cube with a marked
pixel. (b) The spectrum of the marked pixel. (c) The wavelet
transformation coefficient vector of the marked spectrum. (d) The
image composed of the first transformation coefficient of spectra
from all pixels according to pixels’ spatial arrangement.

ods [16, 20, 18] have drawn much attention for HSI compression. However, how to reconstruct HSI accurately from
a few noisy measurements is still challenging.
Regularization methods [18, 20, 16] are effective to deal
with the reconstruction in HCS. One of their most important concerns is to learn a proper sparsity prior for HSI. Since
high spectral resolution gives a continuous spectrum at each
pixel, HSI can be sparsified pixel by pixel (see Figure 1) and
a group of sparse vectors are generated. Though many regularizers (e.g., ℓ0 norm and ℓ1 norm etc.) can depict the
sparsity in each of those sparse vectors, they usually treat
coefficients in the vector independently without considering
its structure, which is crucial to improving the reconstruction accuracy of standard sparse learning [17].
For those sparse vectors generated from HSI, two kinds of structures are often considered. One is the structure
in each sparse vector, the other is the structure among different sparse vectors (see Figure 1, where the transformation coefficient vectors of all pixels are spatially correlated).
They are termed as intra-vector structure and inter-vector
structure in this study. To explore the intra-vector structure, Chen [9] proposed a tree structured sparsity prior for
the wavelet transformation coefficients of image. Wipf et
al. [27] represented the implicit structure in a sparse vector
by an empirical Bayes framework. Zhang et al. [28] proposed a matrix-based reweighted Laplace prior to capture
the structure in each column vector from a sparse matrix
assuming those column vectors are independent. For intervector structure, Cotter et al. [10] extended the classical fo-

3550

