Semantic Video Entity Linking based on Visual Content and Metadata
Yuncheng Li, Xitong Yang, Jiebo Luo
University of Rochester
Department of Computer Science
Rochester, New York 14627, USA
{yli,xyang35,jluo}@cs.rochester.edu

Abstract
Video entity linking, which connects online videos to the
related entities in a semantic knowledge base, can enable
a wide variety of video based applications including video
retrieval and video recommendation. Most existing systems
for video entity linking rely on video metadata. In this paper, we propose to exploit video visual content to improve
video entity linking. In the proposed framework, videos are
first linked to entity candidates using a text-based method.
Next, the entity candidates are verified and reranked according to visual content. In order to properly handle large
variations in visual content matching, we propose to use
Multiple Instance Metric Learning to learn a “set to sequence” metric for this specific matching problem. To evaluate the proposed framework, we collect and annotate 1912
videos crawled from the YouTube open API. Experiment results have shown consistent gains by the proposed framework over several strong baselines.

1. Introduction
Watching online video has become a part of many people’s daily lives. For video hosting websites, it is at the
core of their business to increase user engagement. A key
problem is how to help people access what they want from
the massive amount of videos. Many systems have tried
to solve this problem from different angles, e.g., text-based
search, categorized video browsing, trending video highlights, related video suggestions, and personalized video
recommendation [3, 5, 25–27]. Accurate video content understanding is the key to achieve success for all these applications. Unlike texts and images, semantic video understanding is a more open problem for many reasons. In this
paper, we propose a vision-based method to solve a specific
video understanding problem: video entity linking.
Video entity linking is the task of connecting videos with
the entities in a given database, such as Wikipedia. A wide
variety of video-based applications can benefit from video

Figure 1: The overview of the proposed framework. Given
an online video, we first extract entity candidates by linking its title with a knowledge graph. Based on a learned
matching metric, the entity candidates are then ranked and
verified by matching the video with the entity’s representative images.

entity linking given that the entities are associated with rich
attributes and connected together in a semantic graph. However, video entity linking is a very challenging problem.
The reasons are many folds. 1. The set of entities of interests are very diverse, such as people, places, art works
and artifacts, and the vocabulary size and visual variations
make it infeasible to develop classification based models.
2. Visual content information is only part of the video. For
example, the information to link some entities may be con14615

