Zero-Shot Learning via Semantic Similarity Embedding
Ziming Zhang and Venkatesh Saligrama
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Boston University
{zzhang14, srv}@bu.edu

Abstract
DOG
TREE

BOAT

TRUCK

HORSE
DOG
CAT
TREE

Histogram of Unseen
Source Mixtures
BOAT

TREE

TRUCK

CAT

CAR

HORSE

BOAT

CAR

TRUCK

BOAT

TREE

TRUCK

CAT

HORSE

While there has been significant progress in large-scale
classification in recent years [31], lack of sufficient training
data for every class and the increasing difficulty in finding
annotations for a large fraction of data might impact further
improvements.
Zero-shot learning is being increasingly recognized as
a way to deal with these difficulties. One version of zero
shot learning is based on so-called source and target domains. Source domain is described by a single vector corresponding to each class based on side information such
as attributes [8, 16, 21, 25, 29], language words/phrases
[4, 9, 34], or even learned classifiers [42], which we assume can be collected easily. The target domain is described
by a joint distribution of images/videos and labels [16, 41].
During training time, we are given source domain attributes
and target domain data corresponding to only a subset of
classes, which we call seen classes. During test time, source
domain attributes for unseen (i.e. no training data provided)

CAT

1. Introduction

HORSE

In this paper we consider a version of the zero-shot
learning problem where seen class source and target domain data are provided. The goal during test-time is to accurately predict the class label of an unseen target domain
instance based on revealed source domain side information
(e.g. attributes) for unseen classes. Our method is based on
viewing each source or target data as a mixture of seen class
proportions and we postulate that the mixture patterns have
to be similar if the two instances belong to the same unseen
class. This perspective leads us to learning source/target
embedding functions that map an arbitrary source/target
domain data into a same semantic space where similarity
can be readily measured. We develop a max-margin framework to learn these similarity functions and jointly optimize parameters by means of cross validation. Our test results are compelling, leading to significant improvement in
terms of accuracy on most benchmark datasets for zero-shot
recognition.

Mixture Es=mate for
Unseen Test Instance

Figure 1. Proposed method with source/target domain data displayed on
the leftmost/rightmost figures respectively. Light blue corresponds to unseen classes and other colors depict seen class data. Light-blue data is
unavailable during training. During test-time unseen source domain data
is revealed along with an arbitrary unseen instance from target domain
(light-blue) is presented and we are to identify its unseen class label. Each
unseen class source domain data is expressed as a histograms of seen class
proportions. Seen class proportions are estimated for the target instance
and compared with each of the source domain histograms.

classes are revealed. The goal during test time is to predict
for each target domain instance which of the seen/unseen
classes it is associated with.
Key Idea: Our proposed method is depicted in Fig. 1. We
view target data instances as arising from seen instances and
attempt to express source/target data as a mixture of seen
class proportions. Our algorithm is based on the postulate
that if the mixture proportion from target domain is similar
to that from source domain, they must arise from the same
class. This leads us to learning source and target domain
embedding functions using seen class data that map arbitrary source and target domain data into mixture proportions
of seen classes.
We propose parameterized-optimization problems for
learning semantic similarity embedding (SSE) functions
from training data and jointly optimize predefined parameters using cross validation on held-out seen class data. Our
method necessitates fundamentally new design choices requiring us to learn class-dependent feature transforms because components of our embedding must account for contribution of each seen class. Our source domain embedding is based on subspace clustering literature [37] that
are known to be resilient to noise. Our target domain
embedding is based on a margin-based framework using
the intersection function or the rectified linear unit (ReLU)

4166

