DeepBox: Learning Objectness with Convolutional Networks
Weicheng Kuo
Bharath Hariharan
Jitendra Malik
University of California, Berkeley
{wckuo, bharath2, malik}@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Existing object proposal approaches use primarily
bottom-up cues to rank proposals, while we believe that
“objectness” is in fact a high level construct. We argue for a
data-driven, semantic approach for ranking object proposals. Our framework, which we call DeepBox, uses convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to rerank proposals from
a bottom-up method. We use a novel four-layer CNN architecture that is as good as much larger networks on the
task of evaluating objectness while being much faster. We
show that DeepBox significantly improves over the bottomup ranking, achieving the same recall with 500 proposals as
achieved by bottom-up methods with 2000. This improvement generalizes to categories the CNN has never seen before and leads to a 4.5-point gain in detection mAP. Our
implementation achieves this performance while running at
260 ms per image.

1. Introduction
Object detection methods have moved from scanning
window approaches [9] to ones based on bottom-up object
proposals [11]. Bottom-up proposals [1] have two major
advantages: 1) by reducing the search space, they allow the
usage of more sophisticated recognition machinery, and 2)
by pruning away false positives, they make detection easier.
[14, 10]
Most object proposal methods rely on simple bottom-up
grouping and saliency cues. The rationale for this is that this
step should be reasonably fast and generally applicable to
all object categories. However, we believe that there is more
to objectness than bottom-up grouping or saliency. For instance, many disparate object categories might share highlevel structures (such as the limbs of animals and robots)
and detecting such structures might hint towards the presence of objects. A proposal method that incorporates these
and other such cues is likely to perform much better.
In this paper, we argue for a semantic, data-driven notion
of objectness. Our approach is to present a large database
of images with annotated objects to a learning algorithm,

and let the algorithm figure out what low-, mid- and highlevel cues are most discriminative of objects. Following recent work on a range of recognition tasks [11, 12, 18], we
use convolutional networks (CNNs) [19] for this task. Concretely, we train a CNN to rerank a large pool of object proposals produced by a bottom-up proposal method (we use
Edge boxes [30] for most experiments in this paper). For
ease of reference, we call our approach DeepBox. Figure 1
shows our framework.
We propose a lightweight four layer network architecture
that significantly improves over bottom-up proposal methods in terms of ranking (26% relative improvement on AUC
over Edge boxes on VOC 2007 [8]). Our network architecture is as effective as state-of-the-art classification networks on this task while being much smaller and thus much
faster. In addition, using ideas from SPP [13] and Fast RCNN [10], our implementation runs in 260 ms per image,
comparable to some of the fastest bottom-up proposal approaches like Edge Boxes (250 ms). We also provide evidence that what our network learns is category-agnostic:
our improvements in performance generalize to categories
that the CNN has not seen before (16% improvement over
Edge boxes on COCO [20]). Our results suggest that a)
there is indeed a generic, semantic notion of objectness beyond bottom-up saliency, and that b) this semantic notion of
objectness can be learnt effectively by a lightweight CNN.
Object proposals are just the first step in an object detection system, and the final evaluation of a proposal system is
the impact it has on detection performance. We show that
the Fast R-CNN detection system [10], using 500 DeepBox
proposals per image, is 4.5 points better than the same object detector using 500 Edge box proposals. Thus our high
quality proposals directly lead to better object detection.
The rest of the paper is laid out as follows. In Section 2
we discuss related work. We describe our network architecture and training and testing procedures in Section 3. Section 4 describes experiments and we end with a discussion.

2. Related work
Russell et al. [26] were one of the first to suggest a
category-independent method to propose putative objects.
12479

