Learning Ordinal Relationships for Mid-Level Vision
Daniel Zoran
CSAIL, MIT

Phillip Isola
CSAIL, MIT

Dilip Krishnan
Google

William T. Freeman
Google and CSAIL, MIT

danielz@mit.edu

phillipi@mit.edu

dilipkay@google.com

wfreeman@google.com

Figure 1: Framework overview: given an input image we choose points on which to make ordinal estimates (e.g. Which of
two points is closer to the camera? Which has darker surface color?). We train models to perform these estimations. We then
globalize these estimates to produce metric estimates of reflectance, shading and depth. Our approach has multiple benefits
over direct metric estimation.

Abstract

We propose a framework that infers mid-level visual
properties of an image by learning about ordinal relationships. Instead of estimating metric quantities directly, the
system proposes pairwise relationship estimates for points
in the input image. These sparse probabilistic ordinal measurements are globalized to create a dense output map of
continuous metric measurements. Estimating order relationships between pairs of points has several advantages
over metric estimation: it solves a simpler problem than
metric regression; humans are better at relative judgements,
so data collection is easier; ordinal relationships are invariant to monotonic transformations of the data, thereby increasing the robustness of the system and providing qualitatively different information. We demonstrate that this framework works well on two important mid-level vision tasks:
intrinsic image decomposition and depth from an RGB image. We train two systems with the same architecture on
data from these two modalities. We provide an analysis of
the resulting models, showing that they learn a number of
simple rules to make ordinal decisions. We apply our algorithm to depth estimation, with good results, and intrinsic
image decomposition, with state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
Mid-level vision involves the estimation of physical
properties of pixels within an image. Examples of such
problems are depth extraction, surface normal orientation
estimation, intrinsic image decomposition, segmentation
and shadow detection/removal [23, 4, 35, 13, 20, 22, 34].
Usually, metric (continuous valued) estimates are required
at each pixel location. However, there are many cases where
such a quantity may be hard to extract, or even if estimated,
may be irrelevant to the task at hand. Consider looking at
a piece of paper on top of a table: it would be hard to say
how much closer the paper is to the observer, since the metric difference is tiny. An ordinal relation between the paper
and the table, however, is clearly present. A similar case
happens in outdoor scenes: looking at a range of mountains,
it is usually easy to say which mountain is in front of which,
but metric distances between them may be hard to estimate
by sight alone. Another example is the estimation of surface
albedo (reflectance) within an image. It can be difficult to
give a precise albedo estimate, and this has been shown by
experiments on lightness perception [9]. On the other hand,
it is natural for an observer to say which of two points has
darker or lighter reflectance. Only in rare cases do humans
fail at this task, and such cases can be newsworthy, as in the
Internet controversy over the color of a particular dress [1].
Ordinal relationships and rankings have been the subject of much research in computer vision [6, 26, 27], ma1388

