Fill and Transfer:
A Simple Physics-based Approach for Containability Reasoning
Lap-Fai Yu1 Noah Duncan2 Sai-Kit Yeung3
1
University of Massachusetts Boston, 2 University of California, Los Angeles,
3
Singapore University of Technology and Design
Abstract
The visual perception of object affordances has emerged
as a useful ingredient for building powerful computer vision and robotic applications [31]. In this paper we introduce a novel approach to reason about liquid containability
- the affordance of containing liquid. Our approach analyzes container objects based on two simple physical processes: the Fill and Transfer of liquid. First, it reasons
about whether a given 3D object is a liquid container and
its best filling direction. Second, it proposes directions to
transfer its contained liquid to the outside while avoiding
spillage. We compare our simplified model with a common
fluid dynamics simulation and demonstrate that our algorithm makes human-like choices about the best directions
to fill containers and transfer liquid from them. We apply
our approach to reason about the containability of several
real-world objects acquired using a consumer-grade depth
camera.

1. Introduction
One of the fundamental metrics to categorize man-made
objects is functionality, also called object affordance [11,
13], which Gibson defined as the opportunities for action
provided by a particular object. Object affordance is an important concept in the field of visual perception. The human
cognition system possesses subtle yet powerful reasoning
ability when it comes to analyzing the affordances of everyday objects in a scene. This ability enables humans to
correctly manipulate objects to finish daily tasks.
Most of the man-made objects in our living environment
are designed to possess certain object affordances. Pointed
out by Sullivan [34] as a famous design postulate, “form
ever follows function”. Tversky [35] further noted, “function can often be inferred from form, in part because form
can determine function”. This indeed explains why the
pitcher in Figure 1(a) has a narrow mouth (so that liquid
can be poured out steadily via its mouth), and why the holeridden tray in Figure 1(b) is not designed for holding liquid
(as liquid can leak through its holes).
Figure 1(c) shows a collection of different types of objects, whose visual appearance varies significantly in terms
of geometry and surface reflectance. However, all these
objects share the same object affordance of containability.
Figure 1(d) shows a plate and a cup, each able to contain
liquid. However, for carrying liquid, one usually prefers to
use the cup instead of the plate, because the plate will spill
the liquid if perturbed even slightly but the cup will not. Our
goal is to devise a simple approach that enables computers

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Some non-trivial questions that our simple approach can
answer given a 3D object. (a) Which direction shall we tilt the
pitcher to pour the water out? (b) Shall we use this container to
hold water? (c) Which object is a good liquid container? (d) Shall
we use a plate or a cup to carry water?

to make these choices without expensive computation.
Recent advancement of consumer-grade 3D depth sensors (e.g. Occipital Structure Sensor1 ) allows even general users to easily acquire full-view 3D data of everyday objects, using a mobile device. The growing availability of good-quality 3D data increases the level of visual analysis that computers can perform to understand objects and scenes, for example, by physics-based reasoning [15, 40, 41]. Current vision research aims to use this
data to enable computers to understand and manipulate everyday objects as naturally as humans do.
We share the same stance as in qualitative physics [9]:
simple physics-based models can be more suitable than precise numerical simulations for reasoning about many practical daily situations. This stance can be justified by the fact
that humans can interact seamlessly with the objects in their
everyday surroundings, without knowing the equations and
numerical parameters required by traditional physics to describe the physical interactions happening.
To this end, we propose a simplified physics-based approach to perform containability analysis of objects. We
demonstrate that our approach can answer non-trivial questions about containability (Figure 1) and hence make the
right manipulation decisions. We experimentally verify our
approach by comparing its outputs with human preferences
and with a common fluid dynamics simulation.
1 http://structure.io

1711

