Pose-Invariant 3D Face Alignment
Amin Jourabloo, Xiaoming Liu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Michigan State University, East Lansing MI 48824
{jourablo, liuxm}@msu.edu
Abstract
Face alignment aims to estimate the locations of a set
of landmarks for a given image. This problem has received
much attention as evidenced by the recent advancement in
both the methodology and performance. However, most
of the existing works neither explicitly handle face images
with arbitrary poses, nor perform large-scale experiments
on non-frontal and profile face images. In order to address
these limitations, this paper proposes a novel face alignment algorithm that estimates both 2D and 3D landmarks
and their 2D visibilities for a face image with an arbitrary
pose. By integrating a 3D point distribution model, a cascaded coupled-regressor approach is designed to estimate
both the camera projection matrix and the 3D landmarks.
Furthermore, the 3D model also allows us to automatically
estimate the 2D landmark visibilities via surface normal.
We use a substantially larger collection of all-pose face images to evaluate our algorithm and demonstrate superior
performances than the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
This paper aims to advance face alignment in aligning
face images with arbitrary poses. Face alignment is a process of applying a supervised learned model to a face image
and estimating the locations of a set of facial landmarks,
such as eye corners, mouth corners, etc [6]. Face alignment
is a key module in the pipeline of most facial analysis algorithms, normally after face detection and before subsequent
feature extraction and classification. Therefore, it is an enabling capability with a multitude of applications, such as
face recognition [31], expression recognition [2], face deidentification [13], etc.
Given the importance of this problem, face alignment
has been extensively studied since Dr. Cootes’ Active Shape
Model (ASM) in the 1990s [6]. Especially in recent years,
face alignment has become one of the most published subjects in vision conferences [1, 21, 35, 36, 38, 43]. The existing approaches can be categorized into three types: Con-

Figure 1: Given a face image with an arbitrary pose, our proposed algorithm automatically estimates the 2D locations and visibilities of facial landmarks, as well as 3D landmarks. The displayed 3D landmarks are estimated for the image in the center.
Green/red points indicate visible/invisible landmarks.
strained Local Model (CLM)-based approach (e.g., [6, 26]),
Active Appearance Model (AAM)-based approach (e.g.,
[16, 17, 22]) and regression-based approach (e.g., [4, 30]),
and an excellent survey can be found in [33].
Despite the continuous improvement on the alignment
accuracy, face alignment is still a very challenging problem,
due to the non-frontal face pose, low image quality, occlusion, etc. Among all the challenges, we identify the pose
invariant face alignment as the one deserving substantial research efforts, for a number of reasons. First, face detection
has substantially advanced its capability in detecting faces
in all poses, including profiles [42], which calls for the subsequent face alignment to handle faces with arbitrary poses.
Second, many facial analysis tasks would benefit from the
robust alignment of faces at all poses, such as expression
recognition and 3D face reconstruction [24]. Third, there
are very few existing approaches that can align a face with
any view angle, or have conducted extensive evaluations on
face images across ±90◦ yaw angles [40, 48], which is a
clear contrast with the vast face alignment literature [33].
Motivated by the needs to address the pose variation, and
the lack of prior work in handling poses, as shown in Fig. 1,

3694

