Entropy Minimization for Convex Relaxation Approaches
Mohamed Souiai1
Martin R. Oswald2
3
Youngwook Kee
Junmo Kim
Marc Pollefeys2
Daniel Cremers1
1
2
3
TU Munich, Germany
ETH Zürich, Switzerland
KAIST, South Korea
3

Abstract
Despite their enormous success in solving hard combinatorial problems, convex relaxation approaches often suffer from the fact that the computed solutions are far from
binary and that subsequent heuristic binarization may substantially degrade the quality of computed solutions. In this
paper, we propose a novel relaxation technique which incorporates the entropy of the objective variable as a measure
of relaxation tightness. We show both theoretically and experimentally that augmenting the objective function with an
entropy term gives rise to more binary solutions and consequently solutions with a substantially lower optimality
gap. We use difference of convex function (DC) programming as an efficient and provably convergent solver for the
arising convex-concave minimization problem. We evaluate this approach on three prominent non-convex computer
vision challenges: multi-label inpainting, image segmentation and spatio-temporal multi-view reconstruction. These
experiments show that our approach consistently yields better solutions with respect to the original integral optimization problem.

1. Introduction
Numerous problems in vision – including two-region
and multi-region image segmentation, stereo- and multiview reconstruction or optical flow estimation – can be cast
as variational multi-labeling problems of the form
u∗ = arg min E(u),

(1.1)

u

with a labeling function u : Ω ! Γ from a domain Ω to a label space Γ. The domain and the label space can be both discrete or continuous. Numerous works have proposed methods for efficiently computing solutions to the above integer
problem. A common approach [21] is to rephrase the above
integer problem as a binary labeling problem with an indicator variable u : Ω ! {0, 1}|Γ| :
u∗bin =

arg min E(u) ,
u:Ω→{0,1}|Γ|

(1.2)

possibly subject to additional constraints. While this binary
formulation often leads to a convex energy E, the binary
constraint makes the optimization domain non-convex and
generally yields a hard combinatorial problem.
Relaxation. The central idea of many convex relaxation
techniques is to drop the integrality constraint and consider
the relaxed convex problem:
u∗rel = arg min E(u).

(1.3)

u:Ω→[0,1]|Γ|

Solving this problem is usually much easier, but its solution
u∗rel can be non-binary and consequently a rounding scheme
needs to be applied to obtain a binary solution.
Rounding. In general, the rounded solution can be very
different from the globally optimal solution u∗bin and may
not even be a local minimum of the binary objective (1.2).
The simplest rounding scheme is to select the label with
the highest likelihood. We will detail the rounding schemes
later when looking at certain problem instances of (1.3).
For certain 2-label problems, a thresholding theorem
[17] may assure provably optimal binary solutions upon
simple thresholding of the relaxed solution u∗rel . For more
general multi-label problems the computed solutions are often far from binary and rounding may drastically increase
the energy and the corresponding a-posteriori optimality
bound (the energetic difference between rounded and relaxed solution). Moreover, a number of works incorporate
additional constraints on the solution in order to constraint
the volume/area [22, 27], or higher order moments [8] of
the resulting segmentation, or to enforce size proportions of
respective segments [15]. While these constraints are meaningful for the binary problem (1.2), they often change their
physical meaning in the relaxed setting (1.3).
Novel relaxation scheme. In order to cope with the above
mentioned problems we propose to augment problem (1.1)
with an additional term which promotes the integrality of
the solution during optimization and thereby leads to better
solutions with substantially smaller optimality gaps. The
key idea is to control the integrality of the objective variable by means of Shannon’s entropy. Entropy minimization
has been used in several computer vision applications including shadow removal [4] and image segmentation [23]

1778

