Semantic Segmentation With Object Clique Potentials
Xiaojuan Qi

Jianping Shi Shu Liu Renjie Liao
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Jiaya Jia

{xjqi, jpshi, sliu, rjliao, leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
We propose an object clique potential for semantic segmentation. Our object clique potential addresses the misclassified object-part issues arising in solutions based on
fully-convolutional networks. Our object clique set, compared to that yielded from segment-proposal-based approaches, is with a significantly smaller size, making our
method consume notably less computation. Regarding system design and model formation, our object clique potential can be regarded as a functional complement to
local-appearance-based CRF models and works in synergy
with these effective approaches for further performance improvement. Extensive experiments verify our method.

(a) Input

(b) Segment proposal result [3]

(c) Input

(d) FCN result [24]

(e) Input

(f) CRF after FCN result [2]

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental task in computer vision that involves labeling each pixel in an image to a category. It relates to the tasks of segmentation,
image classification and object detection, but differs from
them by nature. Semantic segmentation predicts the additional category information that is not involved in bottomup segmentation, and classifies multiple objects together
with their locations. This is also different from image classification. Compared to object detection, it produces more
accurate pixel-level location, and contains additional background class.
In recent years, deep convolutional neural networks
(CNN) [17, 32] quicken the development of semantic segmentation systems [24, 3]. One stream is to directly adopt
CNN to classify segment proposals generated by objectiveness approaches [7, 11, 3]. These methods enjoy the advantage to classify complete and tight object segment proposals. But there are still two main issues that possibly influence the performance.
First, the computation cost is relatively heavy. Even at
test time, around 2,000 segment proposals need to be evaluated in the deep neural networks. Reducing the number of
segment proposals could decrease the recall. Second, the
initial bottom-up segmentation results almost determine the

Figure 1. (a) and (b) illustrate problematic segment proposals due
to inappropriate initial segments. (c) and (d) show an example
difficult for the FCN system. The receptive fields of predicted
point in green and yellow in (d) correspond to the bounding box
in (c). (e) and (f) demonstrate that the CRF model cannot correct
large mistakes – top-left of (f) is the initial FCN prediction result.

final structure. When the initial segments go wrong, such
as that shown in Fig. 1(a) and (b), the system cannot correct the problematic proposals. Such cases are common in
complex-scene images.
The other line [24] is to replace the fully connected layers with convolution ones to produce a fully convolutional
network (FCN) for dense prediction. It solves the efficiency
problem by reusing the convolution output. The end-to-end
dense prediction also leads to flexible segment prediction.
But when two categories have similar parts, such as dog
and cat, the sliding window receptive field could be misled
for part identification due to unawareness of global clues.
12587

