Component-wise modeling of articulated objects
Valsamis Ntouskos, Marta Sanzari, Bruno Cafaro, Federico Nardi,
Fabrizio Natola, Fiora Pirri, Manuel Ruiz
ALCOR LAB, Dipertimento di Ingegneria Informatica Automatica e Gestionale
{ntouskos,sanzari,cafaro,fnardi,natola,pirri,ruiz}@diag.uniroma1.it

Abstract
We introduce a novel framework for modeling articulated objects based on the aspects of their components.
By decomposing the object into components, we divide the
problem in smaller modeling tasks. After obtaining 3D
models for each component aspect by employing a shape
deformation paradigm, we merge them together, forming
the object components. The final model is obtained by
assembling the components using an optimization scheme
which fits the respective 3D models to the corresponding
apparent contours in a reference pose. The results suggest
that our approach can produce realistic 3D models of articulated objects in reasonable time.

1. Introduction
The problem of modeling articulated objects, like people, animals and complex human artifacts has a long history
in computer vision. Obtaining 3D models of objects from
images is essential for many high-level vision tasks. Early
approaches suggested a hierarchical composition of the object components, represented as generalized cylinders [4],
geons [3], or superquadrics [30, 15], just to cite a few well
known approaches to the structural descriptions theory. In
these early works, components were modeled with parametric 3D shapes of few degrees of freedom, leading to limited
resemblance to the actual geometry of the component.
With the popularization of accurate deformable models,
introduced also by the computer graphics community (see
[5] for a review), more realistic models of the components
of an object are obtained. Recent works [32, 37, 38] have
successfully shown how some types of animals can be modeled from a single image, relying mainly on the symmetry
of the animal’s shape. These approaches differ from the
ones proposed in computer graphics (e.g. [25, 11, 21]),
where input from the 3D artist is essential. The single view
modeling methods, however, are not suitable for modeling
articulated objects since some of their assumptions become
not valid. In particular, the components of the object do not

Figure 1: Left: Images of an animal downloaded from the
web overlaid with segmentation masks, Center: modeled
components overlaid on the input images, Right: final 3D
model obtained with the proposed method.

share the same plane of symmetry.
In this work, we provide a solution to the problem of
modeling articulated objects by explicitly modeling their
components from various aspects. We consider a hierarchical decomposition of the object into components. Depending on the geometric complexity of the component, a
different number of views is required for the modeling. For
example, an animal’s torso typically requires three to four
representative views (left, right, front and back). Views of a
component lead to the component aspects. An example of
the decomposition in components and aspects is presented
in Figure 2. From each aspect an approximate model of
the imaged component is obtained using the deformation
paradigm. Then, these aspect models are merged together
to form a component. Components are typical of an object
class and, in turn, are assembled considering a reference
pose of the object, providing a 3D model of the whole object. Here, we assume that the object components are segmented out in the respective views. It is important to note
that the different views need not correspond to the same
physical object as far as objects belong to the same specific class. We focus our study on animals as they typically
satisfy this property. An example of a 3D model obtained
with our approach is shown in Figure 1.
The paper is organized as follows. In the next section we
12327

