Object detection via a multi-region & semantic segmentation-aware CNN model
Spyros Gidaris
Universite Paris Est, Ecole des Ponts ParisTech

Nikos Komodakis
Universite Paris Est, Ecole des Ponts ParisTech

gidariss@imagine.enpc.fr

nikos.komodakis@enpc.fr

Abstract
We propose an object detection system that relies on a
multi-region deep convolutional neural network (CNN) that
also encodes semantic segmentation-aware features. The
resulting CNN-based representation aims at capturing a diverse set of discriminative appearance factors and exhibits
localization sensitivity that is essential for accurate object
localization. We exploit the above properties of our recognition module by integrating it on an iterative localization
mechanism that alternates between scoring a box proposal
and refining its location with a deep CNN regression model.
Thanks to the efficient use of our modules, we detect objects with very high localization accuracy. On the detection
challenges of PASCAL VOC2007 and PASCAL VOC2012
we achieve mAP of 78.2% and 73.9% correspondingly, surpassing any other published work by a significant margin.

1. Introduction
One of the most studied problems of computer vision is
that of object detection: given an image return all the instances of one or more type of objects in form of bounding
boxes that tightly enclose them. The last two years, huge
improvements have been observed on this task thanks to the
recent advances of deep learning community [18, 1, 14].
Among them, most notable is the work of Sermanet et
al. [24] with the Overfeat framework and the work of Girshick et al. [10] with the R-CNN framework..
Overfeat [24] uses two CNN models that apply in a sliding window fashion on multiple scales of an image. The
first is used to classify if a window contains an object and
the second to predict the true bounding box location of the
object. Finally, the dense class and location predictions are
merged with a greedy algorithm in order to produce the final
set of object detections.
R-CNN [10] uses Alex Krizhevsky’s Net [17] to extract features from box proposals provided by selective
This work was supported by the ANR SEMAPOLIS project. Its code
will become available on github.com/gidariss/mrcnn-object-detection/.

Figure 1: Left: detecting the sheep on this scene is very difficult
without referring on the context, mountainish landscape. Center:
In contrast, the context on the right image can only confuse the
detection of the boat. The pure object characteristics is what a
recognition model should focus on in this case. Right: This car
instance is occluded on its right part and the recognition model
should focus on the left part in order to confidently detect it.

search [27] and then it classifies them with class specific
linear SVMs. Girshick et al. [10], manage to train networks
with millions of parameters by first pre-training on the
auxiliary task of image classification and then fine-tuning
on a small set of images annotated for the detection task.
This simple pipeline surpasses by a large margin the detection performance of all the previously published systems,
such as deformable parts models [8] and non-linear multikernel approaches [28]. This success of R-CNN comes
from the fact that hand-engineered features like HOG [3]
or SIFT [22] are replaced with the high level object representations produced from the last layer of a CNN model.
By employing an even deeper CNN model, such as the 16layers VGG-Net [25], they boosted the performance another
7 points [10].
In this paper we aim to further advance the state-of-theart on object detection by improving on two key aspects
that play a critical role in this task: object representation
and object localization.
Object representation. One of the lessons learned from
the above-mentioned works is that indeed features matter
a lot on object detection and our work is partly motivated
from this observation. However, instead of proposing only
a network architecture that is deeper, here we also opt for
an architecture of greater width, i.e., one whose last hidden layers provide features of increased dimensionality. In
doing so, our goal is to build a richer candidate box representation. This is accomplished at two levels:
(1). At a first level, we want our object representation

1134

