TRIC-track: Tracking by Regression with Incrementally Learned Cascades
Xiaomeng Wang

Michel Valstar
Brais Martinez
Muhammad Haris Khan
Tony Pridmore
Computer Vision Laboratory, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK

{psxxw, michel.valstar, brais.martinez, psxmhk, tony.pridmore}@nottingham.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel approach to part-based tracking by replacing local matching of an appearance model by
direct prediction of the displacement between local image
patches and part locations. We propose to use cascaded
regression with incremental learning to track generic objects without any prior knowledge of an object’s structure
or appearance. We exploit the spatial constraints between
parts by implicitly learning the shape and deformation parameters of the object in an online fashion. We integrate a
multiple temporal scale motion model to initialise our cascaded regression search close to the target and to allow it
to cope with occlusions. Experimental results show that our
tracker ranks first on the CVPR 2013 Benchmark.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: (a) Training a direct displacement regressor with
four examples. (b) Testing a regressor. Four test patches
sampled around the initial location (blue dot) provide predictions (purple dots). (c) Evidence aggregation map. (d)
Location-based initialisation and implicit shape model.

1. Introduction
We propose a method for structured object Tracking by
Regression with Incrementally learned Cascades (TRICtrack). Visual tracking of generic objects is one of the most
active topics in computer vision. It aims to detect the location of a possibly moving target by extracting local appearance features and matching them between consecutive
images to obtain accurate estimates of target location, often helped by similar estimates of the object’s motion. The
parameters describing a target object can vary, but often include position, size, orientation and velocity. Tracking information can subsequently be used to reason about the target’s behaviour or complete other tasks that require knowledge of the object’s state. If solved, visual tracking has
extensive applications in areas such as visual (robot) navigation, surveillance, traffic monitoring, video compression,
medical imaging etc.
Despite the large body of computer vision work addressing this problem, robust visual tracking of generic objects
is still a challenging problem. The performance of a visual tracking algorithm is affected by many factors, such
as non-rigid object deformation, partial or full occlusion of
the target, illumination variation, scale variation, viewpoint

change, motion blur, background clutter, etc. The combination of rigid motion and non-rigid object deformation results in complex appearance changes, making general object tracking a particularly hard problem.
Current part-based trackers rely upon a response map estimating the likelihood that any given location in an image
represents the target (part). While approaches to the computation of this fitness vary from simple template matching
to complex machine learning based methods, all assign a
single scalar value to a queried location. Tracking then becomes a problem of determining what area(s) to search in,
often guided by some motion model(s), how to construct an
appearance model that can capture changes in the object’s
image properties, and how to deal with local optima.
While a template likelihood strategy may appear to be
the logical solution to the visual tracking problem, its view
of the image as a set of independent, possible target locations introduces a number of inherent drawbacks. Firstly,
incorrect optima occur when changes in the target’s appearance make it look less like the original template than
some background image patch(es), or when there are mul-

4337

