Robust Heart Rate Measurement from Video Using Select Random Patches
Antony Lam and Yoshinori Kuno
Graduate School of Science and Engineering
Saitama University
{antonylam,kuno}@cv.ics.saitama-u.ac.jp

Abstract
The ability to remotely measure heart rate from videos
without requiring any special setup is beneficial to many
applications. In recent years, a number of papers on heart
rate (HR) measurement from videos have been proposed.
However, these methods typically require the human subject
to be stationary and for the illumination to be controlled.
For methods that do take into account motion and illumination changes, strong assumptions are still made about the
environment (e.g. background can be used for illumination
rectification). In this paper, we propose an HR measurement method that is robust to motion, illumination changes,
and does not require use of an environment’s background.
We present conditions under which cardiac activity extraction from local regions of the face can be treated as a linear
Blind Source Separation problem and propose a simple but
robust algorithm for selecting good local regions. The independent HR estimates from multiple local regions are then
combined in a majority voting scheme that robustly recovers the HR. We validate our algorithm on a large database
of challenging videos.

(a) Proposed Video Heart Rate Measurement System

(b) Estimated Plethysmographic Signal from Majority Vote vs.
Ground Truth ECG

Figure 1: Heart Rate Measurement from Video Captured by
Consumer Camera
mentary information in a facial emotion recognition system,
which would be of great benefit to affective computing in
human-computer and human-robot interaction applications.
Another potential application would be in health monitoring. A networked camera system could be set up in a nursing home to continually monitor patient health for the long
term without uncomfortable sensors. Realtime monitoring
of HR over webcam could also be done by medical professionals. In addition, HR measurement could be used as a
biometric to prevent anti-spoofing.
Recent work [1, 8, 10, 13, 14] has demonstrated the viability of video based HR measurement. However, these
studies were conducted under controlled settings. In a real
setting, many factors could make extraction of HR difficult.
For example, there would be motion (rigid and non-rigid)
and changes in illumination that would greatly affect the
appearance of skin over time. A notable exception is the

1. Introduction
The ability to measure heart rate (HR) allows us to learn
a lot about the physiological and emotional states of people,
as well as their overall health. Conventional methods for
measuring HR such as electrocardiography (ECG) or photoplethysmography using optical sensors require the sensor
to make physical contact with the person. This can be inconvenient and uncomfortable for the person while also limiting the number of applications HR measurement could be
used in. Fortunately, it has been shown (under controlled
conditions) that it is possible to use a conventional camera
to remotely detect small changes in skin color due to a person’s cardiac pulse [18].
The ability to use conventional cameras to remotely measure HR would open doors to many possibilities. For example, HR measurement using cameras could provide comple1
3640

