Oriented Light-Field Windows for Scene Flow
Pratul P. Srinivasan1 , Michael W. Tao1 , Ren Ng1 , Ravi Ramamoorthi2
{pratul,mtao,ren}@eecs.berkeley.edu, ravir@cs.ucsd.edu
1

University of California, Berkeley, 2 University of California, San Diego

Abstract
2D spatial image windows are used for comparing pixel
values in computer vision applications such as correspondence for optical flow and 3D reconstruction, bilateral filtering, and image segmentation. However, pixel window
comparisons can suffer from varying defocus blur and perspective at different depths, and can also lead to a loss
of precision. In this paper, we leverage the recent use of
light-field cameras to propose alternative oriented lightfield windows that enable more robust and accurate pixel
comparisons. For Lambertian surfaces focused to the correct depth, the 2D distribution of angular rays from a pixel
remains consistent. We build on this idea to develop an
oriented 4D light-field window that accounts for shearing
(depth), translation (matching), and windowing. Our main
application is to scene flow, a generalization of optical flow
to the 3D vector field describing the motion of each point
in the scene. We show significant benefits of oriented lightfield windows over standard 2D spatial windows. We also
demonstrate additional applications of oriented light-field
windows for bilateral filtering and image segmentation.

1. Introduction
Pixel value comparisons are used for a variety of
computer vision applications, including finding correspondences between images for 3D reconstruction, enforcing
brightness consistency for calculating optical and scene
flow, calculating weights for adaptive filters such as bilateral
filters, and determining pixel similarity for image segmentation. With conventional images, we can compare pixels
by comparing their RGB (or other color space) values. For
more robust comparisons, we can also compare 2D pixel
windows instead of individual pixels, but this involves a
loss of precision. Furthermore, both pixel value comparisons and window comparisons are prone to errors due to
the depth of objects in the scene; the windows corresponding to the same scene points at two different depths will
appear different due to focal blur and perspective.
We propose a method to represent scene points, that uses

the information from 4D light-field images [2, 13], to enable
more accurate and robust pixel comparisons (Sec. 3). Each
spatial pixel has a 2D distribution of incident angular rays.
If focused to the correct effective depth in the scene, all angular rays are consistent for Lambertian surfaces, since all
rays converge to the same scene point. When not focused
to the correct depth in the scene, the angular rays of a spatial location on the sensor incorporate information from the
spatial neighborhood of the scene point. We leverage these
insights to develop oriented 4D light-field windows, that account for shearing in the light field ray space due to focusing
at different depths, translation for pixel matching, and windowing. This is a general representation that in the limit
approaches a single spatial pixel with a 2D angular extent,
effectively replacing the 2D spatial window, and alleviating
issues with loss of precision and defocus blur.
A natural application is the computation of scene flow,
since it involves the estimation of corresponding spatial
points (Sec. 4). Scene flow [26] is the 3D vector field describing the motion of each scene point over time. It extends
the conventional notion of optical flow by also providing
the change in depth. Scene flow has many applications in
vision, including establishing correspondence, computing
camera and object motions, and estimating shape. We propose an algorithm to compute dense non-rigid scene flow
from a pair of light-field images, acquired using a consumer light-field camera (Lytro Illum). We demonstrate that
oriented light-field windows provide better matching than
conventional spatial windows, and derive a 4D light-field
matching formula and energy minimization, analogous to
traditional 2D brightness consistency.
We further demonstrate oriented light-field windows by
using them for filtering images with a bilateral filter and
segmenting images (Sec. 5). We show that the results are
significantly better than when using traditional 2D images.

2. Previous Work
2.1. Light-Fields in Computer Vision
The 4D light-field is the total spatio-angular distribution
of light rays passing through free space, and light-field cam-

3496

