Conditional Random Fields as Recurrent Neural Networks
Vibhav Vineet1,2†
Shuai Zheng1* Sadeep Jayasumana1∗ Bernardino Romera-Paredes1
Zhizhong Su3 Dalong Du3 Chang Huang3 Philip H. S. Torr1
1
Torr-Vision Group, University of Oxford 2 Stanford University 3 Baidu Research

Abstract
Pixel-level labelling tasks, such as semantic segmentation, play a central role in image understanding. Recent approaches have attempted to harness the capabilities of deep
learning techniques for image recognition to tackle pixellevel labelling tasks. One central issue in this methodology
is the limited capacity of deep learning techniques to delineate visual objects. To solve this problem, we introduce
a new form of convolutional neural network that combines
the strengths of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
and Conditional Random Fields (CRFs)-based probabilistic graphical modelling. To this end, we formulate Conditional Random Fields with Gaussian pairwise potentials
and mean-field approximate inference as Recurrent Neural
Networks. This network, called CRF-RNN, is then plugged
in as a part of a CNN to obtain a deep network that has
desirable properties of both CNNs and CRFs. Importantly,
our system fully integrates CRF modelling with CNNs, making it possible to train the whole deep network end-to-end
with the usual back-propagation algorithm, avoiding offline
post-processing methods for object delineation.
We apply the proposed method to the problem of semantic image segmentation, obtaining top results on the challenging Pascal VOC 2012 segmentation benchmark.

1. Introduction
Low-level computer vision problems such as semantic
image segmentation or depth estimation often involve assigning a label to each pixel in an image. While the feature
representation used to classify individual pixels plays an important role in this task, it is similarly important to consider
factors such as image edges, appearance consistency and
spatial consistency while assigning labels in order to obtain
accurate and precise results.
Designing a strong feature representation is a key challenge in pixel-level labelling problems. Work on this topic
∗ Authors contributed equally.
† Work conducted while author at the University of Oxford.

includes: TextonBoost [50], TextonForest [49], and Random Forest-based classifiers [48]. Recently, supervised
deep learning approaches such as large-scale deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have been immensely successful in many high-level computer vision tasks such as
image recognition [29] and object detection [19]. This motivates exploring the use of CNNs for pixel-level labelling
problems. The key insight is to learn a strong feature representation end-to-end for the pixel-level labelling task instead of hand-crafting features with heuristic parameter tuning. In fact, a number of recent approaches including the
particularly interesting works FCN [35] and DeepLab [9]
have shown a significant accuracy boost by adapting stateof-the-art CNN based image classifiers to the semantic segmentation problem.
However, there are significant challenges in adapting
CNNs designed for high level computer vision tasks such as
object recognition to pixel-level labelling tasks. Firstly, traditional CNNs have convolutional filters with large receptive fields and hence produce coarse outputs when restructured to produce pixel-level labels [35]. Presence of maxpooling layers in CNNs further reduces the chance of getting a fine segmentation output [9]. This, for instance, can
result in non-sharp boundaries and blob-like shapes in semantic segmentation tasks. Secondly, CNNs lack smoothness constraints that encourage label agreement between
similar pixels, and spatial and appearance consistency of the
labelling output. Lack of such smoothness constraints can
result in poor object delineation and small spurious regions
in the segmentation output [57, 56, 30, 37].
On a separate track to the progress of deep learning
techniques, probabilistic graphical models have been developed as effective methods to enhance the accuracy of pixellevel labelling tasks. In particular, Markov Random Fields
(MRFs) and its variant Conditional Random Fields (CRFs)
have observed widespread success in this area [30, 27] and
have become one of the most successful graphical models
used in computer vision. The key idea of CRF inference
for semantic labelling is to formulate the label assignment
problem as a probabilistic inference problem that incorporates assumptions such as the label agreement between
4321
1529

