Towards Computational Baby Learning: A Weakly-supervised Approach for
Object Detection
Xiaodan Liang1,2 Si Liu1,4 Yunchao Wei1,3 Luoqi Liu1 Liang Lin2 Shuicheng Yan 1∗
1
National University of Singapore 2 Sun Yat-sen University 3 Beijing Jiaotong university
4
State Key Laboratory of Information Security, Institute of Information Engineering,
Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
Intuitive observations show that a baby may inherently
possess the capability of recognizing a new visual concept
(e.g., chair, dog) by learning from only very few positive
instances taught by parent(s) or others, and this recognition capability can be gradually further improved by exploring and/or interacting with the real instances in the
physical world. Inspired by these observations, we propose a computational model for weakly-supervised object
detection, based on prior knowledge modelling, exemplar
learning and learning with video contexts. The prior knowledge is modeled with a pre-trained Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN). When very few instances of a new concept are given, an initial concept detector is built by exemplar learning over the deep features the pre-trained CNN.
The well-designed tracking solution is then used to discover
more diverse instances from the massive online weakly labeled videos. Once a positive instance is detected/identified
with high score in each video, more instances possibly from
different view-angles and/or different distances are tracked
and accumulated. Then the concept detector can be finetuned based on these new instances. This process can be repeated again and again till we obtain a very mature concept
detector. Extensive experiments on Pascal VOC-07/10/12
object detection datasets [9] well demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework. It can beat the state-of-the-art
full-training based performances by learning from very few
samples for each object category, along with about 20,000
weakly labeled videos.

1. Introduction
Empirically, we may have the following intuitive observations on how a baby learns: after the parent(s) or others
teach the baby a few instances about a new concept, the ini∗ This work was done when the first author worked as an intern in National University of Singapore.

tial recognition capability about the concept can be built1 .
During continuously exploring and/or interacting with diverse instances and scenes in real life, the baby can associate the initial simple instances with other variants by using various information linkages. Based on the accumulated instances about the concept, the baby can gradually
improve its recognition capability and recognize diverse instances he/she never saw.
Recent successes in computer vision [33] [20] [41], however, largely on a large number of labeled instances of visual
concepts, which may require considerable human efforts.
The construction of an appearance-based object detector is
costly and difficult because the number of training examples must be large enough to capture different variations in
the object appearance. Some researchers have made efforts
on improving the initial models by using very few labeled
data, along with the detection/search results from web images [4] [8] [5] or weakly annotated videos [30] [2]. this
paper, we build a computational model for weakly supervised object detection by drawing inspiration from the baby
learning process. As illustrated in Figure 1, we propose a
robust learning framework which can effectively model the
prior knowledge, build the initial model by exemplar learning with very few positive instances for a new concept, and
gradually learn a mature object detector by exploring more
diverse instances in videos.
First, we model the prior knowledge (i.e. feature representation) with a pre-trained Convolutional Neural network (CNN) in two steps. We first train a generic CNN
by the large image classification dataset. We then fine-tune
the CNN with the instances of previously learned visual
concepts for transferring object classification network into
the detection network. Second, when very few positive instances of a new concept are given, the initial object detector
is built by exemplar learning [25], which trains a separate
linear classifier for every exemplar in the training set based
1 Note that it does not necessarily mean baby truly learns in this way
from neuron-science perspective.

1999

