Compression Artifacts Reduction by a Deep Convolutional Network
Chao Dong, Yubin Deng, Chen Change Loy, and Xiaoou Tang
Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{dc012,dy015,ccloy,xtang}@ie.cuhk.edu.com

Abstract
Lossy compression introduces complex compression artifacts, particularly the blocking artifacts, ringing effects
and blurring. Existing algorithms either focus on removing
blocking artifacts and produce blurred output, or restores
sharpened images that are accompanied with ringing effects. Inspired by the deep convolutional networks (DCN)
on super-resolution [5], we formulate a compact and efﬁcient network for seamless attenuation of different compression artifacts. We also demonstrate that a deeper model can
be effectively trained with the features learned in a shallow network. Following a similar “easy to hard” idea, we
systematically investigate several practical transfer settings
and show the effectiveness of transfer learning in low-level
vision problems. Our method shows superior performance
than the state-of-the-arts both on the benchmark datasets
and the real-world use case (i.e. Twitter).

1. Introduction
Lossy compression (e.g. JPEG, WebP and HEVC-MSP)
is one class of data encoding methods that uses inexact
approximations for representing the encoded content. In
this age of information explosion, lossy compression is
indispensable and inevitable for companies (e.g. Twitter
and Facebook) to save bandwidth and storage space. However, compression in its nature will introduce undesired
complex artifacts, which will severely reduce the user experience (e.g. Figure 1). All these artifacts not only decrease perceptual visual quality, but also adversely affect
various low-level image processing routines that take compressed images as input, e.g. contrast enhancement [16],
super-resolution [30, 5], and edge detection [3]. However,
under such a huge demand, effective compression artifacts
reduction remains an open problem.
We take JPEG compression as an example to explain
compression artifacts. JPEG compression scheme divides
an image into 8×8 pixel blocks and applies block discrete
cosine transformation (DCT) on each block individually.
Quantization is then applied on the DCT coefﬁcients to

(a) Left: the JPEG-compressed image, where we could see blocking artifacts, ringing effects and blurring on the eyes, abrupt intensity changes on
the face. Right: the restored image by the proposed deep model (AR-CNN),
where we remove these compression artifacts and produce sharp details.

(b) Left: the Twitter-compressed image, which is ﬁrst re-scaled to a small
image and then compressed on the server-side. Right: the restored image by
the proposed deep model (AR-CNN)

Figure 1. Example compressed images and our restoration results
on the JPEG compression scheme and the real use case – Twitter.

save storage space. This step will cause a complex combination of different artifacts, as depicted in Figure 1(a).
Blocking artifacts arise when each block is encoded without considering the correlation with the adjacent blocks, resulting in discontinuities at the 8×8 borders. Ringing effects along the edges occur due to the coarse quantization
of the high-frequency components (also known as Gibbs
phenomenon [9]). Blurring happens due to the loss of
high-frequency components. To cope with the various compression artifacts, different approaches have been proposed,
some of which can only deal with certain types of artifacts.
For instance, deblocking oriented approaches [18, 21, 26]
perform ﬁltering along the block boundaries to reduce only
blocking artifacts. Liew et al. [17] and Foi et al. [6]
use thresholding by wavelet transform and Shape-Adaptive
DCT transform, respectively. These approaches are good at

576

