Low-Rank Tensor Constrained Multiview Subspace Clustering
Changqing Zhang1
Huazhu Fu3
Si Liu2
Guangcan Liu4
Xiaochun Cao1,2 ∗
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University
2
State Key Laboratory of Information Security, IIE, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Institute for Infocomm Research, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
4
School of Information and Control, Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology
caoxiaochun@iie.ac.cn; zhangchangqing@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we explore the problem of multiview subspace clustering. We introduce a low-rank tensor constraint to explore the complementary information from multiple
views and, accordingly, establish a novel method called
Low-rank Tensor constrained Multiview Subspace Clustering (LT-MSC). Our method regards the subspace representation matrices of different views as a tensor, which captures
dexterously the high order correlations underlying multiview data. Then the tensor is equipped with a low-rank
constraint, which models elegantly the cross information
among different views, reduces effectually the redundancy of the learned subspace representations, and improves
the accuracy of clustering as well. The inference process
of the affinity matrix for clustering is formulated as a tensor nuclear norm minimization problem, constrained with
an additional ℓ2,1 -norm regularizer and some linear equalities. The minimization problem is convex and thus can be
solved efficiently by an Augmented Lagrangian Alternating
Direction Minimization (AL-ADM) method. Extensive experimental results on four benchmark image datasets show
the effectiveness of the proposed LT-MSC method.

1. Introduction
Many problems in machine learning and computer vision involve multiview data, in which each data point is represented by different information from multiple sources of
features. For example, in computer vision problems, images and videos are often described by different kinds of
features, such as color, texture and edge. Web pages are also
able to be represented in a multiview fashion, based on the
text, hyperlinks and possibly existing visual information. In
general, the multiview representation can capture seamlessly the rich information from multiple data cues as well as
∗ Corresponding Author

the complementary information among different cues, and
thus be beneﬁcial to various tasks, e.g., clustering, classiﬁcation, de-noising. In this paper, we focus on advancing
clustering by making use of the multiview representation.
To integrate different features into a uniﬁed framework,
most existing multiview clustering methods employ graph
based models. Early methods focus on the setting of “twoview” [14, 1, 6]: The most recent method in [14] constructs
a bipartite graph to connect two types of features, and uses a standard spectral clustering algorithm to obtain the ﬁnal
clustering result. The method in [1] extends k-means to handle the data of two conditionally independent views. These
early methods depend on the assumption that there are only
two views, and thus it is hard to extend them to the cases of
three or more views. The approach in [35] fuses the information from multiple graphs with Linked Matrix Factorization (LMF).To exploit complementary information, some
methods employ co-regularization and co-training strategies, e.g., [4], [5], [23], [37] and [22]. The methods [2, 7]
based on dimension reduction typically use Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) to project high dimensional multiview data onto a low-dimensional subspace. The method
[39] recovers a shared low-rank transition probability matrix as a crucial input to the standard Markov chain method
for clustering. The work in [10] learns a common representation under the spectral clustering framework by combining Laplacians of different views.
While effectual, existing methods may not fully explore
the advantages of multiview representation. In fact, most
previous methods capture only the pairwise correlations between different views, but essentially ignore the high order correlations underlying the multiple views. Moreover,
the inference procedure of existing methods often leads to
non-convex optimization problems, which in general cannot guarantee to produce globally optimal solutions. The
method in [38] reaches a convex formulation, but, again, is
limited to the case of two-view. The proposed method, as
will be shown later, formulates the inference procedure as

1582

