A Groupwise Multilinear Correspondence Optimization for 3D Faces
Timo Bolkart
Saarland University, Germany

Stefanie Wuhrer
Inria Rhône-Alpes, France

tbolkart@mmci.uni-saarland.de

stefanie.wuhrer@inria.fr

Abstract
Multilinear face models are widely used to model the
space of human faces with expressions. For databases of
3D human faces of different identities performing multiple
expressions, these statistical shape models decouple identity and expression variations. To compute a high-quality
multilinear face model, the quality of the registration of the
database of 3D face scans used for training is essential.
Meanwhile, a multilinear face model can be used as an effective prior to register 3D face scans, which are typically
noisy and incomplete. Inspired by the minimum description
length approach, we propose the first method to jointly optimize a multilinear model and the registration of the 3D
scans used for training. Given an initial registration, our
approach fully automatically improves the registration by
optimizing an objective function that measures the compactness of the multilinear model, resulting in a sparse model.
We choose a continuous representation for each face shape
that allows to use a quasi-Newton method in parameter
space for optimization. We show that our approach is computationally significantly more efficient and leads to correspondences of higher quality than existing methods based
on linear statistical models. This allows us to evaluate our
approach on large standard 3D face databases and in the
presence of noisy initializations.

1. Introduction
The human face is one important factor for any kind of
social interaction in our daily life. This motivates many different fields such as human computer interaction, medicine,
ergonomics or security, to investigate the human face. Since
many of these areas are interested in the 3D geometry of the
face, the number of publicly available 3D face databases increased over the last years. As the manual analysis of large
databases is intractable, automatic data driven and statistical
approaches are widely used to analyze the structure of the
data. To compute statistics, all shapes of the dataset need to
be in correspondence [10, Chapter 1].
Computing these correspondences for human face data is

a challenging task that many methods aim to solve (e.g. [24,
26, 17, 14, 27]). Given a good registration, a statistical face
model can be learned. In computer vision and graphics,
statistical face models are used e.g. to reconstruct the 3D
geometry of the face from 2D images [1], to recognize facial
expressions [24], to transfer expressions between images or
videos [30], or to change expressions in 3D videos [31].
Statistical face models can also be used to reconstruct
the 3D geometry from noisy or partially occluded face
scans [5] and are therefore directly applicable for registration. Furthermore, registration methods with prior learned
knowledge outperform model-free methods like template
fitting [25, 2]. Summing up, this is a chicken-and-egg problem: given a good registration, a statistical model can be
learned, and given a representative statistical model, a good
registration can be computed. The quality of a given statistical model can be measured [10, Chapter 3.3.1], and due
to the dependency of the statistical model on a registration,
this measurement also evaluates the underlying registration.
Methods that aim at jointly optimizing the registration
and a statistical model have been developed for principal component analysis (PCA) (e.g. [10, Chapter 4], [21]).
Furthermore, variants of this linear method like part-based
PCA [6], kernel PCA [8] or human body specific approaches [16] exist. These methods measure the model
quality and change the registration such that the quality of
the model and the registration improve at the same time.
Since the model quality depends on all shapes, these methods are called groupwise optimization methods. Linear
PCA-based methods have been proven to outperform different pairwise correspondence optimization methods [9].
Since the variations in databases of human faces from
different identities performing different expressions cannot
be modeled well using a linear space, the existing methods
are not suitable for optimizing the correspondence of human
faces. The space of human faces in various expressions can
be well modeled using a multilinear model [30, 24, 31, 2, 5],
which is a higher-order generalization of a PCA model.
This motivates us to propose an approach to optimize
the correspondence for 3D face databases based on multilinear statistical models. The correspondence is optimized
13604

