Context Aware Active Learning of Activity Recognition Models
Mahmudul Hasan and Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury
University of California, Riverside
mhasa004@ucr.edu, amitrc@ee.ucr.edu

Abstract
Activity recognition in video has recently benefited from
the use of the context e.g., inter-relationships among the
activities and objects. However, these approaches require
data to be labeled and entirely available at the outset. In
contrast, we formulate a continuous learning framework
for context aware activity recognition from unlabeled video
data which has two distinct advantages over most existing
methods. First, we propose a novel active learning technique which not only exploits the informativeness of the individual activity instances but also utilizes their contextual
information during the query selection process; this leads to
significant reduction in expensive manual annotation effort.
Second, the learned models can be adapted online as more
data is available. We formulate a conditional random field
(CRF) model that encodes the context and devise an information theoretic approach that utilizes entropy and mutual
information of the nodes to compute the set of most informative query instances, which need to be labeled by a human.
These labels are combined with graphical inference techniques for incrementally updating the model as new videos
come in. Experiments on four challenging datasets demonstrate that our framework achieves superior performance
with significantly less amount of manual labeling.

1. Introduction
Enormous amount of visual data is being generated continuously from various sources. Learning from these visual
data, e.g., learning activity models, should be a continuous
process so that the models can be improved with new video
observations and adapted to the changes in dynamic environment. However, learning needs labeled data and labeling
these large corpus of videos requires expensive and tedious
human labor. Continuous manual labeling of these incomMahmudul Hasan is with the Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering and Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury is with the Dept. of Electrical and
Computer Engineering at University of California Riverside. This work
was supported in part by NSF under grant IIS-1316934, by US Department of Defense, and by Google.

A2
A1

A3

Figure 1. A sequence of a video stream [1] shows three new unlabeled activities - person getting out of a car (A1) at T + 0s,
person opening a car trunk (A2) at T + 7s, and person carrying
an object (A3) at T + 12s. These activities are spatio-temporally
correlated (termed as context). Conventional approaches to active
learning for activity recognition do not exploit these relationships
in order to select the most informative instances. However, our approach exploits context and actively selects instances (in this case
A2) that provide maximum information about other neighbors.

ing videos in order to train the recognition models is infeasible. Active learning can be used to achieve an effective
solution to this problem, since it is a powerful tool for training classifiers from unlabeled data sources with a reduced
labeling cost and without compromising performance.
Recent successes in visual recognition take advantage
of the fact that, in nature, objects and events tend to coexist with each other in a particular configuration, which
is often termed as context [2]. Similarly, human activities in reality are inter-related and their surroundings can
provide significant visual clue for their recognition (Figure 1). Several research works [3–7] considered the use
of context from different perspectives to recognize human
activities and showed significant performance improvement
over the approaches that do not use context. However, these
approaches are batch methods that require large amount of
manually labeled data and are not able to continuously update their models. Even though few research works such
as [8–10] learn human activity models incrementally from
streaming videos, they do not utilize contextual information
for more efficient recognition. In this work, we formulate
a continuous learning framework for context aware activity recognition models that leverages upon a novel active
learning technique in order to reduce the required human
annotation effort.

4543

