Group Membership Prediction
Ziming Zhang, Yuting Chen, and Venkatesh Saligrama
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Boston University
{zzhang14, yutingch, srv}@bu.edu

Abstract
The group membership prediction (GMP) problem involves predicting whether or not a collection of instances
share a certain semantic property. For instance, in kinship
verification given a collection of images, the goal is to predict whether or not they share a familial relationship. In this
context we propose a novel probability model and introduce
latent view-specific and view-shared random variables to
jointly account for the view-specific appearance and crossview similarities among data instances. Our model posits
that data from each view is independent conditioned on
the shared variables. This postulate leads to a parametric
probability model that decomposes group membership likelihood into a tensor product of data-independent parameters and data-dependent factors. We propose learning the
data-independent parameters in a discriminative way with
bilinear classifiers, and test our prediction algorithm on
challenging visual recognition tasks such as multi-camera
person re-identification and kinship verification. On most
benchmark datasets, our method can significantly outperform the current state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Visual similarity plays an important role in visual recognition in object detection and scene understanding [11, 17].
A visual similarity function returns a score of how likely
two instances (e.g. images and videos) share similar semantic concepts (e.g. persons, cars, etc.). With this perspective
we propose the Group Membership Prediction (GMP) problem, where the goal is to determine how likely a collection
of distinct items share the same semantic property. Fig. 1
depicts the idea of the GMP problem for two visual recognition tasks, i.e. person re-identification and kinship verification. In person re-identification (Re-ID) we are given a collection of images of persons captured from multiple views
(cameras) and the goal is to detect whether or not they belong to the same person. In applications such as kinship
detection, the underlying semantic property is more general, and the goal is to predict whether or not a collection of

(a) Person re-identification

(b) Kinship verification

Figure 1. Illustration of group membership prediction (GMP) in the visual
recognition tasks of (a) person re-identification and (b) kinship verification.
Here we would like to predict (a) whether the four pedetrain images are
taken from the same person, and (b) whether the face images are from the
same family. These images are borrowed from (a) VIPeR dataset [13] and
(b) Family101 dataset [8], respectively.

images share a familial relationship. GMP poses significant
challenges on account of large variations in data including
lighting conditions, poses and camera views.
We introduce a novel parametric probability model for
predicting group membership. Our key insight is that although the visual appearances can significantly vary, they
share a set of latent variables common to all views. As depicted in Fig. 2, we can hypothesize “body parts” as shared
latent variables for all the pedestrian images, while for kinship verification “facial landmarks” could be considered as
the shared latent variables. Our model postulates that conditioned on the location of each shared latent variable (body
part or facial landmark) the visual appearance at that location is conditionally independent for different views. This
property leads to a natural way of measuring image similarities through comparison of visual similarities of the same
shared latent variables across different views.
This postulate leads us to a joint parametric probability model that consists of view-specific and view-shared
random variables. View-specific variables account for visual characteristics within a view while view-shared variables account for the integration of multi-view information.
The group membership likelihood factorizes into a tensor
product consisting of data-independent and data-dependent
factors. We learn the data-independent parameters (i.e.
weights) discriminatively using bilinear classifiers. Finally
we marginalize these data tensors over all the dimensions

3916

