One Shot Learning via Compositions of Meaningful Patches
Alex Wong
University of California, Los Angeles

Alan Yuille
University of California, Los Angeles

alexw@cs.ucla.edu

yuille@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
Training
Sample

…

Perhaps one of the more impressive feats of human intelligence is the ability to learn a concept from few examples
— or even just one. At a young age, children easily learn
their first language without complete exposure to the entire
language and can even make inferences on novel concepts
from their limited knowledge [8]. In fact, they can acquire
a new word based on a single encounter [4]. However, if
we survey state of the art learning methods, the results presented are the product of training from thousands of examples, where even a simple method such as logistic regression
can perform very well [17]. Such performance becomes difficult to attain with only a single example.
We believe that the basis for one-shot learning stems
from the sharing of similar structures amongst objects of
the same class. A bicycle can be parsed into a set of handles connected to the frame with two wheels and a seat. We
can easily recognize a similar visual concept (eg. tricycle or
motor bike) when it can be decomposed to a similar set of
parts that embodies the structure of the objects. These parts

…

1. Introduction

Building a
Compositional
Model

…

The task of discriminating one object from another is almost trivial for a human being. However, this task is computationally taxing for most modern machine learning methods; whereas, we perform this task at ease given very few
examples for learning. It has been proposed that the quick
grasp of concept may come from the shared knowledge between the new example and examples previously learned.
We believe that the key to one-shot learning is the sharing
of common parts as each part holds immense amounts of information on how a visual concept is constructed. We propose an unsupervised method for learning a compact dictionary of image patches representing meaningful components
of an objects. Using those patches as features, we build a
compositional model that outperforms a number of popular algorithms on a one-shot learning task. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of this approach on hand-written digits and
show that this model generalizes to multiple datasets.

Test Image

Reconstruction

Figure 1. Examples of reconstructions produced by our method.
The model was trained on MNIST and can generalize to the USPS
hand-written digit dataset.

and their relations give us the basis for representing a number of other similar vehicles. We seek to exploit the innate
structures within visual concepts by learning a set of parts
for a compositional model that can tackle one-shot learning.
Our work is motivated by [19] who showed that a partbased model is an effective means of achieving one-shot
learning. Their work highlights a compositional model that
showed promising results on a one-shot character recognition task. After building an in-house dataset recording
both characters and the individual strokes human participants used to draw them, they trained their model on a single image from each class leveraging this set of strokes. Although the authors showed that one-shot learning can indeed be done, their method requires extensive human aid in
generating a set of labeled strokes that compose each character. The need for these hand-crafted features in turn limited their work to a non-standard dataset (not yet released to
the research community). Motivated by these limitations,
our goal is to extend the use of part-based models to oneshot learning without the need for human supervision so that
it can be applied to common datasets. Our method uses
symmetry axis [24] as an object descriptor (Fig. 2, 3) and
11197

