Activity Auto-Completion:
Predicting Human Activities from Partial Videos
Zhen Xu1,2 , Laiyun Qing1,2 , Jun Miao2
1
Key Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, China
xuzhen13@mails.ucas.ac.cn, lyqing@ucas.ac.cn, jmiao@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an activity auto-completion
(AAC) model for human activity prediction by formulating
activity prediction as a query auto-completion (QAC) problem in information retrieval. First, we extract discriminative patches in frames of videos. A video is represented
based on these patches and divided into a collection of segments, each of which is regarded as a character typed in the
search box. Then a partially observed video is considered
as an activity preﬁx, consisting of one or more characters.
Finally, the missing observation of an activity is predicted
as the activity candidates provided by the auto-completion
model. The candidates are matched against the activity preﬁx on-the-fly and ranked by a learning-to-rank algorithm.
We validate our method on UT-Interaction Set #1 and Set
#2 [19]. The experimental results show that the proposed
activity auto-completion model achieves promising performance.

1. Introduction
The exponential growth of video devices has leaded to
a tremendous demand for intelligent video analysis techniques. In the past decade, various methods have been proposed for recognizing after-the-fact activities [1]. Though
great successes have been achieved, it’s too luxury for an
intelligent system to recognize human activities until the
end of videos (e.g. video surveillance, health care, humancomputer interaction). In recent years, predicting human
activities from partially observed videos has been an active
research topic [18, 8, 17, 13, 14].
Ryoo [18] deﬁnes human activity prediction as an inference of the ongoing activity given only partial observations (see Fig.1). Existing solutions based on multi-class sequential matching usually output a clear class label [18, 8].

A. Query auto-completion

B. Activity auto-completion

segment =
activity character
partial video = activity prefix

full video= activity query

Figure 1. An analogy between activity prediction and query autocompletion. A) Query candidates for a query preﬁx: activity predi,
according to google.com. B) We focus on activity prediction.
Partially observed videos are considered as activity preﬁxes, consisting of one or more visual characters.

However, the information contained in a partially observed
video may be ambiguous. We claim that an intelligence system should not jump to a conclusion in the early stages of
an activity. For instance, presented with ﬁrst few frames of
a surveillance video, we cannot judge whether it is shoplifting or just reaching for something. When more frames are
observed, the judgement will be more conﬁdent. A good
choice may be ranking all potential activities in real time.
Inspired by query auto-completion (QAC) [20], we propose a novel activity auto-completion (AAC) model for human activity prediction. A partially observed video and
a full video, in our paper, are regarded as a preﬁx and a
query respectively. Fig.1 illustrates the comparison between
QAC and our proposed AAC. Just like QAC providing users
with high quality candidates in modern search engines, our
AAC recommends potential activities. We ﬁrst explore mid-

3191

