LEWIS: Latent Embeddings for Word Images and their Semantics
Albert Gordo
Jon Almazán
Naila Murray
Xerox Research Centre Europe

Florent Perronnin
Facebook AI Research ∗

{albert.gordo,jon.almazan,naila.murray}@xrce.xerox.com

perronnin@fb.com

Abstract
The goal of this work is to bring semantics into the tasks
of text recognition and retrieval in natural images. Although text recognition and retrieval have received a lot of
attention in recent years, previous works have focused on
recognizing or retrieving exactly the same word used as a
query, without taking the semantics into consideration.
In this paper, we ask the following question: can we predict semantic concepts directly from a word image, without explicitly trying to transcribe the word image or its
characters at any point? For this goal we propose a convolutional neural network (CNN) with a weighted ranking
loss objective that ensures that the concepts relevant to the
query image are ranked ahead of those that are not relevant. This can also be interpreted as learning a Euclidean
space where word images and concepts are jointly embedded. This model is learned in an end-to-end manner, from
image pixels to semantic concepts, using a dataset of synthetically generated word images and concepts mined from
a lexical database (WordNet). Our results show that, despite the complexity of the task, word images and concepts
can indeed be associated with a high degree of accuracy.

1. Introduction
In recent years there has been an increased interest in
tasks related to text recognition and retrieval in natural images [15, 27]. For example, given an image of a word, one
may be interested in recognizing the word, either using a list
of possible transcriptions [4, 10, 27] or in an unconstrained
manner [6, 12]. There has also been a growing interest in
word image retrieval: given a query, which can be either a
text string or another word image, one tries to retrieve the
relevant word images in a dataset [4, 10].
In all these cases, the goal has been to retrieve or
recognize exactly the same word used as a query, without taking the semantics into consideration. For example,
given a query image with the word phoenix, it would be
∗ This work was done while Florent Perronnin was affiliated with the
Computer Vision Group at Xerox Research Centre Europe.

“Phoenix”
“restaurant”

city

mythical being

capital

restaurant

Figure 1: Comparison of standard scene text recognition
and retrieval (top), and the proposed word image understanding tasks (bottom). Strings in quotes represent text
strings while strings in bounding boxes represent concepts.
transcribed as phoenix, without any consideration of its
meaning. Similarly, using the text string restaurant as
a query would only retrieve images containing this word in
them (see Figure 1 top).
In contrast, in this paper we are interested in the problem
of word image understanding, i.e. we wish to bring semantics into the tasks of word image recognition and retrieval.
For example, we would like to capture the semantic meanings of the word phoenix as both a city and a state capital,
and also its semantic meaning as a mythical being (see Figure 1 bottom). Semantics play a very important role in scene
understanding and for scene text, particularly in urban scenarios, they will allow one to perform tasks beyond simple
lexical matching. To illustrate this, let us take the example
of a system which would parse a street scene and especially
which would classify building faces into different business
classes such as restaurants, hotels, banks, etc. While the
presence of a sign pizzeria is indicative of a restaurant,
the mere transcription of the text in the sign is not sufficient
in itself to deduce this. Additional reasoning capabilities
enabled by an understanding of the semantics of the word
are required to make the classification decision.
A straightforward, two-step approach to achieving this
goal would be to first transcribe the word image, and then
match the transcriptions to the semantic concepts. The transcriptions could be matched using lexical databases of English such as WordNet [1], that contain a hierarchy of words
annotated with semantic concepts. In this two-step ap11242

