Airborne Three-Dimensional Cloud Tomography
Anthony B. Davis
Jet Propulsion Laboratory
California Inst. of Technology
Pasadena, California

Aviad Levis, Yoav Y. Schechner, Amit Aides
Dept. Electrical Eng.,
Technion - Israel Inst. Technology, Haifa, Israel
{levisav@tx,yoav@ee,amitibo@campus}.technion.ac.il

Anthony.B.Davis@jpl.nasa.gov

Abstract
orbit

We seek to sense the three dimensional (3D) volumetric
distribution of scatterers in a heterogenous medium. An important case study for such a medium is the atmosphere. Atmospheric contents and their role in Earth’s radiation balance have significant uncertainties with regards to scattering components: aerosols and clouds. Clouds, made of water droplets, also lead to local effects as precipitation and
shadows. Our sensing approach is computational tomography using passive multi-angular imagery. For light-matter
interaction that accounts for multiple-scattering, we use the
3D radiative transfer equation as a forward model. Volumetric recovery by inverting this model suffers from a computational bottleneck on large scales, which include many
unknowns. Steps taken make this tomography tractable,
without approximating the scattering order or angle range.

IBC (x, ω)

I (x, ω)

ϑ

∂Ω
Ω
J

line
t

igh

of s

x0

1. Introduction
Scattering and refractive media are increasingly considered in computer vision [19, 20, 38, 39, 46, 48], typically
for observing background objects [47, 35, 56]. However,
in important cases, the medium itself is of interest. For example, remote sensing of the atmosphere seeks to assess
the distribution of various airborne scatterers. Image data
is used to fit a physical model of light propagation through
the medium and recover scatterer properties. Similar efforts
use refractive propagation models to recover properties of
refractive media [6, 24, 25, 49, 55].
This paper seeks volumetric recovery of a three dimensional (3D) heterogeneous highly scattering medium. Furthermore, this work performs recovery in a very large scale:
the atmosphere embedded with clouds. The data comprises
images acquired from multiples directions [50], as illustrated in Fig. 1. Such a setup samples the scene’s lightfield [1, 3, 23, 26, 28]. 3D volumetric recovery is achieved
in various domains using tomography, finding wide use in

Figure 1. A multi-angular imager passing over an atmospheric domain enables multi-pixel multi-view acquisition [16, 46]. Incoming solar radiation is a boundary condition. A bidirectional reflectance distribution function characterizes the bottom surface.
Light scatters in the medium, generally multiple times, creating
a scatter field J. Integrating J and the boundary radiation using
corresponding attenuation, yields the radiance I (x, ω).

biomedical imaging [15, 52] and computational photography [6, 29, 49, 53]. However, this work faces several important challenges. First, due to the large volumes involved,
our setup is passive, using the steady, uniform and collimated Sun as the radiation source. This is contrary to
most tomography setups, in which the source is controllable. Second, in most tomographic models, as in X-ray,
direct-transmission [34] forms the signal, while small-angle
scattering has been treated as a perturbation. In contrast, in
a medium as a cloud, the source and detector are generally
not aligned: scattering including high orders is the dominant signal component.

3379

