A SPATIO-TEMPORAL APPEARANCE REPRESENTATION FOR
VIDEO-BASED PEDESTRIAN RE-IDENTIFICATION
Kan Liu†
Bingpeng Ma‡
Wei Zhang†
Rui Huang⋆∗
School of Control Science and Engineering, Shandong University, China
‡
School of Computer and Control Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
⋆
NEC Laboratories, China
†

sakuraxiafan@gmail.com, bpma@ucas.ac.cn, davidzhangsdu@gmail.com, huang-rui@nec.cn

Abstract
Pedestrian re-identification is a difficult problem due to
the large variations in a person’s appearance caused by different poses and viewpoints, illumination changes, and occlusions. Spatial alignment is commonly used to address
these issues by treating the appearance of different body
parts independently. However, a body part can also appear differently during different phases of an action. In this
paper we consider the temporal alignment problem, in addition to the spatial one, and propose a new approach that
takes the video of a walking person as input and builds a
spatio-temporal appearance representation for pedestrian
re-identification. Particularly, given a video sequence we
exploit the periodicity exhibited by a walking person to generate a spatio-temporal body-action model, which consists
of a series of body-action units corresponding to certain
action primitives of certain body parts. Fisher vectors are
learned and extracted from individual body-action units and
concatenated into the final representation of the walking
person. Unlike previous spatio-temporal features that only
take into account local dynamic appearance information,
our representation aligns the spatio-temporal appearance
of a pedestrian globally. Extensive experiments on public
datasets show the effectiveness of our approach compared
with the state of the art.

1. Introduction
Identifying a specific person in videos is critical to many
surveillance, security and multimedia applications such as
on-line tracking or off-line searching a person of interest
in videos. Person re-identification (re-id) has been widely
used to describe such a task, i.e., re-identifying a person
∗ Corresponding author.

This work was partially supported by
NSFC 61203253, 61572465, 61573222, Shandong Province RF
2015ZDXX0801A02, BS2013DX023, and SRF for ROCS, SEM.

who has been previously observed in a video camera network. The entire pipeline of a re-id system may include
person detection, tracking, segmentation (desirable but not
necessary), feature modeling and matching. A typical re-id
algorithm often focuses on feature modeling and matching,
assuming that the input are cropped images containing the
roughly aligned human subjects, coming from a person detector or tracker, preferably with reasonable segmentation.
Although face is probably the most reliable, visually accessible biometric to a person’s identity, it is not always
useful in video surveillance scenarios due to the low resolution and pose variations of individuals in typical surveillance footage. In such cases, body features are more useful
because they can be detected and measured at lower resolution. Gait is a whole-body, behavioral biometric that
describes the way a person walks and has long been studied for person identification. However, since gait is considered a biometric that is not affected by the appearance
of a person, most state-of-the-art gait recognition methods
work with silhouettes, which are difficult to extract, especially from surveillance data with cluttered background and
occlusions. Therefore, in this paper we make the usual assumption that the person of interest does not change clothes
between cameras, and focus on the person re-id methods
that mainly use the body appearance, while also take into
account the gait information to some extent.
This problem is quite challenging primarily because of
the large variations in a person’s appearance caused by different poses and viewpoints, illumination changes, and occlusions. A common strategy to address these issues is to
exploit a body part model to take into account the non-rigid
shape of the human body and treat the appearance of different body parts independently [25]. This is essentially a
form of spatial alignment. However, a body part can also
appear differently during different phases of an action. For
instance, the arms may change appearance when swinging,
sometimes may occlude the torso and change the torso’s ap13810

