Learning to Predict Saliency on Face Images
Mai Xu∗, Yun Ren, Zulin Wang
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, 100191, China
MaiXu@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel method, which learns to detect saliency of face images. To be more specific, we obtain
a database of eye tracking over extensive face images, via conducting an eye tracking experiment. With analysis on
eye tracking database, we verify that the fixations tend to
cluster around facial features, when viewing images with
large faces. For modeling attention on faces and facial
features, the proposed method learns the Gaussian mixture
model (GMM) distribution from the fixations of eye tracking data as the top-down features for saliency detection of
face images. Then, in our method, the top-down features
(i.e., face and facial features) upon the the learnt GMM are
linearly combined with the conventional bottom-up features
(i.e., color, intensity, and orientation), for saliency detection. In the linear combination, we argue that the weights corresponding to top-down feature channels depend on
the face size in images, and the relationship between the
weights and face size is thus investigated via learning from
the training eye tracking data. Finally, experimental results show that our learning-based method is able to advance state-of-the-art saliency prediction for face images.
The corresponding database and code are available online:
www.ee.buaa.edu.cn/xumfiles/saliency detection.html.

1. Introduction
According to the study on the human visual system
(HVS) [17], when a person looks at a scene, she/he may pay
much visual attention to a small region (the fovea) around
a point of eye fixation with high resolutions. The other regions, namely the peripheral regions, are captured with little attention at low resolutions, such that humans can survive from the processing of tremendous visual data. Visual
attention therefore is a key to perceive the world around humans, and it has been widely studied in psychophysics, neurophysiology, and even computer vision societies [1]. With
computation on features of either images or videos, saliency
∗ Mai Xu and Yun Ren contribute equality to this work.

detection is an effective way to predict the human visual attention attracted by different regions of a scene. As the output of saliency detection, the saliency map of an image or a
video frame has been widely applied in object detection [3],
object recognition [8], image retargeting [20], image quality
assessment [6], and also image/video compression [25].
The existing methods on saliency detection can be classified into two categories: bottom-up and top-down methods. The representative bottom-up method on detecting image saliency is Itti’s model [13], which combines centersurround features of color, intensity, and orientation together. Afterwards, Koch and Ullman [24] extended Itti’s model by incorporating the proto-object inference in the saliency map. Most recently, there has been extensive advanced
work (e.g., [5, 7, 10, 11, 26]) on bottom-up saliency detection.
In fact, top-down visual features play a crucial role in
determining the saliency of a scene. Hence, the top-down
saliency detection methods have been broadly studied in
[4, 22, 28]. Cerf et al. [4] found out that face is an important top-down feature to attract visual attention, as in their
experiments faces were fixed on in 88.9% within first two
fixations (7 subjects viewing 150 face images). Therefore,
they proposed to combine Viola & Jones (VJ) face detector [23] with Itti’s model [13] for improving the saliency
detection accuracy over face images. Since it is more reasonable to learn how important face is for attracting visual
attention, several state-of-the-art methods [12, 15, 27] have
been proposed to apply machine learning algorithms in topdown saliency detection of Cerf’s work [4]. For example,
Zhao [27] utilized the fixations on face images to quantify
the weight of the face channel on attracting visual attention.
Most recently, Jiang et al. [14] has extended Cerf’s work [4]
to saliency detection in a scene with multiple faces, i.e.,
saliency detection in a crowd. In their work, multiple kernel
learning (MKL) is applied to learn a more robust discrimination between salient and non-salient regions in multi-face
scenes, for detecting saliency in a crowd.
Although the existing work has taken into account one
or more faces on saliency detection, it does not explore the
distribution of eye fixations within faces. As shown in Fig13907

