COUNT Forest: CO-voting Uncertain Number of Targets using Random Forest
for Crowd Density Estimation
Viet-Quoc Pham, Tatsuo Kozakaya, Osamu Yamaguchi and Ryuzo Okada
Corporate Research and Development Center, Toshiba Corporation
1, Komukai-Toshiba-cho, Saiwai-ku, Kawasaki, 212-8582, Japan
quocviet.pham@toshiba.co.jp

Count = 41

Abstract
This paper presents a patch-based approach for crowd
density estimation in public scenes. We formulate the problem of estimating density in a structured learning framework applied to random decision forests. Our approach
learns the mapping between patch features and relative locations of all objects inside each patch, which contribute
to generate the patch density map through Gaussian kernel
density estimation. We build the forest in a coarse-to-fine
manner with two split node layers, and further propose a
crowdedness prior and an effective forest reduction method
to improve the estimation accuracy and speed. Moreover,
we introduce a semi-automatic training method to learn the
estimator for a specific scene. We achieved state-of-the-art
results on the public Mall dataset and UCSD dataset, and
also proposed two potential applications in traffic counts
and scene understanding with promising results.

1. Introduction
Counting objects in images is important in many realworld applications, including traffic control, industrial inspection, surveillance and medical image analysis. Counting in crowded scene is non-trivial owing to severe interobject occlusion, scene perspective distortion and complex
backgrounds. Besides counting, estimating crowd density is
necessary for understanding crowd behaviour, especially in
large public spaces such as train stations and streets. This
paper addresses the problem of counting in public scenes
based on crowd density estimation, as shown in Fig. 1.
Existing counting methods can be classified into three
categories: counting by detection [19, 30], counting by
clustering [8, 25] and counting by regression [10, 11, 21, 16,
9, 23]. In the first two categories, counting is based on individual detection and motion segmentation, which are sensitive to heavy object occlusion and cluttered background.
Particularly, for such crowded scenes that only a part of

Figure 1. Our objective is to estimate the object density map and
the number of objects (right) from an input image (left).

object instance can be observed, detection and segmentation of individuals become impracticable. In counting by
regression, counting techniques learn a mapping between
low-level features and people count, and therefore they can
avoid explicit object detection and segmentation in crowded
scenes.
Counting by regression methods differs depending on the
target of regression: the object count, or the object density.
Chen et al. [11, 10] learn the regression mapping between
the low-level imagery feature and the number of object.
They achieved state-of-the-art results for counting people
by introducing the concept of cumulative attribute to the regression problems, which improved the counting accuracy
by considering the cumulative dependent nature of regression labels [10]. In another approach, Lempitsky et al. [21]
estimate an image density whose integral over any image
region gives the count of objects within that region. The
object density is more informative than the object count,
since it can give a rough estimate on the object locations,
as shown in Fig. 1. Therefore, crowd density estimation is
more useful for understanding the crowd behaviour. To estimate the crowd density, Lempitsky et al. learn a linear transformation of the feature representation f (x) that approximates the density function at each pixel D(x) = ω T f (x)
[21]. The problem here is that it is difficult to design a feature satisfying the linear approximation hypothesis.
This paper presents a patch-based approach for crowd

3253

