3D Time-Lapse Reconstruction from Internet Photos
Ricardo Martin-Brualla1
David Gallup2
Steven M. Seitz1,2
University of Washington1
Google Inc.2
{rmartin,seitz}@cs.washington.edu

dgallup@google.com

Abstract
Given an Internet photo collection of a landmark, we
compute a 3D time-lapse video sequence where a virtual
camera moves continuously in time and space. While previous work assumed a static camera, the addition of camera
motion during the time-lapse creates a very compelling impression of parallax. Achieving this goal, however, requires
addressing multiple technical challenges, including solving
for time-varying depth maps, regularizing 3D point color
profiles over time, and reconstructing high quality, hole-free
images at every frame from the projected profiles. Our results show photorealistic time-lapses of skylines and natural
scenes over many years, with dramatic parallax effects.

1. Introduction
Time-lapses make it possible to see events that are otherwise impossible to observe, like the motion of stars in
the night sky or the rolling of clouds. By placing fixed
cameras, events over even longer time spans can be imaged, like the construction of skyscrapers or the retreat of
glaciers [4]. Recent work [12, 13] has shown the exciting possibility of computing time-lapses from large Internet photo collections. In this work, we seek to compute 3D
time-lapse video sequences from Internet photos where a
virtual camera moves continuously in both time and space.
Professional photographers exploit small camera motions to capture more engaging time-lapse sequences [10].
By placing the camera on a controlled slider platform the
captured sequences show compelling parallax effects. Our
technique allows us to recreate such cinematographic effects by simulating virtual camera paths, but with Internet
photo collections.
We build on our previous work [12] and introduce key
new generalizations that account for time-varying geometry
and enable virtual camera motions. Given a user-defined
camera path through space and over time, we first compute time-varying depthmaps for the frames of the output sequence. Using the depthmaps, we compute correspondences across the image sequence (aka. “3D tracks”).

Virtual
Camera Path
Internet Photos

3D Scene

Synthesized 3D Time-lapse
Figure 1. In this paper we introduce a technique to produce high
quality 3D time-lapse movies from Internet photos, where a virtual
camera moves continuously in space during a time span of several
years. Top-left: Sample input photos of the gardens in Lombard
Street, San Francisco. Top-right: Schematic of the 3D scene and
the virtual camera path. Bottom: Example frames of the synthesized 3D time-lapse video. Please see the supplementary video
available at the project website [15]. Credits: Creative Commons
photos from Flickr users Eric Astrauskas, Francisco Antunes, Florian Plag and Dan Dickinson.

We then regularize the appearance of each track over time
(its “color profile”). Finally, we reconstruct the time-lapse
video frames from the projected color profiles.
Our technique works for any landmark that is widely
photographed, where, over time, thousands of people have
taken photographs of roughly the same view. Previous
work [12] identified more than 10,000 such landmarks
around the world.
The key contributions of this paper are the following: 1)
recovering time-varying, temporally consistent depthmaps
from Internet photos via a more robust adaption of [23], 2)
a 3D time-lapse reconstruction method that solves for the
temporal color profiles of 3D tracks, and 3) an image reconstruction method that computes hole-free output frames
from projected 3D color profiles. Together, these contributions allow our system to correctly handle changes in geom11332

