Visual Phrases for Exemplar Face Detection
Vijay Kumar

Anoop Namboodiri
C. V. Jawahar
CVIT, IIIT Hyderabad, India

Abstract
Recently, exemplar based approaches [13, 22] have
been successfully applied for face detection in the wild.
Contrary to traditional approaches that model face variations from a large and diverse set of training examples,
exemplar-based approaches use a collection of discriminatively trained exemplars for detection. In this paradigm,
each exemplar casts a vote using retrieval framework and
generalized Hough voting, to locate the faces in the target
image. The advantage of this approach is that by having
a large database that covers all possible variations, faces
in challenging conditions can be detected without having to
learn explicit models for different variations.
Current schemes, however, make an assumption of independence between the visual words, ignoring their relations in the process. They also ignore the spatial consistency of the visual words. Consequently, every exemplar
word contributes equally during voting regardless of its location. In this paper, we propose a novel approach that
incorporates higher order information in the voting process. We discover visual phrases that contain semantically
related visual words and exploit them for detection along
with the visual words. For spatial consistency, we estimate
the spatial distribution of visual words and phrases from
the entire database and then weigh their occurrence in exemplars. This ensures that a visual word or a phrase in
an exemplar makes a major contribution only if it occurs
at its semantic location, thereby suppressing the noise significantly. We perform extensive experiments on standard
FDDB, AFW and G-album datasets and show significant
improvement over previous exemplar approaches.

1. Introduction
Face detection is one of the classical computer vision
problems that finds extensive applications in a variety of
commercial systems. Despite years of research, it still remains a challenging and unsolved problem. Though the current algorithms have matured for near-frontal faces, they are
yet to achieve a satisfactory performance for unconstrained
face images, popularly known as in the wild faces.

Voting maps

Exemplars

+

+
FDDB test image

ﬁnal voting map
after aggregation

Figure 1. Ensemble of Exemplars for Face detection: A large
database of diverse exemplars is collected, and indexed using a
BoW representation. During testing, each exemplar casts a vote
on the test image at multiple scales. The votes from different exemplars are then aggregated to detect the faces.

Most of the popular algorithms for detecting objects and
faces are either based on cascaded AdaBoost classifiers [28]
or deformable part models (DPM) [5]. The Viola and Jones
cascade [28] of discriminatively trained AdaBoost classifiers is extremely efficient and is very effective for frontal
faces. DPM based approaches [5, 18, 30, 37], on the other
hand, handle intra-class variations by learning the individual parts of an object along with their deformations. Both
approaches aim to learn face variations from a large set
of training examples seeking good generalization performance. However, it is extremely difficult to capture all possible object variations in a compact model, whether holistic
or part based.
Contrary to the above approaches, recently proposed exemplar based detectors [13, 22] do not explicitly model the
face variations. Instead, it follows Bag-of-Words (B OW)
retrieval technique and Hough voting [6, 12] to detect the
faces efficiently. In this paradigm, a large database of exemplars that cover significant face variations are collected.
Local features (such as SIFT) are extracted, quantized and
indexed using traditional B OW technique. For detection,
each exemplar casts a vote on the given target image at multiple scales after which the votes are aggregated (Figure 1).
Since each exemplar is specific to particular variation, it is
possible to detect faces in challenging conditions using a
sufficiently large database with diverse exemplars. This ap-

1994

