Learning Semi-Supervised Representation Towards a Unified Optimization
Framework for Semi-Supervised Learning
Chun-Guang Li1 , Zhouchen Lin2,3 , Honggang Zhang1 , and Jun Guo1
1

School of Info. & Commu. Engineering, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University
3
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiaotong University
{lichunguang, zhhg, guojun}@bupt.edu.cn; zlin@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
State of the art approaches for Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) usually follow a two-stage framework – constructing an affinity matrix from the data and then propagating
the partial labels on this affinity matrix to infer those unknown labels. While such a two-stage framework has been
successful in many applications, solving two subproblems
separately only once is still suboptimal because it does not
fully exploit the correlation between the affinity and the labels. In this paper, we formulate the two stages of SSL into a
unified optimization framework, which learns both the affinity matrix and the unknown labels simultaneously. In the
unified framework, both the given labels and the estimated
labels are used to learn the affinity matrix and to infer the
unknown labels. We solve the unified optimization problem
via an alternating direction method of multipliers combined
with label propagation. Extensive experiments on a synthetic data set and several benchmark data sets demonstrate the
effectiveness of our approach.

1. Introduction
In real world applications, one often faces the scenario
that the acquisition of data with labels is quite costly in human labor, whereas a large amount of unlabeled data are relatively easy to obtain. Therefore, Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) was proposed to incorporate both unlabeled data
and labeled data for classification [26, 6, 7, 33].

1.1. Related Work
In the past decade, graph-based SSL approaches have attracted much attention for its simple and elegant formulation and a number of algorithms have been proposed, e.g.,

[26, 34, 17, 31, 4, 18, 28, 19, 11, 30, 15]. For a more detailed survey, please refer to [33].
The central idea behind the graph-based SSL approaches is to explore the pairwise affinity between data points to
infer those unknown labels. More concretely, the unknown
labels should be consistent with both the given partial labels
and the pairwise affinity. In this sense, graph-based SSL approaches are usually interpreted as a process of propagating
labels through the pairwise affinity of data points, which is
called label propagation [31, 33, 8].
The affinity to measure the similarity of data points
and the mechanism to infer those unknown labels are two fundamental components in SSL. Roughly speaking,
different approaches differ in the way to induce the affinity matrix, e.g., [34, 31, 32, 28, 11, 30, 10, 15, 36],
and/or the mechanics to infer those unknown labels, e.g.,
[26, 34, 17, 31, 32, 16, 1, 28, 19].
The existing approaches to define the affinity can be
roughly divided into three categories: a) the Euclidean distance based approaches, which use the k nearest neighbors
rule to find the local neighborhood and encode the proximity among data points as binary weights or as “soft” weights by a heat kernel, e.g., [5, 34, 6, 12]; b) the local selfexpressiveness model based approaches, which induce the
affinity by expressing each data point as a linear combination of local neighbors, e.g., [25, 28]; c) the global selfexpressiveness model based approaches, which induce the
affinity by expressing each data point as a linear combination of all other data points, e.g., sparsity induced affinity [11, 30, 15, 36] and low-rankness induced affinity [23].
The Euclidean distance based approaches and the local selfexpressiveness model based approaches depend upon the
local neighborhood parameter (e.g., k) and there is no reliable approach to determine its optimal value.
While the mechanics to infer those unknown labels being

2767

