Weakly- and Semi-Supervised Learning of a Deep Convolutional Network for
Semantic Image Segmentation
George Papandreou∗
Google, Inc.

Liang-Chieh Chen∗
UCLA

Kevin P. Murphy
Google, Inc.

Alan L. Yuille
UCLA

gpapan@google.com

lcchen@cs.ucla.edu

kpmurphy@google.com

yuille@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
Deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) trained
on a large number of images with strong pixel-level annotations have recently significantly pushed the state-of-art in
semantic image segmentation. We study the more challenging problem of learning DCNNs for semantic image segmentation from either (1) weakly annotated training data
such as bounding boxes or image-level labels or (2) a combination of few strongly labeled and many weakly labeled
images, sourced from one or multiple datasets. We develop
Expectation-Maximization (EM) methods for semantic image segmentation model training under these weakly supervised and semi-supervised settings. Extensive experimental
evaluation shows that the proposed techniques can learn
models delivering competitive results on the challenging
PASCAL VOC 2012 image segmentation benchmark, while
requiring significantly less annotation effort. We share
source code implementing the proposed system at https:
//bitbucket.org/deeplab/deeplab-public.

1. Introduction
Semantic image segmentation refers to the problem of
assigning a semantic label (such as “person”, “car” or
“dog”) to every pixel in the image. Various approaches have
been tried over the years, but according to the results on the
challenging Pascal VOC 2012 segmentation benchmark, the
best performing methods all use some kind of Deep Convolutional Neural Network (DCNN) [2, 5, 8, 14, 25, 27, 41].
In this paper, we work with the DeepLab-CRF approach
of [5, 41]. This combines a DCNN with a fully connected
Conditional Random Field (CRF) [19], in order to get high
resolution segmentations. This model achieves state-ofart results on the challenging PASCAL VOC segmentation
benchmark [13], delivering a mean intersection-over-union
(IOU) score exceeding 70%.
A key bottleneck in building this class of DCNN-based
∗ The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

segmentation models is that they typically require pixellevel annotated images during training. Acquiring such data
is an expensive, time-consuming annotation effort. Weak
annotations, in the form of bounding boxes (i.e., coarse
object locations) or image-level labels (i.e., information
about which object classes are present) are far easier to
collect than detailed pixel-level annotations. We develop
new methods for training DCNN image segmentation models from weak annotations, either alone or in combination
with a small number of strong annotations. Extensive experiments, in which we achieve performance up to 69.0%,
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed techniques.
According to [24], collecting bounding boxes around
each class instance in the image is about 15 times
faster/cheaper than labeling images at the pixel level. We
demonstrate that it is possible to learn a DeepLab-CRF
model delivering 62.2% IOU on the PASCAL VOC 2012
test set by training it on a simple foreground/background
segmentation of the bounding box annotations.
An even cheaper form of data to collect is imagelevel labels, which specify the presence or absence of semantic classes, but not the object locations. Most existing approaches for training semantic segmentation models
from this kind of very weak labels use multiple instance
learning (MIL) techniques. However, even recent weaklysupervised methods such as [25] deliver significantly inferior results compared to their fully-supervised counterparts,
only achieving 25.7%. Including additional trainable objectness [7] or segmentation [1] modules that largely increase the system complexity, [31] has improved performance to 40.6%, which still significantly lags performance
of fully-supervised systems.
We develop novel online Expectation-Maximization
(EM) methods for training DCNN semantic segmentation
models from weakly annotated data. The proposed algorithms alternate between estimating the latent pixel labels
(subject to the weak annotation constraints), and optimizing the DCNN parameters using stochastic gradient descent
(SGD). When we only have access to image-level annotated training data, we achieve 39.6%, close to [31] but

1742

