Photogeometric Scene Flow for High-Detail Dynamic 3D Reconstruction
Paulo F. U. Gotardo1 , Tomas Simon2 , Yaser Sheikh2 , and Iain Matthews1,2
1

2

Disney Research

{paulo.gotardo, iainm}@disneyresearch.com

{tsimon, yaser}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Photometric stereo (PS) is an established technique for
high-detail reconstruction of 3D geometry and appearance.
To correct for surface integration errors, PS is often combined with multiview stereo (MVS). With dynamic objects,
PS reconstruction also faces the problem of computing optical flow (OF) for image alignment under rapid changes in
illumination. Current PS methods typically compute optical
flow and MVS as independent stages, each one with its own
limitations and errors introduced by early regularization. In
contrast, scene flow methods estimate geometry and motion,
but lack the fine detail from PS. This paper proposes photogeometric scene flow (PGSF) for high-quality dynamic 3D
reconstruction. PGSF performs PS, OF, and MVS simultaneously. It is based on two key observations: (i) while image
alignment improves PS, PS allows for surfaces to be relit to
improve alignment; (ii) PS provides surface gradients that
render the smoothness term in MVS unnecessary, leading to
truly data-driven, continuous depth estimates. This synergy
is demonstrated in the quality of the resulting RGB appearance, 3D geometry, and 3D motion.

1. Introduction
High-resolution geometry and appearance are invaluable
assets in the movie and video game industries—the quality
of a 3D model can make or break the perceived realism of
an animation. When it comes to facial models, people have
a remarkably low threshold for inaccuracies, and even the
smallest details in geometry and appearance are important.
In this paper, we improve the resolution and detail in the
geometry and appearance of dynamic 3D capture.
Photometric stereo (PS) is a well-established technique
to capture high-detail geometry and appearance of real objects, observed under different illumination conditions [32],
see Fig. 1(a). PS is generally used to enhance the detail of
an initial low-resolution geometry, most often obtained via
multiview stereo (MVS) [11,21]. Although computed independently, PS and MVS are complementary in nature: PS
provides continuous depth values (fine detail) even for tex-

Carnegie Mellon University

!

"""

!
!
!

(a) Photometric Stereo

!
!

"""

(c) Photogeometric Stereo

"

(b) Multiview Stereo

!
!

"""
"""
"""

(d) Photogeometric Scene Flow

Figure 1. Photogeometric scene flow (PGSF) provides highquality 3D surface, motion and RGB albedo by simultaneously
solving photometric stereo (PS), multiview stereo (MVS) and optical flow (OF). The usual combination of color-PS and MVS (c)
corrects for low-frequency shape errors, but presents underconstrained shadow regions (e.g., nose) and monochromatic albedo.

tureless 3D surfaces, but suffers from integration drift (relative depth); MVS provides absolute depth, but its estimates
suffer from matching errors and spatial regularization further smoothes fine detail, Fig. 1(b). When PS and MVS are
computed independently, this synergy is under-explored [8].
In dynamic PS reconstruction, object motion introduces
the additional need to align images taken under significant
changes in illumination, which remains a challenging problem. Typically, optical flow (OF) [7,16] is used as a third independent component, with residual misalignment leading
to loss of detail [31]. As an alternative, 3-color PS [13, 33]
was proposed to instantaneously capture 3D geometry in
a single frame—with spectrally multiplexed illumination.
However, 3-color PS requires objects to be monochromatic
and also suffers from self-shadowing (missing data) [14].
Fig. 1(c) is an example color-PS+MVS reconstruction.
In this paper, we propose a new approach for dynamic
3D capture that simultaneously computes PS, MVS, and OF
in a coupled way. Key to this approach is the fact that PS not

846

