Learning Parametric Distributions for Image Super-Resolution: Where Patch
Matching Meets Sparse Coding
Yongbo Li, Weisheng Dong , Guangming Shi, Xuemei Xie
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, China, 710071
yongboli@stu.xidian.edu.cn, {wsdong, xmxie}@mail.xidian.edu.cn, gmshi@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing approaches toward Image super-resolution (SR) is often either data-driven (e.g., based on internet-scale
matching and web image retrieval) or model-based (e.g.,
formulated as an Maximizing a Posterior (MAP) estimation
problem). The former is conceptually simple yet heuristic; while the latter is constrained by the fundamental limit
of frequency aliasing. In this paper, we propose to develop a hybrid approach toward SR by combining those two
lines of ideas. More specifically, the parameters underlying sparse distributions of desirable HR image patches are
learned from a pair of LR image and retrieved HR images.
Our hybrid approach can be interpreted as the first attempt
of reconciling the difference between parametric and nonparametric models for low-level vision tasks. Experimental
results show that the proposed hybrid SR method performs
much better than existing state-of-the-art methods in terms
of both subjective and objective image qualities.

1. Introduction
Image super resolution (SR) aiming to reconstructed a
high-resolution (HR) image from a single low-resolution
(LR) image is a classic ill-posed inverse problem. Prior
knowledge of the underlying HR image is required to compensate the loss of the information. To incorporate the prior knowledge, the image SR is commonly formulated as a
Maximum a Posterior estimation problem, where a posterior probability is maximized to reconstruct a visually pleasant HR image. To faithfully reconstruct the HR image, the
selection of the prior distribution of the underlying HR image is of great importance.
The sparsity prior of natural images has been extensively
exploited in the literature. The gradient sparse prior is often
employed to suppress the noise and other visual artifacts
during the reconstruction [12, 8, 11]. However, fine image details are also often removed. Recently, coupled with
dictionary learning, patch-based sparse coding approaches

have shown the popularity and effectiveness for image SR
[6, 5, 18, 17, 19]. The sparse codes of the desired HR image
patches are first inferred from the LR image patches, and
then used to reconstruct the HR image patches. Due to the
ill-posed nature of SR problem, the selection of an appropriate sparse regularizer is critical for the success of these
methods. Typically, parametric sparse models (e.g., the
Laplacian, Generalized Gaussian) are adopted. The model parameters can be either manually selected or estimated
from the input LR images [18, 6, 19]. Advanced sparse
methods considering the structural correlations between the
patches have also been proposed [19, 7]. However, due to
the lack of sufficient information, it is rather challenging to
accurately estimate the sparse models from the LR image,
especially for large scaling factors.
The learning-based methods have also attracted many
attentions. In [10, 14, 18], a large number of LR/HR
patch pairs are constructed and the high-frequency details
of the input LR patches are inferred from the training LR/HR pairs. Recent studies show that the learning-based
SR approaches can become more effective when the training images are more correlated with the given LR image
[20, 15]. In [20, 15], similar images are first retrieved from
a large image database, and then the high-frequency details
are learned from the retrieved images. Despite its effective for SR the HR images, visual artifacts can often be observed due to the inconsistences between the learned highfrequency details and the observed LR image.
To address the limitations of the sparsity-based and the
learning-based methods, we propose a novel image SR approach that combines the sparse coding and the image retrieval based learning into an unified SR framework. For a
given LR image, a set of HR images that are highly correlated with the desired HR image are retrieved from a database.
Instead of learning the high-frequency details, we propose
to learn the parametric sparse models for the desired HR
patches from both the retrieved HR image and the LR image. Specifically, the Laplacian models with nonzero means are learned. With the learned sparse models, which are

450

