Predicting Depth, Surface Normals and Semantic Labels
with a Common Multi-Scale Convolutional Architecture

1

David Eigen1 Rob Fergus1,2
Dept. of Computer Science, Courant Institute, New York University
2
Facebook AI Research
{deigen,fergus}@cs.nyu.edu

Abstract
In this paper we address three different computer vision
tasks using a single multiscale convolutional network architecture: depth prediction, surface normal estimation, and
semantic labeling. The network that we develop is able
to adapt naturally to each task using only small modifications, regressing from the input image to the output map directly. Our method progressively refines predictions using a
sequence of scales, and captures many image details without any superpixels or low-level segmentation. We achieve
state-of-the-art performance on benchmarks for all three
tasks.

1. Introduction
Scene understanding is a central problem in vision that
has many different aspects. These include semantic labels
describing the identity of different scene portions; surface
normals or depth estimates describing the physical geometry; instance labels of the extent of individual objects; and
affordances capturing possible interactions of people with
the environment. Many of these are often represented with
a pixel-map containing a value or label for each pixel, e.g. a
map containing the semantic label of the object visible at
each pixel, or the vector coordinates of the surface normal
orientation.
In this paper, we address three of these tasks, depth prediction, surface normal estimation and semantic segmentation — all using a single common architecture. Our multiscale approach generates pixel-maps directly from an input
image, without the need for low-level superpixels or contours, and is able to align to many image details using a
series of convolutional network stacks applied at increasing
resolution. At test time, all three outputs can be generated
in real time (∼30Hz). We achieve state-of-the art results
on all three tasks we investigate, demonstrating our model’s
versatility.
There are several advantages in developing a general
model for pixel-map regression. First, applications to new
tasks may be quickly developed, with much of the new work

lying in defining an appropriate training set and loss function; in this light, our work is a step towards building offthe-shelf regressor models that can be used for many applications. In addition, use of a single architecture helps
simplify the implementation of systems that require multiple modalities, e.g. robotics or augmented reality, which in
turn can help enable research progress in these areas. Lastly,
in the case of depth and normals, much of the computation
can be shared between modalities, making the system more
efficient.

2. Related Work
Convolutional networks have been applied with great
success for object classification and detection [19, 12, 30,
32, 34]. Most such systems classify either a single object
label for an entire input window, or bounding boxes for a
few objects in each scene. However, ConvNets have recently been applied to a variety of other tasks, including
pose estimation [36, 27], stereo depth [38, 25], and instance
segmentation [14]. Most of these systems use ConvNets to
find only local features, or generate descriptors of discrete
proposal regions; by contrast, our network uses both local
and global views to predict a variety of output types. In addition, while each of these methods tackle just one or two
tasks at most, we are able to apply our network to three disparate tasks.
Our method builds upon the approach taken by Eigen
et al. [8], who apply two convolutional networks in stages
for single-image depth map prediction. We develop a more
general network that uses a sequence of three scales to generate features and refine predictions to higher resolution,
which we apply to multiple tasks, including surface normals estimation and per-pixel semantic labeling. Moreover,
we improve performance in depth prediction as well, illustrating how our enhancements help improve all tasks.
Single-image surface normal estimation has been addressed by Fouhey et al. [10, 11], Ladicky et al. [21], Barron
and Malik [3, 2], and most recently by Wang et al. [37], the
latter in work concurrent with ours. Fouhey et al. match to
discriminative local templates [10] followed by a global op12650

