Linearization to Nonlinear Learning for Visual Tracking
Bo Ma 1 , Hongwei Hu 1 , Jianbing Shen∗ 1 , Yuping Zhang 1 , Fatih Porikli 2
1

Beijing Lab of Intelligent Information Technology, School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2
Research School of Engineering, Australian National University, and NICTA Australia

Abstract
Due to unavoidable appearance variations caused by occlusion, deformation, and other factors, classifiers for visual tracking are nonlinear as a necessity. Building on the
theory of globally linear approximations to nonlinear functions, we introduce an elegant method that jointly learns
a nonlinear classifier and a visual dictionary for tracking
objects in a semi-supervised sparse coding fashion. This
establishes an obvious distinction from conventional sparse
coding based discriminative tracking algorithms that usually maintain two-stage learning strategies, i.e., learning a
dictionary in an unsupervised way then followed by training a classifier. However, the treating dictionary learning
and classifier training as separate stages may not produce
both descriptive and discriminative models for objects. By
contrast, our method is capable of constructing a dictionary
that not only fully reflects the intrinsic manifold structure of
the data, but also possesses discriminative power. This paper presents an optimization method to obtain such an optimal dictionary, associated sparse coding, and a classifier in
an iterative process. Our experiments on a benchmark show
our tracker attains outstanding performance compared with
the state-of-the-art algorithms.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking is a fundamental task in computer
vision, and various tracking algorithms [23, 14, 19, 16, 28,
25, 7, 4] have been proposed in the past. Nevertheless, it
still remains as a challenging problem for typical real-world
scenarios where many uncontrolled factors such as illumination variation, occlusion, deformation, in-plane rotation,
background clutters, etc. encountered during tracking cause
∗ Corresponding author: Jianbing Shen (shenjianbing@bit.edu.cn).
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61472036 and 61272359), and the National Basic Research
Program of China (973 Program) (2013CB328805). Specialized Fund for
Joint Building Program of Beijing Municipal Education Commission.

considerable complications.
Among methods addressing these difficulties, sparse
coding based methods have attracted much attention because of their robust performance in similar classification
[10] and recognition [29] tasks. After the first trial of
Mei and Ling [19] in tracking based on l1 minimization.
Liu et al. [16] proposed a local sparse appearance model
with K-selection to represent target appearance. To model
local appearance, Wang et al. [28] learned visual prior
from generic real-world images and transferred it into local sparse representation. Wang et al. [25, 24] supposed
noise term in sparse representation was Gaussian-Laplacian
distributed and introduced a least soft-thresold squares algorithm. However, the dictionary in most of these tracking methods based on sparse representation often results
from unsupervised clustering algorithms, and may not be
the most advantageous to visual tracking. Most sparse coding approaches do not take the spatial structure between
original sample space and coding space into consideration.
When encoding a sample, it is argued that those items in
dictionary close to this sample to be reconstructed should be
activated. Local Coordinate Coding (LCC) [34, 33] learns a
set of anchor points (also called dictionary) to reconstruct
original samples while keeping locality. It has recently
shown impressive performance on nonlinear learning. An
approximation method of LCC was proposed by wang et al.
[26], which demonstrated the good performance of locality
constrain in sparse coding for image classification. Lin et al.
[15] have already introduced it into large-scale image classification, which showed good performance and high classification accuracy. But they formed the dictionary by kmeans only. Xie et al. [31] proposed a large-scale dictionary
learning for LCC in object recognition experiments. Hu et
al. [8] introduced nonlinear learning using LCC into visual
tracking. But their method took still a two-stage learning
strategy, and the treatment of separating dictionary learning
from classifier learning may not produce optimal dictionary
for tracking.
Dictionary learning and updating are crucial steps of

4400

