Learning to transfer: transferring latent task structures and its application to
person-specific facial action unit detection
Timur Almaev
Brais Martinez
Michel Valstar
The School of Computer Science
University of Nottingham
{psxta4, Brais.Martinez, Michel.Valstar}@nottingham.ac.uk

Abstract
In this article we explore the problem of constructing
person-specific models for the detection of facial Action
Units (AUs), addressing the problem from the point of view
of Transfer Learning and Multi-Task Learning. Our starting
point is the fact that some expressions, such as smiles, are
very easily elicited, annotated, and automatically detected,
while others are much harder to elicit and to annotate. We
thus consider a novel problem: all AU models for the target subject are to be learnt using person-specific annotated
data for a reference AU (AU12 in our case), and no data or
little data regarding the target AU. In order to design such
a model, we propose a novel Multi-Task Learning and the
associated Transfer Learning framework, in which we consider both relations across subjects and AUs. That is to say,
we consider a tensor structure among the tasks. Our approach hinges on learning the latent relations among tasks
using one single reference AU, and then transferring these
latent relations to other AUs. We show that we are able to
effectively make use of the annotated data for AU12 when
learning other person-specific AU models, even in the absence of data for the target task. Finally, we show the excellent performance of our method when small amounts of
annotated data for the target tasks are made available.

1. Introduction
Automatic facial expression recognition is an active topic
in computer vision and machine learning. It has seen so
much activity that it already contributed to the creation of
three new research directions: Affective Computing [17],
Social Signal Processing [24], and Behaviomedics [22]. Imbuing machines with the ability to correctly identify the
non-verbal cues humans express, such as facial expressions,
would certainly allow a whole new level of interaction between a human being and a machine.
The problem of reliable automatic facial expression

Figure 1. Example of facial displays and their constituent Action
Units (AUs).

recognition is a complex one due to the very high level of
variability introduced by factors unrelated to facial expressions, such as identity, head pose or variations in the lighting conditions. The problem is even more complex when
we consider non-prototypical facial expressions. There are
only six prototypical expressions (often referred to as the six
basic emotions; anger, disgust, fear, happiness, sadness and
surprise), which makes for a nicely tractable problem from
a computer science perspective. Unfortunately, people do
not frequently display such strong expressions as anger or
disgust in everyday life [24]. Instead, a much wider range of
mental states and social intentions are communicated. An
often cited number of facial displays shown in day to day
life is 7,000.
To simplify the decoding of such a vast expression space,
many researchers take the principled approach of recognising the individual facial muscle actions that contribute to
make up a facial expression. Most often the Facial Action
Coding System (FACS) [6] is used for this. It was originally
developed by Ekman and Friesen in 1978 [7], and revised
in 2002 [6]. The revision specifies 32 atomic facial muscle
actions, named Action Units (AUs), and 14 additional Action Descriptors (ADs) that account for miscellaneous actions. FACS is comprehensive and objective in its description. Since any facial expression results from the activation

3774

