Robust Statistical Face Frontalization
Christos Sagonas∗
Yannis Panagakis∗
∗
Department of Computing,
Imperial College London,
180 Queen’s Gate,
London SW7 2AZ, U.K.

Stefanos Zafeiriou∗
Maja Pantic∗†
†
EEMCS,
University of Twente,
Drienerlolaan 5,
7522 NB Enschede, The Netherlands

{c.sagonas, i.panagakis, s.zafeiriou, m.pantic}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract

b) Optimization

a) Input

c) Output

1

Recently, it has been shown that excellent results can
be achieved in both facial landmark localization and poseinvariant face recognition. These breakthroughs are attributed to the efforts of the community to manually annotate facial images in many different poses and to collect 3D
facial data. In this paper, we propose a novel method for
joint frontal view reconstruction and landmark localization
using a small set of frontal images only. By observing that
the frontal facial image is the one having the minimum rank
of all different poses, an appropriate model which is able
to jointly recover the frontalized version of the face as well
as the facial landmarks is devised. To this end, a suitable
optimization problem, involving the minimization of the nuclear norm and the matrix ℓ1 norm is solved. The proposed
method is assessed in frontal face reconstruction, face landmark localization, pose-invariant face recognition, and face
verification in unconstrained conditions. The relevant experiments have been conducted on 8 databases. The experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method in comparison to the state-of-the-art methods
for the target problems.

1. Introduction
Face frontalization refers to the recovery of the frontal
view of faces from single unconstrained images. Accurate
face frontalization is a cornerstone for many face analysis
problems. For example the recent success in face recognition in unconstrained conditions would not be possible
without a meticulously designed face frontalization procedure [35].
An essential step towards face frontalization is facial
landmark localization. State-of-the-art landmark localization methods [5, 17, 28, 32, 36, 40] model the problem discriminatively by capitalizing on the availability of annotated

2

X(1)(p)=

X(2)(p)=

U(1)=

U(2)=

min rank(L)+ |E|0

{L,c,✂p,E}

s.t. X(p+

L=

d) Recognition

i

Feature
extraction

p) = L + E, L(1)=

E(1)=

Ui x ci
L(2)=
Recognition

E(2)=
Donald
Pleasence

Figure 1. Flowchart of the proposed method: a) Given an input
image, the results from a detector, and a statistical model U, built
on frontal images only, b) a constrained low-rank minimization
problem is solved. c) Face alignment and frontal view reconstruction are performed simultaneously. Finally, d) face recognition is
performed using the frontalized image.

data in terms of facial landmarks [30, 31]. Unfortunately,
the annotation of facial landmarks is laborious, expensive,
and time consuming process. This is even more the case for
faces that are not in frontal pose1 .
In many cases, accurate 2D landmark localization is not
enough for successful face frontalization. That is, in practice, the frontalization step is very elaborate requiring both
landmark localization and pose correction by usually resorting to 3D face models [33–35, 41]. In general, 3D modelbased methods achieve high recognition accuracy [35, 41].
However, such methods cannot be widely applied since they
require: (a) a method for accurate landmark localization in
various poses, (b) fitting learned 3D model of faces, which
is expensive to built, and (c) a robust image warping algorithm for frontal view image reconstruction [35]. Recently, a simple method for the reconstruction of frontal
views using a 3D reference mesh has been proposed in literature [12]. The main difference between the frontalization
system in [35] and the one proposed in [12] is that the latter
1 From experience we know that annotation of facial image with poses
take in many cases twice the time compared with frontal poses.

3871

