A Gaussian Process Latent Variable Model for BRDF Inference
Stamatios Georgoulis1 , Vincent Vanweddingen1 , Marc Proesmans1 and Luc Van Gool1,2
1
ESAT-PSI/VISICS, KU Leuven 2 CVL, ETH Zurich
stam.georgoulis, vincent.vanweddingen, marc.proesmans, luc.vangool @esat.kuleuven.be

Abstract
The problem of estimating a full BRDF from partial observations has already been studied using either parametric or non-parametric approaches. The goal in each case
is to best match this sparse set of input measurements. In
this paper we address the problem of inferring higher order reflectance information starting from the minimal input of a single BRDF slice. We begin from the prototypical case of a homogeneous sphere, lit by a head-on
light source, which only holds information about less than
0.001% of the whole BRDF domain. We propose a novel
method to infer the higher dimensional properties of the
material’s BRDF, based on the statistical distribution of
known material characteristics observed in real-life samples. We evaluated our method based on a large set of
experiments generated from real-world BRDFs and newly
measured materials. Although inferring higher dimensional
BRDFs from such modest training is not a trivial problem,
our method performs better than state-of-the-art parametric, semi- parametric and non-parametric approaches. Finally, we discuss interesting applications on material relighting, and flash-based photography.

1. Introduction
How an object appears is essentially determined by the
combination of its shape, its surface materials (reflectance),
and the lighting environment. Producing photo-realistic
renderings of an object under novel lighting is of great importance for various applications that are based on Virtual
Reality (VR) or Augmented Reality (AR). For these applications one thus needs to accurately capture both the 3D
shape and the surface reflectance. Yet, it is fair to say that
3D shape extraction has advanced more than the extraction
of surface reflectance. We assume that a high-quality 3D
shape of the modeled object is known in advance and we
focus on precisely estimating its reflectance characteristics.
The appearance properties of opaque materials are effectively encoded by the Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution
Function (BRDF) [25], which relates incoming and outgo-

Figure 1. Assuming a known shape a BRDF slice can be extracted
from a single image. Using the proposed method the full BRDF
can be inferred to relight to object under novel lighting conditions.

ing directions of light transport. Specifically, this function
estimates the fraction of reflected light for every pair of incoming/outgoing light directions. Typically, such BRDF
has to be recorded with sophisticated hardware setups that
independently drive a light source and a sensor to many different positions around the object [22, 23, 17]. These setups
are expensive and inaccessible to most researchers, let alone
casual users. Furthermore, a dense sampling of an object’s
BRDF - usually only of a small planar patch - is a timeconsuming process; for a sampling at an angular resolution
of 1 degree more than 108 measurements are required [18].
In this paper, we analyze how a complete BRDF can
be inferred when only a limited number of its samples are
available. In particular, we consider the use of a camera
with built-in flash. In that case the viewing and lighting directions are almost identical. We assume the flash light to
be dominant over other illumination in the scene and that
a single image is taken. Our starting point is the prototypical case of a single image of a sphere. Unlike previous
studies that consider either environment lighting [32, 21] or
sparse samples across the entire BRDF domain [28], in our
case the coincidence of lighting and viewing directions only
yields a small section of the BRDF space (see Sec. 2). This
is a particularly difficult case compared to this considered in
[32, 21, 28], because not only do we have very few samples
but they are also very concentrated, so in our case inferring
13559

