Self-calibration of optical lenses
Michael Hirsch and Bernhard Schölkopf
Department of Empirical Inference
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
firstname.lastname@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
Even high-quality lenses suffer from optical aberrations,
especially when used at full aperture. Furthermore, there
are significant lens-to-lens deviations due to manufacturing tolerances, often rendering current software solutions
like DxO, Lightroom, and PTLens insufficient as they don’t
adapt and only include generic lens blur models.
We propose a method that enables the self-calibration of
lenses from a natural image, or a set of such images. To this
end we develop a machine learning framework that is able
to exploit several recorded images and distills the available
information into an accurate model of the considered lens.

1. Introduction
High-quality lenses are typically the most expensive part
in modern camera systems. Even high grade lenses exhibit
severe lens aberrations at open aperture [38, 9]. In addition,
lens-to-lens deviations due to manufacturing tolerances can
be significant [5, 35]. Existing approaches aka DxO, Lightroom that use parametric models often neglect these individual errors and hence provide only limited image quality
improvements.
Recently, Shih et al. [35] suggested an approach to calibrate individual lenses using a grid of light points and fitting parameters of the lens prescription to counter this issue. Schuler et al. [33] proposed a blind algorithm to correct for the individual errors of a lens. Our approach takes
this one step further. It uses machine learning to estimate a
regression model for the family of non-stationary lens blurs.
This model represents point spread functions as real-valued
functions of several parameters such as image position and
orientation, allowing for continuous transfer across settings
and multiple images. It makes use of major progress in the
field of blind deconvolution (BD) during recent years [42],
and it can exploit information present in sets of images in an
elegant way, thus improving the blur model with the amount
of photos taken over time. All these images are natural images, and none of them needs to be taken of a custom calibration pattern, which is why we refer to the process as
self-calibration. Both high-quality lenses and simple lenses
benefit from the approach that renders time and cost intensive physical calibration approaches unnecessary.
The optical aberrations of a lens are generally described
by the point spread function (PSF). The overall PSF (or

blur) model is a high-dimensional function that for a given
lens depends on a number of quantities, including position
in the image plane, wavelength, aperture stop, focus length
(for zooms), and focus setting. If we had a sufficiently
large training set of accurate PSF observations1 covering the
space of input variability, we could simply apply machine
learning to estimate the overall PSF. Each PSF measurement, however, would ideally require an optical measurement under controlled conditions, and it is not feasible to
do this for each individual lens. The challenge addressed by
the present paper thus is how to estimate this function from
a relatively small set of imperfect PSF estimates extracted
automatically from natural images, taking advantage of the
symmetries of the problem. To this end, we introduce a
non-parametric regression framework that learns a continuous PSF model as a function of lens settings. Our approach
is generic and provides a framework that allows any local
PSF estimation algorithm to be used and hence will benefit
from future advances in the field of BD. At the same time
any non-blind deconvolution (NBD) algorithm can be used
for the final image correction, once the PSF family has been
estimated. Therefore, our approach is not limited to a specific algorithm — it can be viewed as a novel generic tool
for the continuous modeling of non-stationary point spread
functions (PSFs).
Once we have a mathematical model of the blur at hand,
we can use it to correct and enhance the captured image via
NBD. We measure the improvement in image quality using
test charts using the commercial image quality system iQ
developed by Image Engineering [17].
Our contributions are three-fold:
• we present a benchmark for lens blur and make a comprehensive comparison of state-of-the-art PSF estimation algorithms
• we show how to get reliable PSF estimates from captured photos
• we introduce a new framework for spatially-varying
PSF models depending on all relevant input variables
that makes use of local PSF estimates and outputs a
continuous PSF model tailored for each individual lens
considered.
1 These local PSFs are often also referred to simply as PSFs, since they
are also functions. We can think of them as functions obtained from the
overall PSFs by restriction to a subset of the input arguments.

612

