CV-HAZOP: Introducing Test Data Validation for Computer Vision
Oliver Zendel, Markus Murschitz, Martin Humenberger, Wolfgang Herzner
AIT Austrian Institute of Technology
Donau-City-Strasse 1, 1220 Vienna, Austria
{oliver.zendel,markus.murschitz.fl,martin.humenberger,wolfgang.herzner}@ait.ac.at

Abstract
Test data plays an important role in computer vision
(CV) but is plagued by two questions: Which situations
should be covered by the test data and have we tested
enough to reach a conclusion? In this paper we propose
a new solution answering these questions using a standard procedure devised by the safety community to validate complex systems: The Hazard and Operability Analysis (HAZOP). It is designed to systematically search and
identify difficult, performance-decreasing situations and aspects. We introduce a generic CV model that creates the basis for the hazard analysis and, for the first time, apply an
extensive HAZOP to the CV domain. The result is a publicly
available checklist with more than 900 identified individual hazards. This checklist can be used to evaluate existing
test datasets by quantifying the amount of covered hazards.
We evaluate our approach by first analyzing and annotating the popular stereo vision test datasets Middlebury and
KITTI. Second, we compare the performance of six popular
stereo matching algorithms at the identified hazards from
our checklist with their average performance and show, as
expected, a clear negative influence of the hazards. The
presented approach is a useful tool to evaluate and improve
test datasets and creates a common basis for future dataset
designs.

This work presents a new way to facilitate this safety assessment process and goes beyond the basic scope of benchmarking: applying a proven method used by the safety community for the first time to the CV domain. It provides an
independent measure that counts the challenges in a dataset
that are testing the robustness of CV algorithms.
The typical software quality assurance process uses two
steps to provide objective evidence that a given system fulfills its requirements: verification and validation [16]. Verification checks whether or not the specification was implemented correctly (e.g. no bugs) [2]. Validation addresses
the question whether or not the algorithm meets the original
requirements, e.g., is robust enough under difficult circumstances. Validation is performed using test datasets as inputs
and comparing the algorithm’s output against the expected
results (ground truth, GT).
While general methods for verification can be applied to
CV algorithms, the validation part is rather specific. A big
problem when validating CV algorithms is the enormous
amount of possible input datasets, i.e. test images (e.g. for
640×480 8bit image inputs there are 256640∗480 ≈ 10739811
different test images). An effective way to overcome this
problem is to find equivalence classes and to test the system
with a representative of each class. However, the definition
of equivalence classes for CV is tough: How can we describe in mathematical terms, say, all possible images which
show a tree or not a car? This leads to two main challenges
for CV validation:

1. Introduction
Many safety-critical systems depend on CV technologies
to navigate or manipulate their environment and require a
strong safety assessment due to the evident risk to human
lives [24]. Unfortunately, people working in the field of
CV will often notice that algorithms scoring high in public
benchmarks [32] perform rather poor in real world scenarios. The reason is that those limited benchmarks are applied to open world problems. While every new proposed
algorithm is evaluated based on these benchmark datasets,
the datasets themselves rarely have to undergo independent
evaluation.

1. What should be part of the test dataset to ensure that
the required level of robustness is achieved?
2. How can redundancies be avoided to allow the identification of problematic flaws (wastes time and creates
a bias towards repeated elements)?
Traditional benchmarking tries to characterize performance of multiple implementations using fixed datasets to
create a ranking based on this data. Contrary, validation
tries to show that the algorithm can reliably solve the task
at hand, even under difficult conditions. Although both use
application specific datasets, their goals are not the same
and benchmarking sets are not suited for validation.

2066

