Person Recognition in Personal Photo Collections
Seong Joon Oh

Rodrigo Benenson

Mario Fritz

Bernt Schiele

Max Planck Institute for Informatics
Saarbrücken, Germany
{joon,benenson,mfritz,schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
Recognising persons in everyday photos presents major challenges (occluded faces, different clothing, locations,
etc.) for machine vision. We propose a convnet based person recognition system on which we provide an in-depth
analysis of informativeness of different body cues, impact of
training data, and the common failure modes of the system.
In addition, we discuss the limitations of existing benchmarks and propose more challenging ones. Our method is
simple and is built on open source and open data, yet it improves the state of the art results on a large dataset of social
media photos (PIPA).

1. Introduction
Person recognition in private photo collections is challenging: people can be shown in all kinds of poses and
activities, from arbitrary viewpoints including back views,
and with diverse clothing (e.g. on the beach, at parties, etc.,
see Figure 1). This paper presents an in-depth analysis of
the problem of person recognition in photo albums: given
a few annotated training images of a person (possibly from
different albums), and a single image at test time, can we
tell if the image contains the same person?
Intuitively, the ability to recognize faces in the wild [22]
is an important ingredient. However, when persons are engaged in an activity (i.e. not posing) their face becomes only
partially visible (non-frontal, occlusion) or simply fully
non-visible (back-view). Therefore, additional information
is required to reliably recognize people. We explore three
other sources: first, body of a person contains information
about their shape and appearance; second, human attributes
such as gender and age help to reduce the search space; and
third, scene context further reduces ambiguities.
The main contributions of the paper are the following.
First, we provide a detailed analysis of performance of
different cues (§3). Second, we propose a more realistic
and challenging experimental protocols over PIPA (§5.1)
on which a deeper understanding of robustness of different
cues can be attained (§5.2). Third, in the process, we obtain

✔
✔
Attributes ✔
All cues ✔
Head
Body

✘

✔
✔
✔

✘
✘

✔
✔

✘
✘
✘

✔

Figure 1. Person recognition in photo albums is hard. To handle
the diverse scenarios we need to exploit multiple cues from different body regions and information sources. Photos show test cases
successfully recognised by our system, ticks indicate which ingredient could handle it. For example, the surfer is not recognised
when using only head or head+body cues. However, it is successfully recognised when the additional attribute cues are provided.

best results on the recently proposed PIPA dataset and show
that previous performance can be matched without specialized face recognition or pose estimation (§4). Fourth, we
analyse remaining failure modes (§5). Additionally, our
top-performing method is based only on open source code
and data, and we will make the auxiliary data produced by
us public, including the new attribute annotations over PIPA
(§3.7) and the new experimental setups (§5.1).

1.1. Related work
Data type The bulk of previous work on person recognition focus either on facial features [22] (only the head/face
is visible), or on the surveillance scenario [3, 2] (full
body is visible, usually in low resolution). Both settings
have seen a recent shift from sophisticated classifiers based
on hand-crafted features and metric learning approaches
[20, 7, 5, 29, 26, 41, 1], towards methods based on deep
learning [37, 36, 43, 33, 27, 38, 21].
In this paper we tackle a different scenario, where persons may appear at different zoom levels (e.g. only head,
upper torso, full body visible), and in any pose (e.g. sitting,
running, posing), and from any point of view (e.g. front,
side, back view), see Figures 1 and 7. The “Gallagher collection person dataset” [15] was the first dataset covering

3862

