Learning Analysis-by-Synthesis for 6D Pose Estimation in RGB-D Images
Alexander Krull,∗ Eric Brachmann, Frank Michel, Michael Ying Yang, Stefan Gumhold, Carsten Rother
TU Dresden
Dresden, Germany
∗

alexander.krull@tu-dresden.de

Abstract
Analysis-by-synthesis has been a successful approach
for many tasks in computer vision, such as 6D pose estimation of an object in an RGB-D image which is the topic
of this work. The idea is to compare the observation with
the output of a forward process, such as a rendered image
of the object of interest in a particular pose. Due to occlusion or complicated sensor noise, it can be difficult to
perform this comparison in a meaningful way. We propose
an approach that “learns to compare”, while taking these
difficulties into account. This is done by describing the posterior density of a particular object pose with a convolutional neural network (CNN) that compares observed and
rendered images. The network is trained with the maximum
likelihood paradigm. We observe empirically that the CNN
does not specialize to the geometry or appearance of specific objects. It can be used with objects of vastly different shapes and appearances, and in different backgrounds.
Compared to state-of-the-art, we demonstrate a significant
improvement on two different datasets which include a total
of eleven objects, cluttered background, and heavy occlusion.

1. Introduction
Tremendous effort has focused on the tasks of object instance detection and pose estimation in images and videos.
In this paper, we consider pose estimation in a single RGBD image, as shown in Fig. 1. Given the extra depth channel,
it becomes feasible to extract the full 6D pose (3D rotation and 3D translation) of object instances present in the
scene. Pose estimation has important applications in many
areas, such as robotics [21, 33], medical imaging [24], and
augmented reality [12]. Recently, Brachmann et al. [5]
achieved state-of-the-art results by adapting an analysisby-synthesis approach for pose estimation in RGB-D images. They use a random forest [6] to obtain pixelwise
dense predictions. Building upon the system of [5], we pro-

Figure 1. Three pose estimation results from the occlusion dataset
from [5] and [14]. Arrows indicate the positions of estimated and
ground truth poses. The green silhouette indicates the ground truth
pose, the blue silhouette corresponds to our estimated pose. Red
indicates the pose estimate from [5]. The marker board served
only for ground truth annotation.

pose a novel method to learn to compare in the analysis-bysynthesis framework. We use a convolutional neural network (CNN) inside a probabilistic context to achieve this.
Analysis-by-synthesis has been a successful approach
for many tasks in computer vision, such as object recognition [13], scene parsing [15], pose estimation, and tracking
[9]. A forward synthesis model generates images from pos1954

