Query Adaptive Similarity Measure for RGB-D Object Recognition
Yanhua Cheng1∗, Rui Cai2 , Chi Zhang4 , Zhiwei Li2 , Xin Zhao1 , Kaiqi Huang1,3 , Yong Rui2
CRIPAC&NLPR, CASIA 2 Microsoft Research
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
4
Sun Yat-Sen University
1

Email:{yh.cheng, xzhao, kaiqi.huang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, {ruicai, v-cz, zli, yongrui}@microsoft.com

#1

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of improving the top-1 accuracy of RGB-D object recognition. Despite of the impressive top-5 accuracies achieved by existing methods, their
top-1 accuracies are not very satisfactory. The reasons are
in two-fold: (1) existing similarity measures are sensitive to
object pose and scale changes, as well as intra-class variations; and (2) effectively fusing RGB and depth cues is still
an open problem. To address these problems, this paper first
proposes a new similarity measure based on dense matching, through which objects in comparison are warped and
aligned, to better tolerate variations. Towards RGB and
depth fusion, we argue that a constant and golden weight
doesn’t exist. The two modalities have varying contributions when comparing objects from different categories. To
capture such a dynamic characteristic, a group of matchers
equipped with various fusion weights is constructed, to explore the responses of dense matching under different fusion
configurations. All the response scores are finally merged
following a learning-to-combination way, which provides
quite good generalization ability in practice. The proposed
approach win the best results on several public benchmarks,
e.g., achieves 92.7% top-1 test accuracy on the Washington
RGB-D object dataset, with a 5.1% improvement over the
state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
RGB-D object recognition has now become an active research area with the rapid development of commodity depth
cameras. These depth cameras, such as Kinect, are capable of recording synchronized color and depth data, which
together provide rich multimodal information to depict an
object. In the past year, a noticeable trend is that depth
∗ The work was performed at Microsoft Research.

#2

#3

(a)
#1

#2

#3

query

(b)
Figure 1. Given a query pitcher, (a) shows the top-3 categories
predicted by the state-of-the-art CNN-RNN method [30], which
wrongly promotes the cap due to its black color; and (b) shows
the results of the proposed approach, in which the other pitcher is
correctly ranked at the ﬁrst position. Please be noted that in (b),
both the color and depth images are warped according to the query.

camera has been integrated into mobile devices like Google
Tango [1] and Microsoft Hololens [2], which offer an even
appealing platform for RGB-D object recognition.
Remarkable research efforts have been invested in recent
years. Some of them focus on devising elaborated features
for both RGB and depth channels [20, 8, 5]; while others study exploiting machine learning techniques to combine
cues of the two modalities [21, 4, 7, 30]. All these methods
have made signiﬁcant progress to advance the state-of-theart, e.g., several approaches [5, 4, 7, 30] were observed to
achieve around 98% top-5 accuracy on the very challenging
Washington RGB-D object dataset [20]. Such an impressive
performance indeed demonstrates the advantages of RGBD data for object recognition, also provides a solid base for
follow-up studies. Towards the demands of practical scenarios, especially of those applications on mobile platform, the major concern of existing approaches is their top-1
accuracies are not satisfactory enough. Averagely, current
solutions obtain around 85% top-1 accuracy, which cannot
provide a high-quality and stable user experience.
Improving top-1 accuracy of RGB-D object recognition
remains a very challenging problem. The reasons are in

145

