Reflection Modeling for Passive Stereo
Rahul Nair1
1

Andrew Fitzgibbon2

Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing,

Daniel Kondermann1
2

Microsoft Research,

3

Carsten Rother3

Computer Vision Lab Dresden,

Heidelberg University, Germany

Cambridge, UK

Technical University Dresden, Germany

{first.last}@ iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

awf@microsoft.com

carsten.rother@tu-dresden.de

Abstract
Stereo reconstruction in presence of reality faces many
challenges that still need to be addressed. This paper considers reflections, which introduce incorrect stereo matches
due to the observation violating the diffuse-world assumption underlying the majority of stereo techniques. Unlike
most existing work, which employ regularization or robust
data terms to suppress such errors, we derive two least
squares models from first principles that generalize diffuse
world stereo and explicitly take reflections into account.
These models are parametrized by depth, orientation and
material properties, resulting in a total of up to 5 parameters per pixel that have to be estimated. Additionally widerange non-local interactions between viewed and reflected
surface have to be taken into account. These two properties
make optimization of the model appear prohibitive, but we
present evidence that it is actually possible using a variant
of patch match stereo.

1. Introduction
The traditional approach to stereo matching frequently
models image formation as a world consisting of Lambertian surfaces observed through a perfect pin hole camera.
While these assumptions, together with the right regularization, do suffice in many settings, there remain real-world
situations where this is not the case. Recent benchmarks
and challenges [12, 32] have shown that there are often situations where the imaging model is violated, either geometrically or radiometrically. Reflective surfaces violate the
Lambertian world assumption and cause the observed color
of a surface point to depend on the viewpoint. In turn, this
leads to false minima in stereo matching data terms that depend on some form of brightness constancy (cf. Figure 1).
The traditional approach to handle specular surfaces is either by robust data terms or by using strong regularization
techniques. The work presented here has a different goal
and was guided by the following questions: Is it possible to

Figure 1. Illustration of Errors Caused by Reflective Surfaces.
Left: Stereo image. Right: Typical Disparity Map. The color
observed on the road at the reflection of the silhouette depends on
the position of the camera. The algorithm therefore assigns erroneous disparity values at this location.

derive a data term that explicitly takes reflective materials
into account? And if so, is this model of any use? Can we
estimate scene parameters using this model?
Our findings on handling stereo with reflections are summarized in Figure 2. By additionally modeling up to two
bidirectional reflectance distribution function (BRDF) parameters, it is not only possible to remove errors due to
reflective surfaces, but it is also possible to obtain material information from the two images that can potentially be
used for segmentation purposes or view synthesis. Finally,
while not explicitly estimated, the separation of diffuse and
reflection components falls out of the box. Note that the
work presented does not include any form of global regularization or post-processing on top of the presented results.
This derived from the goal to give insights upon the utility
of the proposed data-terms. The estimated parameters are
a sole result of local optimization of the proposed model
parameters.
In Section 3, we revisit the roots of stereo matching as a
least squares problem and from this derive simplified models that take reflections into account. Also, we show that
traditional diffuse world stereo is in fact just another special case. The models are parametrized by per pixel depth,
normals and up to two surface material parameters which
encode strength of the reflection component and roughness

2291

