Learning Large-Scale Automatic Image Colorization
Aditya Deshpande, Jason Rock and David Forsyth
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{ardeshp2, jjrock2, daf} @illinois.edu

http://vision.cs.illinois.edu/projects/lscolor

Abstract
We describe an automated method for image colorization that learns to colorize from examples. Our method exploits a LEARCH framework to train a quadratic objective
function in the chromaticity maps, comparable to a Gaussian random field. The coefficients of the objective function
are conditioned on image features, using a random forest.
The objective function admits correlations on long spatial
scales, and can control spatial error in the colorization of
the image. Images are then colorized by minimizing this
objective function.
We demonstrate that our method strongly outperforms a
natural baseline on large-scale experiments with images of
real scenes using a demanding loss function. We demonstrate that learning a model that is conditioned on scene
produces improved results. We show how to incorporate a
desired color histogram into the objective function, and that
doing so can lead to further improvements in results.

data and prior knowledge to set up an optimization problem, which is solved to recover the desired representation.
Rather than using domain knowledge to set up prior or likelihood terms, we train an optimization problem by requiring
it to produce good colorizations of training data.
Contributions: Our colorization method is learned from
data, using a novel variant of LEARCH to balance pixelwise accuracy and spatial error. Comparable methods for
training Gaussian Random Fields must impose positive definiteness constraints on the inverse covariance matrix, and
encounter practical limits on the scale of spatial terms in the
inverse covariance matrix; our method avoids these difficulties. Our method significantly outperforms the best baseline
we are aware of, in the first quantitative colorization experiments we are aware of. We show how to exploit a target
histogram to apply global constraints. We show that possessing a scene label at run-time always provides a target
histogram that results in improved quantitative performance
performance; this scene label could come from an oracle,
from application logic, or from a scene classifier applied to
the grey-level image.

1. Introduction
We describe a method that learns to colorize grey-level
images. Our method learns a cost function that evaluates local predictions of color, spatial consistency, and consistency
with an overall histogram. There are two reasons to be interested in colorization. First, solutions have some practical
applications (colorizing old movies or photographs; correcting color in legacy images). Second, the problem is a good
model for a wide range of problems. In many cases, we
wish to take an image and predict a set of values at each
pixel in the input image, using information from the input
image. Our predictions should have significant long-scale
spatial structure. Problems like predicting albedo, shading,
depth, denoised images, and so on have this form. One advantage of colorization as a model is that immense colorization datasets are easily available, and they are organized in
interesting ways. We use the SUNS dataset [20], which is
organized by scene.
It is natural to predict image maps by using image

1.1. Related Work
The problem most like ours is predicting an intrinsic image (one predicts albedo and shading instead of the color
layers). The traditional approach splits an image into shading and albedo components [9]. Good strategies should
have three properties. First we wish to correctly predict individual pixels. Second we wish to avoid bad spatial patterns in the output, even over long scales. Third we should
be capable of predicting multiple channels, even when those
channels have complex interactions. The properties are usually in tension. For example the best independent prediction
of pixel values generally contains bad patterns. Traditionally, this tension is managed by an optimization problem. A
learned data term attempts to predict each pixel correctly
based on some local information while hand chosen priors enforce spatial and channel coherence. While the data
terms are often portable, priors are often specific to particular problems, and can be hard to identify. For example,
1567

