Model-Based Tracking at 300Hz using Raw Time-of-Flight Observations
Jan Stühmer §† , Sebastian Nowozin † , Andrew Fitzgibbon † , Richard Szeliski † , Travis Perry ‡ ,
Sunil Acharya ‡ , Daniel Cremers § and Jamie Shotton †
§

Technische Universität München

†

Microsoft Research

Abstract

modulated,
clustered

Microsoft

modulated,
equispaced

unmodulated,
equispaced

our approach

high frame-rate

frame 0

time

Consumer depth cameras have dramatically improved
our ability to track rigid, articulated, and deformable 3D
objects in real-time. However, depth cameras have a limited temporal resolution (frame-rate) that restricts the accuracy and robustness of tracking, especially for fast or unpredictable motion. In this paper, we show how to perform
model-based object tracking which allows to reconstruct the
object’s depth at an order of magnitude higher frame-rate
through simple modifications to an off-the-shelf depth camera. We focus on phase-based time-of-flight (ToF) sensing,
which reconstructs each low frame-rate depth image from
a set of short exposure ‘raw’ infrared captures. These raw
captures are taken in quick succession near the beginning of
each depth frame, and differ in the modulation of their active illumination. We make two contributions. First, we detail how to perform model-based tracking against these raw
captures. Second, we show that by reprogramming the camera to space the raw captures uniformly in time, we obtain
a 10x higher frame-rate, and thereby improve the ability to
track fast-moving objects.

inferred
depth

‡

frame 1

frame 2

phase-based ToF

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Overview. Phase-based time-of-flight (ToF) sensors infer a low frame-rate stream of depth images from a set of shortexposure ‘raw’ captures that are clustered closely in time to reduce
motion artifacts. For illustration purposes, we use five colors here
to indicate different frequencies and phase modulations of the illuminant and sensor; see text. For the application of model-based
tracking, we propose to forego the depth reconstruction step, and
instead track directly from equispaced raw captures, giving us signal at much higher frame-rate.

Tracking objects that move is a fundamental computer
vision task that enables higher-level reasoning about the
world. There are several key challenges for visual object tracking that limit the accuracy of current systems: (i)
changing object appearance due to object translation, rotation, deformation, and lighting variation; (ii) occlusion,
and objects leaving the viewing volume; (iii) simultaneous
tracking of multiple objects whose number may vary over
time; and (iv) tracking under fast object or camera motion.
General purpose tracking approaches address these challenges through adaptive non-parametric methods, as in
mean-shift tracking [4], and by online learning of a flexible object representation [22]. For multiple objects longer
temporal reasoning is required to disambiguate different ob-

jects with similar appearance [21, 1]. Despite significant
progress in the last decade, general purpose tracking remains challenging, as illustrated by the recent VOT 2014
challenge [16]. For other general surveys on object tracking, see [27, 26].
In this paper we do not address the general purpose tracking problem but instead focus on accurately tracking fastmoving rigid objects. One strategy to perform such tracking is to use custom high speed sensors and processing
units [20]. Alternatively one could increase the resolution
of the captured frames in order to improve angular accuracy,
a point made in an extensive synthetic SLAM study [10]. A
third option may be to use multiple camera systems [17].
13577

