Temporal Perception and Prediction in Ego-Centric Video
Yipin Zhou
Tamara L. Berg
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC, United States
[yipin,tlberg]@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
Given a video of an activity, can we predict what will
happen next? In this paper we explore two simple tasks
related to temporal prediction in egocentric videos of everyday activities. We provide both human experiments to
understand how well people can perform on these tasks and
computational models for prediction. Experiments indicate
that humans and computers can do well on temporal prediction and that personalization to a particular individual or
environment provides significantly increased performance.
Developing methods for temporal prediction could have far
reaching benefits for robots or intelligent agents to anticipate what a person will do, before they do it.

1. Introduction
Accurate visual recognition of image and video content
is becoming a reality: there have been significant recent
advancements in algorithms to recognize content elements,
such as, objects [21], scenes [42], or attributes [41]. Much
of this work focuses on estimating what’s in the frame, that
is, information that is directly visible within the image or
video. Alas, an image captures only a thin slice of reality, and much of true human-level visual understanding is
about what happens beyond the frame: making inferences
about the broader contexts, e.g. spatial, temporal, social,
etc, suggested by a given visual input.
In this paper we explore predicting temporal context beyond the frame, examining how well humans and computers
can make predictions about what will happen next during
everyday activities. Such reasoning will be necessary for
producing intelligent agents that can understand what a person is doing and anticipate what they are likely to do next.
Both types of inference can help produce robots that more
naturally interact with humans in our daily lives.
There has been a great deal of previous work on recognizing activities from general video [23, 7, 37, 22, 20] and
egocentric video [30, 9, 18, 33, 10]. Some recent work has
started to look at the task of predicting what might happen
next in video, focusing on specific tasks like predicting future trajectories of cars [36], pedestrians [19], or general
moving objects [40].
In our work we introduce two tasks related to temporal
prediction. In the first task, given two short video snippets
of an activity, the goal is to predict their correct temporal

ordering. In the second task, given a longer context video
plus two video snippets sampled from before or after the
context video, the goal is to predict which video snippet
was captured closest in time after the context video. This
task models the scenario of predicting what a person will
do next in ego-centric video.
These tasks have several advantages. They provide a
measure of video understanding that is complementary to
standard activity recognition with tasks that do not require
semantic labels, but are easy to evaluate. They also provide
quantitative measures for temporal prediction, one challenging aspect of general scene understanding. The tasks
are also designed so that we can ask (multiple) people to
perform the same tasks as the algorithms, allowing us to
measure human performance on temporal prediction. In
summary, this provides an initial first step toward enabling
computers to understand the temporal nature of videos.
We provide a variety of experiments to evaluate the temporal prediction tasks. First we evaluate human performance under several different scenarios. Given our findings,
we design several different computational methods for temporal prediction using state of the art deep learning features
selected to capture a range of different types of video content. To enable these experiments, we collect a new dataset
of ego-centric videos of everyday activities. This dataset
allows us to evaluate both general models for temporal prediction and prediction models personalized to a particular
individual or environment.
In summary, our contributions are:
• Definition of two new tasks for temporal prediction in
video: pairwise ordering and future prediction.
• A new dataset of ego-centric videos of everyday activities, including both individuals and families living in
the same location.
• Experiments to evaluate human performance on each
of the proposed temporal prediction tasks.
• Evaluation of deep features for object, scene, and motion estimation incorporated into several classification
methods for pairwise ordering and future prediction.
The rest of our paper is organized as follows. We first
review related work (Sec 1.1). Then we introduce the temporal prediction tasks (Sec 2.1) and our first person personalized activity dataset (Sec 2.2). Next we perform experi-

4498

