Additive Nearest Neighbor Feature Maps
Zhenzhen Wang1,2 , Xiao-Tong Yuan1 , Qingshan Liu1 and Shuicheng Yan2
1
Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, China
2
National University of Singapore, Singapore
wazhenzhen@gmail.com, {xtyuan,qsliu}@nuist.edu.cn, eleyans@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
In this paper, we present a concise framework to approximately construct feature maps for nonlinear additive kernels such as the Intersection, Hellinger’s, and χ2 kernels.
The core idea is to construct a set of anchor points for each
individual feature and assign to every query the feature map
of its nearest neighbor or the weighted combination of those
of its k-nearest neighbors in the anchors. The constructed
feature maps can be compactly stored by a group of nearest
neighbor (binary) indication vectors along with the anchor
feature maps. The approximation error of such an anchored
feature mapping approach is analyzed. We evaluate the performance of our approach on large-scale nonlinear support
vector machines (SVMs) learning tasks in the context of visual object classification. Experimental results on several
benchmark data sets show the superiority of our method
over existing feature mapping methods in achieving reasonable tradeoff between training time and testing accuracy.

1. Introduction
Discriminative classification using kernel Support Vector
Machines (SVMs) is one of the standard techniques used
in supervised machine learning and computer vision. According to the linearity or nonlinearity of the kernel function K(·, ·), the kernel SVMs can be categorized as linear SVMs or nonlinear SVMs. It is commonly acknowledged that the nonlinear SVMs tend to achieve better performances than those linear ones. For instance, by using χ2
kernel SVMs, Yang et al. [31] observed ∼ 15% improvement over linear SVMs on the Caltech-256 dataset [12],
Li [18] achieved more than 5% improvement on MNIST
dataset [15]. Maji and Berg [19] improved classification
accuracy by more than 10% using Intersection kernel on
Caltech-101 dataset [10] and DaimlerChrysler pedestrian
dataset [21]. Vedaldi and Zisserman [27] demonstrated the
effectiveness of the Hellinger’s kernel by an increase of
12% in classification accuracy on the Caltech-101 dataset.
Although often being inferior to their nonlinear coun-

terparts in accuracy, the linear SVMs have been shown to
scale well to sample and/or feature size by using large-scale
optimization tools such as stochastic optimization and consensus optimization [9, 24, 4, 5]. Models that operate on the
nonlinear kernel matrices usually take much longer time to
train and test than those linear ones. For example, a dataset
with half a million training examples and each of which
consists of thousands of features might take days to train
with any nonlinear kernels, not to mention using billion
or trillion features. In contrast, it only needs a few hours
to train using linear SVMs. Thus, with the current trend
of using ultra-high-dimensional representations and examples, huge computational cost and increasing storage space
of nonlinear SVMs have gradually been a bottleneck for the
extensive use of nonlinear classifiers.
The appealing classification performance of nonlinear
SVMs and the scalability of linear SVMs inspire researchers to develop the so called feature mapping technique to bridge the gap between linear and nonlinear
SVMs [27, 18, 30, 20]. The common spirit of this type
of methods is to map a data sample x ∈ RD to a higher
dimensional feature vector φ(x) such that the linear product of any two samples φ(x)⊤ φ(y) can well approximate
the kernel function K(x, y) evaluated on these two samples. After such a feature mapping, nonlinear SVMs can be
converted into linear ones for efficient and scalable training
and testing, while preserving the classification quality of the
original nonlinear classifiers.
In this paper, we are particularly interested in constructing feature maps for the following nonlinear kernels with
additive structure:
K(x, y) =

D
X

Kd (xd , yd ),

(1)

d=1

where Kd are bi-variate nonlinear functions.
For examPD
i yi
ple, the χ2 kernel with Kχ2 (x, y) = i=1 x2x
and the
PD i +yi
Intersection kernel with Kmin (x, y) =
i=1 min(xi , yi )
are two popular instances of additive kernels. The additive
structure of these kernels allows us to perform feature mapping independently for individual features. That is, we may

2866

