HD-CNN: Hierarchical Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
for Large Scale Visual Recognition
Zhicheng Yan† , Hao Zhang‡ , Robinson Piramuthu∗ , Vignesh Jagadeesh∗ ,
Dennis DeCoste∗ , Wei Di∗ , Yizhou Yu⋆†
†
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, ‡ Carnegie Mellon University
∗
eBay Research Lab, ⋆ The University of Hong Kong

Abstract
In image classification, visual separability between different object categories is highly uneven, and some categories are more difficult to distinguish than others. Such difficult categories demand more dedicated classifiers. However, existing deep convolutional neural networks (CNN)
are trained as flat N-way classifiers, and few efforts have
been made to leverage the hierarchical structure of categories. In this paper, we introduce hierarchical deep CNNs
(HD-CNNs) by embedding deep CNNs into a two-level category hierarchy. An HD-CNN separates easy classes using a coarse category classifier while distinguishing difficult classes using fine category classifiers. During HDCNN training, component-wise pretraining is followed by
global fine-tuning with a multinomial logistic loss regularized by a coarse category consistency term. In addition,
conditional executions of fine category classifiers and layer
parameter compression make HD-CNNs scalable for largescale visual recognition. We achieve state-of-the-art results
on both CIFAR100 and large-scale ImageNet 1000-class
benchmark datasets. In our experiments, we build up three
different two-level HD-CNNs, and they lower the top-1 error of the standard CNNs by 2.65%, 3.1%, and 1.1%.

1. Introduction
Deep CNNs are well suited for large-scale supervised visual recognition tasks because of their highly scalable training algorithm. It only needs to cache a small chunk of the
potentially huge volume of training data during sequential
scans. One of the complications that arises in large datasets
with a large number of categories is that the visual separability of object categories is highly uneven. Some categories are much harder to distinguish than others. Take the
categories in CIFAR100 as an example. It is easy to tell an
Apple from a Bus, but harder to tell an Apple from an Orange. In fact, both Apples and Oranges belong to the same

coarse category fruit and vegetables, while Buses belong to
another coarse category, vehicles 1, as defined within CIFAR100. Nonetheless, most deep CNN models nowadays
are flat N-way classifiers, which share a set of fully connected layers. This makes us wonder whether such a flat
structure is adequate for distinguishing all the difficult categories. A very natural and intuitive alternative organizes
classifiers in a hierarchical manner according to the divideand-conquer strategy. Although hierarchical classification
has been proven effective for conventional linear classifiers
[38, 8, 37, 22], few attempts have been made to exploit category hierarchies [3, 29] in deep CNN models.
Since deep CNN models are large models themselves,
organizing them hierarchically imposes the following challenges. First, instead of a handcrafted category hierarchy,
how can we learn such a category hierarchy from the training data itself so that cascaded inferences in a hierarchical
classifier will not degrade the overall accuracy while dedicated fine category classifiers exist for hard-to-distinguish
categories? Second, a hierarchical CNN classifier consists
of multiple CNN models at different levels. How can we
leverage the commonalities among these models and effectively train them all? Third, it would also be slower and
more memory consuming to run a hierarchical CNN classifier on a novel testing image. How can we alleviate such
limitations?
In this paper, we propose a generic and principled hierarchical architecture, Hierarchical Deep Convolutional Neural Network (HD-CNN), that decomposes an image classification task into two steps. First, easy classes are separated by a coarse category CNN classifier. Second, challenging classes are routed downstream to fine category classifiers. HD-CNN is modular and is built upon a building
block CNN, which can be chosen to be any of the stateof-the-art single CNN. An HD-CNN follows the coarse-tofine classification paradigm and probabilistically integrates
predictions from fine category classifiers. We show that
HD-CNN can achieve lower error than the corresponding
building block CNN, at the cost of a manageable increase

2740

