MeshStereo: A Global Stereo Model with Mesh Alignment Regularization for
View Interpolation
Chi Zhang2,3∗ Zhiwei Li1

Yanhua Cheng4

Rui Cai1

Hongyang Chao2,3

Yong Rui1

1

3

2
Microsoft Research
Sun Yat-Sen University
SYSU-CMU Shunde International Joint Research Institute, P.R. China
4
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
We present a novel global stereo model designed for view
interpolation. Unlike existing stereo models which only output a disparity map, our model is able to output a 3D triangular mesh, which can be directly used for view interpolation. To this aim, we partition the input stereo images
into 2D triangles with shared vertices. Lifting the 2D triangulation to 3D naturally generates a corresponding mesh.
A technical difficulty is to properly split vertices to multiple copies when they appear at depth discontinuous boundaries. To deal with this problem, we formulate our objective as a two-layer MRF, with the upper layer modeling the
splitting properties of the vertices and the lower layer optimizing a region-based stereo matching. Experiments on
the Middlebury and the Herodion datasets demonstrate that
our model is able to synthesize visually coherent new view
angles with high PSNR, as well as outputting high quality
disparity maps which rank at the first place on the new challenging high resolution Middlebury 3.0 benchmark.

1. Introduction
Stereo model is a key component to generate 3D proxies
(either point-clouds [18] or triangular meshes [15]) for view
interpolation. Mesh-based approaches are becoming more
and more popular [15][16][6][20] because they are faster
in rendering speed, have more compact model size and produce better visual effects compared to the point-cloud-based
approaches. A typical pipeline to obtain triangular meshes
consists of two steps: 1) generate disparity/depth maps by
a stereo model, and 2) extract meshes from the estimated
disparity maps by heuristic methods, such as triangulating
∗ The first author was partially supported by the NSF of China under

Grant 61173081, the Guangdong Natural Science Foundation, China, under Grant S2011020001215, and the Guangzhou Science and Technology
Program, China, under Grant 201510010165.

Figure 1. A 2D triangulation and a 3D mesh of the Bowling2 test
case from Middlebury 2.0 [14] generated by our approach. Blue
dots in the left images denote 2D vertices whose splitting probability greater than 0.5.

the polyline-simplified disparity regions [16].
However, due to the separation of the two steps, the obtained meshes may not be optimal for the final goal of view
interpolation. The stereo matching community mainly focuses on producing disparity maps with low pixel-wise error rates [5][9][25][23][17][12][24]. However, pixel-wise
accurate disparity maps are not necessary nor sufficient to
generate high quality meshes for the task of view interpolation. Moreover, the internal structures of a mesh, e.g.,
alignment of adjacent triangles, which would be helpful for
rendering, are not exploited.
This observation motivates us to develop an integrated
approach for view interpolation, which should have two desired properties: 1) the model can naturally produce a mesh
structure, such that view interpolation reduces to a simple
rendering problem; 2) the model can output a corresponding disparity map with high quality to make the rendering
results look as natural as possible. In this paper, we propose
a stereo model that works on a 2D triangulation of an input
view with these two goals in mind.
In the proposed model, an input image is first partitioned
into 2D triangular regions according to edge distribution
and local visual consistency, as shown in Fig. 1, with common vertices shared by adjacent triangles. To generate the
12057

