Panoptic Studio: A Massively Multiview System for Social Motion Capture ∗
Hanbyul Joo Hao Liu† Lei Tan‡ Lin Gui† Bart Nabbe
Iain Matthews§ Takeo Kanade Shohei Nobuharak Yaser Sheikh
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
{hanbyulj,bana,tk,yaser}@cs.cmu.edu, {liu.hao,gui.lin}@ouc.edu.cn, tanlei@hnu.edu.cn
iainm@disneyresearch.com, nob@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract
We present an approach to capture the 3D structure and
motion of a group of people engaged in a social interaction. The core challenges in capturing social interactions
are: (1) occlusion is functional and frequent; (2) subtle motion needs to be measured over a space large enough to
host a social group; and (3) human appearance and configuration variation is immense. The Panoptic Studio is a
system organized around the thesis that social interactions
should be measured through the perceptual integration of
a large variety of view points. We present a modularized
system designed around this principle, consisting of integrated structural, hardware, and software innovations. The
system takes, as input, 480 synchronized video streams of
multiple people engaged in social activities, and produces,
as output, the labeled time-varying 3D structure of anatomical landmarks on individuals in the space. The algorithmic contributions include a hierarchical approach for generating skeletal trajectory proposals, and an optimization
framework for skeletal reconstruction with trajectory reassociation.

1. Introduction
There is a prevailing scientific consensus that nearly
two-thirds of interpersonal communication is transmitted
via nonverbal cues [6, 33]. Yet, despite the fundamental
role these cues play in enabling social function, the protocol underlying this communication is poorly understood—
Sapir [35] called it “an elaborate code that is written
nowhere, known to no one, and understood by all”. Some
structures of this code have been identified through observational study, such as reciprocity [7] or synchrony [10].

However, systematic studies of such phenomena have remained almost entirely focused on the analysis of facial
expressions, despite emerging evidence [28, 3] that facial
expressions provide a fundamentally incomplete characterization of nonverbal communication. One proximal cause
for this singular focus on the face is that capturing natural
social interaction presents challenges that current state-ofthe-art motion capture systems simply cannot address.
There are three principal challenges in capturing social
signaling between individuals in a group: (1) subtle motion has to be measured over a volume sufficient to house
a dynamic social group; (2) strong occlusions functionally
emerge in natural social interactions (e.g., people systematically face each other while interacting, bodies are occluded
by gesticulating limbs); (3) social signaling is sensitive to
interference. For instance, attaching markers to the face or
body, a pre-capture model building stage, or even instructing each individual to assume a canonical body pose during
an interaction, primes the nature of subsequent interactions.
In this paper, we present a system designed to address these issues, with integrated innovations in hardware design, motion representation, and motion reconstruction. The organizing principle is that social motion capture
should be performed by the consolidation of a large number of “weak” perceptual processes rather than the analysis
of a few sophisticated sensors. The large number of views
provide robustness to occlusions, provide precision over the
capture space, and facilitate the boosting of weak 2D human
pose detectors into a strong 3D skeletal tracker. In particular, our contributions include:
1. Modularized Hardware: We present the modular
design of a massively multiview capture consisting
of 480 simultaneously triggered VGA cameras, distributed over the surface of 5.49m geodesic sphere
(sufficient to house social groups).

∗ http://www.cs.cmu.edu/ hanbyulj/panoptic-studio
˜
† Ocean University of China

2. Skeletal Representation: We present a new representation for social motion capture labeling and embedding a dense 3D trajectory stream within a moving

‡ Hunan University
§ Disney Research Pittsburgh
k Kyoto University

3334

