Joint Object and Part Segmentation using Deep Learned Potentials
Peng Wang1 Xiaohui Shen2 Zhe Lin2 Scott Cohen2 Brian Price2 Alan Yuille1
1
University of California, Los Angeles 2 Adobe Research

Abstract
Segmenting semantic objects from images and parsing
them into their respective semantic parts are fundamental
steps towards detailed object understanding in computer vision. In this paper, we propose a joint solution that tackles semantic object and part segmentation simultaneously,
in which higher object-level context is provided to guide
part segmentation, and more detailed part-level localization is utilized to refine object segmentation. Specifically,
we first introduce the concept of semantic compositional
parts (SCP) in which similar semantic parts are grouped
and shared among different objects. A two-stream fully convolutional network (FCN) is then trained to provide the SCP
and object potentials at each pixel. At the same time, a
compact set of segments can also be obtained from the SCP
predictions of the network. Given the potentials and the
generated segments, in order to explore long-range context,
we finally construct an efficient fully connected conditional
random field (FCRF) to jointly predict the final object and
part labels. Extensive evaluation on three different datasets
shows that our approach can mutually enhance the performance of object and part segmentation, and outperforms the
current state-of-the-art on both tasks.

1. Introduction
Decomposing an object into semantic parts enables a
more detailed understanding of the object, which can provide additional information to benefit many computer vision
tasks such as pose estimation [42, 11], detection [3, 8], segmentation [13], and fine-grained recognition [44]. Thus, it
has become an attractive research topic to leverage semantic part representation through part detection [5, 16, 8], and
human joint estimation [36].
In the literature of semantic segmentation, while objectlevel segmentation over multiple object categories has
been extensively studied along with the growing popularity of standard evaluation benchmarks such as PASCAL
VOC [15], object parsing (i.e., segmenting objects into semantic parts) is addressed mostly for a few specific categories provided with accurate localization such as human [45, 13, 11] and cars [13].
With the increasing availability of semantic part anno-

tail

dog

head
body
leg

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. We handle the prediction of semantic object and part
segmentation in a wild scene scenario. (a) Original image. (b)&(c)
are the object and part segmentation respectively, generated from
our algorithm.

tations [8], more recent works have attempted to handle
more difficult classes like animals with homogeneous appearance [39], and to perform both object and part segmentation [21], as illustrated in Fig. 1. However, in [21], object and part segmentation are performed sequentially, in
which the object mask is first segmented, and then the part
labels are assigned to the pixels within the mask. As a result, the errors from the predicted semantic object masks
may be propagated to the parts.
In fact, object and part segmentation are complementary and mutually beneficial to each other. Semantic object segmentation requires a larger receptive field in order
to correctly recognize the object, while part segmentation
focuses on local details to obtain more accurate segmentation boundaries and accommodate large pose and viewpoint
variations. If these two tasks are tackled simultaneously, by
integrating the object-level guidance with part-level detailed
segmentation, we can address two of the most challenging
problems at the same time, i.e., discovering the subtle appearance differences between different parts within a single
object, and avoiding the ambiguity across similar object categories. Motivated by this observation, we propose a joint
solution to object and part segmentation, in which the consistency of the object and parts are enforced through joint
training and inference.
Fig. 2 shows the overall framework of our approach.
When performing part segmentation over multiple object
classes, the appearance of some parts may be very similar, e.g., horse legs and cow legs. Therefore in order to reduce the ambiguity and complexity during training, instead
of treating each semantic part type independently [21], we
allow some part labels to be shared by related object classes,
and group the labelled parts of different classes into a se11573

