Multi-Label Cross-modal Retrieval
Viresh Ranjan1∗ Nikhil Rasiwasia2
1

Virginia Tech

2

Snapdeal.com

3

C. V. Jawahar3

CVIT, IIIT Hyderabad

Abstract
In this work, we address the problem of cross-modal retrieval in presence of multi-label annotations. In particular, we introduce multi-label Canonical Correlation Analysis (ml-CCA), an extension of CCA, for learning shared
subspaces taking into account the high level semantic information in the form of multi-label annotations. Unlike
CCA, ml-CCA does not rely on explicit pairings between
the modalities, instead it uses the multi-label information to
establish correspondences. This results in a discriminative
subspace which is better suited for cross-modal retrieval
tasks. We also present Fast ml-CCA, a computationally efficient version of ml-CCA, which is able to handle large scale
datasets. We show the efficacy of our approach by conducting extensive cross-modal retrieval experiments on three
standard benchmark datasets. The results show that the
proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art retrieval performance on the three datasets.

1. Introduction
With the huge surge in multimedia content over the internet, coupled by factors such as reduction in the cost of
storage devices and high speed internet connectivity, most
of the websites now contain rich content pertaining to various modalities such as text, image, video, audio, animation
etc. This has led to the development of cross-modal systems, where the goal is to build systems that enable interactivity across content modalities. For example, the design of
cross-modal retrieval systems [5, 9, 22, 23, 27, 35, 14, 29,
34, 38, 36, 20], where queries from one modality (e.g., image) can be matched to database entries from another (e.g.,
text articles).
In recent years, a lot of work has been done in the
computer vision community towards the development of
cross-modal systems. One popular solution is to learn a
common latent space by learning modality-specific projections using paired samples across the two modalities,
followed by classification/retrieval operation. This latent
∗ This work was done while VR was a student at CVIT, IIIT Hyderabad.

Figure 1: Figure shows two images from Caltech-256
dataset [6]. The images belong to the classes “camel” (L)
and “laptop” (R) respectively. Clearly, both the images can
also be labeled with the class “people”.

space is cross-modal as both the modalities can be represented in this space without any distinction. Several approaches have been proposed to learn such cross-modal
spaces [5, 9, 22, 23, 27, 35, 14]. Of these, Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) is fast becoming the de-facto standard where the common subspace is learned by maximizing
the correlation between the projections of the two modalities.
While CCA has been popular for its simplicity and efficiency, it has several drawbacks. First and foremost is
the inability of the classic CCA to account for additional
high-level semantic information such as the class label of
the datapoints. Since class information is not utilized while
learning the projection directions, the learned subspace is
less discriminative in nature [23, 27]. In the past few years,
several works have successfully addressed the above shortcoming by proposing alternatives and extensions of CCA
to account for label information [27, 23, 5, 30]. However,
most of these strategies assume that the data is annotated
with a single label. Although the simplest case of additional semantic information is that of single-label, often it
is not sufficient to talk about multimedia data belonging to
a single class. In fact, even in standard single-label singlemodality datasets, it is often the case that a natural image
can be assigned to multiple classes. For example, Figure 1,
shows two images from popular single-label ‘Caltech256’
dataset [6]. Although they were labeled with “camel” and
“laptop” classes respectively, they can also be labeled with
14094

