Multi-view Convolutional Neural Networks for 3D Shape Recognition
Hang Su

Subhransu Maji
Evangelos Kalogerakis
University of Massachusetts, Amherst

Erik Learned-Miller

{hsu,smaji,kalo,elm}@cs.umass.edu

Abstract
A longstanding question in computer vision concerns the
representation of 3D shapes for recognition: should 3D
shapes be represented with descriptors operating on their
native 3D formats, such as voxel grid or polygon mesh, or
can they be effectively represented with view-based descriptors? We address this question in the context of learning
to recognize 3D shapes from a collection of their rendered
views on 2D images. We first present a standard CNN architecture trained to recognize the shapes’ rendered views
independently of each other, and show that a 3D shape
can be recognized even from a single view at an accuracy
far higher than using state-of-the-art 3D shape descriptors.
Recognition rates further increase when multiple views of
the shapes are provided. In addition, we present a novel
CNN architecture that combines information from multiple
views of a 3D shape into a single and compact shape descriptor offering even better recognition performance. The
same architecture can be applied to accurately recognize
human hand-drawn sketches of shapes. We conclude that
a collection of 2D views can be highly informative for 3D
shape recognition and is amenable to emerging CNN architectures and their derivatives.

1. Introduction
One of the fundamental challenges of computer vision is
to draw inferences about the three-dimensional (3D) world
from two-dimensional (2D) images. Since one seldom has
access to 3D object models, one must usually learn to recognize and reason about 3D objects based upon their 2D appearances from various viewpoints. Thus, computer vision
researchers have typically developed object recognition algorithms from 2D features of 2D images, and used them to
classify new 2D pictures of those objects.
But what if one does have access to 3D models of each
object of interest? In this case, one can directly train
recognition algorithms on 3D features such as voxel occupancy or surface curvature. The possibility of building such
classifiers of 3D shapes directly from 3D representations

has recently emerged due to the introduction of large 3D
shape repositories, such as 3D Warehouse, TurboSquid, and
Shapeways. For example, when Wu et al. [37] introduced
the ModelNet 3D shape database, they presented a classifier for 3D shapes using a deep belief network architecture
trained on voxel representations.
While intuitively, it seems logical to build 3D shape classifiers directly from 3D models, in this paper we present
a seemingly counterintuitive result – that by building classifiers of 3D shapes from 2D image renderings of those
shapes, we can actually dramatically outperform the classifiers built directly on the 3D representations. In particular,
a convolutional neural network (CNN) trained on a fixed set
of rendered views of a 3D shape and only provided with a
single view at test time increases category recognition accuracy by a remarkable 8% (77% → 85%) over the best models [37] trained on 3D representations. With more views
provided at test time, its performance further increases.
One reason for this result is the relative efficiency of the
2D versus the 3D representations. In particular, while a full
resolution 3D representation contains all of the information
about an object, in order to use a voxel-based representation in a deep network that can be trained with available
samples and in a reasonable amount of time, it would appear that the resolution needs to be significantly reduced.
For example, 3D ShapeNets use a coarse representation of
shape, a 30×30×30 grid of binary voxels. In contrast a single projection of the 3D model of the same input size corresponds to an image of 164×164 pixels, or slightly smaller
if multiple projections are used. Indeed, there is an inherent
trade-off between increasing the amount of explicit depth
information (3D models) and increasing spatial resolution
(projected 2D models).
Another advantage of using 2D representations is that
we can leverage (i) advances in image descriptors [22, 26]
and (ii) massive image databases (such as ImageNet [9]) to
pre-train our CNN architectures. Because images are ubiquitous and large labeled datasets are abundant, we can learn
a good deal about generic features for 2D image categorization and then fine-tune to specifics about 3D model projections. While it is possible that some day as much 3D
1945

