Rendering of Eyes for Eye-Shape Registration and Gaze Estimation
Erroll Wood1 , Tadas Baltrušaitis1 , Xucong Zhang2 , Yusuke Sugano2 , Peter Robinson1 , Andreas Bulling2
University of Cambridge, United Kingdom {eww23,tb346,pr10}@cam.ac.uk
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Germany {xczhang,sugano,bulling}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
Images of the eye are key in several computer vision
problems, such as shape registration and gaze estimation.
Recent large-scale supervised methods for these problems
require time-consuming data collection and manual annotation, which can be unreliable. We propose synthesizing
perfectly labelled photo-realistic training data in a fraction
of the time. We used computer graphics techniques to build
a collection of dynamic eye-region models from head scan
geometry. These were randomly posed to synthesize close-up
eye images for a wide range of head poses, gaze directions,
and illumination conditions. We used our model’s controllability to verify the importance of realistic illumination
and shape variations in eye-region training data. Finally,
we demonstrate the benefits of our synthesized training data
(SynthesEyes) by out-performing state-of-the-art methods for
eye-shape registration as well as cross-dataset appearancebased gaze estimation in the wild.

1. Introduction
The eyes and their movements convey our attention and
play a role in communicating social and emotional information [1]. Therefore they are important for a range of
applications including gaze-based human-computer interaction [2], visual behavior monitoring [3], and – more recently
– collaborative human-computer vision systems [4, 5]. Typical computer vision tasks involving the eye include gaze
estimation: determining where someone is looking, and eyeshape registration: detecting anatomical landmarks of the
eye, often as part of the face (e.g. eyelids).
Machine learning methods that leverage large amounts of
training data currently perform best for many problems in
computer vision, such as object detection [6], scene recognition [7], or gaze estimation [8]. However, capturing data
for supervised learning can be time-consuming and require
accurate ground truth annotation. This annotation process

Rendered training images

Eye-shape registration

Gaze estimation

pitch = 15°, yaw = 9°

Figure 1: We render a large number of photorealistic images of eyes
using a dynamic eye region model. These are used as training data
for eye-shape registration and appearance-based gaze estimation.

can be expensive and tedious, and there is no guarantee that
human-provided labels will be correct. Ground truth annotation is particularly challenging and error-prone for learning
tasks that require accurate labels, such as tracking facial
landmarks for expression analysis, and gaze estimation.
To address these problems, researchers have employed
learning-by-synthesis techniques to generate large amounts
training data with computer graphics. The advantages of this
approach are that both data collection and annotation require
little human labour and image synthesis can be geared to
specific application scenarios. The eye-region is particularly difficult to model accurately given the dynamic shape
changes it undergoes with facial motion and eyeball rotation,
and the complex material structure of the eyeball itself. For
this reason, recent work on learning-by-synthesis for gaze
estimation employed only fundamental computer graphics
techniques – rendering low-resolution meshes without modeling illumination changes or accounting for the varying
material properties of the face [9]. In addition, these models
are not fully controllable and the synthesized datasets contain
only gaze labels, limiting their usefulness for other computer
vision problems, such as facial landmark registration.
We present a novel method for rendering realistic eyeregion images at a large scale using a collection of dynamic

3756

