Unsupervised Tube Extraction using Transductive Learning and Dense
Trajectories
Mihai Marian Puscas1 , Enver Sangineto1 , Dubravko Culibrk1,2 and Nicu Sebe1
1
Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science,
University of Trento, Italy
2
Department of Industrial Engineering and Management,
University of Novi Sad, Serbia
mihaimarian.puscas,sangineto,Dubravko.Culibrk@unitn.it; sebe@disi.unitn.it

Abstract
We address the problem of automatic extraction of foreground objects from videos. The goal is to provide a method
for unsupervised collection of samples which can be further used for object detection training without any human
intervention. We use the well known Selective Search approach to produce an initial still-image based segmentation
of the video frames. This initial set of proposals is pruned
and temporally extended using optical flow and transductive learning. Specifically, we propose to use Dense Trajectories in order to robustly match and track candidate boxes
over different frames. The obtained box tracks are used to
collect samples for unsupervised training of track-specific
detectors. Finally, the detectors are run on the videos to extract the final tubes. The combination of appearance-based
static ”objectness” (Selective Search), motion information
(Dense Trajectories) and transductive learning (detectors
are forced to ”overfit” on the unsupervised data used for
training) makes the proposed approach extremely robust.
We outperform state-of-the-art systems by a large margin
on common benchmarks used for tube proposal evaluation.

1. Introduction
The main motivation behind this work is to develop a
method for automatic extraction of samples from videos
which can then be used for unsupervised training of object
detectors. In fact, the impressive progress recently obtained
in object classification and object detection, e.g., using Convolutional Neural Networks [15, 11], heavily relies on huge
datasets for training. While there exist huge supervised
datasets for object classification (e.g., Imagenet), common
datasets for object detection are much smaller, due to the
additional effort which is necessary to produce bounding

Figure 1. Optical Flow between two consecutive frames can be
used as a ”voting” mechanism for matching Bonding Boxes. The
blue lines are dense trajectories in common between the two boxes,
while the red lines are trajectory starting from the first box but not
included in the second.

box (BB) annotations. However, there is a source of information which is not sufficiently taken into account, which
can be used as a sort of surrogate of manual annotation,
and this information is motion. In a given video, many objects of interest (persons, animals, vehicles, common tools,
etc.) usually have a relative movement with respect to the
camera viewpoint. This movement can be exploited to automatically segment such objects and provide BBs without
human intervention.
One of the first attempts in this direction is the work of
[19], in which Prest et al. extract tubes from a video clip
which are used to train an object detector. A tube is defined
as a sequence of BBs which (tightly) encloses the object of
interest over different frames. This definition can be seen as
a temporal extension of the ”objectness”, the property of an
image window to likely contain an object instead of uninformative background. Objectness in still images has been
studied in many works [24, 1, 5, 7]. For instance, Selective
Search [24] is widely used in the object detection community in order to select a subset of windows in a still image
which are then input to the classifier. However, it is worth
noticing that the main goal of Selective Search and similar
approaches is to speed up the testing phase, i.e., to replace
the ”old” sliding window approach with an initial selection
11653

