Automated Facial Trait Judgment and Election Outcome Prediction:
Social Dimensions of Face
Jungseock Joo1,3 , Francis F. Steen2 , and Song-Chun Zhu1
1

Departments of Computer Science and Statistics, UCLA
2
Department of Communication Studies, UCLA
3
Facebook
jungseock@gmail.com

Abstract
The human face is a primary medium of human communication and a prominent source of information used to
infer various attributes. In this paper, we study a fully automated system that can infer the perceived traits of a person
from his face – social dimensions, such as “intelligence,”
“honesty,” and “competence” – and how those traits can
be used to predict the outcomes of real-world social events
that involve long-term commitments, such as political elections, job hires, and marriage engagements. To this end,
we propose a hierarchical model for enduring traits inferred from faces, incorporating high-level perceptions and
intermediate-level attributes.
We show that our trained model can successfully classify
the outcomes of two important political events, only using
the photographs of politicians’ faces. Firstly, it classifies
the winners of a series of recent U.S. elections with the accuracy of 67.9% (Governors) and 65.5% (Senators). We
also reveal that the different political offices require different types of preferred traits. Secondly, our model can
categorize the political party affiliations of politicians, i.e.,
Democrats vs. Republicans, with the accuracy of 62.6%
(male) and 60.1% (female). To the best of our knowledge,
our paper is the first to use automated visual trait analysis
to predict the outcomes of real-world social events. This
approach is more scalable and objective than the prior behavioral studies, and opens for a range of new applications.

1. Introduction
1.1. Trait Judgment from Faces
The human face is a highly salient medium of human communication, carrying surprisingly rich information
about the subject, including gender [12], ethnicity [14], age

Figure 1. The inferred social dimensions of faces of a few Republican politicians who may run for 2016 presidency, predicted by
our learned model.

[31], emotional state [11, 10], and identity [38, 22], each of
which has been studied intensively both in human perception and computer vision. Furthermore, research in social
psychology suggests that people also make inference about
persistent social traits such as “trustworthy” or “dominant”
from facial appearance [5, 25]. Evaluating others along
these dimensions is a routine activity in our daily lives:
when we choose a spouse, hire a new employee, or select political leaders to make crucial decisions on our behalf. An extensive literature indicates that facial appearance can have a significant impact on social trait judgment
[32, 34, 37].
In this paper, we study the cognitive procedure of social
13712

