Context-aware CNNs for person head detection
Tuan-Hung Vu∗

Anton Osokin†

Ivan Laptev∗

INRIA/ENS

Abstract
Person detection is a key problem for many computer vision tasks. While face detection has reached maturity, detecting people under a full variation of camera view-points,
human poses, lighting conditions and occlusions is still a
difficult challenge. In this work we focus on detecting human heads in natural scenes. Starting from the recent local
R-CNN object detector, we extend it with two types of contextual cues. First, we leverage person-scene relations and
propose a Global CNN model trained to predict positions
and scales of heads directly from the full image. Second,
we explicitly model pairwise relations among objects and
train a Pairwise CNN model using a structured-output surrogate loss. The Local, Global and Pairwise models are
combined into a joint CNN framework. To train and test
our full model, we introduce a large dataset composed of
369, 846 human heads annotated in 224, 740 movie frames.
We evaluate our method and demonstrate improvements of
person head detection against several recent baselines in
three datasets. We also show improvements of the detection
speed provided by our model.

1. Introduction
Common images and videos primarily focus on people.
Indeed, about 35% of pixels in movies and YouTube videos
as well as about 25% of pixels in photographs belong to
people [18]. This strong bias together with the growing
amount of daily videos and photographs urge reliable methods for person analysis in visual data.
Person detection is a key component for many tasks including person identification, action recognition, age and
gender recognition, autonomous driving, cloth recognition
and many others. While face detection has reached maturity [21], the more general task of finding people in images
and video still remains to be very challenging. For example, state-of-the-art object detectors [12] reach only 65%
Average Precision for the person class on the Pascal VOC
∗ WILLOW project-team, Départment d’Informatique de l’Ecole Normale Supérieure, ENS/INRIA/CNRS UMR 8548, Paris, France
† SIERRA project-team, Départment d’Informatique de l’Ecole Normale Supérieure, ENS/INRIA/CNRS UMR 8548, Paris, France

Local model

Global model

Pairwise model

Figure 1. Results of head detection for a sample movie frame. The
output of our method (bottom) is obtained from the combination
of Local, Global and Pairwise CNN models. Bounding boxes illustrate detections: yellow – correct, red – false. Links between
detections correspond to the pairwise potentials of our model: yellow – attractive, red – repulsive.

benchmark. Common difficulties arise from variations in
human pose, background clutter, motion blur, low image
resolution, occlusions and poor lighting conditions.
Recent advances in Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNN) [19] have brought significant progress in image classification [17] and other vision tasks. In particular, CNNbased object detectors such as R-CNN [12] have shown
large gains compared to previous models [11, 37]. Most
of existing methods, however, treat objects independently
and model appearance inside object bounding boxes only.
Meanwhile, information available in the scene around objects [33] as well as relations among objects [7] are known
to provide complementary contextual cues for recognition.
Such cues are likely to be particularly helpful when object
appearance lacks discriminative cues due to low image resolution, poor lighting and other factors.
In this work we build on the recent CNN model for object detection [12] and extend it to contextual reasoning.
We particularly focus on person detection and aim to lo-

2893

