RGB-W: When Vision Meets Wireless
Alexandre Alahi
Albert Haque
Li Fei-Fei
Computer Science Department, Stanford University
{alahi,ahaque,feifeili}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract

Meters
20

Inspired by the recent success of RGB-D cameras, we
propose the enrichment of RGB data with an additional
“quasi-free” modality, namely, the wireless signal emitted
by individuals’ cell phones, referred to as RGB-W. The received signal strength acts as a rough proxy for depth and
a reliable cue on a person’s identity. Although the measured signals are noisy, we demonstrate that the combination of visual and wireless data significantly improves the
localization accuracy. We introduce a novel image-driven
representation of wireless data which embeds all received
signals onto a single image. We then evaluate the ability of
this additional data to (i) locate persons within a sparsitydriven framework and to (ii) track individuals with a new
confidence measure on the data association problem. Our
solution outperforms existing localization methods. It can
be applied to the millions of currently installed RGB cameras to better analyze human behavior and offer the next
generation of high-accuracy location-based services.

1. Introduction
The analysis of human behavior in indoor spaces significantly improved over the recent years as a result of complementing RGB data with the depth modality (RGB-D)
[34, 18, 7, 2]. However, these setups are rare and often too
costly to deploy. Today, millions of spaces are monitored by
a single RGB camera. The challenges with these monocular
views lie in the depth estimation and self-occlusion problems. To address these challenges, we propose to complement RGB data with an additional “quasi-free” modality,
namely wireless signals (e.g. wifi or Bluetooth) emitted
by cell phones, referred to as RGB-W (see Figure 1). Recent studies have shown that over 50% of visitors in public spaces leave their wifi enabled, and several municipal
governments are planning large-scale wifi implementations.
Meanwhile, beacon technology (Bluetooth Low Energy) is
also being deployed in public spaces to enable locationbased services such as self-guided tours, item delivery, or to
perform role-based activity understanding in hospitals. To

MAC7
MAC4
MAC13
MAC3
12:a2:D9

MAC9

10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3

MAC22
92:A2:BD

2
MAC2
MAC1

1
MAC10
0

CD:10:9F
9F:2D:31

12:AF:39

Figure 1: Illustration of a scene captured with RGB-W data. The W data
represents the received signal strength (RSS) from individuals’ cell phones
(through wifi or Bluetooth) with their corresponding unique identifier (e.g.,
MAC address). We aim to jointly locate and track individuals with our
proposed ring-based image representation of the wireless signals.

benefit from these services, visitors and staff intentionally
agree to share their wireless signal.
In this paper, we aim to improve the localization and
tracking of individuals with RGB-W data. This has numerous benefits for applications ranging from space analytics for safety, security, and behavioral studies, to locationbased services using smartphones. For the sake of clarity,
we refer to wifi, Bluetooth, or beacon signals, as W data
throughout this paper. W data provides a stream of packets from each phone describing the received signal strength
(RSS) of the packets and their origin – a unique identifier
commonly called a mac ID. The tuple {RSS, mac ID} is
captured through the W modality and serves as an additional source of information to better solve vision tasks with
a RGB camera.
The underlying motivation behind RGB-W data is the
complementary nature of the two modalities. On one hand,
RGB-based methods can accurately locate and track individuals in the absence of occlusion, but in crowded scenes,
their performance deteriorates. On the other hand, W data
does not suffer from the occlusion problem and can solve
the data association across time with the observed mac ID,
but cannot precisely locate in 3D. To fuse the advantages

3289

