Learning to track for spatio-temporal action localization
Philippe Weinzaepfela

Zaid Harchaouia,b
a
b
Inria∗
NYU

Cordelia Schmida

firstname.lastname@inria.fr

Abstract
We propose an effective approach for spatio-temporal
action localization in realistic videos. The approach first
detects proposals at the frame-level and scores them with
a combination of static and motion CNN features. It then
tracks high-scoring proposals throughout the video using
a tracking-by-detection approach. Our tracker relies simultaneously on instance-level and class-level detectors.
The tracks are scored using a spatio-temporal motion histogram, a descriptor at the track level, in combination with
the CNN features. Finally, we perform temporal localization of the action using a sliding-window approach at the
track level. We present experimental results for spatiotemporal localization on the UCF-Sports, J-HMDB and
UCF-101 action localization datasets, where our approach
outperforms the state of the art with a margin of 15%, 7%
and 12% respectively in mAP.

1. Introduction
Recent work on action recognition mostly focuses on the
problem of action classification [22, 33, 43]. The goal is to
assign a category label to a video, in most cases cropped to
the extent of the action. In a long stream of video, an action
may have varying temporal extent. Furthermore, the action
is also spatially localized. Yet, detecting an action in space
and time remains a challenging task which received little
attention so far.
Some previous works address related issues by putting
emphasis either on the spatial or on the temporal localization. Action recognition and localization in still images [3]
is an extreme example along the first line, where local detectors are trained e.g. with HOG features and localize spatially the person and/or the object. On the other extreme,
recent work on action recognition and localization from
videos [7, 19, 31] perform temporal localization, for which
dense motion features such as dense trajectories [43] proved
effective.
∗ LEAR team, Inria Grenoble Rhone-Alpes, Laboratoire Jean Kuntzmann, CNRS, Univ. Grenoble Alpes, France.

Several recent works address spatial and temporal localization jointly. They resort to figure-centric models [27, 34,
23], discriminative parts [30] or proposals [15, 46, 11]. Proposals are obtained by hierarchical merging of supervoxels [15], by maximizing an actionness score [46] or by relying on selective search regions and CNN features [11].
The main challenge in spatio-temporal localization is to
accommodate the uncertainty of per-frame spatial localization and the temporal consistency. If the spatial localization performed independently on each frame is too selective
and at the same time uncertain, then enforcing the temporal consistency of the localization may fail. Here we use
proposals to obtain a set of per frame spatial proposals and
enforce temporal consistency based on a tracker, that simultaneously relies on instance-level and class-level detectors.
Our approach starts from frame-level proposals extracted
with a high-recall proposal algorithm [47]. Proposals are
scored using CNN descriptors based on appearance and motion information [11]. To ensure the temporal consistency,
we propose to track them with a tracking-by-detection approach combining an instance-level and class-level detector.
We then score the tracks with the CNN features as well as
a spatio-temporal motion histogram descriptor, which captures the dynamics of an action. At this stage, the tracks
are localized in space, but the temporal localization needs
to be determined. Temporal localization is performed using
a multi-scale sliding-window approach at the track level.
In summary, this paper introduces an approach for
spatio-temporal localization, by learning to track, with
state-of-the-art experimental results on UCF-Sports, JHMDB and UCF-101. A spatio-temporal local descriptor
allows to single out more relevant tracks and temporally localize the action at the track level.
This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 2, we review related work on action localization. We then present
an overview of our approach in Sec. 3 and give the details
in Sec. 4. Finally, Sec. 5 presents experimental results.

2. Related work
Most approaches for action recognition focus on action
classification [1, 33]. Feature representations such as bag13164

