Recursive Fréchet Mean Computation on the Grassmannian and its Applications
to Computer Vision
Rudrasis Chakraborty and Baba C. Vemuri
Department of CISE, University of Florida
Gainesville, FL 32611, USA
{rudrasis, vemuri}@cise.ufl.edu
Abstract

In the past decade, Grassmann manifolds (Grassmannian) have been commonly used in mathematical formulations of many Computer Vision tasks. Averaging points
on a Grassmann manifold is a very common operation in
many applications including but not limited to, tracking, action recognition, video-face recognition, face recognition,
etc. Computing the intrinsic/Fréchet mean (FM) of a set of
points on the Grassmann can be cast as finding the global
optimum (if it exists) of the sum of squared geodesic distances cost function. A common approach to solve this
problem involves the use of the gradient descent method.
An alternative way to compute the FM is to develop a recursive/inductive definition that does not involve optimizing
the aforementioned cost function. In this paper, we propose one such computationally efficient algorithm called the
Grassmann inductive Fréchet mean estimator (GiFME). In
developing the recursive solution to find the FM of the given
set of points, GiFME exploits the fact that there is a closed
form solution to find the FM of two points on the Grassmann. In the limit as the number of samples tends to infinity, we prove that GiFME converges to the FM (this is
called the weak consistency result on the Grassmann manifold). Further, for the finite sample case, in the limit as the
number of sample paths (trials) goes to infinity, we show
that GiFME converges to the finite sample FM. Moreover,
we present a bound on the geodesic distance between the
estimate from GiFME and the true FM. We present several
experiments on synthetic and real data sets to demonstrate
the performance of GiFME in comparison to the gradient
descent based (batch mode) technique. Our goal in these
applications is to demonstrate the computational advantage
and achieve comparable accuracy to the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
The Grassmann manifold has been commonly used in
mathematical formulations of many computer vision tasks
such as video based face recognition [34, 4], activity recognition [5, 35], video restoration [15], shape analysis [13, 25]
etc. Given a set of data points on a Grassmann manifold,
finding their average is a crucial task in many classification
and clustering based applications including the aforementioned applications. Since, a general Riemannian manifold
lacks vector space structure, a Euclidean mean is not a valid
representative of the average of points on the manifold. Instead one can use a Riemannian center of mass, also known
as the Fréchet mean (FM) [12, 18] as a way to denote the
average of data points. This mean however is not unique in
general and can be shown to be unique only in a geodesic
ball of a certain injectivity/convexity radius. We refer the
reader to an excellent paper [2] for a detailed exposition on
this topic. Further, in general there is no closed form solution for the FM of an arbitrary number of points on a Riemannian manifold. Of course, one can argue about using the
Euclidean mean which though computationally efficient, is
not intrinsic and does not have many of the desired properties of the FM on the manifold. On a Riemannian manifold,
the FM is defined as the minimizer of the sum of squared
geodesic distances cost function. A popular approach to
compute the FM is to use a gradient descent technique on
this cost function [10, 24, 3]. An alternative approach to
finding the FM proposed in [14] however does not involve
the minimization of a cost function but is posed as a special
case of iteratively finding the zeros of a vector field on the
Riemannian manifold.
Where applicable, a recursive algorithm can take advantage of the closed form solution to compute the FM of two
points as the base of the recursion and recurse through the
number of points in the given set. This will yield a much
faster way to compute the FM if and when the convergence
of the algorithm can be proved. In [31], an inductive definition of FM was proposed and almost sure convergence

4229

