Context-guided diffusion for label propagation on graphs
Kwang In Kim
Lancaster University

James Tompkin
Harvard Paulson SEAS

Hanspeter Pfister
Harvard Paulson SEAS

Abstract
Existing approaches for diffusion on graphs, e.g., for label
propagation, are mainly focused on isotropic diffusion, which
is induced by the commonly-used graph Laplacian regularizer. Inspired by the success of diffusivity tensors for anisotropic diffusion
in image processing, we presents anisotropic diffusion on graphs
and the corresponding label propagation algorithm. We develop
positive definite diffusivity operators on the vector bundles
of Riemannian manifolds, and discretize them to diffusivity
operators on graphs. This enables us to easily define new robust
diffusivity operators which significantly improve semi-supervised
learning performance over existing diffusion algorithms.

1. Introduction
Physical diffusion describes how energy, mass, or substances
spread over time — how their densities smoothen out in a medium.
Simulating physical diffusion on a Euclidean space, a manifold, or
their discrete approximations, e.g., grids or graphs, has application
in image processing, computer vision, and machine learning.
For instance, diffusion is now a standard tool for removing noise
or to highlight salient structures [32]. The graph Laplacian,
as a discrete approximation of the generator of the diffusion
process on manifolds, i.e., the Laplace-Beltrami operator, is
commonly used in spectral clustering and semi-supervised
learning, which finds applications in object recognition [7, 33],
image retrieval [10], and segmentation and matting [3, 25].
Similarly, stochastic diffusion process on graphs find application
in multi-label classification [30] and image retrieval [12].
In these applications, typically we are given a set of objects
X = {x1,...,xn} and corresponding assignments of variables
Y t = {y1t ,...,ynt } at time t = 0. Then, (simulated) diffusion
models how Y smooths over X. For instance, when X denotes
vertices of a mesh, Y is the coordinate representations of X in an
embedding space X , leading to mesh fairing. More generally, if
X denotes noisy observations of data points lying on a manifold,
diffusion leads to manifold denoising. If Y represents class labels
of data points in X, diffusion leads to label propagation and
facilitates semi-supervised learning. In this case, Y is assumed
to be a sample from an underlying classification function f on
X (i.e., Y ={y1,...,yn}={f(x1),...,f(xn)}).
Diffusion is determined by the initial condition Y 0 and the
diffusivity defined on X or X . Roughly, the diffusivity describes

1

Christian Theobalt
MPI for Informatics

the direction and strength of f (and equivalently Y ) being
smoothed at each time instance t. In general, the diffusivity
is inhomogeneous as it varies over X, and is anisotropic as its
strength varies over different directions at each point x ∈ X.
For instance, in image processing, diffusivity is strong in flat
regions but weaker on edges. Further, on an edge, diffusivity is
stronger along the direction of edges than across it. This leads to
edge-preserving image smoothing as pioneered by Weickert [32].
For graph data, diffusion can be seen as label propagation in
semi-supervised learning. Thus far, label propagation has mainly
focused on isotropic diffusion (i.e., the diffusivity is fixed on the
entire data space and all directions at each point therein), and
only recently has anisotropic diffusion been explored: Coifman
and Lafon [5] apply anisotropic diffusion to the graph-based
dimensionality reduction problem. They control diffusivity by
normalizing the (originally isotropic) pair-wise similarity with the
evaluations of diffused coordinate values. Szlam et al. [29] generalizes and extends this framework to semi-supervised learning by
controlling diffusivity via evaluations of class labels f: If f(xi)
and f(xj ) are similar, i.e., if the class labels of xi and xj are
likely to be the same, then diffusivity along the edge joining them
is high. Otherwise, diffusivity becomes low, which prevents label
propagation across class boundaries. This leads to significant performance improvement over classical isotropic diffusion. Kim et
al. [21] proposed adapting diffusivity on Riemannian manifolds
based on local curvature estimates: Diffusivity is strong in flat
regions and weak along the direction of the curvature operator,
which leads to an awareness of intersections between manifolds
and so improves performance over isotropic equivalents. However,
this requires the data X to be embedded in an ambient Euclidean
space, and so does not apply to inference on general graphs.
We propose two contributions for anisotropic diffusion on
graphs. First, we analyze continuous anisotropic diffusion
processes on smooth manifolds, and show that anisotropic
diffusion is nothing more than isotropic diffusion on a manifold
with a new metric. Based on this analysis, we arrive at a new
anisotropic graph Laplacian approach which is similar to the
stochastic kernel smoothing approach of Szlam et al. [29], but
with a new geometric intuition. This provides explicit criteria
to define valid diffusivities on graphs and manifolds, and it
facilitates non-linear diffusion on graphs. Second, we explore two
possible operators which control diffusivity of each edge based on
local neighborhood contexts and not just their end vertices. This
context-guided diffusion extends to graphs the robust diffusion
algorithm originally developed for image enhancement [32], and

2776

