Depth Recovery from Light Field Using Focal Stack Symmetry
Haiting Lin1
Can Chen1
Sing Bing Kang2
Jingyi Yu1,3
3
2
1
ShanghaiTech University
Microsoft Research
University of Delaware
{haiting, canchen}@udel.edu

sbkang@microsoft.com

Abstract
We describe a technique to recover depth from a light
field (LF) using two proposed features of the LF focal stack. One feature is the property that non-occluding pixels exhibit symmetry along the focal depth dimension centered at the in-focus slice. The other is a data consistency
measure based on analysis-by-synthesis, i.e., the difference
between the synthesized focal stack given the hypothesized
depth map and that from the LF. These terms are used in
an iterative optimization framework to extract scene depth.
Experimental results on real Lytro and Raytrix data demonstrate that our technique outperforms state-of-the-art solutions and is significantly more robust to noise and undersampling.

yu@eecis.udel.edu

Scene

Original

BM3D

Ours on original

GC on original

GC on denoised

Figure 1. Noise handling (Lytro raw data extracted by [2]). Traditional stereo matching approaches either use a large smoothness
term or first denoise the input [8, 41]. Both have the effect of
blurring boundaries. Our technique is able to recover fine details
without oversmoothing using the original noisy input.

1. Introduction
Given the commercial availability of light field (LF)
cameras such as the Lytro [1] and Raytrix [4], the use of
LFs for scene capture and analysis is becoming more attactive. It has been shown that given the simultaneous multiple
views, LFs enable improved image analysis, e.g., stereo reconstruction [20], refocusing [29], saliency detection [23],
and scene classification [39].
In our work, we use commercially available LF cameras, namely Lytro and Raytrix. Note that these cameras
have significantly lower sampling density (380 × 380) than
most previous LF-based approaches (e.g., Stanford camera array, camera gantry [3]). Using the Lytro and Raytrix
cameras presents challenges: while they provide high angular sampling, they are still spatially undersampled (causing
aliasing in refocusing, as shown in Fig. 2), and SNR is low
due to ultra small aperture (14µm in Lytro, 20µm in Lytro
Illum, and 50µm in Raytrix) and limited view extracting
toolbox [2]. As shown in Figs. 1 and 2, previous approaches have issues with noise and refocusing.
In this paper, we propose a new depth from light field
(DfLF) technique by exploring two new features of the focal
stack. Our contributions are:
• Symmetry analysis on the focal stack. We show that

the profile is symmetrically centered at the in-focus
slice if the pixel corresponds to a non-occluding 3D
point, even under noise and undersampling.
• New data consistency measure based on analysis-bysynthesis. Given a depth map hypothesis, we synthesize the focal stack. This is compared with that computed directly from the LF.
• Iterative optimization framework that incorporates the
two features.
Experimental results on real Lytro and Raytrix images
demonstrate that our technique outperforms the state-ofthe-art solutions and is significantly more robust to noise
and undersampling.

2. Related Work
Our work is related to multi-view reconstruction and
Depth-from-Focus; more detailed surveys can be found in
[10, 11, 27, 28]. Here we only briefly discuss the most relevant ones to our approach.
Using LF data as input, Wanner and Goldlücke [37, 36,
39] optimize the direction field in 2D Epipolar Image (EPI)

3451

