Semi-Supervised Zero-Shot Classification with Label Representation Learning
Xin Li
Yuhong Guo
Department of Computer and
Information Sciences, Temple University
Philadelphia, PA 19122, USA

Dale Schuurmans
Department of Computing Science
University of Alberta
Edmonton, AB T6G 2E8, Canada

{xinli,yuhong}@temple.edu

daes@ualberta.ca

Abstract
Given the challenge of gathering labeled training data,
zero-shot classification, which transfers information from
observed classes to recognize unseen classes, has become
increasingly popular in the computer vision community.
Most existing zero-shot learning methods require a user
to first provide a set of semantic visual attributes for each
class as side information before applying a two-step prediction procedure that introduces an intermediate attribute
prediction problem. In this paper, we propose a novel zeroshot classification approach that automatically learns label embeddings from the input data in a semi-supervised
large-margin learning framework. The proposed framework
jointly considers multi-class classification over all classes
(observed and unseen) and tackles the target prediction
problem directly without introducing intermediate prediction problems. It also has the capacity to incorporate semantic label information from different sources when available. To evaluate the proposed approach, we conduct experiments on standard zero-shot data sets. The empirical
results show the proposed approach outperforms existing
state-of-the-art zero-shot learning methods.

1. Introduction
Visual recognition has made tremendous progress over
the last decade. Many reliable and efficient recognition approaches have been developed based on the combination of
powerful low-level features such as SIFT [19] and HoG [8],
and robust machine learning techniques such as SVMs and
Boosting. These recognition systems however typically require a sufficient amount of labeled training images for each
class to achieve good classification performance. However,
it is very expensive to collect many annotated training instances for every single class given the dramatic increase of
the image categories. It is therefore important and desirable
to develop classification systems that can significantly reduce the need for labeled training instances from each class.

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed framework. The model
can automatically learn the label embeddings M , while side
label information, denoted as M 0 , is optional.

Zero-shot learning, introduced in [17] and [10] in parallel, offers a compelling solution where unseen classes that
do not have any labeled instances are recognized based
on knowledge transferred from observed classes with ample labeled instances. The general methodology pursued in
the zero-shot classification literature requires the learner to
have access to some mid-level semantic label representation that has been defined by human experts or extracted
from auxiliary text sources to establish inter-class connections. By exploiting different types of mid-level label representation, current zero-shot learning methods can be categorized into two main groups. One group, attribute-based
methods, exploit attributes shared between class categories
[10, 16, 17, 22], which provides an intermediate label representation. For example, attributes such as “black”, “fourleg” and “has ears” can be shared between animal class
categories to provide a visually meaningful representation
vector for each class label. The main drawback of attributebased approaches is that they require labor-intensive manual annotation for the class-attribute associations. The other
14211

