Multi-kernel Correlation Filter for Visual Tracking
Ming TANG and Jiayi FENG
National Lab of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
{tangm,jyfeng}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn ∗

Abstract
Correlation filter based trackers are ranked top in terms
of performances. Nevertheless, they only employ a single
kernel at a time. In this paper, we will derive a multikernel correlation filter (MKCF) based tracker which fully takes advantage of the invariance-discriminative power
spectrums of various features to further improve the performance. Moreover, it may easily introduce location and representation errors to search several discrete scales for the
proper one of the object bounding box, because normally
the discrete candidate scales are determined and the corresponding feature pyramid are generated ahead of searching. In this paper, we will propose a novel and efficient scale
estimation method based on optimal bisection search and
fast evaluation of features. Our scale estimation method is
the first one that uses the truly minimal number of layers of
feature pyramid and avoids constructing the pyramid before
searching for proper scales.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking is one of the most challenging
problems in computer vision [32, 18, 20, 26, 23]. To adapt
to unpredictable variations of object appearance and background during tracking, one strategy is to select a single
strong feature that is robust to any variation. However,
this has been known to be difficult [33, 11], especially for
the model-free tracking task in which no prior knowledge
about the target object is known except for the initial frame.
Therefore, designing an efficient scheme to combine several
complementary features is a natural alternative.
In such a natural scheme, different features would capture different channels of target information and result in a
better performance [35, 37, 21, 7]. Since any feature possesses its own invariance and discriminative power, what really distinguishes one feature from another is its location at
∗ This work was supported by Natural Science Foundation of China.
Grant No. 61375035.
The corresponding author of the paper is Ming TANG.

#21

#263

#340

#70

#423

#467

#240

#300

#450

Figure 1. Qualitative comparisons of our Multi-kernel Correlation Filter (MKCF) with state-of-the-art trackers, Struck [13],
KCF [15], and CN2 [7] on 3 sequences [36]. The figure is best
viewed in color.

the invariance-discriminative power spectrum [33]. And the
location may vary for different types of variations. Complementary features should be selected in such a way that
they are not at the same location of the spectrum for the
same appearance variation. In other words, complementary
features must be at different spectrum locations under the
same variation, especially in long term tracking because the
object appearance and its local background may vary substantially. Concatenation of several features into a single
kernel space, however, may confuse their characteristics on
the invariance-discriminative power spectrums, and is not a
good choice. Consequently, a multiple kernel feature, i.e.,
a combination of several kernels, one for each feature, is a
natural choice.
In recent years, correlation filter based trackers have
been proposed [4, 15, 7, 6, 16] and achieved top performance. Bolme et al.[4] proposed a correlation filter
based tracker, called Minimum Output Sum of Squared Error (MOSSE), with classical signal processing techniques.

3038

