Joint Optimization of Segmentation and Color Clustering
Ekaterina Lobacheva 1

Olga Veksler 2

Yuri Boykov 2

elobacheva@hse.ru

olga@csd.uwo.ca

yuri@csd.uwo.ca

1

National Research University
Higher School of Economics,Russia

2

Computer Vision Group
University of Western Ontario, Canada

Abstract
Binary energy optimization is a popular approach for
segmenting an image into foreground/background regions.
To model region appearance, color, a relatively high dimensional feature, should be handled effectively. A full
color histogram is usually too sparse to be reliable. One
approach is to reduce dimensionality by color space clustering. Another popular approach is to fit GMMs for soft
color space clustering. These approaches work well when
the foreground/background are sufficiently distinct. In cases
of more subtle difference in appearance, both approaches
may reduce or even eliminate foreground/background distinction. This happens because either color clustering is
performed completely independently from segmentation, as
a preprocessing step (in clustering), or independently for
the foreground and independently for the background (in
GMM). We propose to make clustering an integral part
of segmentation, by including a new clustering term in
the energy. Our energy favors clusterings that make foreground/background appearance more distinct. Exact optimization is not feasible, therefore we develop an approximate algorithm. We show the advantage of including the
color clustering term into the energy function on camouflage images, as well as standard segmentation datasets.

1. Introduction
Optimization of binary energy is a common approach
for segmenting an image into foreground/background regions [3, 14, 2, 18, 11, 10, 15, 17]. Most segmentation functions include an appearance term to model foreground/background, and a smoothness term to encourage
smooth boundaries. Here we focus on appearance models.
We are interested in the case when appearance models
are not known in advance, but rather must be estimated
from the image to be segmented, like in the GrabCut framework [14, 2]. The appearance parameters have to be estimated together with segmentation, making the problem NP-

Figure 1. Top: original image with the initialization box in red.
The star object has two distinct colors: o1 and o2 , and the stripy
background has distinct colors b1 and b2 . Colors o1 and b1 (in
orange spectrum) are similar. Bottom: (a) initial GMM fit with
one component for the foreground and background. Blue and
red dots show background and foreground colors, respectively.
Background color b1 fits the foreground model better, leading
to a segmentation failure in (d); (c) kmeans clusters colors into
{o1 , o2 , b1 } and {b2 }. This makes o1 and b1 indistinguishable,
causing a segmentation failure in (e). Right: we find an adaptive
clustering into two components that keeps initial foreground colors (inside red box) and background colors (outside red box) in
separate clusters.

hard [2], in contrast to the case of known appearance [3],
To estimate appearance models, one initializes with a
rough segmentation, usually a box. The foreground is estimated from the inside and the background from the outside

1626

