Dense Continuous-Time Tracking and Mapping
with Rolling Shutter RGB-D Cameras
Christian Kerl, Jörg Stückler, and Daniel Cremers
Technische Universität München
{kerl,stueckle,cremers}@in.tum.de

Abstract
We propose a dense continuous-time tracking and mapping method for RGB-D cameras. We parametrize the
camera trajectory using continuous B-splines and optimize
the trajectory through dense, direct image alignment. Our
method also directly models rolling shutter in both RGB and
depth images within the optimization, which improves tracking and reconstruction quality for low-cost CMOS sensors.
Using a continuous trajectory representation has a number of advantages over a discrete-time representation (e.g.
camera poses at the frame interval). With splines, less variables need to be optimized than with a discrete representation, since the trajectory can be represented with fewer
control points than frames. Splines also naturally include
smoothness constraints on derivatives of the trajectory estimate. Finally, the continuous trajectory representation allows to compensate for rolling shutter effects, since a pose
estimate is available at any exposure time of an image. Our
approach demonstrates superior quality in tracking and reconstruction compared to approaches with discrete-time or
global shutter assumptions.

1. Introduction
Most current approaches to simultaneous localization
and mapping (SLAM) with RGB-D cameras estimate the
trajectory at discrete times, e.g. one pose for each frame [2,
6, 10]. Implicitly, the discrete pose of a frame needs to apply to all pixels in the image—an assumption that is clearly
violated for rolling shutter cameras. In effect, the alignment
of two images is biased towards a wrong estimate for such
cameras. Since most consumer-grade RGB-D cameras use
rolling shutter CMOS sensors, the use of a trajectory representation is desirable that can provide a camera pose estimate for each sensor row individually and allows for compensating for rolling shutter.
In this paper, we propose to optimize a continuous-time
trajectory representation in the form of B-splines through
direct, dense image alignment. This way, our approach can

Figure 1: We propose a dense tracking and mapping method to
estimate a continuous-time trajectory from a sequence of rolling
shutter RGB-D images. Our approach significantly reduces trajectory drift leading to more consistent 3D reconstructions (top)
compared to a state-of-the-art algorithm which estimate discrete
camera poses w.r.t. to keyframes (bottom). Neither method involves global optimization.

incorporate parameters of sensor exposure such as exposure
durations and time differences of the RGB and depth sensor.
The trajectory can be represented with much less parameters, i.e. control points, than pose variables per frame. The
spline parametrization also inherently adds constraints on
derivatives and produces smooth trajectories. Hence, it regularizes the ill-posed problem of estimating the camera pose
for each image row. A further advantage of the spline representation is the easy integration of other sensing modalities
such as inertial measurement units (IMU). These sensors
can have arbitrarily lower or higher measurement rates than
the camera and do not need to measure synchronously with
the frames.
12264

