Person Re-Identification Ranking Optimisation by
Discriminant Context Information Analysis
Jorge Garcı́a1 , Niki Martinel2 , Christian Micheloni2 and Alfredo Gardel1
Department of Electronics, University of Alcala, Alcalá de Henares, Spain
2
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Udine, Udine, Italy
1

jorge.garcia@depeca.uah.es, niki.martinel@uniud.it, christian.micheloni@uniud.it,
alfredo@depeca.uah.es

Abstract
Person re-identification is an open and challenging problem in computer vision. Existing re-identification approaches focus on optimal methods for features matching
(e.g., metric learning approaches) or study the inter-camera
transformations of such features. These methods hardly
ever pay attention to the problem of visual ambiguities
shared between the first ranks. In this paper, we focus on
such a problem and introduce an unsupervised ranking optimization approach based on discriminant context information analysis. The proposed approach refines a given initial ranking by removing the visual ambiguities common to
first ranks. This is achieved by analyzing their content and
context information. Extensive experiments on three publicly available benchmark datasets and different baseline
methods have been conducted. Results demonstrate a remarkable improvement in the first positions of the ranking.
Regardless of the selected dataset, state-of-the-art methods
are strongly outperformed by our method.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification is the problem of re-associating
a same person moving between the disjoint Fields-of-View
of a wide area camera network. Due to the inherent challenges present in a multi-camera setting, the person reidentification is still an open problem. In particular, when a
person is sensed by the different viewpoints of disjoint cameras, his/her appearance undergoes significant illumination
and color variations as well as pose changes. The non-rigid
shape of the human body, as well as background clutter, introduce additional challenges.
In the recent past, the research community endeavored
to overcome the aforementioned issues by proposing different methods based on: (i) discriminative signatures exploiting multiple local and global features [39, 22, 25, 24] to

Figure 1: Typical cumulative matching characteristics
(CMC) curve achieved by re-identification approaches. In
the background, a bar-chart indicates the number of true
matches for each rank. In the first ranks the matched persons share visual ambiguities, while higher ones have visual
disparities.
compute the persons representations. These representations
have been combined with reference sets [3], patch matching strategies [42, 28], saliency learning [36] and joint attributes [16]; (ii) feature transformations addressing the reidentification problem by finding the transformation functions that affect the visual features acquired by disjoint cameras [44, 27]. In [14], a unique brightness transfer function
(BTF) computed between features was used to match persons across camera pairs. Recent works [26, 44, 7] also considered that the transformation is not unique and it depends
on several factors; (iii) metric learning where approaches
still rely on particular features but also advantage of a training phase to learn distances used to compute the match in
a different feature space [26, 35]. In [6], a metric learning
framework which minimizes the distance between features
of pairs of true matches, while maximizing the same between pairs of wrong matches. Performance were improved
by learning a relaxed Mahalanobis metric [12], by consider11305

