Robust and Optimal Sum-of-Squares-Based Point-to-Plane Registration of
Image Sets and Structured Scenes
Danda Pani Paudel1 , Adlane Habed2 , Cédric Demonceaux1 , and Pascal Vasseur3
1

Le2i laboratory, University of Bourgogne Franche-Comté, CNRS, France
2
ICube laboratory, University of Strasbourg, CNRS, France
3
LITIS EA laboratory, University of Rouen, France,
{danda-pani.paudel,cedric.demonceaux}@u-bourgogne.fr, adlane.habed@icube.unistra.fr,
pascal.vasseur@univ-rouen.fr

Abstract
This paper deals with the problem of registering a known
structured 3D scene and its metric Structure-from-Motion
(SfM) counterpart. The proposed work relies on a prior
plane segmentation of the 3D scene and aligns the data
obtained from both modalities by solving the point-toplane assignment problem. An inliers-maximization approach within a Branch-and-Bound (BnB) search scheme is
adopted. For the first time in this paper, a Sum-of-Squares
optimization theory framework is employed for identifying point-to-plane mismatches (i.e. outliers) with certainty.
This allows us to iteratively build potential inliers sets and
converge to the solution satisfied by the largest number of
point-to-plane assignments. Furthermore, our approach is
boosted by new plane visibility conditions which are also
introduced in this paper. Using this framework, we solve
the registration problem in two cases: (i) a set of putative
point-to-plane correspondences (with possibly overwhelmingly many outliers) is given as input and (ii) no initial correspondences are given. In both cases, our approach yields
outstanding results in terms of robustness and optimality.

1. Introduction
The emergence of affordable 3D sensors and high quality 2D cameras has triggered a growing interest in combining both imaging modalities. 3D sensors allow us to obtain faithful 3D scene models in the form of dense 3D point
clouds while images can be used to extract texture information. High quality 3D models with mapped texture can
be obtained provided the 2D and 3D sensors are registered
in a common reference frame. The two imaging modalities are generally registered off-line and the 2D and 3D

sensors kept rigidly attached at all time during acquisition.
Doing so may, however, be either impractical or impossible. On the one hand, suitable acquisition conditions for
one sensor may not be adequate for the other (e.g. lighting
conditions for cameras, surface orientation for 3D sensor,
etc.) and, on the other hand, some application-specific requirements (e.g. camera on a drone and a 3D scanner on
a vehicle) may altogether prohibit the sensors to be rigidly
attached. When the cameras and the 3D sensor are free, reliable methods for registering the two modalities are highly
desirable. This consists in establishing feature correspondences between the two modalities and estimating the rigid
transformation aligning their respective reference frames.
Structure-from-Motion (SfM) techniques allow us to
compute 3D point coordinates from pixel correspondences
across images. It is thus tempting to regard the registration
of 3D and 2D sensors as that of two 3D point sets: one set
induced by the images and the other obtained from scanner measurements. Registering 3D point clouds is a wellstudied problem. Most methods use the Iterative Closest
Point (ICP) algorithm (or its variants) [31, 11, 24]. While
ICP is a local method, recent work by Yang et al. [35]
(Go-ICP) provides the very first globally optimal solution
to same-scale point set registration. However, because SfM
reconstructions suffer from a scale ambiguity, methods devised for registering same-scale data cannot be employed.
Most methods handling the scale ambiguity rely on establishing correspondences either between the 3D measurements obtained by both modalities or directly between
scanned data and images [17, 5, 8]. The sought transformation parameters are then obtained either by minimizing
the registration loss function or maximizing the consensus set of inliers. Note that Random Sample Consensus
(RANSAC) [10] is the most widely used method for finding

2048

