Automatic Concept Discovery from Parallel Text and Visual Corpora
Chen Sun
Univ. of Southern California

Chuang Gan∗
Tsinghua University

Ram Nevatia
Univ. of Southern California

chensun@usc.edu

ganchuang1990@gmail.com

nevatia@usc.edu

Abstract
Humans connect language and vision to perceive the
world. How to build a similar connection for computers?
One possible way is via visual concepts, which are text
terms that relate to visually discriminative entities. We propose an automatic visual concept discovery algorithm using
parallel text and visual corpora; it filters text terms based
on the visual discriminative power of the associated images,
and groups them into concepts using visual and semantic
similarities. We illustrate the applications of the discovered
concepts using bidirectional image and sentence retrieval
task and image tagging task, and show that the discovered
concepts not only outperform several large sets of manually
selected concepts significantly, but also achieves the stateof-the-art performance in the retrieval task.

1. Introduction
Language and vision are both important for us to understand the world. Humans are good at connecting the two
modalities. Consider the sentence “A fluffy dog leaps to
catch a ball”: we can all relate fluffy dog, dog leap and catch
ball to the visual world and describe them in our own words
easily. However, to enable a computer to do something similar, we need to first understand what to learn from the visual
world, and how to relate them to the text world.
Visual concepts are a natural choice to serve as the basic unit to connect language and vision. A visual concept
is a subset of human vocabulary which specifies a group of
visual entities (e.g. fluffy dog, curly dog). We name the
collection of visual concepts as a visual vocabulary. Computer vision researchers have long collected image examples of manually selected visual concepts, and used them to
train concept detectors. For example, ImageNet [6] selects
21,841 synsets in WordNet as the visual concepts, and has
by far collected 14,197,122 images in total. One limitation
of the manually selected concepts is that their visual detectors often fail to capture the complexity of the visual world,

and cannot adapt to different domains. For example, people
may be interested in detecting birthday cakes when they try
to identify a birthday party, but this concept is not present
in ImageNet.
To address this problem, we propose to discover the visual concepts automatically by joint use of parallel text and
visual corpora. The text data in parallel corpora offers a rich
set of terms humans use to describe visual entities, while
visual data has the potential to help computer organize the
terms into visual concepts. To be useful, we argue that the
visual concepts should have the following properties:
Discriminative: a visual concept must refer to visually
discriminative entities that can be learned by available computer vision algorithms.
Compact: different terms describing the same set of visual entities should be merged into a single concept.
Our proposed visual concept discovery (VCD) framework first extracts unigrams and dependencies from the text
data. It then computes the visual discriminative power of
these terms using their associated images and filters out the
terms with low cross-validated average precision. The remaining terms may be merged together if they correspond
to very similar visual entities. To achieve this, we use semantic similarity and visual similarity scores, and cluster
terms based on these similarities. The final output of VCD
is a concept vocabulary, where each concept consists a set
of terms and has a set of associated images. The pipeline of
our approach is illustrated in Figure 1.
We work with the Flickr 8k data set to discover visual
concepts; it consists of 8,000 images downloaded from the
Flickr website. Each image was annotated by 5 Amazon
Mechanical Turk (AMT) workers to describe its content.
We design a concept based pipeline for bidirectional image
and sentence retrieval task [17] to automatically evaluate
the quality of the discovered concepts. We also conduct a
human evaluation on a free-form image tagging task using
visual concepts. Evaluation results show that the discovered concepts outperform manually selected concepts significantly.
Our key contributions include:

∗ This work was done when Chuang Gan was a visiting researcher at
University of Southern California.

• We show that manually selected concepts often fail to
12596

