Harvesting Discriminative Meta Objects with Deep CNN Features
for Scene Classification
Ruobing Wu†
†

1

Baoyuan Wang‡

The University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Recent work on scene classification still makes use of
generic CNN features in a rudimentary manner. In this paper, we present a novel pipeline built upon deep CNN features to harvest discriminative visual objects and parts for
scene classification. We first use a region proposal technique to generate a set of high-quality patches potentially
containing objects, and apply a pre-trained CNN to extract
generic deep features from these patches. Then we perform
both unsupervised and weakly supervised learning to screen
these patches and discover discriminative ones representing category-specific objects and parts. We further apply
discriminative clustering enhanced with local CNN finetuning to aggregate similar objects and parts into groups,
called meta objects. A scene image representation is constructed by pooling the feature response maps of all the
learned meta objects at multiple spatial scales. We have
confirmed that the scene image representation obtained using this new pipeline is capable of delivering state-of-theart performance on two popular scene benchmark datasets,
MIT Indoor 67 [22] and Sun397 [31].

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
gained tremendous attention recently due to their great success in boosting the performance of image classification
[14, 19], object detection [7, 26], action recognition [12]
and many other visual computing tasks [23, 21]. In the
context of scene classification, although a series of state-ofthe-art results on popular benchmark datasets (MIT Indoor
67[22], SUN397 [31]) have been achieved, CNN features
are still used in a rudimentary manner. For example, recent
work in [33] simply trains the classical Alex’s net [14] on a
scene-centric dataset (“Places”) and directly extracts holistic CNN features from entire images.
1 This work was partially completed when the first author was an intern
at Microsoft Research.

Wenping Wang†
‡

Yizhou Yu†

Microsoft Technology and Research

The architecture of CNNs suggests that they might not
be best suited for classifying images, including scene images, where local features follow a complex distribution.
The reason is that spatial aggregation performed by pooling
layers in a CNN is too simple, and does not retain much
information about local feature distributions. When critical
inference happens in the fully connected layers near the top
of the CNN, aggregated features fed into these layers are in
fact global features that neglect local feature distributions.
It has been shown in [8] that in addition to the entire image, it is consistently better to extract CNN features from
multiscale local patches arranged in regular grids.
In order to build a discriminative representation based
on deep CNN features for scene image classification, we
need to address two technical issues: (1) Objects within
scene images could exhibit dramatically different appearances, shapes, and aspect ratios. To detect diverse local objects, one could in theory add many perturbations to the input image by warping and cropping at various aspect ratios,
locations, and scales, and then feed all of them to the CNN.
This is, however, not feasible in practice; (2) To distinguish
one scene category from another, it is much desired to harvest discriminative and representative category-specific objects and object parts. For example, to tell a “city street”
from a “highway”, one needs to identify objects that can
only belong to a “city street” but not a “highway” scene.
Pandey and Lazebnik [20] adopt the standard DPM to adaptively infer potential object parts. It is however unclear how
to initialize the parts and how to efficiently learn them using
CNN features.
In this paper, we present a novel pipeline built upon
deep CNN features for harvesting discriminative visual objects and parts for scene classification. We first use a region proposal technique to generate a set of high-quality
patches potentially containing objects [3]. We apply a pretrained CNN to extract generic deep features from these
patches. Then, for each scene category, we train a oneclass SVM on all the patches generated from the images for
this class as a discriminative classifier [25], which heavily
prunes outliers and other non-representative patches. The

1287

