Intrinsic Depth:
Improving Depth Transfer with Intrinsic Images
Naejin Kong and Michael J. Black
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
Spemannstrasse 41, 72076 Tübingen, Germany
{naejin.kong,black}@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract
We formulate the estimation of dense depth maps from
video sequences as a problem of intrinsic image estimation. Our approach synergistically integrates the estimation
of multiple intrinsic images including depth, albedo, shading, optical flow, and surface contours. We build upon an
example-based framework for depth estimation that uses label transfer from a database of RGB and depth pairs. We
combine this with a method that extracts consistent albedo
and shading from video. In contrast to raw RGB values,
albedo and shading provide a richer, more physical, foundation for depth transfer. Additionally we train a new contour
detector to predict surface boundaries from albedo, shading, and pixel values and use this to improve the estimation of depth boundaries. We also integrate sparse structure
from motion with our method to improve the metric accuracy of the estimated depth maps. We evaluate our Intrinsic Depth method quantitatively by estimating depth from
videos in the NYU RGB-D and SUN3D datasets. We find
that combining the estimation of multiple intrinsic images
improves depth estimation relative to the baseline method.

1. Introduction
As laid out by Barrow and Tenenbaum [2] and elaborated
over the years, intrinsic images correspond to physical properties of the scene such as depth, reflectance, shadows, optical flow, and surface shape. Barrow and Tenenbaum emphasize that the recovery of such intrinsic images is difficult
and that the solution should recover them together, exploiting consistency between them. Here we take a step in that
direction. Given a video sequence, which may contain camera motion and independently moving objects, we estimate
the following intrinsic images at each frame: depth, albedo,
shading, optical flow, and surface contours. As predicted by
Barrow and Tenenbaum, we find that these different intrin-

sic images provide complimentary information and that estimating them in a synergistic way improves our estimation
of scene structure. In doing so, we combine several lines
of work including example-based depth estimation, sparse
structure from motion, optical flow, contour detection, and
reflectance and shading analysis. We refer to our method as
Intrinsic Depth estimation (Fig. 1).
There have been recent successes in directly inferring the
depth structure of images and video sequences from pixel
values. In particular, our method builds on the framework
of Depth Transfer [12], which is a non-parametric, datadriven, method for estimating scene depth using a database
of images (or videos) and corresponding depth images.
Given a new query image Depth Transfer has several steps.
First it finds similar images in a database using gist matching [22]; the gist features are computed from image pixels
and optical flow. It then uses label transfer [18] between
the query image and the matched images to create a set
of possible depth values for the scene. A final stage performs spatio-temporal regularization in an MRF formulation. Given sufficient training data, the method performs
well at extracting plausible, dense, 3D surface structure.
The output is neither metrically accurate nor faithful to the
object boundaries in the scene. Here, however, we show
that we can do better by integrating depth estimation with
the extraction of other intrinsic images.
Gist features computed from pixel values may include
confounding effects of illumination and reflectance. By
mixing together reflectance, illumination, motion, and surface shape, pixel values obscure the physical processes that
give rise to them. If the database contains very similar images (as it does in [12]) good matches will be found. A
query image, however, may look very different due to different illumination and having a database that covers all reflectance and illumination conditions may be prohibitive to
construct. Consequently we hypothesize that albedo and
shading, instead of RGB values, provide a more physically
motivated foundation for depth transfer. To that end, we use
the Intrinsic Video method [13], which extracts temporally
13514

