Object Detection Using Generalization and Efficiency Balanced
Co-occurrence Features
Haoyu Ren, Ze-Nian Li
School of Computing Science
Simon Fraser University
8888 University Drive
Vancouver, Canada, V5A1E3
{hra15,li}@sfu.ca

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a high-accuracy object detector based on co-occurrence features. Firstly, we introduce
three kinds of local co-occurrence features constructed by
the traditional Haar, LBP, and HOG respectively. Then the
boosted detectors are learned, where each weak classifier
corresponds to a local image region with a co-occurrence
feature. In addition, we propose a Generalization and Efficiency Balanced (GEB) framework for boosting training. In
the feature selection procedure, the discrimination ability,
the generalization power, and the computation cost of the
candidate features are all evaluated for decision. As a result, the boosted detector achieves both high accuracy and
good efficiency. It also shows the performance competitive
with the state-of-the-art methods for pedestrian detection
and general object detection tasks.
Object detection is an indispensable technology in many
applications such as artificial intelligence, multimedia systems, and video surveillance. The major problem is that
the object appearances vary greatly because of different illuminations, view points, poses, and the presence of occlusions. This has motivated the invention of various approaches. Among them, a commonly used paradigm is to
train a boosted classifier based on local features [14][26].
For example, Viola et al. [26] used AdaBoost algorithm to
train a cascade classifier based on the Haar feature. Zhang
et al. [36] proposed an improved version of the Haar feature based on up-right human body to construct a cascade
pedestrian detector. Dollar et al. [7] enabled neighbouring
detectors to communicate by a proposed crosstalk cascade
for pedestrian detection.
Boosting family algorithms achieve considerable performance for some object detection tasks. However, since the
difficulty of the training samples increases stage by stage,

it gets more and more difficult to find appropriate features
to describe the object characteristic effectively. For those
more complicated objects such as multi-view and multipose pedestrian, the problem becomes much more serious
that in later training rounds the classification task may be
beyond the descriptive ability of traditional features [31].
As a result, many researchers propose to use more powerful features, such as high-order gradient features, heterogeneous features and feature fusion. Recently, the cooccurrence features [18][20][35] have become a hot topic.
The co-occurrence information extracted by these features
are able to capture some complicate object characteristics.
Unfortunately, they also lead to heavy computation cost because the dense feature vector is time-consuming to calculate. In addition, we know that the performance of an object detector is decided not only by the discrimination ability of the features, but also by their generalization power,
which is defined as the ability to deal with the cases that
are not part of the training process. Due to the fact that
some diverse co-occurrence patterns are sensitive to background noise, most of the co-occurrence features have poor
generalization power. The detector succeeding in one scene
might fail in another scene with different conditions, such
as pose, illumination, etc. This is actually a trade-off problem. Although using stronger features may contribute to the
training accuracy, it will increase the risk of both low generalization power and high computation cost.
The major contributions of this paper are two folds.
Firstly, we design a set of localized co-occurrence features
which can be computed efficiently. Three kinds of cooccurrence features, CoHaar, CoLBP, and CoHOG are constructed. In addition, a new Generalization and Efficiency
Balanced (GEB) framework is proposed, which is utilized
to evaluate the accuracy, efficiency, and robustness of different weak classifiers at the same time. As a result, the
boosted detector based on GEB not only achieves high ac-

46

