Robust Nonrigid Registration by Convex Optimization
Qifeng Chen
Stanford University

Abstract
We present an approach to nonrigid registration of 3D
surfaces. We cast isometric embedding as MRF optimization and apply efficient global optimization algorithms
based on linear programming relaxations. The Markov random field perspective suggests a natural connection with
robust statistics and motivates robust forms of the intrinsic
distortion functional. Our approach outperforms a large
body of prior work by a significant margin, increasing registration precision on real data by a factor of 3.

1. Introduction
Given two surfaces S, T ⊂ R3 , the nonrigid registration
problem calls for computing a physically or perceptually
meaningful mapping f : S → T . For example, if S and
T are two models of people in different poses, a natural
mapping associates the corresponding body parts [6]. Such
mappings can be used for loop closure detection in dynamic
scene reconstruction, regularization in joint shape analysis,
propagation of material properties across 3D models, and
other applications in computer vision and graphics.
Treatments of the registration problem differ in the
mathematical formulation of the registration objective—
typically a functional on the space of mappings—and the
computational approach to optimizing the objective. A particularly elegant formulation calls for minimizing the intrinsic distortion induced by the mapping [8]. If S and T are
accurate surface models of near-isometric shapes, a lowdistortion mapping can yield plausible correspondences.
Since models produced by 3D scanning systems are imperfect, registration algorithms that operate on such data
must be robust to its defects. These defects can be mild,
such as surface noise and occlusion gaps, or severe, such
as large-scale fusion of adjoining parts. The severe defects
are particularly challenging because they violate basic assumptions made by many registration algorithms. These
violations commonly lead to registration failure. A recent
evaluation of state-of-the-art algorithms on real data with
carefully collected ground truth found that none of the evaluated algorithms performed satisfactorily [6].

Vladlen Koltun
Intel Labs

In this paper, we develop an approach to surface registration that alleviates some of the difficulties encountered by
existing techniques. Our guiding observation is that minimization of the intrinsic distortion functional can be cast as
MRF optimization [2]. We show that this simple observation has profound implications for surface registration.
The MRF formulation allows us to tap into highly efficient global optimization algorithms based on linear programming relaxations. We show that simply optimizing a
variant of the classical intrinsic distortion objective [8] using modern MRF optimization machinery yields state-ofthe-art registration accuracy, outperforming far more complex registration pipelines.
Furthermore, the Markov random field perspective suggests a natural connection with robust statistics and motivates robust forms of the embedding objective. We show
that optimizing a robust objective stabilizes registration in
the presence of major topological violations and substantially increases registration accuracy. Our final model improves registration precision on the challenging FAUST
dataset by a factor of 3 relative to the state of the art. Figure
1 illustrates the results. The presented approach is simple
and provides a natural baseline for future progress.

2. Background
Nonrigid shape registration was considered by Elad and
Kimmel, who identified the utility of isometric embeddings
[12]. They proposed matching two shapes by embedding
them in an intermediate Euclidean space, such that geodesic
distances are approximated by Euclidean ones. This reduces nonrigid registration to rigid registration in an intermediate space, albeit at a loss of accuracy. A number of
other methods that use an intermediate space followed, notably the conformal mapping approach [24, 52, 19].
A more direct approach is to embed one surface directly
into the other, without intermediate embeddings. This formulation was developed by Bronstein et al. [8], building on
the work of Mémoli and Sapiro [28]. They defined the embedding objective in terms of the distance distortion induced
by the mapping:
X
p
wi,j dS (si , sj ) − dT (f (si ), f (sj )) . (1)
E(f ) =
i,j

12039

