Square Localization for Efficient and Accurate Object Detection∗
Cewu Lu♯,‡
§

Yongyi Lu§

Hao Chen†

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
♯

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

†

Chi-Keung Tang§
‡

Stanford University

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Abstract
The key contribution of this paper is the compact square
object localization, which relaxes the exhaustive sliding
window from testing all windows of different combinations
of aspect ratios. Square object localization is category
scalable. By using a binary search strategy, the number of scales to test is further reduced empirically to only
O(log(min{H, W })) rounds of sliding CNNs, where H
and W are respectively the image height and width. In the
training phase, square CNN models and object co-presence
priors are learned. In the testing phase, sliding CNN models
are applied which produces a set of response maps that can
be effectively filtered by the learned co-presence prior to
output the final bounding boxes for localizing an object. We
performed extensive experimental evaluation on the VOC
2007 and 2012 datasets to demonstrate that while efficient,
square localization can output precise bounding boxes to
improve the final detection result.

1. Introduction
Object detection and recognition has been a long standing problem in computer vision. The advent of state-of-theart machine learning techniques has made important breakthrough in recent years. Given a testing image, one of the
main tasks is to localize (that is, find the coordinates of an
image window that contains) a semantic object. Once an
image window is given, the remaining step is object recognition, which has been well addressed recently by the stateof-the-art convolutional neural network (CNN) [14] which
labels the most likely object categories (or background).
The exhaustive approach is what researchers call “sliding
window” testing, where image windows of all possible sizes
and aspect ratios at all possible locations are tested. Not surprisingly, the exhaustive sliding window was quickly written off as impractical due to its prohibitive cost, and most researchers resort to compromises and consider significantly
∗ This research is supported by the Research Grant Council of the Hong
Kong Special Administrative Region under grant number 619711.

Object Image

Compact Square Object Image

Figure 1. Object images and their compact square images.
Accuracy
whole image
compact square image

CNN model
87.3%
84.6%

Human
97.6%
95.4%

Table 1. Empirical recognition accuracy of the CNN model [14]
and human recognition on the VOC 2007 dataset. We ask people to
label the category based on compact square object (CSO) images.
With more careful parameter tuning of the CNN we believe the
above accuracy can be further improved.

fewer image windows. Representative approaches include
the effective selective search method [20]. In practice, the
exhaustive search can be sidestepped 1 but quantization will
be involved in the form of uniform object proposal sampling.
While the exhaustive method searches over all possible positions, scales and aspect ratios of image windows,
given an H × W image, the number of aspect ratios and
scales combination is O(HW ) while the number of scales
is only O(min(H, W )). Therefore, if we could relax the aspect ratio requirement, the sliding window would be much
more efficient. Interestingly, we observe that both hu1 For example, a fixed set R of aspects (which can be learned form
the data) is used. Also in practice the sampling for the scale is proportional to the object size, to have a constant variation of the object scale,
a logarithmic variation in terms of H (the image height) can be used.
The time complexity is thus O(R log(H)) which is comparable to our
O(log(min{H, W })).

2560

