A Novel Representation of Parts for Accurate 3D Object Detection and Tracking
in Monocular Images
Alberto Crivellaro1

1

Mahdi Rad2
Pascal Fua1

Yannick Verdie1
Vincent Lepetit2

Kwang Moo Yi1

Computer Vision Laboratory, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland
2

Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision, Graz University of Technology, Austria

{alberto.crivellaro, yannick.verdie, kwang.yi, pascal.fua}@epfl.ch
{rad, lepetit}@icg.tugraz.at

Abstract
We present a method that estimates in real-time and under challenging conditions the 3D pose of a known object.
Our method relies only on grayscale images since depth
cameras fail on metallic objects; it can handle poorly textured objects, and cluttered, changing environments; the
pose it predicts degrades gracefully in presence of large occlusions. As a result, by contrast with the state-of-the-art,
our method is suitable for practical Augmented Reality applications even in industrial environments. To be robust to
occlusions, we first learn to detect some parts of the target object. Our key idea is to then predict the 3D pose of
each part in the form of the 2D projections of a few control
points. The advantages of this representation is three-fold:
We can predict the 3D pose of the object even when only
one part is visible; when several parts are visible, we can
combine them easily to compute a better pose of the object;
the 3D pose we obtain is usually very accurate, even when
only few parts are visible.

1. Introduction
3D object detection and tracking methods have undergone impressive improvements in recent years [5, 27, 13,
4, 30, 25, 39, 17, 1, 45, 38, 20, 35, 44]. However, each
of the current approaches has its own weaknesses: Many of
these approaches [5, 13, 1, 35] rely on a depth sensor, which
would fail on metallic objects or outdoor scenes; methods
based on feature points [25, 17] expect textured objects;
those based on edges [4, 39] are sensitive to cluttered background; most of these methods [13, 27, 30, 38, 11, 45, 20]
are not robust to occlusion. We also want a method fast
enough for interactive 3D applications.

Figure 1. Detecting a box in 3D with a regular camera under challenging conditions. On this dataset, the user removes objects from
the box and leaves them on the table, often occluding large portions of the box. Despite these difficulties, we can accurately estimate the 3D pose of the box, in each image independently.

As Fig. 1 shows 1 , we are interested in scenes with poorly
textured objects, possibly visible only under heavy occlusions, drastic light changes, and changing background. A
depth sensor is not an option in our setup, as the target
objects often have specular surfaces. Feature point-based
methods also fail because of the lack of texture. These are
typical conditions of many Augmented Reality applications.
At the core of our approach is the efficient detection of
discriminative parts of the target object. Relying on parts
for 3D object detection is not new [12, 27, 33, 20, 45]. The
1 All the figures of this work are best seen in colors.

14391

