Hierarchical Higher-order Regression Forest Fields:
An Application to 3D Indoor Scene Labelling
Trung T. Pham, Ian Reid, Yasir Latif
School of Computer Science
The University of Adelaide

Stephen Gould
Research School of Computer Science
The Australian National University

{trung.pham,ian.reid,yasir.latif}@adelaide.edu.au

stephen.gould@anu.edu.au

Abstract

Although there has been remarkable progress in 2D image semantic segmentation, 3D scene semantic labelling has
not received as much attention or achievement (though some
notable exceptions exist, e.g., [12, 8]). Unlike 2D images
which capture specific views, 3D reconstructed point clouds
cover the whole scene with a large number of things and
stuff, making label prediction more challenging. Yet 3D
data inherently carries rich contextual information beneficial for the label prediction task if successfully exploited.
Koppula et al. [12] proposed a graphical model with sophisticated pairwise potentials to encode contextual relations between different objects for 3D indoor scene understanding.
The model parameters are learned from training data using a Structured Support Vector Machine (SSVM) approach.
Kahler and Reid [8] learn similar potential functions using Decision Tree Fields (DTF) [19] and Regression Tree
Fields (RTF) [7]. The tree based method [8] is more efficient
and yields similar segmentation accuracies. Although initial
promising results have been reported, both of these models
restrict themselves to pairwise potential functions limiting
their ability to encode complex geometrical and topological
characteristics of 3D scenes.
We propose to overcome the above-mentioned limitations of previous work by introducing a novel higher-order
model for semantic 3D indoor scene labelling. Our higherorder potentials can capture much more structural information embedded in the scene than the common pairwise potentials, thus effectively yield more accurate label predictions. Moreover, we extend the proposed higher-order models to hierarchical models that allow the incorporation of
features and contextual information evaluated at different
scales for even better performance.
Specifically, we generalize the popular higher-order associative P n Potts model [9] and its robustified version [10]
to a new family of arbitrary higher-order models. Similar
to the robust P n models, our higher-order potentials can
be decomposed into the sum of pairwise terms by introducing auxiliary variables, thus admitting efficient inference
and learning. The main difference is that rather than penalizing the count of variables (within a clique) that disagree
with the dominant label as in the Potts models, our higherorder potentials employ more arbitrary penalty functions to

This paper addresses the problem of semantic segmentation of 3D indoor scenes reconstructed from RGB-D images.
Traditionally label prediction for 3D points is tackled by employing graphical models that capture scene features and
complex relations between different class labels. However,
the existing work is restricted to pairwise conditional random fields, which are insufficient when encoding rich scene
context. In this work we propose models with higher-order
potentials to describe complex relational information from
the 3D scenes. Specifically, we relax the labelling problem to a regression, and generalize the higher-order associative P n Potts model to a new family of arbitrary higherorder models based on regression forests. We show that
these models, like the robust P n models, can still be decomposed into the sum of pairwise terms by introducing
auxiliary variables. Moreover, our proposed higher-order
models also permit extension to hierarchical random fields,
which allows for the integration of scene context and features computed at different scales. Our potential functions
are constructed based on regression forests encoding Gaussian densities that admit efficient inference. The parameters
of our model are learned from training data using a structured learning approach. Results on two datasets show clear
improvements over current state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
In recent years significant progress has been made in
Structure from Motion (SfM) and Visual Simultaneous Localisation and Mapping (VSLAM) and it is now possible to
perform real-time, dense 3D reconstruction in an indoor environment using either a single camera [18] or RGB-D sensor [17]. However, even such dense representations are simply sets of 3D points encoding the scene geometry, and are
often inadequate for high-level applications such as mobile
robot navigation or manipulation [2]. In this paper we aim
to generate more meaningful representations of 3D scenes
in terms of semantic regions and objects, rather than pure
3D point clouds.
1
2246

