Unsupervised Semantic Parsing of Video Collections
Ozan Sener1,2
1

Amir R. Zamir1

Silvio Savarese1

Ashutosh Saxena2,3

Stanford University, 2 Cornell University, 3 Brain of Things Inc.
{ozansener,zamir,ssilvio,asaxena}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Human communication typically has an underlying
structure. This is reflected in the fact that in many user generated videos, a starting point, ending, and certain objective steps between these two can be identified. In this paper,
we propose a method for parsing a video into such semantic steps in an unsupervised way. The proposed method is
capable of providing a “semantic storyline” of the video
composed of its objective steps. We accomplish this using
both visual and language cues in a joint generative model.
The proposed method can also provide a textual description
for each of the identified semantic steps. We evaluate this
method on a large number of complex YouTube videos and
show results of unprecedented quality for this intricate and
impactful problem.

1. Introduction
Human communication takes many forms, including language and vision. For instance, explaining “how-to” perform a certain task can be communicated via language (e.g.,
Do-It-Yourself books) as well as visual (e.g., instructional
YouTube videos) information. Regardless of the form,
such human-generated communication is generally structured and has a clear beginning, end, and a set of steps in between. Parsing such communication into its semantic steps
is the key to understanding structured human activities.
Language and vision provide different, but correlating
and complementary information. Challenge lies in that both
video frames and language (from subtitles generated via
ASR) are only a noisy, partial observation of the actions
being performed. However, the complementary nature of
language and vision gives the opportunity to understand the
activities from these partial observations. In this paper, we
present a unified model, incorporating both of the modalities, in order to parse human activities into activity steps
with no form of supervision other than requiring videos to
be of the same category (e.g., videos retrieved by query
cooking eggs, changing tires, etc.).
The key idea in our approach is the observation that the
large collection of videos, pertaining to the same activity

Video 1
Video 2
Video 3
Video 4
...
Video k

time

Crack the eggs.

Use a wire whisk
to beat the eggs.

Make sure butter
melts completely.

Remove omelet
onto a plate.

Step 1

Step 2

Step n-1

Step n

Figure 1: Given a large video collection (frames and subtitles)
of an structured category (e.g., How to cook an omelette?), we
discover activity steps (e.g., crack the eggs). We also parse the
videos based on the discovered steps.

class, typically include only a few objective activity steps,
and the variability is the result of exponentially many ways
of generating videos from activity steps through subset selection and time ordering. We study this construction based
on the large-scale information available in YouTube in the
form of instructional videos (e.g., “Making pancake”, “How
to tie a bow tie”). We adopt Instructional videos since they
have many desirable properties like the volume of the information (e.g., YouTube has 281.000 videos for ”How to tie
a bow tie”) and a well defined notion of activity step. However, the proposed parsing method is applicable to any type
of structured videos as long as they are composed of a set
of objective steps.
The output of our method can be seen as the “semantic storyline” of a rather long and complex video collection
(see Fig. 1). This storyline provides what particular steps
are taking place in the video collection, when they are occurring, and what their meaning is (what-when-how). This
method also puts videos performing the same overall task
in common ground and capture their high-level relations.
In the proposed approach, given a collection of videos,
we first generate a set of language and visual atoms. These
atoms are the result of relating object proposals from each
frame as well as detecting the frequent words from subtitles. We then employ a generative beta process mixture
model, which identifies the activity steps shared among the
videos of the same category based on a representation us14480

