Building Dynamic Cloud Maps from the Ground Up
Calvin Murdock
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University

Nathan Jacobs
Department of Computer Science
University of Kentucky

cmurdock@cs.cmu.edu

jacobs@cs.uky.edu

Robert Pless
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Washington University in St. Louis
pless@cse.wustl.edu

Abstract
Satellite imagery of cloud cover is extremely important
for understanding and predicting weather. We demonstrate
how this imagery can be constructed “from the ground up”
without requiring expensive geo-stationary satellites. This
is accomplished through a novel approach to approximate
continental-scale cloud maps using only ground-level imagery from publicly-available webcams. We collected a
year’s worth of satellite data and simultaneously-captured,
geo-located outdoor webcam images from 4388 sparsely
distributed cameras across the continental USA. The satellite data is used to train a dynamic model of cloud motion
alongside 4388 regression models (one for each camera)
to relate ground-level webcam data to the satellite data
at the camera’s location. This novel application of largescale computer vision to meteorology and remote sensing
is enabled by a smoothed, hierarchically-regularized dynamic texture model whose system dynamics are driven to
remain consistent with measurements from the geo-located
webcams. We show that our hierarchical model is better
able to incorporate sparse webcam measurements resulting
in more accurate cloud maps in comparison to a standard
dynamic textures implementation. Finally, we demonstrate
that our model can be successfully applied to other natural
image sequences from the DynTex database, suggesting a
broader applicability of our method.

1. Introduction
Large-scale maps of cloud cover are an integral component in weather prediction and analysis. While they are usually obtained by a small number of expensive government
satellites, recent work [16] has demonstrated the potential
for leveraging geo-located outdoor webcams as an alterna-

Regression Model

Kalman Filter

Regression Model

Ground Truth

Proposed Method

Ideal Measurements

Figure 1: We construct large-scale maps of cloud cover by modeling cloud motion through a linear dynamical system that is Kalman
ﬁltered to integrate noisy, sparse measurements acquired from regression models on webcam imagery. Our model is trained on one
year of data from 4388 webcams alongside concurrent satellite imagery. Even with signiﬁcant measurement noise and uncertainty,
our model produces reasonable alternatives to satellite imagery.
To decouple the challenge of modeling cloud dynamics from acquiring cloudiness measurements from webcams, we also compare against synthesized images using ideal measurements sampled from ground truth data.

tive source of this valuable information. Thus, instead of
obtaining a single view of clouds from above, a vast system of ground-based local webcam measurements can be
coordinated to produce a similar global representation, as
shown in Figure 1. While [16] used only spatial interpolation methods to combine local measurements of cloudiness,
we demonstrate that the synthesis performance can be improved by incorporating temporal constraints by modeling
the regular dynamics of cloud motion. To demonstrate this,
we train our model on one year of data captured from 4388
webcams every half hour and test on six months of extrapolated data. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this is the

684

