Occlusion-aware Depth Estimation Using Light-field Cameras
Ting-Chun Wang
UC Berkeley

Alexei A. Efros
UC Berkeley

Ravi Ramamoorthi
UC San Diego

tcwang0509@berkeley.edu

efros@eecs.berkeley.edu

ravir@cs.ucsd.edu

Abstract
Consumer-level and high-end light-field cameras are
now widely available. Recent work has demonstrated practical methods for passive depth estimation from light-field
images. However, most previous approaches do not explicitly model occlusions, and therefore cannot capture sharp
transitions around object boundaries. A common assumption is that a pixel exhibits photo-consistency when focused
to its correct depth, i.e., all viewpoints converge to a single (Lambertian) point in the scene. This assumption does
not hold in the presence of occlusions, making most current approaches unreliable precisely where accurate depth
information is most important – at depth discontinuities.
In this paper, we develop a depth estimation algorithm
that treats occlusion explicitly; the method also enables
identification of occlusion edges, which may be useful in
other applications. We show that, although pixels at occlusions do not preserve photo-consistency in general, they are
still consistent in approximately half the viewpoints. Moreover, the line separating the two view regions (correct depth
vs. occluder) has the same orientation as the occlusion edge
has in the spatial domain. By treating these two regions
separately, depth estimation can be improved. Occlusion
predictions can also be computed and used for regularization. Experimental results show that our method outperforms current state-of-the-art light-field depth estimation
algorithms, especially near occlusion boundaries.

Input light-field image Wanner et al. (CVPR12)

Our Result

Yu et al. (ICCV13)

Tao et al. (ICCV13)

Chen et al. (CVPR14)

Figure 1: Comparison of depth estimation results of different algorithms from a light-field input image. Darker represents closer and lighter represents farther. It can be seen
that only our occlusion-aware algorithm successfully captures most of the holes in the basket, while other methods
either smooth over them, or have artifacts as a result.

angular
patch

(a) Non-occluded pixels

angular
patch

(b) Occluded pixels

1. Introduction

Figure 2: Non-occluded vs. occluded pixels. (a) At nonoccluded pixels, all view rays converge to the same point
in the scene if refocused to the correct depth. (b) However,
photo-consistency fails to hold at occluded pixels, where
some view rays will hit the occluder.

Light-field cameras from Lytro [3] and Raytrix [18]
are now available for consumer and industrial use respectively, bringing to fruition early work on light-field rendering [10, 15]. An important benefit of light-field cameras for
computer vision is that multiple viewpoints or sub-apertures
are available in a single light-field image, enabling passive
depth estimation [4]. Indeed, Lytro Illum and Raytrix software produces depth maps used for tasks like refocusing after capture, and recent work [20] shows how multiple cues
like defocus and correspondence can be combined.
However, very little work has explicitly considered oc-

clusion. A common assumption is that, when refocused
to the correct depth (the depth of the center view), angular pixels corresponding to a single spatial pixel represent viewpoints that converge to one point in the scene. If
we collect these pixels into an angular patch (Eq. 6), they
exhibit photo-consistency for Lambertian surfaces, which
means they all share the same color (Fig. 2a). However, this
assumption is not true when occlusions occur at a pixel;
photo-consistency no longer holds (Fig. 2b). Enforcing
photo-consistency on these pixels will often lead to incorrect depth results, causing smooth transitions around sharp
13487

