An Efficient Minimal Solution for Multi-Camera Motion
Jonathan Ventura
Department of Computer Science
University of Colorado Colorado Springs

Clemens Arth
Vincent Lepetit
Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision
Graz University of Technology

jventura@uccs.edu

{arth,lepetit}@icg.tugraz.at

Abstract
We propose an efficient method for estimating the motion
of a multi-camera rig from a minimal set of feature correspondences. Existing methods for solving the multi-camera
relative pose problem require extra correspondences, are
slow to compute, and/or produce a multitude of solutions.
Our solution uses a first-order approximation to relative
pose in order to simplify the problem and produce an accurate estimate quickly. The solver is applicable to sequential multi-camera motion estimation and is fast enough for
real-time implementation in a random sampling framework.
Our experiments show that our approach is both stable and
efficient on challenging test sequences.

1. Introduction
A fundamental problem in computer vision is computing the motion of a camera, or multi-camera rig, from the
observed movement of points in successive images. The
camera motion between two image captures is called the
relative pose. While the single-camera relative pose problem has been extensively investigated in prior work, the
multi-camera case has been given attention only recently.
However, multi-camera motion estimation is a critical technology for many emerging applications such as self-driving
cars with vehicle-mounted cameras and aerial vehicles such
as quadcopters.
Existing solutions to the multi-camera relative pose
problem [30, 15, 20] have deficiencies such as slow computation, producing a huge number of solutions, or using extra
correspondences above the minimal six. In order to deal
with feature mismatches, any relative pose solution needs
to be applied repeatedly in a random sampling loop such as
RANSAC [8]. This motivates the need for a solution that
is fast and uses the minimal number of correspondences in
order to reduce the number of samples required.
In this work, we derive a novel solution to the generalized camera relative pose problem which is faster than
existing solutions while maintaining similar accuracy. The

Figure 1. Illustration of moving multi-camera rigs. The black
points and dashed lines indicate corresponding observations of a
feature in the two capture instances. Left: A general multi-camera
configuration with four cameras. Right: An axial camera configuration with two cameras (a stereo camera).

insight in our work comes from applying a first-order approximation to relative pose, which simplifies the problem
and leads to an efficient solution. Our method is intended to
be applied to successive video frames from a moving multicamera rig. This allows us to assume small camera motion between frames, which makes the approximated motion model an appropriate choice.
Applying the approximated motion model to the problem leads to a simplified system of polynomials which can
be solved in a specialized and efficient way. Because our
solution is both computationally efficient and accurate, it
would be very useful for motion estimation on resourceconstrained platforms such as unmanned aerial vehicles,
small drones, mobile robots, and handheld devices.

2. Related Work
Stewénius et al. introduced a minimal solution for the
generalized epipolar constraint [30]; however, this method
produces up to 64 solutions and is too computationally complex to be considered for a real-time implementation. The
linear solution of Li et al. [20] uses seventeen points and,
while fast, it is sensitive to noise and requires a huge number of RANSAC iterations because of the sample size.
Specialized solutions to the generalized relative pose
problem have been investigated previously, such as using
point triangulation [4] or initial motion estimation from a
4321
747

