Dense image registration and deformable surface reconstruction
in presence of occlusions and minimal texture ∗
Dat Tien Ngoa

Sanghyuk Parkb
Chang D. Yoob
a

Anne Jorstada
Pascal Fuaa

Alberto Crivellaroa

Computer Vision Laboratory, EPFL, Switzerland
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Korea

b

Abstract
Deformable surface tracking from monocular images
is well-known to be under-constrained. Occlusions often
make the task even more challenging, and can result in failure if the surface is not sufficiently textured. In this work,
we explicitly address the problem of 3D reconstruction of
poorly textured, occluded surfaces, proposing a framework
based on a template-matching approach that scales dense
robust features by a relevancy score. Our approach is extensively compared to current methods employing both local feature matching and dense template alignment. We test
on standard datasets as well as on a new dataset (that will
be made publicly available) of a sparsely textured, occluded
surface. Our framework achieves state-of-the-art results for
both well and poorly textured, occluded surfaces.

1. Introduction
Being able to recover the 3D shape of deformable surfaces from ordinary images will make it possible to field reconstruction systems that require only a single video camera, such as those that now equip most mobile devices. It
will also allow 3D shape recovery in more specialized contexts, such as when performing endoscopic surgery or using a fast camera to capture the deformations of a rapidly
moving object. Depth ambiguities make such monocular
shape recovery highly under-constrained. Moreover, when
the surface is partially occluded or has minimal texture, the
problem becomes even more challenging because there is
little or no useful information about large parts of it.
Arguably, these ambiguities could be resolved by using a
depth-camera, such as the popular Kinect sensor [33]. However, such depth-cameras are more difficult to fit into a cellphone or an endoscope and have limited range. In this work,
we focus on 3D shape recovery given a reference image and
a single corresponding 3D template shape known a priori.
When the surface is well-textured, correspondencebased methods have proved effective at solving this problem, even in the presence of occlusions [3, 5, 6, 7, 24, 26,
∗ This work was supported in part by the Swiss National Science Foundation and ICT R&D program of MSIP/IITP [B0101-15-0307]. E-mails:
{firstname.lastname}@epfl.ch, {shine0624, cd yoo}@kaist.ac.kr

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Figure 1. Tracking a sparsely textured surface in the presence
of occlusion: (a) template image, (b) input image, (c) relevancy
score, (d) surface tracking result with proposed framework. All
figures in this paper are best viewed in color.

37]. In contrast, when the surface lacks texture, dense pixellevel template matching should be used instead. Unfortunately, many methods such as [21, 31] either are hampered
by a narrow basin of attraction, which means they must be
initialized from interest points correspondences, or require
supervised learning to enhance robustness. Using Mutual
Information has often been claimed [10, 12, 23, 38] to be
effective at handling these difficulties but our experiments
do not bear this out. Instead, we advocate template matching over robust dense features that relies on a pixel-wise
relevancy score pre-computed for each frame, as shown in
Fig. 1. Our approach can handle occlusions and lack of texture simultaneously. Moreover, no training step is required
as in [31], which we consider to be an advantage because
this obligates either collecting training data or having sufficient knowledge of the surface properties, neither of which
may be forthcoming.
Our main contribution is therefore a robust framework
for image registration and monocular 3D reconstruction of
deformable surfaces in the presence of occlusions and minimal texture. A main ingredient is the pixel-wise relevancy
score we use to achieve the robustness. We will make the
code publicly available, and release the dataset we used
12273

