Discriminative Low-Rank Tracking
Yao Sui, Yafei Tang, Li Zhang
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
suiyao@gmail.com, tangyf24@chinaunicom.cn, chinazhangli@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Good tracking performance is in general attributed to
accurate representation over previously obtained targets
or reliable discrimination between the target and the surrounding background. In this work, we exploit the advantages of the both approaches to achieve a robust tracker. We construct a subspace to represent the target and
the neighboring background, and simultaneously propagate
their class labels via the learned subspace. Moreover, we
propose a novel criterion to identify the target from numerous target candidates on each frame, which takes into account both discrimination reliability and representation accuracy. In addition, with the proposed criterion, the ambiguity in the class labels of the neighboring background samples, which often influences the reliability of discriminative
tracking model, is effectively alleviated, while the training
set is still kept small. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our tracker performs favourably against many other
state-of-the-art trackers.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking plays an important role in computer vision for its various practical applications, e.g., video surveillance, human-machine interface and robotics. The fundamental task of visual tracking is to estimate the motion states of the target on each frame, given an initial state. In
general, tracking models can be viewed as either generative or discriminative. Generative model focuses on finding
a region of interest (ROI) in the frame image as the target, which best matches a learned target appearance model, while discriminative model trains a binary classifier to
distinguish the target from background. Current studies
have shown that discriminative model achieves better performance if the size of training set is sufficiently large [15],
and that generative model can obtain higher generalization
when only a limited number of training samples are available [22]. In the pursuit of precise tracking results, we may
prefer discriminative model if we can acquire a sufficiently
large number of training samples. However, it is unpracti-

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Illustration of the discriminative low-rank learning. (a) A
number of original samples belonging to two classes in the threedimensional observation space. (b) The samples projected into the
learned two-dimensional subspace. (c) The samples reconstructed
over the learned subspace, which are also successfully separated
between the two classes by the learned classifier.

cal to obtain so many training samples. Even we can acquire
these samples, considering the time-sensitive nature of visual tracking, the training cost over these samples is also
unacceptably expensive.
In this work, we aim to utilize the good generalization
capability of generative model, and augment it with discriminative capability, in order to achieve improved tracking performance. Thus, our tracking model is both generative and discriminative. We choose two simple but very effective methods for our model: subspace learning and linear
classification. Joint learning [26, 25, 19] is used to construct this model, i.e., we construct a subspace to represent the
target and background, and simultaneously propagate their
class labels by a linear classifier. This assigns both representation and discrimination capabilities to the learned subspace: the target and background can be accurately represented (reconstructed) by the learned subspace, and simultaneously their reconstructions over this subspace can also
be reliably distinguished by the linear classifier. In brief,
we intend to construct such a subspace, the discriminative
subspace, over which the reconstructed samples are linearly
separable. The basic idea of our method, called the discriminative low-rank learning, is illustrated in Fig. 1. With the
choices for our tracking model, we are still facing several
problems addressed as follows.

3002

