Convolutional Channel Features
Bin Yang
Junjie Yan
Zhen Lei
Stan Z. Li
Center for Biometrics and Security Research & National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
{bin.yang, jjyan, zlei, szli}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Deep learning methods are powerful tools but often suffer from expensive computation and limited flexibility. An
alternative is to combine light-weight models with deep representations. As successful cases exist in several visual
problems, a unified framework is absent. In this paper,
we revisit two widely used approaches in computer vision,
namely filtered channel features and Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN), and absorb merits from both by proposing
an integrated method called Convolutional Channel Features (CCF). CCF transfers low-level features from pretrained CNN models to feed the boosting forest model. With
the combination of CNN features and boosting forest, CCF
benefits from the richer capacity in feature representation
compared with channel features, as well as lower cost in
computation and storage compared with end-to-end CNN
methods. We show that CCF serves as a good way of tailoring pre-trained CNN models to diverse tasks without finetuning the whole network to each task by achieving stateof-the-art performances in pedestrian detection, face detection, edge detection and object proposal generation.

1. Introduction
Many object detection solutions can be taken as the combinations of the feature extractor and classifier. Combinations such as Haar-like feature with boosting [49], HOG
feature with SVM [9], multiple channel features with boosting [11] and fine-tuned high-level CNN features with SVM
[21] have largely improved the object detection. Among
these combinations, the multiple channel features with
boosting and the fine-tuned high-level CNN features with
SVM [21] show the most promising performances on various detection tasks.
The multiple channel features approach can be seen as an
improved version of the Viola-Jones framework [49] with
carefully hand-crafted channel feature representation and
more sophisticated boosting algorithm. Multiple channel
features first showed great performance in pedestrian detec-

tion [12], and was later generalized to face detection [50],
edge detection [15] and object proposal generation [55].
Recent improvements are gained by applying learned or
sophisticated hand-crafted filters on the HOG+LUV channels [39, 53]. Besides the accuracy, it typically runs at realtime speed and has very few parameters. Current bottleneck mainly lies in the representation capacity of the handcrafted feature representation since the performance saturates as we add more and more hand-crafted filters (from
tens to hundreds then to thousands) on the channel features.
The fine-tuned high-level CNN feature with SVM has recently shown extreme power [21, 40] in challenging tasks.
Typically, a CNN model previously trained on ImageNet
classification task is fine-tuned for new task and then the
mid-level or high-level features of the CNN are extracted
and fed into a SVM classifier. Owing to its large improvements in image classification, the learned feature hierarchies also set up new records in other vision tasks, like
object detection [21], semantic segmentation [25] and finegrained category detection [51]. The main advantage of this
kind of approach is that the CNN has large capacity to handle large-scale training data and the learning process is endto-end. However, currently CNN is often accompanied by
huge computation complexity in inference and learning, and
the model size is usually large (e.g., more than 500MB for
widely used VGG net [45]).
In practice, we always desire for better performance
and lower computation/storage cost. This motivates us
to build a bridge between the above two approaches and
gain benefits from their respective advantages at the same
time. Specifically, we extend the multiple channel features
to low-level feature maps transferred from a CNN model
trained on ImageNet image classification task, or equivalently speaking, replace the high-level connections in CNN
with a boosting forest. The advantages are twofold: the
transferred feature maps from CNN improve the representative capacity in channel features, while the boosting forest absolves the painstaking fine-tuning of high-level connections in CNN during the adaptation to various classification/regression problems. We name the new method as
1 82

