Text Flow: A Unified Text Detection System in Natural Scene Images
Shangxuan Tian1 , Yifeng Pan2 , Chang Huang2 , Shijian Lu3 , Kai Yu2 , and Chew Lim Tan1
1

School of Computing, National University of Singapore, Singapore
tianshangxuan@u.nus.edu,tancl@comp.nus.edu.sg
2
Institute of Deep Learning, Baidu Research, China
{panyifeng,huangchang,yukai}@baidu.com
3
Visual Computing Department, Institute for Infocomm Research, Singapore
slu@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

Abstract
The prevalent scene text detection approach follows four
sequential steps comprising character candidate detection,
false character candidate removal, text line extraction, and
text line verification. However, errors occur and accumulate throughout each of these sequential steps which often
lead to low detection performance. To address these issues,
we propose a unified scene text detection system, namely
Text Flow, by utilizing the minimum cost (min-cost) flow network model. With character candidates detected by cascade
boosting, the min-cost flow network model integrates the
last three sequential steps into a single process which solves
the error accumulation problem at both character level and
text line level effectively. The proposed technique has been
tested on three public datasets, i.e, ICDAR2011 dataset, ICDAR2013 dataset and a multilingual dataset and it outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on all three datasets with
much higher recall and F-score. The good performance on
the multilingual dataset shows that the proposed technique
can be used for the detection of texts in different languages.

1. Introduction
Machine reading of texts in scene images has attracted
increasing interests in recent years, largely due to its important roles in many practical applications such as autonomous navigation, multilingual translation, image retrieval, object recognition, etc. One prevalent scene text detection approach typically consists of four sequential steps
namely character candidate detection, false character candidate removal, text line extraction, and text line verification [4, 7, 26, 30]. However, this prevalent approach suffers
from two typical limitations, i.e., the constraint to texts in

Figure 1: Text detection examples on ICDAR2013 dataset (top
row) and the multilingual dataset (bottom row).

English and the low detection recall.
First, character candidate detection often makes use of
connected components (CCs) that are extracted in different
ways to detect as many text components as possible (for
a high recall). On the other hand, this “greedy” detection
approach includes too many non-text components, leaving
the ensuing false alarm removal (for a high precision) a very
challenging task. In addition, CCs do not work well for texts
of many non-Latin languages such as Chinese and Japanese,
where each character often consists of more than one connected component.
Second, the sequential processing approach often suffers
from a typical error accumulation problem. In particular,
the error occurring in each of the four sequential steps will
propagate to the subsequent steps and eventually lead to
a low detection recall. The situation becomes even worse
considering that many existing techniques focus on the optimization of simply one or a few of the four sequential steps.
In addition, many existing text line extraction techniques
rely heavily on knowledge-driven rules [4, 8, 17] that are
14651

