3D-Assisted Feature Synthesis for Novel Views of an Object
Hao Su∗ , Fan Wang∗ , Eric Yi, Leonidas Guibas
Stanford University

Abstract
Comparing two images from different views has been
a long-standing challenging problem in computer vision,
as visual features are not stable under large view point
changes. In this paper, given a single input image of an
object, we synthesize its features for other views, leveraging
an existing modestly-sized 3D model collection of related
but not identical objects.To accomplish this, we study the
relationship of image patches between different views of
the same object, seeking what we call surrogate patches
— patches in one view whose feature content predicts well
the features of a patch in another view. Based upon these
surrogate relationships, we can create feature sets for all
views of the latent object on a per patch basis, providing
us an augmented multi-view representation of the object.
We provide theoretical and empirical analysis of the feature
synthesis process, and evaluate the augmented features
in fine-grained image retrieval/recognition and instance
retrieval tasks. Experimental results show that our synthesized features do enable view-independent comparison
between images and perform significantly better than other
traditional approaches in this respect.

1. Introduction
Comparing images of objects from different views is a
classic and cornerstone task in computer vision. It is the
core for many applications such as object instance recognition, image matching and retrieval, and object classification.
In most scenarios, although the input is 2D images, the
comparison between images is actually aimed at comparing
the underlying 3D objects, regardless the different camera
viewpoints from which they were captured. When the
viewpoint difference is small, existing pipelines built upon
robust local features [15, 7, 14] can perform the comparison
well. However, these pipelines usually fail when the viewpoint difference is very large, since the content and relative
locations of local features fail to persist.
Humans can do cross-view image comparisons very
well, even if the viewpoint difference is large. Given a
single image of an object, one can easily imagine the under⇤ Indicates equal contributions.

Observed View

Observed View

Figure 1: Visualization of synthesized HoG features on 8
canonical views Given the input image in the center, its HoG
feature is shown in the red bounding box, and the synthesized
features are visualized for the other view points.

lying 3D object, and infer the appearance in different views.
This, however, is highly challenging for computers, due to
two challenges: 1) estimating the 3D structure from a single
image is physically under-determined: depth is missing for
the observed parts, and all information is missing for the
unseen parts; 2) synthesizing realistic details in novel views
needs sophisticated geometric reasoning.
In this paper, we address the cross-view image comparison problem by synthesizing features of different views for
an imaged object (Fig. 1), using a modestly-sized 3D model
collection as a non-parametric prior. 3D models can provide
strong prior information to help an algorithm “imagine”
what the underlying 3D object should look like from novel
views. Recently, more and more high-quality 3D models
are available online, organized with category and geometric
annotations such as alignment [2], making our proposed
approach possible and effective. Moreover, we directly
synthesize image features instead of synthesizing raw pixel
values of novel view images. The motivation for doing so is
that most computer vision techniques rely on image features
as input. Furthermore, since features are more abstract
forms of image appearance, they can be easier to transfer
across views. Finally, by synthesizing features at a set of
canonical viewpoints, we augment the original feature set
and obtain a true multi-view representation of the object,
effectively lifting the 2D image to 2-1/2D space [23, 5].
Our method is based upon two key observations. First,
12677

