Contour Flow: Middle-Level Motion Estimation by Combining Motion
Segmentation and Contour Alignment
Huijun Di, Qingxuan Shi, Feng Lv, Ming Qin, Yao Lu
Beijing Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology
School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology
{ajon, shiqingxuan, lvfeng, qinming, vis_yl}@bit.edu.cn

Figure 1: The inputs (a, c), outputs (b, d), and capabilities (e, f) of contour flow, see text for details.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Our goal is to estimate contour flow (the contour pairs
with consistent point correspondence) from inconsistent
contours extracted independently in two video frames. We
formulate the contour flow estimation locally as a motion
segmentation problem where motion patterns grouped from
optical flow field are exploited for local correspondence
measurement. To solve local ambiguities, contour flow
estimation is further formulated globally as a contour
alignment problem. We propose a novel two-staged
strategy to obtain global consistent point correspondence
under various contour transitions such as splitting,
merging and branching. The goal of the first stage is to
obtain possible accurate contour-to-contour alignments,
and the second stage aims to make a consistent fusion of
many partial alignments. Such a strategy can properly
balance the accuracy and the consistency, which enables a
middle-level motion representation to be constructed by
just concatenating frame-by-frame contour flow estimation.
Experiments prove the effectiveness of our method. 1
This work was supported in part by National Natural Science
Foundation of China (No. 61003098, 61273273, and 61271374), the
Specialized Fund for Joint Building Program of Beijing Municipal
Education Commission, and research Fund for Doctoral Program of
Higher Education of China (No. 20121101110043).

4355

General-purpose motion estimation is a long-standing
research topic in computer vision, due to its potential difficulties and broad applications. Optical flow estimation
(e.g. [1]-[3], to name a few) and point tracking [4]-[7] are
two representative methods, which have found their wide
usages in motion/video segmentation [8][9], object tracking [10], human pose estimation [11]-[13] and action
recognition [7], etc. Despite the widespread utility, these
methods provide only low level motion information, making further motion analysis or recognition from their results
challenging. The related results lack compact yet descriptive information about the shape and the motion of objects
in the scene, where optical flow is too dense to explicitly
reflect structures, while point trajectories are too sparse or
unorganized to represent sophisticated structures.
Aiming at complementing these methods, this paper
addresses a problem of contour flow estimation. As shown
in Fig. 1a and 1c, the edge pixels in each video frame are
linked independently into several contours. And the goal of
this paper is to find consistent correspondence of the points
on the contours between two consecutive frames (see Fig.
1d). According to motion consistency the original contours
from two frames are dismembered and regrouped into
coincident ones (see Fig. 1b and 1d). Such coincident
contour pairs with point correspondence are called contour

