Efficient Decomposition of Image and Mesh Graphs by Lifted Multicuts
M. Keuper1 , E. Levinkov2 , N. Bonneel3 , G. Lavoué3 , T. Brox1 and B. Andres2,∗
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Freiburg
Combinatorial Image Analysis, MPI for Informatics, Saarbrücken
3
Laboratoire d’Informatique en Image et Systèmes d’Information, CNRS Lyon
2

Abstract
Formulations of the Image Decomposition Problem [8]
as a Multicut Problem (MP) w.r.t. a superpixel graph have
received considerable attention. In contrast, instances of the
MP w.r.t. a pixel grid graph have received little attention,
firstly, because the MP is NP-hard and instances w.r.t. a pixel
grid graph are hard to solve in practice, and, secondly, due
to the lack of long-range terms in the objective function of
the MP. We propose a generalization of the MP with longrange terms (LMP). We design and implement two efficient
algorithms (primal feasible heuristics) for the MP and LMP
which allow us to study instances of both problems w.r.t. the
pixel grid graphs of the images in the BSDS-500 benchmark
[8]. The decompositions we obtain do not differ significantly
from the state of the art, suggesting that the LMP is a competitive formulation of the Image Decomposition Problem.
To demonstrate the generality of the LMP, we apply it also
to the Mesh Decomposition Problem posed by the Princeton
benchmark [16], obtaining state-of-the-art decompositions.

1. Introduction
Formulations of the Image Decomposition Problem [8]
as a Minimum Cost Multicut Problem (MP) [17, 19] have
received considerable attention [2, 5, 6, 7, 10, 12, 13, 26,
27, 28, 31, 32, 35, 40, 41]. Advantages of this formulation
are in order: Firstly, the feasible solutions of the MP relate
one-to-one to the decompositions of a graph. In particular,
the number of components is not fixed in advance but is
determined by the solution. Secondly, the MP, unlike balanced cut problems [37], does not favor one decomposition
over another by definition. Thirdly, multicut algorithms are
easy to use; they take as input a graph, e.g. the pixel grid
graph of an image, and, for every edge, a real-valued cost
(reward) of the incident ∗nodes being in distinct components,
1−p
e
e.g. log 1−p
pe + log p∗ , for an estimated probability pe of
boundary [8] at the edge e, and a prior probability p∗ ∈ (0, 1)

of cuts. The output is a 01-labeling of the edges that welldefines a decomposition of the graph by 0 indicating “join”
and 1 indicating “cut”.
One disadvantage is the NP-hardness of the MP [11, 18].
Despite significant progress in the design of efficient heuristics [10, 12, 13, 29], instances of the MP for image segmentation have so far only been solved w.r.t. superpixel adjacency
graphs and not w.r.t. pixel grid graphs, with the sole and
notable exception of [10]. A second disadvantage results
from the fact that a multicut makes explicit only for edges
whether the incident nodes are in distinct components. It
does not make explicit for pairs of nodes that are not neighbors whether these are in distinct components. Hence, the
linear objective function of the MP w.r.t. a pixel grid graph
cannot assign a cost specifically to all decompositions for
which a pair of pixels that are not neighbors are in distinct
components. This limitation, noted e.g. in [7], hampers applications as it is often hard to estimate, for an image and
a pair of neighboring pixels, whether the image is to be cut
precisely between these pixels (only these estimates are used
in the MP), and as it is sometimes easy to estimate for pixels
at larger distance whether these are in distinct components
(these estimates are not used in the MP).
An optimization problem whose feasible solutions relate
one-to-one to the decompositions of a graph and whose objective function can assign, for any pair of nodes, a cost to
all decompositions for which these nodes are in distinct components, although desirable, has not been proposed before.
Contribution. We propose the Minimum Cost Lifted
Multicut Problem (LMP), a generalization of the MP whose
feasible solutions relate one-to-one to the decompositions of
a graph and whose objective function can assign, for any pair
of nodes, a real-valued cost (reward) to all decompositions
for which these nodes are in distinct components. We design
and implement two efficient algorighms for both the MP and
the LMP and evaluate both problem formulations in conjunction with both algorithms for the Image Decomposition
Problem in terms of the BSDS-500 benchmark [8] and for
the Mesh Decomposition Problem in terms of the Princeton
Mesh Segmentation benchmark [16].

∗ Correspondence: andres@mpi-inf.mpg.de

11751

