The Likelihood-Ratio Test and Efficient Robust Estimation
Andrea Cohen1 , Christopher Zach2
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
2
Toshiba Research, Cambridge, UK
acohen@inf.ethz.ch
chzach@crl.toshiba.uk

Abstract
Robust estimation of model parameters in the presence of
outliers is a key problem in computer vision. RANSAC inspired techniques are widely used in this context, although
their application might be limited due to the need of a priori knowledge on the inlier noise level. We propose a new
approach for jointly optimizing over model parameters and
the inlier noise level based on the likelihood ratio test. This
allows control over the type I error incurred. We also propose an early bailout strategy for efficiency. Tests on both
synthetic and real data show that our method outperforms
the state-of-the-art in a fraction of the time.

1. Introduction
Robust estimation of model parameters from data points
contaminated with outlier noise is a fundamental problem
in geometric computer vision. In many applications the random sampling paradigm (RANSAC [7]) is employed due to
its efficiency and its robustness to large amounts of outliers.
In statistical terms, RANSAC (and its many modern variants), aims to find a maximum likelihood estimate (MLE)
for the desired model parameters and inlier fraction by using a mixture model of inlier and outlier distributions. Since
the objective for MLE has many local minima, RANSAC
uses many restarts by sampling model parameters from subsets of data to find an approximate MLE. The solely optimized parameters of the mixture are the model parameters
and the mixture coefficient. Other parameters such as the
inlier noise level are assumed to be provided in advance.
In several applications the inlier noise level is not known
in advance, and even a sensible estimate may be unavailable, e.g. if two image-based 3D models with unknown
scale need to be merged, or if nothing is known on how
the data points were obtained. More frequently, the model
parameters have usually too few degrees of freedom—the
models are underspecified—for efficiency reasons, e.g. lens
distortion is typically not modeled in robust estimation techniques for multi-view geometry. Underspecified models

therefore may invalidate assumptions on the inlier noise
level. Overall, adding the inlier noise level as additional
unknown to be determined from given data is beneficial in
many applications of robust model estimation.
Jointly optimizing over model parameters and the inlier noise level requires much more emphasis on reasoning
about statistical errors that can occur in robust estimation.
In standard RANSAC with a fixed inlier noise level, the
only relevant statistical error is a type II error (false negative rate) of missing a well-supported model due to the
bounded number of sampling iterations. If the noise level
is unknown, reasoning about the type I error (false positive
rate) of hallucinating a model with many inliers due to a
large chosen value for the noise level is critical. The need
of controlling the type I error in such setting has been identified in [19, 13], but to our knowledge using the generalized
likelihood ratio test (LRT) for robust model estimation with
unknown inlier noise level has not been considered in the
literature so far. In this work our contributions are: (i) we
propose to use the LRT test statistic as the objective function for robust model estimation with unknown inlier noise
level. It allows us to control the type I error of fitting an
insignificant model into random, unstructured data in a statistically sound manner. (ii) We show how the number of
sampling iterations given by the RANSAC formula leads to
reduction of the search range for the inlier noise level, accelerating model verification. (iii) We propose a bailout test
to further speed up model verification, which makes our approach (which also determines the inlier noise level) comparable in runtime to modern RANSAC implementations
(which assume a given noise level).

2. Related Work
When the inlier noise level is unknown, standard robust
estimation with a fixed criterion (i.e. inlier threshold) to determine inliers and outliers is not applicable. Numerous
methods have been proposed to address this task (e.g. least
median of squares [17], MINPRAN [19], AMLESAC [8],
AC-RANSAC [13, 14], RECON [16], kernel density esti-

2282

