Minimum Barrier Salient Object Detection at 80 FPS
Jianming Zhang1

Input

SO

Stan Sclaroff1 Zhe Lin2 Xiaohui Shen2 Brian Price2
1
2
Boston University
Adobe Research

AMC

HS

SIA

HC

FT

Radomı́r Mĕch2

Ours

GT

Figure 1: Sample saliency maps of several state-of-the-art methods (SO [39], AMC [15], HS [34] and SIA [6]) and methods
with fast speed (HC [5], FT [1] and ours). Our method runs at about 80 FPS using a single thread, and produces saliency
maps of high quality. Previous methods with similar speed, like HC and FT, usually cannot handle complex images well.

Abstract
We propose a highly efficient, yet powerful, salient object
detection method based on the Minimum Barrier Distance
(MBD) Transform. The MBD transform is robust to pixelvalue fluctuation, and thus can be effectively applied on raw
pixels without region abstraction. We present an approximate MBD transform algorithm with 100X speedup over
the exact algorithm. An error bound analysis is also provided. Powered by this fast MBD transform algorithm, the
proposed salient object detection method runs at 80 FPS,
and significantly outperforms previous methods with similar
speed on four large benchmark datasets, and achieves comparable or better performance than state-of-the-art methods. Furthermore, a technique based on color whitening is
proposed to extend our method to leverage the appearancebased backgroundness cue. This extended version further
improves the performance, while still being one order of
magnitude faster than all the other leading methods.

1. Introduction
The goal of salient object detection is to compute a
saliency map that highlights the salient objects and suppresses the background in a scene. Recently, this problem
has received a lot of research interest owing to its usefulness
in many computer vision applications, e.g. object detection,
action recognition, and various image/video processing applications. Due to the emerging applications on mobile de-

vices and large scale datasets, a desirable salient object detection method should not only output high quality saliency
maps, but should also be highly computationally efficient.
In this paper, we address both the quality and speed requirements for salient object detection.
The Image Boundary Connectivity Cue, which assumes
that background regions are usually connected to the image
borders, is shown to be effective for salient object detection [39, 33, 36, 35]. To leverage this cue, previous methods, geodesic-distance-based [33, 39] or diffusion-based
[15, 35], rely on a region abstraction step to extract superpixels. The superpixel representation helps remove irrelevant images details, and/or makes these models computationally feasible. However, this region abstraction step also
becomes a speed bottleneck for this type of methods.
To boost the speed, we propose a method to exploit the
image boundary connectivity cue without region abstraction. We use the Minimum Barrier Distance (MBD) [30, 8]
to measure a pixel’s connectivity to the image boundary.
Compared with the widely used geodesic distance, the
MBD is much more robust to pixel value fluctuation. In
contrast, the geodesic distance transform often produces a
rather fuzzy central area when applied on raw pixels, due to
the small-weight-accumulation problem observed in [33].
Since the exact algorithm for the MBD transform is not
very efficient, we present FastMBD, a fast raster-scanning
algorithm for the MBD transform, which provides a good
approximation of the MBD transform in milliseconds, being two orders of magnitude faster than the exact algorithm
[8]. Due to the non-smoothness property [11] of MBD, er11404

