Active one-shot scan for wide depth range using a light field projector
based on coded aperture
Hiroshi Kawasaki, Satoshi Ono, Yuki, Horita, Yuki Shiba
Kagoshima University
Kagoshima, Japan

Ryo Furukawa, Shinsaku Hiura
Hiroshima City University
Hiroshima, Japan

{kawasaki,ono}@ibe.kagoshima-u.ac.jp

{ryo-f,hiura}@hiroshima-cu.ac.jp

Abstract
The central projection model commonly used to model
cameras as well as projectors, results in similar advantages and disadvantages in both types of system. Considering the case of active stereo systems using a projector
and camera setup, a central projection model creates several problems; among them, narrow depth range and necessity of wide baseline are crucial. In the paper, we solve
the problems by introducing a light field projector, which
can project a depth-dependent pattern. The light field projector is realized by attaching a coded aperture with a high
frequency mask in front of the lens of the video projector,
which also projects a high frequency pattern. Because the
light field projector cannot be approximated by a thin lens
model and a precise calibration method is not established
yet, an image-based approach is proposed to apply a stereo
technique to the system. Although image-based techniques
usually require a large database and often imply heavy computational costs, we propose a hierarchical approach and a
feature-based search for solution. In the experiments, it is
confirmed that our method can accurately recover the dense
shape of curved and textured objects for a wide range of
depths from a single captured image.

1. Introduction
One-shot active scanning systems for capturing dynamic
scenes have been intensively investigated because of strong
demands in various fields, e.g., medical, robotics, games,
etc [13, 18]. Previous works mainly used light projectors
that radiate a structured light pattern from a single optical
center. An advantage of the model is that there is an inherent duality between the geometrical properties of such projectors and the central projection model, e.g., a pinhole or
lens camera model, so that the projector in an active stereo
system can be formalized as an ‘inverse camera’ from a passive stereo system. Because of this analogy, the projected
pattern image can be treated as an image which is captured
by a virtual camera placed at the projector’s position, and

most passive stereo algorithms can be directly applied to the
image pair (i.e., the pattern image and the image captured
by the camera) for stereo reconstruction.
Recently, camera models other than central projection
models, i.e., non-central projection models, such as generalized cameras or light-field cameras, have attracted many
researchers for their unique possibilities for specific purposes [20, 22, 24, 17]. Especially light-field cameras, which
can capture a bundle of incoming light rays from different
directions and their intensities for each point of the image
plane, are widely studied and commercialized because of
their unprecedented capability of controlling the focus at
each pixel, which allows to create all-in-focus images [1].
Considering the geometric duality between a camera and
a projector, if a pattern projector with a non-central projection model is realized, patterns with novel properties,
such as depth-dependent and/or defocus-free projection, are
made possible. However, the naive method for constructing
a light-field projector in which a large number of projectors
are arranged together is known to have several problems,
such as optical design, costs and installation [9, 15].
To solve these issues, we propose a novel light field projector that consists of an off-the-shelf video projector with
a coded aperture mask attached. The system has the same
capability as a densely arranged array of projectors, and
the projected patterns change their appearance depending
on depth. Such nature is in contrast with a traditional central projection system, where generated patterns are invariant with respect to the depth. By making use of the depthdependent pattern, the camera and the projector are not required to be set up with a wide baseline, even with no baseline, the depth can be still reconstructed. To leverage both
the depth-dependency of the projected pattern and the disparities caused by the baseline between the camera and the
projector of our system, we propose a hybrid method fusing
light-field projection and active stereo technique.
As for the actual implementation of a light-field projector, we use lines or dots pattern for both an aperture and a
pattern for projection. As shown later, by using the pattern,
we can generate depth-dependent patterns without blurring
13568

