Bayesian Model Adaptation for Crowd Counts
Bo Liu
Nuno Vasconcelos
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
boliu@eng.ucsd.edu, nuno@ece.ucsd.edu

Abstract
The problem of transfer learning is considered in the
domain of crowd counting. A solution based on Bayesian
model adaptation of Gaussian processes is proposed. This
is shown to produce intuitive model updates, which are
tractable, and lead to an adapted model (predictive distribution) that accounts for all information in both training and adaptation data. The new adaptation procedure
achieves significant gains over previous approaches, based
on multi-task learning, while requiring much less computation to deploy. This makes it particularly suited for the problem of expanding the capacity of crowd counting camera
networks. A large video dataset for the evaluation of adaptation approaches to crowd counting is also introduced.
This contains a number of adaptation tasks, involving information transfer across video collected by 1) a single camera
under different scene conditions (different times of the day)
and 2) video collected from different cameras. Evaluation
of the proposed model adaptation procedure in this dataset
shows good performance in realistic operating conditions.

1. Introduction
The problem of crowd counting [4] has recently received
significant attention in computer vision. Given video of a
crowded environment, the goal is to estimate the density
of the crowd, by counting the number of people that it contains. Various methods have shown that the problem is solvable with fairly high accuracy [4, 5, 14, 21, 23]. In fact, state
of the art results place the prediction error at around ±1 person per video frame, for crowds with dozens of pedestrians.
While this is sufficient for most applications of practical interest, the scalability problem remains open. Most works
assume a large annotated training set per camera view. This
is not practical for large camera networks, where crowd
counting systems are most useful.
The scalability goal makes crowd counting a prime candidate for transfer learning [15]. This consists of sharing

information (or models) across camera views, so as to minimize the amount of manual supervision per view. Like
transfer learning in general, transfer learning methods for
crowd counting can be of several types. They include semisupervised learning (SSL) to account for unlabeled video
in the training process, multi-task learning (MTL) to share
a model across camera views, or model adaptation, to apply
a model trained on a camera view to counting on another.
In principle, all of these are of interest to crowd counting. For example, [13] proposed a system that elegantly
combines SSL and MTL with active learning and manifold
learning to share information across camera views. The
boundaries between different types of transfer learning are
also loose. For example, 2-task MTL can transfer information between two views in a manner similar to model
adaptation. There are, nevertheless, important differences.
While adaptation subsumes the notion of a source and a target view, with asymmetric amounts of training data, this
is usually not the case for MTL, where all sources usually
have equal amounts of data, or for SSL, where the asymmetry is between labeled and unlabeled data. In result, model
adaptation, which adapts an existing model to a small set of
unseen data, tends to be computationally less intensive than
MTL or SSL, which learn from all data.
These issues are of particular concern to this work, which
addresses the problem of expanding the capacity of a crowd
counting camera network, by adding cameras to an already
installed system. This is usually done to expand the system
footprint, i.e. increase the area of a scene that it covers, or
its resolution, e.g. by adding views of areas where counting
already takes place. Increased resolution is desirable when
certain scene features, e.g. building entries or landmarks,
justify detailed crowd counts. Capacity expansion has two
constraints: it should require 1) little human effort, in the
form of small amounts of labeled data per added camera
view, and 2) little computational effort, by requiring minimal model re-training (ideally none). These make the problem more suited for model adaptation, due to its smaller
labeling and computation requirements, than SSL or MTL.
In this work, we introduce a model adaptation proce14175

