Direct Intrinsics: Learning Albedo-Shading Decomposition by Convolutional Regression
Takuya Narihira
UC Berkeley / ICSI / Sony Corp.

Michael Maire
TTI Chicago

Stella X. Yu
UC Berkeley / ICSI

takuya.narihira@jp.sony.com

mmaire@ttic.edu

stellayu@berkeley.edu

Abstract
We introduce a new approach to intrinsic image decomposition, the task of decomposing a single image into albedo
and shading components. Our strategy, which we term direct intrinsics, is to learn a convolutional neural network
(CNN) that directly predicts output albedo and shading
channels from an input RGB image patch. Direct intrinsics
is a departure from classical techniques for intrinsic image
decomposition, which typically rely on physically-motivated
priors and graph-based inference algorithms.
The large-scale synthetic ground-truth of the MPI Sintel
dataset plays a key role in training direct intrinsics. We
demonstrate results on both the synthetic images of Sintel and the real images of the classic MIT intrinsic image
dataset. On Sintel, direct intrinsics, using only RGB input,
outperforms all prior work, including methods that rely on
RGB+Depth input. Direct intrinsics also generalizes across
modalities; it produces quite reasonable decompositions on
the real images of the MIT dataset. Our results indicate that
the marriage of CNNs with synthetic training data may be
a powerful new technique for tackling classic problems in
computer vision.

1. Introduction
Algorithms for automatic recovery of physical scene
properties from an input image are of interest for many applications across computer vision and graphics; examples
include material recognition and re-rendering. The intrinsic
image model assumes that color image I is the point-wise
product of albedo A and shading S:
I =A·S

(1)

Here, albedo is the physical reflectivity of surfaces in the
scene. Considerable research focuses on automated recovery of A and S given as input only color image I [15, 11],
or given I and a depth map D for the scene [19, 1, 2, 5]. Our
work falls into the former category as we predict the decomposition using only color input. Yet, we outperform modern
approaches that rely on color and depth input [19, 1, 2, 5].

output albedo image

CNN
output shading image
input image

Figure 1. Direct intrinsics. We construct a convolutional neural
network (CNN) that, acting across an input image, directly predicts the decomposition into albedo and shading images. It essentially encodes nonlinear convolutional kernels for the output
patches (green boxes) from a much larger receptive field in the input image (cyan box). We train the network on computer graphics
generated images from the MPI Sintel dataset [4] (Figure 2).

We achieve such results through a drastic departure from
most traditional approaches to the intrinsic image problem.
Many works attack this problem by incorporating strong
physics-inspired priors. One expects albedo and material
changes to be correlated, motivating priors such as piecewise constancy of albedo [18, 20, 1, 2] or sparseness of the
set of unique albedo values in a scene [25, 10, 26]. One
also expects shading to vary smoothly over the image [9].
Tang et al. [27] explore generative learning of priors using
deep belief networks. Though learning aligns with our philosophy, we take a discriminative approach.
Systems motivated by physical priors are usually formulated as optimization routines solving for a point-wise
decomposition that satisfies Equation 1 and also fits with
priors imposed over an extended spatial domain. Hence,
graph-based inference algorithms [29] and conditional random fields (CRFs) in particular [3] are often used.
We forgo both physical modeling constraints and graphbased inference methods. Our direct intrinsics approach
is purely data-driven and learns a convolutional regression
which maps a color image input to its corresponding albedo
and shading outputs. It is instantiated in the form of a multiscale fully convolutional neural network (Figure 1).
Key to enabling our direct intrinsics approach is avail-

2992

