High Quality Structure from Small Motion for Rolling Shutter Cameras
Sunghoon Im Hyowon Ha Gyeongmin Choe Hae-Gon Jeon Kyungdon Joo In So Kweon
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Republic of Korea
{shim, hwha, gmchoe, hgjeon, kdjoo}@rcv.kaist.ac.kr, iskweon77@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
We present a practical 3D reconstruction method to obtain a high-quality dense depth map from narrow-baseline
image sequences captured by commercial digital cameras,
such as DSLRs or mobile phones. Depth estimation from
small motion has gained interest as a means of various photographic editing, but important limitations present themselves in the form of depth uncertainty due to a narrow
baseline and rolling shutter. To address these problems, we
introduce a novel 3D reconstruction method from narrowbaseline image sequences that effectively handles the effects
of a rolling shutter that occur from most of commercial digital cameras. Additionally, we present a depth propagation
method to fill in the holes associated with the unknown pixels based on our novel geometric guidance model. Both
qualitative and quantitative experimental results show that
our new algorithm consistently generates better 3D depth
maps than those by the state-of-the-art method.

1. Introduction
With the widespread use of commercial cameras and
the continuous growth observed in computing power, consumers are starting to expect more variety with the photographic applications on their mobile devices. Various features, such as refocusing, 3D parallax and extended depth of
ﬁeld, are a few examples of sought-after functions in such
devices [1, 2]. To meet these needs, estimating 3D information is becoming an increasingly important technique, and
numerous research efforts have focused on computing accurate 3D information at a low cost.
Light-ﬁeld imaging and stereo imaging have been explored as possible solutions. Light-ﬁeld imaging products
utilize a micro-lens array in front of its CCD sensor to capture aligned multi-view images in a single shot. The captured multi-view images are used to compute depth maps
and to produce refocused images. The problem with this
approach is that it requires highly specialized hardware
and it also suffers from a resolution trade-off, which signiﬁcantly reduces the resulting 3D spatial resolution e.g.

Refocusing point

Refocusing point

(a) Yu and Gallup [33]
(b) Our results
Figure 1. Comparison of the proposed method with the state-ofthe-art. Top : Depth maps. Middle : Synthetic defocused images
based on the depth maps. Bottom : 3D meshes.

Lytro [1] and Pelican [30]. Stereo imaging is an alternative
method that works by ﬁnding correspondences of the same
feature points between two rectiﬁed images of the same
scene [2, 34]. Although this method shows reliable depth
results, both cameras are required to be calibrated beforehand and must maintain their calibrated state, which makes
it cumbersome and costly for many applications.
One research direction that has led to renewed interest
is the depth estimation of narrow-baseline image sequences
captured by off-the-shelf cameras, such as DSLRs or mobile phone cameras [15, 33, 13]. The main advantage of
these approaches is that 3D information can be estimated
by an off-the-shelf camera without the need for additional
devices or camera modiﬁcations. However, these methods
use images with a narrow-baseline, a few mm, often failing
to generate reasonable depth maps if existing multi-view
stereo such as [8] were to be applied directly. Additionally, we observe that the rolling shutter (RS) used in most
digital cameras causes severe geometric artifacts and results
in severe errors in 3D reconstruction. These artifacts commonly occur when the motion is at a higher frequency than
1837

