Unsupervised Extraction of Video Highlights Via Robust Recurrent
Auto-encoders

1

Baoyuan Wang2

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Stephen Lin3
David Wipf3
Minyi Guo1
3
Baining Guo
2
3
Microsoft Technology & Research
Microsoft Research

Abstract

1. Introduction
Short-form video has become a popular way for users
to share their experiences on social media platforms such
as YouTube and Facebook. With a well-crafted video, the
user’s experience can be quickly conveyed without testing
the attention span of viewers. However, manually producing a highlight clip from a lengthy video, such as those captured with wearable devices like GoPro cameras, can be
a time-consuming and laborious task, especially on small
∗ This work was done when Huan Yang was an intern at Microsoft Research

Training Pipeline

Raw Video

Testing Pipeline

With the growing popularity of short-form video sharing platforms such as Instagram and Vine, there has been
an increasing need for techniques that automatically extract highlights from video. Whereas prior works have approached this problem with heuristic rules or supervised
learning, we present an unsupervised learning approach
that takes advantage of the abundance of user-edited videos
on social media websites such as YouTube. Based on the
idea that the most significant sub-events within a video class
are commonly present among edited videos while less interesting ones appear less frequently, we identify the significant sub-events via a robust recurrent auto-encoder trained
on a collection of user-edited videos queried for each particular class of interest. The auto-encoder is trained using
a proposed shrinking exponential loss function that makes
it robust to noise in the web-crawled training data, and
is configured with bidirectional long short term memory
(LSTM) [5] cells to better model the temporal structure of
highlight segments. Different from supervised techniques,
our method can infer highlights using only a set of downloaded edited videos, without also needing their pre-edited
counterparts which are rarely available online. Extensive
experiments indicate the promise of our proposed solution
in this challenging unsupervised setting.

User Edited Video

3D Convolution Deep Feature

Huan Yang1∗

Unsupervised
Robust Recurrent
Auto-encoder

Reconstruction Error
small
Highlight

large
Outlier

Figure 1. Overall system pipeline

form-factor display devices such as smart phones. An automated tool for generating highlight clips is thus immensely
desirable such that the user need only to deal with content
capture.
Previous techniques address this problem either by limiting the scope to a particular context or through the use
of supervised learning. The first type of method generally employs heuristic rules designed for a certain type of
video, such as for broadcast sports [20, 18, 25, 31]. Though
effective for their targeted settings, these techniques may
not generalize well to generic, unstructured videos. In contrast, methods based on supervised learning rely on pairs of
edited and raw source videos [24] to infer highlight actions.
Collecting such video pairs, however, can be a challenge.
Although there exists a considerable amount of video data
on the web, users typically do not upload both the raw and
edited versions of a video.
In this work, we propose an unsupervised approach for

4633

