Video Matting via Sparse and Low-Rank Representation
Dongqing Zou, Xiaowu Chen∗, Guangying Cao, Xiaogang Wang
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China

Abstract
We introduce a novel method of video matting via sparse
and low-rank representation. Previous matting methods
[10, 9] introduced a nonlocal prior to estimate the alpha
matte and have achieved impressive results on some data.
However, on one hand, searching inadequate or excessive
samples may miss good samples or introduce noise; on the
other hand, it is difficult to construct consistent nonlocal
structures for pixels with similar features, yielding spatially
and temporally inconsistent video mattes. In this paper, we
proposed a novel video matting method to achieve spatially
and temporally consistent matting result. Toward this end, a
sparse and low-rank representation model is introduced to
pursue consistent nonlocal structures for pixels with similar
features. The sparse representation is used to adaptively
select best samples and accurately construct the nonlocal
structures for all pixels, while the low-rank representation
is used to globally ensure consistent nonlocal structures
for pixels with similar features. The two representations
are combined to generate consistent video mattes. Experimental results show that our method has achieved
high quality results in a variety of challenging examples
featuring illumination changes, feature ambiguity, topology
changes, transparency variation, dis-occlusion, fast motion
and motion blur.

1. Introduction
Video matting is to accurately extract a moving foreground matte from an input video while avoiding spatial
and temporal artifacts. It is a fundamental and important
computer vision problem with many applications, including
hair modeling [7], dehazing [19] and so on. In the past few
years, various video matting methods [14, 3, 23, 25] have
been presented and achieved impressive matting results.
Despite of much progress on video matting, it is still
very challenging to achieve temporal consistency due to
topology variation, motion blur, transparency changing and
∗ corresponding author (email: chen@buaa.edu.cn)

dis-occlusion.
Most video matting methods use optical flow to generate
temporally consistent video mattes. However, optical flow
can not guarantee to estimate an accurate motion for videos
with complex scenes, resulting in temporal artifacts in video
matting. Methods [10, 9] introduce a nonlocal prior to
estimate the alpha matte. However, on one hand, searching
inadequate or excessive samples may miss good samples or
introduce noise; on the other hand, it is difficult to construct
consistent nonlocal structures for pixels with similar features, yielding spatially and temporally inconsistent video
mattes.
In fact, the nonlocal prior proposed in [10, 25] implies
that nonlocal pixels with similar features are generated from
the same subspace. Thus these pixels can be represented
by several bases or atoms according to the sparse and lowrank representations [35, 8, 39]. Accordingly, if we can
discover some subspaces that well represent the foreground
and background of all frames, and build the relationships
between pixels within the same subspace, the spatial and
temporal relationships between pixels would be obtained.
According to the analysis above, it is reasonable to
assume that pixels from the same object in different frames
are drawn from one identical low-rank feature subspace,
and all pixels in several successive frames lie on a union
of multiple subspaces. This assumption can be justified by
natural statistic and observations of videos. Therefore, if
each pixel can be represented as a linear combination of
atoms, we can pursue a low-rank and sparse representation
for all pixels. With the sparse constraint, each pixel in
the video will be only represented with several related
atoms, which in theory is consistent with the principle
of nonlocal matting methods [10, 9]. With the low rank
constraint, pixels with similar features in the same frame are
represented with the same atoms in a dictionary, thus spatial
consistency is achieved. Moreover, under this constraint,
pixels with similar features from successive frames are
represented with the same atoms too. Low-rank constraint
contributes to ensuring temporally consistent mattes.
In this paper, we propose a novel video matting method
via sparse and low-rank representation in this paper. With

1564

