Predicting Deep Zero-Shot Convolutional Neural Networks
using Textual Descriptions
Jimmy Lei Ba

Kevin Swersky
Sanja Fidler
University of Toronto

Ruslan Salakhutdinov

jimmy,kswersky,fidler,rsalakhu@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
The recent success of the deep learning approaches to
object recognition is supported by the collection of large
datasets with millions of images and thousands of labels [3, 32]. Although the datasets continue to grow larger
and are acquiring a broader set of categories, they are very
time consuming and expensive to collect. Furthermore, collecting detailed, fine-grained annotations, such as attribute
or object part labels, is even more difficult for datasets of
such size.
On the other hand, there is a massive amount of textual
data available online. Online encyclopedias, such as English Wikipedia, currently contain 4,856,149 articles, and
represent a rich knowledge base for a diverse set of topics.
Ideally, one would exploit this rich source of information in

1xC

Dot
product
f

g

Cxk

1xk

MLP
CNN

a
eric

…

am

no
genrth
us
sou
th

TF-IDF

fam
birdily
s

One of the main challenges in Zero-Shot Learning of visual categories is gathering semantic attributes to accompany images. Recent work has shown that learning from
textual descriptions, such as Wikipedia articles, avoids the
problem of having to explicitly define these attributes. We
present a new model that can classify unseen categories
from their textual description. Specifically, we use text features to predict the output weights of both the convolutional
and the fully connected layers in a deep convolutional neural network (CNN). We take advantage of the architecture
of CNNs and learn features at different layers, rather than
just learning an embedding space for both modalities, as
is common with existing approaches. The proposed model
also allows us to automatically generate a list of pseudoattributes for each visual category consisting of words from
Wikipedia articles. We train our models end-to-end using the Caltech-UCSD bird and flower datasets and evaluate both ROC and Precision-Recall curves. Our empirical
results show that the proposed model significantly outperforms previous methods.

Class
score

Image

Wikipedia article
The Cardinals or Cardinalidae are a family of passerine
birds found in North and South America
The South American cardinals in the genus…

Figure 1. A deep multi-modal neural network. The first modality
corresponds to tf-idf features taken from a text corpus with a corresponding class, e.g., a Wikipedia article about a particular object.
This is passed through a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) and produces a set of linear output nodes f . The second modality takes in
an image and feeds it into a convolutional neural network (CNN).
The last layer of the CNN is then passed through a linear projection to produce a set of image features g. The score of the class is
produced via f ⊤ g. In this sense, the text pipeline can be though
of as producing a set of classifier weights for the image pipeline.

order to train visual object models with minimal additional
annotation.
The concept of “Zero-Shot Learning” has been introduced in the literature [7, 8, 16, 21, 5, 17] with the aim
to improve the scalability of traditional object recognition
systems. The ability to classify images of an unseen class is
transferred from the semantically or visually similar classes
that have already been learned by a visual classifier. One
popular approach is to exploit shared knowledge between
classes in the form of attributes, such as stripes, four legs,
14247

