A Comprehensive Multi-Illuminant Dataset for Benchmarking of Intrinsic
Image Algorithms
Shida Beigpour, Andreas Kolb
Chair of Computer Graphics and Multimedia Systems, University of Siegen
Hölderlinstrae 3, 57076 Siegen, Germany
{ shida.beigpour, andreas.kolb} @uni-siegen.de

Sven Kunz
sven.kunz83@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper, we provide a new, real photo dataset with
precise ground-truth for intrinsic image research. Prior
ground-truth datasets have been restricted to rather simple illumination conditions and scene geometries, or have
been enhanced using image synthesis methods. The dataset
provided in this paper is based on complex multi-illuminant
scenarios under multi-colored illumination conditions and
challenging cast shadows. We provide full per-pixel intrinsic ground-truth data for these scenarios, i.e. reflectance,
specularity, shading, and illumination for scenes as well as
preliminary depth information. Furthermore, we evaluate 3
state-of-the-art intrinsic image recovery methods, using our
dataset.

1. Introduction
One of the main goals in the image processing research,
from the early days until now, is the ability to describe
the scene in terms of “intrinsic” characteristics like depth,
shape, surface orientation (normals), incident light, and reflectance at each visible surface point [4]. Each of these
intrinsic characteristics provides us with valuable cues for
scene understanding. Several methods have been proposed
which tackle different aspects of this problem in an imagebased manner, i.e. utilizing image-based scene representations with a fixed camera pose. While color constancy
methods are more interested in the chromatic value of the
incident light on the object surface, intrinsic image estimation methods try to separate the effects of the lighting and
scene geometry from the object’s reflectance, i.e. its color
and texture.
A major difficulty for intrinsic image research is getting
access to datasets of images which depict realistic scenar-

ios, and provide precise ground-truth information regarding all intrinsic scene parameters, i.e. reflectance, specularity, shading, and illumination. This kind of datasets allows
the evaluation of the performance of any intrinsic image
method, as well as providing training data for these algorithms. The first reliable dataset is published by Grosse et
al. [15], known as the MIT dataset. While the MIT dataset
has paved the way for many recent intrinsic image methods,
it suffers from limitations like: simple lighting condition (a
single white light source with no ambient lighting, no colored interreflections, no colored lighting edges, no colored
shadows, and very little specularities), simple toy objects
with limited color and texture, and no geometry data.
Recently Barron et al. [2] have synthetically rendered the
MIT images to provide more complex lighting. In their later
work [3], they have also featured synthesized range (depth)
data for the MIT dataset with synthesized Kinect-like noise,
and shown the value of such complimentary information
about the scene in improving the performance of intrinsic
image recovery. Furthermore, they have provided results
on the NYU dataset [21] for which range data, but no real
intrinsic image ground-truth is available.
In the current work, we provide a new, real-photo
ground-truth dataset applicable to intrinsic image research,
which strongly improves over the existing ones in terms of
illumination and scene complexity, and which includes full
intrinsic ground-truth data. Inspired by Grosse et al. [15]
and Beigpour et al. [6], our approaches to scene setup, data
acquisition, and ground-truth determination comprise the
following contributions, addressing new challenges in the
field which were previously not considered:
• Creation of the first reliable multi-illuminant realphoto dataset for the purpose of intrinsic image research presenting complex geometry, multi-colored
non-uniform lighting, large specularities, and chal-

172

