Uncovering Interactions and Interactors: Joint Estimation of Head, Body
Orientation and F-formations from Surveillance Videos
Elisa Ricci1,3 , Jagannadan Varadarajan2 , Ramanathan Subramanian2 ,
Samuel Rota Bulò1 , Narendra Ahuja2,4 , Oswald Lanz1
1
Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy
2
Advanced Digital Sciences Center, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Singapore
3
Department of Engineering, University of Perugia, Italy
4
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, IL USA
{eliricci,rotabulo,lanz}@fbk.eu, {vjagan,subramanian.r}@adsc.com.sg, {n-ahuja}@illinois.edu

Abstract
We present a novel approach for jointly estimating targets’ head, body orientations and conversational groups
called F-formations from a distant social scene (e.g., a
cocktail party captured by surveillance cameras). Differing
from related works that have (i) coupled head and body pose
learning by exploiting the limited range of orientations that
the two can jointly take, or (ii) determined F-formations
based on the mutual head (but not body) orientations of interactors, we present a unified framework to jointly infer
both (i) and (ii). Apart from exploiting spatial and orientation relationships, we also integrate cues pertaining to
temporal consistency and occlusions, which are beneficial
while handling low-resolution data under surveillance settings. Efficacy of the joint inference framework reflects via
increased head, body pose and F-formation estimation accuracy over the state-of-the-art, as confirmed by extensive
experiments on two social datasets.

1. Introduction
Following decades of research progress, head and body
pose estimation (PE) is now possible in challenging settings
where persons are captured at prohibitively low-resolution
with blurred facial and body parts, or moving unconstrained
in an environment with uneven illumination. Buoyed by the
success of PE algorithms that can robustly handle facial appearance variations [7, 36] and learn with limited training
data by exploiting anatomic constraints [5, 8], computer vision research has begun to focus on complex phenomena
like social interactions.
The ability to detect conversational groups or Fformations [11] in social scenes (Fig.1 (left)) is critical for a
variety of applications such as surveillance, social robotics

Figure 1: Problem overview: (Left) Social scene from
the Coffeebreak dataset [12]. We jointly estimate conversational groups and the head, body pose of conversing targets, both of which are non-trivial due to low-resolution
and extreme occlusions. Circles around targets’ feet positions denote body pose, arrows denote head pose, and lines
connecting the circles signify F-formations estimated using our method. (Center) Three member F-formation where
feet positions, head and body orientations are shown– corresponding O-space is denoted using the blue ellipse. (Right)
Exemplar F-formations with two targets.
and behavior analysis. Formally, an F-formation arises naturally in conversational settings whenever two or more individuals in close proximity orient their bodies such that each
of them has an easy, direct and equal access to every other
participant’s transactional segment [11]. For example, when
two persons interact, the typical formation arrangements
are vis-a-vis, L-shape and side-by-side (Fig.1 (right)). The
fact that F-formations are characterized by the shared physical locations and head, body orientations of interactors has
been exploited by several works [12, 33]. In these works,
an F-formation is typically computed by determining interacting members and the center of the O-space [11], i.e., the
center of the smallest empty convex space encompassed by
the interactors (Fig.1 (center)).
Challenges in visual analysis of conversational groups
14660

