Cutting Edge: Soft Correspondences in Multimodal Scene Parsing
Sarah Taghavi Namin1,2 Mohammad Najaﬁ1,2 Mathieu Salzmann2,3 Lars Petersson1,2
1
2
3
Australian National University (ANU)
NICTA∗
CVLab, EPFL, Switzerland
{sarah.namin, mohammad.najafi, lars.petersson}@nicta.com.au

mathieu.salzmann@epfl.ch

Abstract
Exploiting multiple modalities for semantic scene parsing has been shown to improve accuracy over the singlemodality scenario. Existing methods, however, assume that
corresponding regions in two modalities have the same label. In this paper, we address the problem of data misalignment and label inconsistencies, e.g., due to moving objects,
in semantic labeling, which violate the assumption of existing techniques. To this end, we formulate multimodal semantic labeling as inference in a CRF, and introduce latent
nodes to explicitly model inconsistencies between two domains. These latent nodes allow us not only to leverage
information from both domains to improve their labeling,
but also to cut the edges between inconsistent regions. To
eliminate the need for hand tuning the parameters of our
model, we propose to learn intra-domain and inter-domain
potential functions from training data. We demonstrate the
benefits of our approach on two publicly available datasets
containing 2D imagery and 3D point clouds. Thanks to our
latent nodes and our learning strategy, our method outperforms the state-of-the-art in both cases.

1. Introduction
Multi-modal scene analysis aims at leveraging complementary information captured by multiple sensing modalities, such as 3D LIDAR and 2D imagery. In the context of semantic labeling, where the goal is to assign a
class label to the elements of each modality, such as image pixels and 3D points, this has been shown to consistently yield increased accuracy over relying on a single domain [7, 25, 5, 2, 15, 17].
Nevertheless, existing methods suffer from an important
limitation: they typically assume that corresponding regions
in two modalities always have the same label. This assumption is encoded either explicitly by having a single label
variable for all modalities [7, 5, 2], or implicitly by penalizing label differences between the domains [25, 15, 17].
∗

NICTA is funded by the Australian Government through the Department of Communications and the Australian
Research Council through the ICT Centre of Excellence Program.
† The authors would like to thank Justin Domke for his assistance in implementing the learned potentials.

Figure 1. Top: Existing approaches typically directly connect corresponding regions in different modalities and penalize these regions for taking different labels, thus producing wrong labeling in
the presence of data misalignment, or other causes of label disagreement. Bottom: Here, we introduce latent nodes that are
placed between each connected pair of 2D and 3D nodes in the
graph and explicitly let us account for such inconsistencies, and
potentially cut edges between the different domains. Blue spheres
denote one domain (e.g., 3D) and orange squares another one (e.g.,
2D). Our latent nodes are represented as green triangles.

While this assumption may seem reasonable, it is often violated in realistic scenarios. Indeed, in practice, the different modalities are typically not perfectly aligned/registered.
Furthermore, in dynamic scenes, moving objects may not
easily be captured by some sensors, such as 3D LIDAR,
due to their lower acquisition speed. To give a concrete example, in the NICTA/2D3D dataset employed in our experiments, 17% of the connections between the two modalities
correspond to inconsistent labels. As a consequence, since
they fail to model these inconsistencies, existing methods
will typically produce wrong labels in at least one modality.
In this paper, we introduce an approach to multimodal
semantic labeling that explicitly accounts for the inconsistencies of the domains. To this end, as illustrated in
Fig. 1, we formulate multimodal scene parsing as inference
in a Conditional Random Field (CRF), and introduce latent
nodes to handle conﬂicting evidence between the different
domains. The beneﬁt of these latent nodes is twofold: First,
11188

