Robust Non-rigid Motion Tracking and Surface Reconstruction
Using L0 Regularization

1

Kaiwen Guo1,2 , Feng Xu1,3 , Yangang Wang4 , Yebin Liu1,2∗ , Qionghai Dai1,2∗
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology, Beijing, China
2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
4
Microsoft Research
Abstract

We present a new motion tracking method to robustly
reconstruct non-rigid geometries and motions from single
view depth inputs captured by a consumer depth sensor. The
idea comes from the observation of the existence of intrinsic articulated subspace in most of non-rigid motions. To
take advantage of this characteristic, we propose a novel
L0 based motion regularizer with an iterative optimization
solver that can implicitly constrain local deformation only
on joints with articulated motions, leading to reduced solution space and physical plausible deformations. The L0
strategy is integrated into the available non-rigid motion
tracking pipeline, forming the proposed L0 -L2 non-rigid
motion tracking method that can adaptively stop the tracking error propagation. Extensive experiments over complex
human body motions with occlusions, face and hand motions demonstrate that our approach substantially improves
tracking robustness and surface reconstruction accuracy.

1. Introduction
Acquiring 3D models of deforming objects in real-life
is attractive but remains challenging in computer vision and
graphics. One kind of approach is to explore the inner structure of deforming objects and use skeleton-based strategy to
perform the tracking and reconstruction, e.g. human body
tracking [10, 14], hand motion capture [17, 8]. However,
there are large number of deforming objects which cannot be completely modeled by skeletons, e.g. the activity of
people grasping a non-rigid deforming pillow (Fig. 6). Besides, the tracking performance is sensitive to the skeleton
embedding and the surface skinning [2] strategies, which
usually require manual operations to achieve high quality
motion tracking [10, 11].
Non-rigid deformation [23, 22, 19] provides an appealing solution for dynamic objects modeling since it does not
* Corresponding authors: {liuyebin, qhdai}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Figure 1. Reconstruction result compared to [12]. (a) input depth;
(b) reconstruction result of [12]; (c) reconstruction result of our
approach; (d) and (e) color coded normalized motion energy of
result (b) and (c), respectively.

require the build-in skeletons. The basic idea of non-rigid
deformation for objects motion reconstruction is to deform
the model vertices to fit the observations at each time step.
However, since the parameter space of non-rigid deformation is much larger than that of the skeleton space, and
non-rigid deformation usually employs a local optimization,
available non-rigid motion tracking methods are easy to fall
into local minimums. Furthermore, it suffers from error
accumulation, and would usually fail when tracking long
motion sequences from noisy and incomplete data obtained
by a single depth sensor [26]. Robustly tracking of complex human body and hand motions using non-rigid motion
tracking techniques (without embedded skeleton) is still an
open problem.
In this paper, we observe that most of the non-rigid
motions implicitly contain articulated motions, which have
strong deformation changes around the joint regions while
remain unchanged in other regions. This phenomena indicates that different regions should introduce different degree
of smooth deformation priors. When calculating spatial deformation gradient on the object surface, only some joints
regions have non-zero gradient values while other surface
regions keep zero. Fig.1(d) and (e) show the magnitude of
the gradient on two reconstruction results.
Based on this key observation, we contribute a novel

3083

