Conformal and Low-Rank Sparse Representation for Image Restoration
Jianwei Li, Xiaowu Chen∗, Dongqing Zou, Bo Gao, Wei Teng
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China

Abstract

of the learned dictionary becomes the key point for image
restoration problem.

Obtaining an appropriate dictionary is the key point
when sparse representation is applied to computer vision
or image processing problems such as image restoration.
It is expected that preserving data structure during sparse
coding and dictionary learning can enhance the recovery
performance. However, many existing dictionary learning
methods handle training samples individually, while missing relationships between samples, which result in dictionaries with redundant atoms but poor representation ability.
In this paper, we propose a novel sparse representation
approach called conformal and low-rank sparse representation (CLRSR) for image restoration problems. To achieve
a more compact and representative dictionary, conformal
property is introduced by preserving the angles of local
geometry formed by neighboring samples in the feature
space. Furthermore, imposing low-rank constraint on the
coefficient matrix can lead more faithful subspaces and
capture the global structure of data. We apply our CLRSR
model to several image restoration tasks to demonstrate the
effectiveness.

Many approaches have been devoted to learning appropriate dictionaries. Some early dictionary learning methods,
such as K-SVD algorithm [1], focus on reconstruction
power of the dictionary, and have been applied to image
restoration [9]. But these methods are dependent on a large
training dataset. Besides, the dictionary size is fixed, which
may result in dictionary redundancy, making it difficult
to do the signal decompositions. Some other dictionary
learning methods add discrimination constraints to make the
dictionary smaller [36, 34]. However, these methods only
train samples individually or consider the discrimination
between classes, while ignoring local relationships between
samples or structure of the data manifold, which may result
in redundant dictionaries with poor representation ability.
All these problems may lead to bad restoration results due
to the bad dictionary.

1. Introduction
Sparse representation has been proven to be a promising model for image restoration, such as image superresolution [33] and image denoising [9]. The sparse model
is an emerging and powerful method to describe signals
based on the sparsity and redundancy of their representations [9, 21]. The model suggests that there exists a
dictionary which can reconstruct the signals. Each signal
can be represented by a sparse linear combination of atoms
in the dictionary.
In earlier sparsity-based image restoration methods, dictionaries are analytically predefined (e.g., wavelets [22]).
After that, the emergence of new methods [9, 21] approves
that the learned dictionary from training samples have better
performance in image restoration. Therefore, the quality
∗ corresponding author (email: chen@buaa.edu.cn)

Some sparsity-based image restoration methods imply
that preserving the data structure during sparse coding by
building relationships of samples can enhance the recovery
performance [19]. The relationships between samples can
be analyzed from two aspects. From local perspective, local
samples have similar features and form a local subspace,
reflecting the affinities between each other. From global
perspective, samples with similar features are linearly related, and thus they lie on a low-dimensional latent space.
Therefore, the key problem for dictionary based image
restoration is how to embed these two relationships into
dictionary learning and sparse representation.
In this paper, we propose a conformal and low-rank
sparse representation (CLRSR) approach for image restoration. The work from Wright et al. [31] implies that the
images (or their features) lying on a high dimensional
manifold exhibit degenerate structure and form its own
inner structure. This inner structure indeed is a kind of
local relationships. Some researches [16, 10] suggest that
the data inner structures can be better modelled through
Conformal Eigenmaps [27], which projects data from a high
dimensional space to a low dimensional manifold while preserving the angles formed by neighboring samples. These

235

