Local Convolutional Features with Unsupervised Training for Image Retrieval
Mattis Paulin 1
Julien Mairal1
1

Inria ∗

Matthijs Douze1
Florent Perronnin3
2

Zaid Harchaoui1,2
Cordelia Schmid1
3

NYU

Facebook AI Research†

Abstract
Patch-level descriptors underlie several important computer vision tasks, such as stereo-matching or contentbased image retrieval. We introduce a deep convolutional
architecture that yields patch-level descriptors, as an alternative to the popular SIFT descriptor for image retrieval. The proposed family of descriptors, called PatchCKN, adapt the recently introduced Convolutional Kernel
Network (CKN), an unsupervised framework to learn convolutional architectures. We present a comparison framework to benchmark current deep convolutional approaches
along with Patch-CKN for both patch and image retrieval,
including our novel “RomePatches” dataset. Patch-CKN
descriptors yield competitive results compared to supervised CNN alternatives on patch and image retrieval.

Figure 1. Proposed approach: interest regions are first extracted
from images; then the neighborhood of each point is affine- and
orientation-normalized to sample a patch; finally, deep convolutional nets are used to get a descriptor for each patch.

1. Introduction
This paper introduces a deep kernel-based convolutional
approach for the description of image patches that does not
require supervision. The kernel-based feature representation can be effectively approximated using a simple stochastic gradient optimization procedure, yielding a patch-level
descriptor that can be used for image retrieval tasks. Image retrieval is a challenging problem as different images of
the same object/scene may exhibit large variations in viewpoint, illumination, scaling, occlusion, etc – see Figure 1.
State-of-the-art instance-level retrieval systems involve
three steps: 1) interest point detection, 2) description and
3) matching. The goal of step 1) is to select key points that
are reproducible under scale and viewpoint changes – see
[30, 43] for a detailed comparison of detectors. The choice
of a good local representation at step 2) is crucial to ensure
robustness to viewing conditions. As an example, the popular SIFT descriptor [26] is robust to illumination variations
∗ LEAR team, Inria Grenoble Rhône-Alpes, Laboratoire Jean Kuntzmann, CNRS, Univ. Grenoble Alpes, France.
† Research conducted while at the Xerox Research Centre Europe.

or to small rotations.1 As for step 3), the goal is to define
a suitable metric between two patch sets. To avoid the cost
of matching individual patches, scalable alternatives have
been proposed that encode and aggregate local patch statistics, such as bag-of-words [41] and VLAD [19]. In this
work, we focus on step 2), i.e. the description step, while
we rely on state-of-the-art components for the detection and
matching steps.
Our inspiration comes from the expressive feature representations output by deep convolutional neural nets
(CNNs) [23] used in image classification [22]. Features output by a CNN’s intermediate layers can be used as imagelevel descriptors [10] which can be transferred to a variety of tasks – see e.g. [3, 13, 31]. More recently, the question of whether suitable patch-level descriptors could be derived from such architectures has been raised. [25, 12, 39]
provide a preliminary positive answer to this question by
comparing favorably with the SIFT descriptor. While these
works exhibit significant differences, it is worth noting they
1 SIFT refers only to the description part.

1 91

