As-Rigid-As-Possible Volumetric Shape-from-Template
Shaifali Parashar1 , Daniel Pizarro2,1 , Adrien Bartoli1 and Toby Collins1
1
ALCoV-ISIT, UMR 6284 CNRS / Université d’Auvergne, Clermont-Ferrand, France
2
Geintra Research Group, Universidad de Alcalá, Alcalá, Spain

Front

Template

Input image

Back

Ground truth

Front

Back

Front

Proposed volumetric SfT

Front

Front

Thin-shell SfT [4] (open surface) Thin-shell SfT [16] (closed surface)

Figure 1: Volumetric SfT versus thin-shell SfT. Existing methods are thin-shell SfT. They use deformation constraints on the
object’s surface. For instance, [4] uses isometric constraints on the object’s visible (front) surface and reconstructs the object
partially, while [16] uses isometric constraints on the object’s whole closed outer surface and reconstructs it entirely. Volumetric SfT uses deformation constraints on the object’s surface and interior. This greatly improves reconstruction accuracy
and facilitates reconstruction of the object’s interior. In this example, the thin-shell SfT methods [4, 16] reach a 3D error of
20 mm and 13 mm respectively on the visible surface, while the proposed volumetric SfT method reaches a 3D error of 7
mm. It reconstructs the non-visible (back) surface, for which no visual data is available, with a 3D error of 17 mm.

Abstract
The objective of Shape-from-Template (SfT) is to infer
an object’s shape from a single image and a 3D object template. Existing methods are called thin-shell SfT as they
represent the object by its outer surface. This may be an
open surface for thin objects such as a piece of paper or a
closed surface for thicker objects such as a ball. We propose volumetric SfT, which specifically handles objects of
the latter kind. Volumetric SfT uses the object’s full volume
to express the deformation constraints and reconstructs the
object’s surface and interior deformation. This is a challenging problem because for opaque objects, only a part of
the outer surface is visible in the image. Inspired by meshediting techniques, we use an As-Rigid-As-Possible (ARAP)
deformation model that softly imposes local rigidity. We
formalise ARAP isometric SfT as a constrained variational
optimisation problem which we solve using iterative optimisation. We present strategies to find an initial solution
based on thin-shell SfT and volume propagation. Experiments with synthetic and real data show that our method
has a typical maximum relative error of 5% in reconstructing the deformation of an entire object, including its back
and interior for which no visual data is available.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 3D objects from images is an important problem in Computer Vision. It is solved in the case
of rigid environments with rigid Structure-from-Motion
(SfM). However, rigid SfM fails for deformable objects
such as a piece of paper, cloth or the human body. Nonrigid reconstruction is an important current challenge with
a wide spectrum of applications in medical imaging and
the entertainment industry to name a few. Non-rigid reconstruction encompasses at least two different problems: NonRigid Structure-from-Motion (NRSfM) [2, 9, 10], which
uses a set of images of a deforming object, and Shape-fromTemplate (SfT) [21, 4, 16] which uses a single image and a
textured 3D template of the object which may be matched
to the image. The objective in SfT is to obtain the object’s
deformed shape in the camera’s coordinate frame using a
deformation constraint formulated from the object’s physical material. Existing SfT methods use deformation constraints on the object’s outer surface, whose thickness is
considered infinitesimal. We thus call them thin-shell SfT
methods. Thin-shell SfT is very well adapted to thin objects, such as a piece of paper or a balloon, whose outer
surfaces may be well approximated by an open or a closed
surface. However, while thin-shell SfT handles thicker objects such as the woggle of figure 1 or a foam ball, it does
1891

