3D Surface Profilometry using Phase Shifting of De Bruijn Pattern
Matea ¯Donlić, Tomislav Petković and Tomislav Pribanić
University of Zagreb Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computing
Unska 3, HR-10000 Zagreb, Croatia
{matea.donlic, tomislav.petkovic.jr, tomislav.pribanic}@fer.hr

Abstract
A novel structured light method for color 3D surface
profilometry is proposed. The proposed method does not
require color calibration of a camera-projector pair and
may be used for reconstruction of both dynamic and static
scenes. The method uses a structured light pattern that is
a combination of a De Bruijn color sequence and of a sinusoidal fringe. For dynamic scenes a Hessian ridge detector and a Gaussian mixture model are combined to extract stripe centers and to identify color. Stripes are then
uniquely identified using dynamic programming based on
the Smith-Waterman algorithm and a De Bruijn window
property. For static scenes phase-shifting and De Bruijn
window property are combined to obtain a high accuracy
reconstruction. We have tested the proposed method on
multiple objects with challenging surfaces and different
albedos that demonstrate usability and robustness of the
method.

1. Introduction
Structured light projection is a widely studied topic in the
field of 3D imaging where reconstruction needs to be fast,
noninvasive and inexpensive. Non-contact 3D surface profilometry based on structured light is the method of choice
in reverse engineering, industrial quality control of product parts, object recognition, health-care applications and
others. One of the main challenges is improving the accuracy of the reconstruction while projecting as few patterns
as possible thus enabling reduction of acquisition time and
reconstruction of moving objects.
Based on the scene type structured light methods may
be classified into dynamic and static scene reconstruction methods. For dynamic scenes usually only one image is projected, therefore methods are also called oneshot methods. For static scenes multiple images are projected over time, therefore are called multiple-shot methods. Multiple-shot methods produce superior reconstruction than single-shot methods in terms of both resolution

and accuracy, but have a substantially longer acquisition
times and are mostly unsuitable for dynamic scenes. There
are approaches in which multiple images are used for dynamic scene reconstruction but expensive high-speed hardware is required [11, 26]. A more detailed classification of
various reconstruction methods and structured light patterns
is given in [18].
Several widely used one-shot methods [25, 29] are based
on color stripe patterns that satisfy a window property. A finite sequence of length L satisfies a window property if every sub-sequence of length N , called a window, appears exactly once. The window property enables extraction of spatial position through identification of unique subsequences
in a color sequence.
Usual problems that such approaches must solve are robust and precise detection of color stripe centers (or edges)
and accurate color that does not depend on camera-projector
color crosstalk, object albedo, and ambient lightning. Many
have tried to solve these problems by using some form of
color calibration to eliminate the undesired effects. Such
approaches usually involve projection of multiple solid
color patterns from which a crosstalk matrix, albedo coefficients, and ambient illumination are estimated [2, 25, 29].
Alternatively, a tedious photometric calibration of a cameraprojector pair may be performed [9].
A large number of state-of-the art multiple-shot methods are based on a combination of (multiple) phase-shifting,
Gray coding, and color coding [18]. In (multiple) phaseshifting a set of sinusoidal patterns is projected over time
and pixel codification is based only on time-analysis. Phase
estimation, a core of such methods, returns a phase estimate that is ambiguous by an unknown multiple of 2π and
is therefore called wrapped-phase. The main difference between various methods is how the problem of phase unwrapping is solved. This is usually achieved by projecting
multiple spatial frequencies from which the required phase
offset may be computed [16, 15]; or by using additional
images that contain Gray-coded [19] or a color-coded pattern [6] that uniquely identifies a required multiple of 2π.
Some authors have proposed combining different patterns

963

