VQA: Visual Question Answering
Stanislaw Antol∗1 Aishwarya Agrawal∗1 Jiasen Lu1 Margaret Mitchell2
Dhruv Batra1 C. Lawrence Zitnick2 Devi Parikh1
1
Virginia Tech 2 Microsoft Research
1

{santol, aish, jiasenlu, dbatra, parikh}@vt.edu

2

{memitc, larryz}@microsoft.com

Abstract
We propose the task of free-form and open-ended Visual
Question Answering (VQA). Given an image and a natural
language question about the image, the task is to provide an
accurate natural language answer. Mirroring real-world
scenarios, such as helping the visually impaired, both the
questions and answers are open-ended. Visual questions selectively target different areas of an image, including background details and underlying context. As a result, a system
that succeeds at VQA typically needs a more detailed understanding of the image and complex reasoning than a system producing generic image captions. Moreover, VQA is
amenable to automatic evaluation, since many open-ended
answers contain only a few words or a closed set of answers
that can be provided in a multiple-choice format. We provide a dataset containing ∼0.25M images, ∼0.76M questions, and ∼10M answers (www.visualqa.org), and
discuss the information it provides. Numerous baselines for
VQA are provided and compared with human performance.

1. Introduction
We are witnessing a renewed excitement in multi-discipline
Artificial Intelligence (AI) research problems. In particular,
research in image and video captioning that combines Computer Vision (CV), Natural Language Processing (NLP),
and Knowledge Representation & Reasoning (KR) has dramatically increased in the past year [13, 7, 9, 32, 21, 19, 45].
Part of this excitement stems from a belief that multidiscipline tasks like image captioning are a step towards
solving AI. However, the current state of the art demonstrates that a coarse scene-level understanding of an image
paired with word n-gram statistics suffices to generate reasonable image captions, which suggests image captioning
may not be as “AI-complete” as desired.
What makes for a compelling “AI-complete” task? We
believe that in order to spawn the next generation of AI
algorithms, an ideal task should (i) require multi-modal
knowledge beyond a single sub-domain (such as CV) and
(ii) have a well-defined quantitative evaluation metric to
∗ The first two authors contributed equally.

What color are her eyes?
What is the mustache made of?

How many slices of pizza are there?
Is this a vegetarian pizza?

Is this person expecting company?
What is just under the tree?

Does it appear to be rainy?
Does this person have 20/20 vision?

Figure 1: Examples of free-form, open-ended questions collected
for images via Amazon Mechanical Turk. Note that commonsense knowledge is needed along with a visual understanding of
the scene to answer many questions.

track progress. For some tasks, such as image captioning,
automatic evaluation is still a difficult and open research
problem [43, 10, 18].
In this paper, we introduce the task of free-form and openended Visual Question Answering (VQA). A VQA system takes as input an image and a free-form, open-ended,
natural-language question about the image and produces a
natural-language answer as the output. This goal-driven
task is applicable to scenarios encountered when visuallyimpaired users [2] or intelligence analysts actively elicit visual information. Example questions are shown in Fig. 1.
Open-ended questions require a potentially vast set of
AI capabilities to answer – fine-grained recognition (e.g.,
“What kind of cheese is on the pizza?”), object detection
(e.g., “How many bikes are there?”), activity recognition
(e.g., “Is this man crying?”), knowledge base reasoning
(e.g., “Is this a vegetarian pizza?”), and commonsense reasoning (e.g., “Does this person have 20/20 vision?”, “Is this
person expecting company?”).
VQA [16, 30, 42, 2] is also amenable to automatic quantitative evaluation, making it possible to effectively track

2425

