Common Subspace for Model and Similarity:
Phrase Learning for Caption Generation from Images
Yoshitaka Ushiku, Masataka Yamaguchi, Yusuke Mukuta, Tatsuya Harada
The University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan
{ushiku, yamaguchi, mukuta, harada}@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Generating captions to describe images is a fundamental problem that combines computer vision and natural
language processing. Recent works focus on descriptive
phrases, such as “a white dog” to explain the visual composites of an input image. The phrases can not only express objects, attributes, events, and their relations but can
also reduce visual complexity. A caption for an input image can be generated by connecting estimated phrases using a grammar model. However, because phrases are combinations of various words, the number of phrases is much
larger than the number of single words. Consequently, the
accuracy of phrase estimation suffers from too few training
samples per phrase.
In this paper, we propose a novel phrase-learning
method: Common Subspace for Model and Similarity (CoSMoS). In order to overcome the shortage of training samples, CoSMoS obtains a subspace in which (a) all feature
vectors associated with the same phrase are mapped as
mutually close, (b) classifiers for each phrase are learned,
and (c) training samples are shared among co-occurring
phrases. Experimental results demonstrate that our system
is more accurate than those in earlier work and that the accuracy increases when the dataset from the web increases.

1. Introduction
Object, event, and attribute recognition from images
have been widely investigated. Recently, several works
have tackled the sentential description of images to more
flexibly explain the contents of images.
In general, collecting a large amount of data from the
web is a common means to understand various images.
What we can collect automatically are images associated
not with semantically clear labels but with surrounding sentences. Hence, the requirements for caption generation from
images are: scalability, learning image contents, and caption generation using estimated content.

BabyTalk: This is a picture of three persons,
one bottle and one diningtable. The first rusty
person is beside the second person. The rusty
bottle is near the first rusty person, and within
the colorful diningtable. The second person is
by the third rusty person. The colorful diningtable is near the first rusty person, and near
the second person, and near the third rusty person.
Corpus-Guided: Three people are showing the bottle on the street.
Midge: People with a bottle at the table.

Ours: Group of people sitting at a table with a dinner.
Figure 1. Qualitative comparison. A common input image is
shown in the upper left. We compare our result with CorpusGuided [48], Midge [28], and BabyTalk [18].

In order to represent image contents, such as objects,
events, attributes, and their relations, recent works [7, 10,
20, 22, 28, 35, 41, 43] focus on visual phrases describing image contents and their relations. For example, in order to
learn a general class of “dog,” dogs in the following phrases
should be considered in the same class: “white dog”, “black
dog”, “running dog”, and “sleeping dog.” The semantic gap
between image content can be narrowed by learning each
phrase independently, not just the single word “dog.
A
caption for an input image can then be generated by connecting estimated phrases using a grammar model.
Because phrases are combinations of objects, attributes,
and events, a large number of phrases should be learned and
recognized. Therefore, the number of training samples per
phrase is much less than that for the usual object recognition. Recent large-scale visual classification is tackled using a combination of high-dimensional image features and
linear weight vector as classifiers [37] or using a deep convolutional neural network [17]. To adopt these methods to
learn phrases, however, learning many parameters using too
few training samples per phrase would result in over-fitting.
In order to overcome the shortage of training samples,
usage of a subspace is a reasonable way to approximate
classifiers for phrases. Traditional multivariable methods,
such as linear discriminant analysis, can absorb the shortage of training samples by reducing the dimension of fea12668

