Learning to See by Moving
Pulkit Agrawal
UC Berkeley

João Carreira
UC Berkeley

Jitendra Malik
UC Berkeley

pulkitag@eecs.berkeley.edu

carreira@eecs.berkeley.edu

malik@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
The current dominant paradigm for feature learning in
computer vision relies on training neural networks for the
task of object recognition using millions of hand labelled
images. Is it also possible to learn features for a diverse set
of visual tasks using any other form of supervision? In biology, living organisms developed the ability of visual perception for the purpose of moving and acting in the world.
Drawing inspiration from this observation, in this work we
investigated if the awareness of egomotion (i.e. self motion)
can be used as a supervisory signal for feature learning. As
opposed to the knowledge of class labels, information about
egomotion is freely available to mobile agents. We found
that using the same number of training images, features
learnt using egomotion as supervision compare favourably
to features learnt using class-label as supervision on the
tasks of scene recognition, object recognition, visual odometry and keypoint matching.
”We must perceive in order to move, but we must also
move in order to perceive”
J.J Gibson

1. Introduction
Recent advances in computer vision have shown that visual features learnt by neural networks trained for the task
of object recognition using more than a million labelled images are useful for many computer vision tasks like semantic segmentation, object detection and action classification
[18, 10, 1, 33]. However, object recognition is one among
many tasks for which vision is used. For example, humans
use visual perception for recognizing objects, understanding spatial layouts of scenes and performing actions such
as moving around in the world. Is there something special
about the task of object recognition or is it the case that useful visual representations can be learnt through other modes
of supervision? Clearly, biological agents perform complex
visual tasks and it is unlikely that they require external supervision in form of millions of labelled examples. Unlabelled visual data is freely available and in theory this data

can be used to learn useful visual representations. However,
until now unsupervised learning approaches [4, 22, 29, 32]
have not yet delivered on their promise and are nowhere to
be seen in current applications on complex real world imagery.
Biological agents use perceptual systems for obtaining
sensory information about their environment that enables
them to act and accomplish their goals [13, 9]. Both biological and robotic agents employ their motor system for executing actions in their environment. Is it also possible that
these agents can use their own motor system as a source of
supervision for learning useful perceptual representations?
Motor theories of perception have a long history [13, 9],
but there has been little work in formulating computational
models of perception that make use of motor information.
In this work we focus on visual perception and present a
model based on egomotion (i.e. self motion) for learning
useful visual representations. When we say useful visual
representations [34], we mean representations that possess
the following two characteristics - (1) ability to perform
multiple visual tasks and (2) ability of performing new visual tasks by learning from only a few labeled examples
provided by an extrinsic teacher.
Mobile agents are naturally aware of their egomotion
(i.e. self-motion) through their own motor system. In other
words, knowledge of egomotion is “freely” available. For
example, the vestibular system provides the sense of orientation in many mammals. In humans and other animals, the
brain has access to information about eye movements and
the actions performed by the animal [9]. A mobile robotic
agent can estimate its egomotion either from the motor commands it issues to move or from odometry sensors such as
gyroscopes and accelerometers mounted on the agent itself.
We propose that useful visual representations can be
learnt by performing the simple task of correlating visual
stimuli with egomotion. A mobile agent can be treated like
a camera moving in the world and thus the knowledge of
egomotion is similar to the knowledge of camera motion.
Using this insight, we pose the problem of correlating visual stimuli with egomotion as the problem of predicting
the camera transformation from the consequent pairs of im1 37

