Bayesian non-parametric inference for manifold based MoCap representation
Fabrizio Natola, Valsamis Ntouskos, Marta Sanzari, Fiora Pirri
ALCOR LAB, Dipartimento di Ingegneria Informatica Automatica e Gestionale
{natola,ntouskos,sanzari,pirri}@dis.uniroma1.it

Abstract
We propose a novel approach to human action recognition, with motion capture data (MoCap), based on grouping sub-body parts. By representing configurations of actions as manifolds, joint positions are mapped on a subspace via principal geodesic analysis. The reduced space is
still highly informative and allows for classification based
on a non-parametric Bayesian approach, generating behaviors for each sub-body part. Having partitioned the set of
joints, poses relative to a sub-body part are exchangeable,
given a specified prior and can elicit, in principle, infinite
behaviors. The generation of these behaviors is specified
by a Dirichlet process mixture. We show with several experiments that the recognition gives very promising results,
outperforming methods requiring temporal alignment.

1. Introduction
Human action recognition is still a challenging and stimulating problem especially when considering motion capture data (MoCap), which are relevant in several applications including robotics, sports, rehabilitation and entertainment. A considerable amount of work has been proposed so far to solve problems arising in action recognition, such as view-point change, occlusions, likewise variations in behaviors amid different subjects performing the
same action. However there is a significant difference between MoCap and 2D/2.5D action representations, and it
could be argued without fear that the two recognition problems are drastically different, as they address different feature spaces and representations and, consequently, different
recognition methods. MoCap sequences represent actions
by 3D points, and joints of the human skeleton with appropriate kinematics. These data can, for example, be acquired
by means of an RGB-D sensor, such as the Kinect, by infrared marker tracking systems, such as the Vicon System,
or via back-projection techniques using multiple cameras.
With this kind of data, occlusions so far have not been considered a major issue, such as with 2D/2.5 D data, however variations amid behaviors are still a major problem to

be handled. Among the most relevant approaches we recall [14, 19, 17, 23, 30], all using noise and occlusion free
datasets. In [14] actions are represented as structured-time
series, with each frame lying on a high-dimensional ambient space, from which a spatio-temporal manifold is obtained by a dimensionality reduction approach, based on dynamic manifold warping, accounting only for joints translation. In [29], instead, both joints rotations and translations
are considered, so as to construct a novel class of features in
SE(3)×· · ·×SE(3), obtaining a full feature space mapped
on the Lie algebra. In [17] actions are represented via joint
covariance descriptors, so as to work with symmetric positive definite matrices, which lie on Riemannian manifolds.
In most of the approaches the representation of the joints
space is a major issue and the need for a viable compromise
between space reduction and completeness seems evident.
In this sense we propose a novel representation for MoCap
data, by introducing a new skeleton model, which has the
advantage of considering the ambient space of the joints
and mapping it into a reduced space via Principal Geodesic
Analysis. The advantage of the proposed representation is
that it keeps the most from the joints information and, at
the same time, it provides the most suitable transformation
to approach the recognition problem with a non-parametric
Bayesian model.
Indeed, the representation model is crucial, both for eliciting features and for the recognition method used. For
example, [14, 29, 19] consider a time-based ordering for
which a temporal alignment is needed. In particular, [19]
decompose the 3D joints into subspaces representing either
the motion of a single body part, or of the combination of
multiple ones. In our approach, instead, for each joint of the
skeleton, and for each configuration in the action space, we
keep the global transformation of the joint reference frame
with respect to the world inertial frame. These transformation matrices are elements of a Riemannian manifold, and
joints of the human skeleton have ranges of variation, which
can be gathered into groups. In particular, we consider 6
sub-body groups, corresponding to the head, left and right
legs, torso, left and right arms, respectively. Each of these
defined groups represents a set of possible motions of the
14606

