PIEFA: Personalized Incremental and Ensemble Face Alignment
Xi Peng⋆

Shaoting Zhang†

⋆

Rutgers University
Piscataway, NJ, 08854

Yang Yu⋆
†

Dimitris N. Metaxas⋆

The University of North Carolina at Charlotte
Charlotte, NC, 28223

xpeng.nb,yyu,dnm@cs.rutgers.edu

szhang16@uncc.edu

Abstract
Face alignment, especially on real-time or large-scale
sequential images, is a challenging task with broad applications. Both generic and joint alignment approaches have
been proposed with varying degrees of success. However,
many generic methods are heavily sensitive to initializations and usually rely on offline-trained static models, which
limit their performance on sequential images with extensive variations. On the other hand, joint methods are restricted to offline applications, since they require all frames
to conduct batch alignment. To address these limitations,
we propose to exploit incremental learning for personalized ensemble alignment. We sample multiple initial shapes
to achieve image congealing within one frame, which enables us to incrementally conduct ensemble alignment by
group-sparse regularized rank minimization. At the same
time, personalized modeling is obtained by subspace adaptation under the same incremental framework, while correction strategy is used to alleviate model drifting. Experimental results on multiple controlled and in-the-wild
databases demonstrate the superior performance of our approach compared with state-of-the-arts in terms of fitting
accuracy and efficiency.

1. Introduction
Recently, analysing image sequences in large-scale and
unconstrained conditions attracts increasing interest in computer vision community [40]. In the context of face-related
topics, sequential face alignment, i.e., fitting facial landmarks on consecutive frames, is a crucial task with a wide
range of applications, such as Face Verification [31], Facial
Action Unit (FAU) analysis [35] and Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) [25]. It is challenging due to the extensive
rigid and non-rigid variations of human faces [15], as well
as unconstrained imaging conditions such as illumination
changes and occlusions.
It has been shown that either generic face alignment [6,

(a) Generic approaches are sensitive to initializations.

"

# "

#

Joint
Alignment

(b) Joint approaches are restricted to offline batch alignment.

Figure 1: Limitations of existing methods. Yellow points:
different initial shapes. Green points: well-aligned landmarks. Red points: mis-aligned landmarks.

23, 28, 30, 33, 38], aligning each frame independently in
a tracking-by-detection manner by various facial landmark
detectors [10, 22], or joint face alignment [7, 8, 27, 36],
aligning all frames simultaneously in a batch manner, can
be employed for sequential face alignment.
Generic face alignment starts the fitting process from an
initial shape, e.g., a mean face [6, 33] or the result of the last
frame [1, 28]), and deform the shape constrained by facial
deformable models (FDMs) to minimize the reconstruction
residual by either gradient descend optimization [28, 30]
or cascade/boosted regression [6, 33]. They have shown
great success on single image with respect to the efficiency,
e.g., face alignment at 3000 FPS [23], and unconstrained
scenarios, e.g., face alignment in the wild [33]. However,
13880

