Low Dimensional Explicit Feature Maps
Ondřej Chum
CMP, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, CTU in Prague
chum@cmp.felk.cvut.cz

Abstract
Approximating non-linear kernels1 by finite-dimensional
feature maps is a popular approach for speeding up training and evaluation of support vector machines or to encode information into efficient match kernels. We propose
a novel method of data independent construction of low dimensional feature maps. The problem is cast as a linear
program which jointly considers competing objectives: the
quality of the approximation and the dimensionality of the
feature map.
For both shift-invariant and homogeneous kernels the
proposed method achieves a better approximations at the
same dimensionality or comparable approximations at
lower dimensionality of the feature map compared with
state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Kernel machines, such as support vector machines
(SVMs), can approximate any function or decision boundary arbitrarily well when provided with enough training
data. However, such methods scale poorly with the size of
the training set. On the other hand, it was shown [6] that linear SVMs can be trained in linear time with the number of
training examples, which allows its application to very large
datasets. Approximate embeddings, or feature maps, can
preserve the accuracy of kernel methods and enable scaling
to large datasets at the same time.
The demand for linear approximations of non-linear kernel functions is not limited to SVM classification. The idea
of efficient match kernels [2] has been used in various areas
of computer vision. Examples where linear approximation
of non-linear kernels plays an important role, are kernel descriptors of interest points proposed in [1]. In the domain
of image retrieval, [15] proposes to encode the dominant
orientation of regions of interest into aggregated image descriptors, such as VLAD [5] or Fisher vectors [12].
1 I would like to thank Tomáš Werner for his valuable opinions and
interesting discussions. This work was supported by MSMT LL1303 ERCCZ grant.

Formally, for a positive definite kernel [14] K : Rn ×
Rn → R there exists a Hilbert space H and a mapping
Ψ : Rn → H, so that K(x, y) = hΨ(x), Ψ(y)iH , where
h·, ·iH is a scalar product in H. We address the problem
of finding a low-dimensional mapping Ψ̂ : Rn → RD so
that Ψ̂(x)⊤ Ψ̂(y) ≈ hΨ(x), Ψ(y)iH . A natural requirement
from the accuracy point of view is to introduce as little error
as possible by the approximation. On the other hand, from
the practical point of view, the dimensionality of the approximate feature map should be as low as possible. These two
criteria are clearly competing. We propose an optimization
approach which is relaxed into a linear program, that trades
off both criteria.

1.1. Related work
We briefly review the most relevant work on data independent (no training data needed) methods of kernel approximation. Random Fourier features were introduced by
Rahimi and Recht in [13]. The feature map is a Monte Carlo
approximation of the kernel where each dimension of the
feature map represents a cosine function drawn from the
distribution given by the spectrum of the kernel signature.
The Monte Carlo approach requires relatively high number of samples to provide accurate approximation, however, unlike most other approaches, is directly applicable
to very high dimensional input data. The idea has been
extended form shift-invariant kernels to skewed multiplicative histogram kernels in [9]. Maji and Berg in [11] approximate the intersection kernel by a sparse feature map
in closed-form. In [19] high dimensional sparse feature
maps are derived and their relation to product quantisation
is shown. In [18] Vedaldi and Zisserman introduced a generalization of explicit feature maps to the family of additive
homogeneous kernels. In our paper, considerably better approximations with feature maps of the same dimensionality or equally good approximation with lower dimensionality of the feature maps is achieved compared with results
of [18] implemented in [17]. We also show that the proposed method allows for optimization of meaningful errors
measured on the homogeneous kernel output, rather than
solely approximating the kernel signature.
14077

