On Statistical Analysis of Neuroimages with Imperfect Registration
Won Hwa Kim†‡

Sathya N. Ravi⋆

Sterling C. Johnson∗‡

Ozioma C. Okonkwo∗‡

Vikas Singh§†‡

†
Dept. of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI
Dept. of Biostatistics & Med. Informatics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI
⋆
Dept. of Industrial and Systems Engineering, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI
‡
Wisconsin Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI
∗
GRECC, William S. Middleton VA Hospital, Madison, WI
§

Abstract
A variety of studies in neuroscience/neuroimaging seek
to perform statistical inference on the acquired brain image scans for diagnosis as well as understanding the pathological manifestation of diseases. To do so, an important
first step is to register (or co-register) all of the image data
into a common coordinate system. This permits meaningful comparison of the intensities at each voxel across
groups (e.g., diseased versus healthy) to evaluate the effects
of the disease and/or use machine learning algorithms in
a subsequent step. But errors in the underlying registration make this problematic, they either decrease the statistical power or make the follow-up inference tasks less effective/accurate. In this paper, we derive a novel algorithm
which offers immunity to local errors in the underlying deformation field obtained from registration procedures. By
deriving a deformation invariant representation of the image, the downstream analysis can be made more robust as
if one had access to a (hypothetical) far superior registration procedure. Our algorithm is based on recent work on
scattering transform. Using this as a starting point, we
show how results from harmonic analysis (especially, nonEuclidean wavelets) yields strategies for designing deformation and additive noise invariant representations of large
3-D brain image volumes. We present a set of results on synthetic and real brain images where we achieve robust statistical analysis even in the presence of substantial deformation errors; here, standard analysis procedures significantly
under-perform and fail to identify the true signal.

1. Introduction
A broad spectrum of research in neuroscience including
studies focused on understanding the process of aging, the
effects of trauma and the manifestation of neurological disorders rely heavily on statistical analysis of neuroimaging
data [26]. Typical questions may include identifying which

brain regions are affected as a function of disease and/or
finding associations or correlations of regional measurements in the image with future cognitive decline [10, 16, 8].
A key component which precedes much of the “analysis”
pipeline is co-registration [1]. For instance, if the study
cohort includes a set of 100 participants/subjects, the coregistration step will warp each of the 100 images into a
common template coordinate system. It is easy to see that
doing so enables one to retrieve the measurement at a specific voxel v across the entire cohort — in other words, for
any arbitrary voxel in one image, we know its corresponding voxels in all other images. This process, often called
as ”spatial normalization”, is essential for performing either voxel-wise inference (i.e., independently, one voxel at
a time) or utilizing such data for classification or regression
tasks [29, 35, 36].
Given the critical role of registration in statistical image analysis of brain imaging data, the community has invested much effort in algorithms and (mature) software libraries that are reliable and easily deployable. Depending
on the clinical question and the type of image modality under study, methods based on non-linear/free-form deformations optimizing various loss functions (e.g., mutual information) are broadly available [20, 21, 27, 24]. Note that
while the general ideas driving image registration do not
change very frequently, most popular toolboxes are regularly fine-tuned, to achieve better accuracy. These “incremental” refinements seem routine, but are very valuable in
practice. To see why, let us use an example to answer a
closely related question, namely, what happens when the
registration pre-processing is slightly imperfect?
Consider a dataset which consists of two groups: healthy
and diseased subjects. Once the initial co-registration is
done, our goal may be to perform a voxel-wise parametric
test to identify voxels that are statistically different across
the groups suggesting a potential disease effect [2]. It is
commonly observed by practitioners that using a newer registration method that is marginally better relative to its older
1666

