Semantic Component Analysis
Calvin Murdock
Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University

Fernando De la Torre
The Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University

cmurdock@cs.cmu.edu

ftorre@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Ă
Unsupervised and weakly-supervised visual learning in
large image collections are critical in order to avoid the
time-consuming and error-prone process of manual labeling. Standard approaches rely on methods like multipleinstance learning or graphical models, which can be computationally intensive and sensitive to initialization. On the
other hand, simpler component analysis or clustering methods usually cannot achieve meaningful invariances or semantic interpretability. To address the issues of previous
work, we present a simple but effective method called Semantic Component Analysis (SCA), which provides a decomposition of images into semantic components.
Unsupervised SCA decomposes additive image representations into spatially-meaningful visual components that
naturally correspond to object categories. Using an overcomplete representation that allows for rich instance-level
constraints and spatial priors, SCA gives improved results
and more interpretable components in comparison to traditional matrix factorization techniques. If weakly-supervised
information is available in the form of image-level tags,
SCA factorizes a set of images into semantic groups of superpixels. We also provide qualitative connections to traditional methods for component analysis (e.g. Grassmann averages, PCA, and NMF). The effectiveness of our approach
is validated through synthetic data and on the MSRC2 and
Sift Flow datasets, demonstrating competitive results in unsupervised and weakly-supervised semantic segmentation.

1. Introduction
In the last decade, image classiﬁcation has become an incredibly active research topic with widespread applications.
Most methods for visual recognition are fully-supervised
and make use of bounding boxes or pixel-wise segmentations to locate objects of interest. However, this type of
manual labeling is time consuming, error-prone, and potentially suboptimal [29]. On the other hand, the increasing
prevalence of large image collections emphasizes the need

ď
Đ
Ě
Figure 1. An overview of Semantic Component Analysis (SCA)
applied to the task of unsupervised object discovery. (a) From a
set of images containing multiple classes, (b) Bag-of-Words features are extracted pooling information from the entire image. (c)
SCA decomposes these global representations into component histograms associated with meaningful component objects. The segments corresponding to these object histograms are shown in (d).

for fully- or partially-automated techniques for analyzing
and archiving their content.
Real-world images are often composed of a number of
distinct (but semantically-related) regions. A natural aim
of visual learning is to ﬁnd these meaningful regions in an
unsupervised or weakly-supervised manner. For instance,
consider Fig. 1(a): it is clear that there are four component
objects that can explain the given images. The question is
how to recover these semantic components with minimal
supervision. Algorithms that approach this problem face
many challenges, primarily in dealing with large intra-class
variability in appearance, illumination, and pose.
A generative model for image formation can be considered as mixing a number of semantic components: one for
each class present within an image. While the same local
image features (e.g. quantized sift descriptors) may appear in instances from different classes, the distributions of
features within semantic regions are often distinct across
classes. If these global image features could be unmixed
into their semantic components–each representing consistent segmentations belonging only to a single class–then

1484

