Boosting Object Proposals: From Pascal to COCO
Jordi Pont-Tuset and Luc Van Gool
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zürich, Switzerland
{jponttuset,vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
Computer vision in general, and object proposals in particular, are nowadays strongly influenced by the databases
on which researchers evaluate the performance of their algorithms. This paper studies the transition from the Pascal
Visual Object Challenge dataset, which has been the benchmark of reference for the last years, to the updated, bigger,
and more challenging Microsoft Common Objects in Context. We first review and deeply analyze the new challenges,
and opportunities, that this database presents. We then survey the current state of the art in object proposals and evaluate it focusing on how it generalizes to the new dataset. In
sight of these results, we propose various lines of research
to take advantage of the new benchmark and improve the
techniques. We explore one of these lines, which leads to an
improvement over the state of the art of +5.2%.

1. Introduction
The sliding windows approach [27] dominated the object
detection literature for several years. It consists in sweeping a large amount of locations and sizes in the image,
represented by rectangular windows, and then applying an
object/non-object classifier on each of them. The number of
swept windows is usually in the order of millions, so to get
a reasonable speed one needs to rely on very simple classifiers carefully implemented using tools like integral images.
In order to reduce the number of windows to consider,
and thus being able to apply more advanced classification
machinery, the concept of objectness [1] arose; which provides a reduced number of windows, in the order of hundreds or thousands, aiming at keeping the true objects as
much as possible. These techniques have been improving to get more quality and efficiency until the present
days [28, 7, 20, 25], widely known as bounding-box object
proposals methods: they propose a reduced set of windows
aiming at representing the bounding box of the true objects.
Object windows give us the location and scale of the objects, but they miss a crucial queue for object detection:
its shape. While a window representation might be good

Figure 1. Example segmentation annotations from the three studied databases: Pascal SegVOC12 [11], SBD [12], and COCO [19]

enough for certain types of roughly-rectangular objects such
as faces or cars, it is certainly not precise enough to represent more deformable objects such as animals or plants; and
one might need the mask of the object for applications like
image editing or inpainting.
In this context, the segmented object proposal techniques
arose [5, 9], whose objective is to provide a reduced set of
object segmentations, that is, a small set of binary image
masks indicating sets of pixels belonging to an object in the
image. It currently has become an active topic of research
in computer vision [18, 4, 22, 15, 25, 17, 6, 10].
Annotated databases play a crucial role in the improvement of these techniques, both for training the algorithms
and for benchmarking and comparing different approaches.
The Pascal Visual Object Challenge [11] database has been
the driving force behind many of the improvements in latest
years, providing high-quality bounding-box and segmentation annotations for thousands of images.
With the increasing computation power given by modern computers and the annotation capacity provided by
Amazon Mechanical Turk1 , however, much bigger annotated databases are taking its place and further pushing
the literature. ImageNet [23] provides annotated bounding boxes on half million images. Semantic Boundary
Dataset (SBD) [12] extends the Pascal segmented annotations to more than ten thousand images. Most notably, the
recent Microsoft Common Objects in Context (COCO) [19]
1 http://www.mturk.com

11546

