Real-Time Pose Estimation Piggybacked on Object Detection
Roman Juránek, Adam Herout, Markéta Dubská, Pavel Zemčı́k
Graph@FIT, Brno University of Technology
Brno, Czech Republic
ijuranek,herout,idubska,zemcik@fit.vutbr.cz

Abstract

H = 25.1

We present an object detector coupled with pose estimation directly in a single compact and simple model, where
the detector shares extracted image features with the pose
estimator. The output of the classification of each candidate
window consists of both object score and likelihood map of
poses. This extension introduces negligible overhead during detection so that the detector is still capable of real
time operation. We evaluated the proposed approach on
the problem of vehicle detection. We used existing datasets
with viewpoint/pose annotation (WCVP, 3D objects, KITTI).
Besides that, we collected a new traffic surveillance dataset
COD20k which fills certain gaps of the existing datasets and
we make it public. The experimental results show that the
proposed approach is comparable with state-of-the-art approaches in terms of accuracy, but it is considerably faster –
easily operating in real time (Matlab with C++ code). The
source codes and the collected COD20k dataset are made
public along with the paper.

1. Introduction
Reliable detection of vehicles is a crucial part of traffic monitoring systems. The cost of cameras, processing
power, and communication bandwidth are decreasing and
the traffic monitoring systems are not composed of dozens
of cameras anymore. Instead, the number of cameras involved in traffic monitoring is rapidly increasing. Therefore, each camera receives less and less expert human input
such as manual calibration and the systems are expected to
work invariably for various views on the scene.
Interestingly enough, Benenson et al. [2] recently
showed that in specific detection tasks (pedestrians, faces,
traffic signs), less is more and good old methods are capable of producing best results and beat sophisticated systems
with elaborated models. We were curious, if for real-time
detection+pose estimation task we need separated detectors

H = 0.2

H = 5.7

H = 13.6
P=

H = 25.1
P=

Figure 1: Our algorithm estimates pose along with object
detection. Later stages of the soft cascade estimate the pose
by accumulating regression maps, without extracting any
information from the image.
and regressors. The questions we asked and try to answer
are Does omni-directional tree-based detector internal clustering of objects depend on their viewpoint? Is this separation usable for pose estimation? As we show in this paper,
the answers to both questions are Yes and with special impurity function in the tree splits, the pose regression can be
improved without significant detector degradation (Fig. 1).
Methods for multi-view detection and pose estimation
can be divided into two main groups. The first group of
methods requires a 3D model, whether as a CAD model [18,
29, 25, 34, 37, 20, 26], point cloud [13], or in the form of a
wireframe [36]. Methods from the second group can solve

2381

