Convolutional Color Constancy
Jonathan T. Barron
barron@google.com

Abstract
Color constancy is the problem of inferring the color of
the light that illuminated a scene, usually so that the illumination color can be removed. Because this problem is underconstrained, it is often solved by modeling the statistical
regularities of the colors of natural objects and illumination. In contrast, in this paper we reformulate the problem
of color constancy as a 2D spatial localization task in a logchrominance space, thereby allowing us to apply techniques
from object detection and structured prediction to the color
constancy problem. By directly learning how to discriminate between correctly white-balanced images and poorly
white-balanced images, our model is able to improve performance on standard benchmarks by nearly 40%.

assumes that the illuminant color is the average color of
all image pixels, thereby implicitly assuming that object
reflectances are, on average, gray [12]. This simple idea
can be generalized to modeling gradient information or using generalized norms instead of a simple arithmetic mean
[4, 36], modeling the spatial distribution of colors with a filter bank [13], modeling the distribution of color histograms
[21], or implicitly reasoning about the moments of colors
using PCA [14]. Other models assume that the colors of
natural objects lie with some gamut [3, 23]. Most of these
models can be thought of as statistical, as they either assume
some distribution of colors or they learn some distribution
of colors from training data. This connection to learning
and statistics is sometimes made more explicit, often in a

1. Intro
The color of a pixel in an image can be described as a
product of two quantities: reflectance (the color of the paint
of the surfaces in the scene) and illumination (the color of
the light striking the surfaces in the scene). When a person
stands in a room lit by a colorful light they unconsciously
“discount the illuminant”, in the words of Helmholtz [27],
and perceive the objects in the room as though they were
illuminated by a neutral, white light. Endowing a computer
with the same ability is difficult, as this problem is fundamentally underconstrained — given a yellow pixel, how can
one discern if it is a white object under a yellow illuminant,
or a yellow object under a white illuminant? The most general characterization of this problem is the “intrinsic image”
problem [6], but the specific problem of inferring and correcting the color of the illumination of an image is commonly referred to as “color constancy” or “white balance”.
A visualization of this problem can be seen in Figure 1.
Color constancy is a well studied in both vision science
and computer vision, as it relates to the academic study of
human perception as well as practical problems such as designing an object recognition algorithm or a camera. Nearly
all algorithms for this task work by assuming some regularity in the colors of natural objects viewed under a white
light. The simplest such algorihm is “gray world”, which

I

=

our Ŵ , L̂, err = 0.13°

W

× L

baseline Ŵ , L̂, err = 5.34°

Figure 1: Here we demonstrate the color constancy problem: the input image I (taken from [24, 33]) looks green,
and we want to recover a white-balanced image W and
illumination L which reproduces I. Below we have our
model’s solution and error for this image compared to a
state of the art baseline [19] (recovered illuminations are
rendered with respect to ground-truth, so white is correct).
More results can be seen in the supplement.
1379

