An NMF perspective on Binary Hashing
Lopamudra Mukherjee§ , Sathya N. Ravi† , Vamsi K. Ithapu† , Tyler Holmes§ , Vikas Singh†
†
University of Wisconsin-Madison, § University of Wisconsin-Whitewater

Abstract
The pervasiveness of massive data repositories has led
to much interest in efficient methods for indexing, search,
and retrieval. For image data, a rapidly developing body of
work for these applications shows impressive performance
with methods that broadly fall under the umbrella term of
Binary Hashing. Given a distance matrix, a binary hashing
algorithm solves for a binary code for the given set of examples, whose Hamming distance nicely approximates the
original distances. The formulation is non-convex — so existing solutions adopt spectral relaxations or perform coordinate descent (or quantization) on a surrogate objective
that is numerically more tractable. In this paper, we first
derive an Augmented Lagrangian approach to optimize the
standard binary Hashing objective (i.e., maintain fidelity
with a given distance matrix). With appropriate step sizes,
we find that this scheme already yields results that match or
substantially outperform state of the art methods on most
benchmarks used in the literature. Then, to allow the model
to scale to large datasets, we obtain an interesting reformulation of the binary hashing objective as a non-negative matrix factorization. Later, this leads to a simple multiplicative updates algorithm — whose parallelization properties
are exploited to obtain a fast GPU based implementation.
We give a probabilistic analysis of our initialization scheme
and present a range of experiments to show that the method
is simple to implement and competes favorably with available methods (both for optimization and generalization).

1. Introduction
The pervasiveness of massive image data repositories
with billions (and even trillions) of examples has led to
a renewed interest in efficient algorithms for search and
indexing. These datasets correspond to surveillance data,
text, video sequences, measurements from scientific experiments, gene expression profiles and photo collections — in
each case, the data is very high dimensional and efficient
storage and retrieval allows important downstream applications to operate seamlessly. Driven by these requirements,
research in the last decade has focused on both compact rep-

resentations of the data to mitigate dependence on its native dimensionality as well as approximate forms of nearest
neighbor schemes since a linear scan is impractical in most,
if not all, practical deployments.
A simple solution which is (partly) cognizant of both the
space and time considerations in the above setting is dimensionality reduction. Clearly, by mapping (or embedding) the
distribution from the native space D to lower dimensions,
d ≪ D, significantly reduces the storage requirements.
Further, even if a linear (or nearest neighbor) search were
employed, its running time may only be weakly dependent
on D. While this strategy is sometimes sufficient, the literature suggests that retrieval times can be substantially improved if the embedding were binary. The Hamming distance between a query point and an item in the database
can now be computed via logical operations (such as XOR).
This allows a naı̈ve search, even on a massive dataset, to run
within a few seconds. Also, allocating 32 or 64 bits per item
(e.g., an image), one can fit a billion-sized dataset in the
main memory of a moderately priced workstation. These
observations have led to a nice set of results which adapt
the rich theory of Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH) [13] to
this application. LSH obtains dimensionality reduction using Random projections [5]. By the Johnson-Lindenstrauss
lemma, original distances between the examples are preserved (up to some distortion) with high probability. Now,
as the number of bits grows, LSH offers increasingly better
fidelity with the original raw distances. Recent work has
also derived kernelized versions of LSH [17], which makes
the ideas applicable in an even broader setting.
Despite the various advantages of LSH, empirical results
suggest that with a restricted number of bits (usually less
than a hundred), LSH does not perform very well. In other
words, to be practically useful, the number of bits may have
to be large which seriously limits its applicability in problems in computer vision [12]. An elegant solution to this
problem is to use learning within hashing, that is, instead
of treating the hashing function as a black-box, several approaches learn the item-wise code from the data either in a
supervised or unsupervised setting [12]. The core goal in
most of these proposals is to derive a specific hashing code
whose Hamming distances reflect the relationships given by
14184

