Flow Fields: Dense Correspondence Fields for Highly Accurate Large
Displacement Optical Flow Estimation

1

Christian Bailer1

Bertram Taetz1,2

Christian.Bailer@dfki.de

Bertram.Taetz@dfki.de

Didier Stricker1,2
Didier.Stricker@dfki.de
2

German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI), University of Kaiserslautern

Abstract
Modern large displacement optical flow algorithms usually use an initialization by either sparse descriptor matching techniques or dense approximate nearest neighbor
fields. While the latter have the advantage of being dense,
they have the major disadvantage of being very outlier
prone as they are not designed to find the optical flow, but
the visually most similar correspondence. In this paper we
present a dense correspondence field approach that is much
less outlier prone and thus much better suited for optical
flow estimation than approximate nearest neighbor fields.
Our approach is conceptually novel as it does not require
explicit regularization, smoothing (like median filtering) or
a new data term, but solely our novel purely data based
search strategy that finds most inliers (even for small objects), while it effectively avoids finding outliers. Moreover,
we present novel enhancements for outlier filtering. We
show that our approach is better suited for large displacement optical flow estimation than state-of-the-art descriptor
matching techniques. We do so by initializing EpicFlow (so
far the best method on MPI-Sintel) with our Flow Fields
instead of their originally used state-of-the-art descriptor
matching technique. We significantly outperform the original EpicFlow on MPI-Sintel, KITTI and Middlebury.

1. Introduction
Finding the correct dense optical flow between images
or video frames is a challenging problem. While the visual
similarity between two image regions is the most important
clue for finding the optical flow, it is often unreliable due to
illumination changes, deformations, repetitive patterns, low
texture, occlusions or blur. Hence, basically all dense optical flow methods add prior knowledge about the properties
of the flow, like local smoothness assumptions [18], structure and motion adaptive assumptions [30], the assumption that motion discontinuities are more likely at image
edges [26], or the assumption that the optical flow can be ap-

(a) ANNF [16]

(b) Our Flow Field

(c) Our outlier filtered Flow Field

(d) Ground truth

Figure 1. Comparison of state-of-the-art approximate nearest
neighbor fields (a) and Flow Fields (b) with the same data term.
a) and b) are shown with ground truth occlusion map (black pixels). c) is after outlier filtering, occluded regions are successfully
filtered. It can be used as initialization for an optical flow method.

proximated by a few motion patterns [9]. The most popular
of these assumptions is the local smoothness assumption. It
is usually incorporated into a joint energy based regularization that rates data consistency together with the smoothness in a variational setting of the flow [18]. One major
drawback of this setting is that fast minimization techniques
usually rely on local linearization of the data term and thus
can adapt the motion field only very locally. Hence, these
methods have to use image pyramids to deal with fast motions (large displacements) [6]. In practice, this fails in
cases where the determined motion on a lower scale is not
very close to the correct motion of a higher scale.
In contrast, for purely data based techniques like approximate nearest neighbor fields [16] (ANNF) and sparse descriptor matches [32] there are fast approaches that can efficiently perform a global search for the best match on the
full image resolution. However, as there is no regularization, (approximate) nearest neighbor fields (NNF) usually
contain many outliers that are difficult to identify. Furthermore, even if outliers can be identified they leave gaps in the
motion field that must be filled. Sparse descriptor matches
14015

