Global, Dense Multiscale Reconstruction for a Billion Points
Benjamin Ummenhofer and Thomas Brox
Computer Vision Group
University of Freiburg, Germany
{ummenhof, brox}@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract
We present a variational approach for surface reconstruction from a set of oriented points with scale information. We focus particularly on scenarios with non-uniform
point densities due to images taken from different distances.
In contrast to previous methods, we integrate the scale information in the objective and globally optimize the signed
distance function of the surface on a balanced octree grid.
We use a finite element discretization on the dual structure
of the octree minimizing the number of variables. The tetrahedral mesh is generated efficiently from the dual structure,
and also memory efficiency is optimized, such that robust
data terms can be used even on very large scenes. The surface normals are explicitly optimized and used for surface
extraction to improve the reconstruction at edges and corners.

1. Introduction
Current structure from motion pipelines can create
sparse reconstructions of large scenes with thousands of images. Even city scale reconstructions have become feasible
[4]. Such large scenes come along with several challenges
for dense reconstruction. These include (1) an efficient
scene representation, both in terms of memory and computational costs, (2) reconstruction of surfaces observed at
different levels of detail, and (3) graceful handling of noisy
and missing data.
In this paper, we deal with all three aspects. We propose for the first time to optimize a global cost function
that takes the scale of the imaged points into account. Such
scale adaptive reconstructions become important for scenes
that are too large to be modeled at a single scale or where
the focus of attention is concentrated on small parts of the
scene as shown in Fig. 1.
Especially in these cases, the scene representation must
be efficient in memory and should adapt to the scene structure rather than to the size of the input data. Therefore, we
propose an octree representation in conjunction with point

Figure 1. Reconstruction of a scene with large differences in scale.
The top right and bottom left corner show a close-up view of the
respectively marked spots.

aggregation and a fast finite element discretization of the
octree domain into a tetrahedral mesh based on the dual octree. Our discretization does not introduce additional nodes,
thus allowing us to state the optimization problem with a
minimum number of variables with respect to the the tree
structure. Together with the small memory footprint this
makes our approach suitable for the dense reconstruction
from a billion points.
By casting the reconstruction as a global optimization
problem we can complement the data fusion with regularization to deal with noisy or missing measurements. To this
end, we use robust norms in the cost function. This is only
possible because we counter the high memory requirements
of robust norms by efficient storage of the data. To obtain a
faithful reconstruction also of edges and corners at all levels of detail in the octree representation, we explicitly model
and optimize the surface normals.
The input to our method is a point cloud with normal
and scale information describing the size of the underlying
pixel or patch in the world coordinate system. Such data can
be obtained with off-the-shelf disparity estimation methods
and structure-from-motion packages. In particular, we used
the VisualSfM software [21, 20] to compute camera param11341

