Blur-aware Disparity Estimation from Defocus Stereo Images
Ching-Hui Chen? , Hui Zhou† , and Timo Ahonen†
?
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA
†
Nokia Technologies, Sunnyvale, CA, USA
ching@umiacs.umd.edu, hui.7.zhou@nokia.com, timo.ahonen@nokia.com

Abstract
Defocus blur usually causes performance degradation in
establishing the visual correspondence between stereo images. We propose a blur-aware disparity estimation method
that is robust to the mismatch of focus in stereo images.
The relative blur resulting from the mismatch of focus between stereo images is approximated as the difference of
the square diameters of the blur kernels. Based on the defocus and stereo model, we propose the relative blur versus
disparity (RBD) model that characterizes the relative blur
as a second-order polynomial function of disparity. Our
method alternates between RBD model update and disparity update in each iteration. The RBD model in return refines the disparity estimation by updating the matching cost
and aggregation weight to compensate the mismatch of focus. Experiments using both synthesized and real datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed algorithm.

1. Introduction
Recovery of the depth information from binocular vision
is an essential task since the depth information is useful in
the reconstruction of 3D shape [12], matting [24, 14], and
generating variable focus images/videos [13, 22]. However,
the performance of stereo correspondence degrades in regions without prominent textures. Even with the support
of the local neighborhood and regularization [2, 27], stereo
matching remains a challenging problem.
Most of the stereo matching techniques [19] assume
stereo images are all-in-focus. Nevertheless, such assumption is not always satisfied since cameras with real aperture
cannot provide infinite depth of field. For instance, mobile devices usually equip a camera of small f-number (wide
aperture relative to focal length) that is capable of gathering
much light but limits the depth of field. Hence, the visual
correspondence becomes weak when two corresponding regions experience unequal amount of defocus blur. While es-

tablishing the visual correspondence between stereo images
captured with inconsistent focus settings, we cannot simply
ignore the effect of defocus blur. Although the mismatch of
focus is usually adverse in stereo matching, the relative blur
between stereo images provides additional cue to resolve
the intrinsic ambiguity of regular stereo matching, such as
establishing correspondence in region of repetitive texture.
Our objective is to improve disparity estimation for defocus
stereo images via compensating the mismatch of focus and
integrating the cue of relative blur as a whole.
Defocus can be complementary cue to resolve the inherent ambiguity of stereo matching [10, 20]. Several approaches have fused the information from disparity and defocus blur for stereo matching. Rajagopalan et al. [18]
propose a Markov random field (MRF) based approach to
utilize depth from defocus [6] and stereo matching for robust depth estimation. Their proposed approach operates
on two pairs of stereo images, where each view possesses
a focal stack of two images. Assuming that the camera parameters and baseline are known, the depth estimation is
modeled as an energy minimization framework, where the
mismatch of stereo correspondence and deviation from the
defocus model will be penalized. Therefore, it is more robust than using either regular stereo matching or depth from
defocus alone. However, this method requires two focal
stacks from each view, and the camera parameters should
be known in advance. This method is generalized in [1] to
couple the blur, motion, and depth using a calibrated setup.
Several techniques estimate the point spread function without calibrating the camera parameters for depth inference
[15, 21].
Takeda et al. [25] use a pair of defocus stereo images to
combine the depth from defocus and stereo matching. This
approach requires each lens equipped with a coded aperture
mask, and the relation between disparity and the diameter of
the blur kernel should be calibrated in advance. Although
their proposed method is advantageous in recovering the
all-in-focus image, it is not general for defocus stereo images captured by regular cameras with unrestricted focus

855

