Neural Activation Constellations: Unsupervised Part Model Discovery with
Convolutional Networks
Marcel Simon and Erik Rodner
Computer Vision Group, University of Jena, Germany∗
http://www.inf-cv.uni-jena.de/constellation_model_revisited

Abstract
Part models of object categories are essential for challenging recognition tasks, where differences in categories
are subtle and only reflected in appearances of small parts
of the object. We present an approach that is able to
learn part models in a completely unsupervised manner,
without part annotations and even without given bounding boxes during learning. The key idea is to find constellations of neural activation patterns computed using convolutional neural networks. In our experiments, we outperform existing approaches for fine-grained recognition
on the CUB200-2011, Oxford PETS, and Oxford Flowers
dataset in case no part or bounding box annotations are
available and achieve state-of-the-art performance for the
Stanford Dog dataset. We also show the benefits of neural constellation models as a data augmentation technique
for fine-tuning. Furthermore, our paper unites the areas of
generic and fine-grained classification, since our approach
is suitable for both scenarios.

1. Introduction
Object parts play a crucial role in many recent approaches for fine-grained recognition. They allow for
capturing very localized discriminative features of an object [18]. Learning part models is often either done in a
completely supervised manner by providing part annotations [7, 38] or labeled bounding boxes [15, 29].
In contrast, we show how to learn part-models in a completely unsupervised manner, which drastically reduces annotation costs for learning. Our approach is based on learning constellations of neural activation patterns obtained
from pre-learned convolutional neural networks (CNN).
Fig. 1 shows an overview of our approach. Our part hypotheses are outputs of an intermediate CNN layer for
which we compute neural activation maps [29, 30]. Unsupervised part models are either build by randomly selecting
a subset of the part hypotheses or learned by estimating the
∗ The authors thank NVIDIA for GPU hardware donations.

Training
images

CNN
Neural activation
maps

Part
proposals

Constellation
model

Result

*

View 1:

View 2

*

*
*

*

Figure 1. Overview of our approach. Deep neural activation maps
are used to exploit the channels of a CNN as a part detector. We
estimate a part model from completely unsupervised data by selecting part detectors that fire at similar relative locations. The
created part models are then used to extract features at object parts
for weakly-supervised classification.

parameters of a generative spatial part model. In the latter case, we implicitly find subsets of part hypotheses that
“fire” consistently in a certain constellation in the images.
Although creating a model for the spatial relationship of
parts has already been introduced a decade ago [16, 14],
these approaches face major difficulties due to the fact
that part proposals are based on hand-engineered local descriptors and detectors without correspondence We overcome this problem by using implicit part detectors of a
pre-learned CNN, which at the same time greatly simplifies the part-model training. As shown by [36], intermediate CNN outputs can often be linked to semantic parts of
common objects and we are therefore using them as part
proposals. Our part model learning has to select only a few
parts for each view of an object from an already high quality pool of part proposals. This allows for a much simpler
and faster part model creation without the need to explicitly
consider appearance of the individual parts as done in pre11143

