Segment Graph Based Image Filtering: Fast Structure-Preserving Smoothing
Feihu Zhang1,2
Longquan Dai2
Shiming Xiang2
Xiaopeng Zhang2
1
School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
2
NLPR-LIAMA, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
hi.yexu@gmail.com, lqdai@foxmail.com, {smxiang, xpzhang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we design a new edge-aware structure,
named segment graph, to represent the image and we further develop a novel double weighted average image filter
(SGF) based on the segment graph. In our SGF, we use
the tree distance on the segment graph to define the internal weight function of the filtering kernel, which enables
the filter to smooth out high-contrast details and textures
while preserving major image structures very well. While
for the external weight function, we introduce a user specified smoothing window to balance the smoothing effects
from each node of the segment graph. Moreover, we also
set a threshold to adjust the edge-preserving performance.
These advantages make the SGF more flexible in various
applications and overcome the “halo” and “leak” problems appearing in most of the state-of-the-art approaches. Finally and importantly, we develop a linear algorithm for the
implementation of our SGF, which has an O(N ) time complexity for both gray-scale and high dimensional images, regardless of the kernel size and the intensity range. Typically,
as one of the fastest edge-preserving filters, our CPU implementation achieves 0.15s per megapixel when performing filtering for 3-channel color images. The strength of
the proposed filter is demonstrated by various applications,
including stereo matching, optical flow, joint depth map upsampling, edge-preserving smoothing, edges detection, image denoising, abstraction and texture editing.

1. Introduction
Natural image often contains rich trivial details and textures, which may reduce the performance of many visual
computing algorithms. Serving as the pre-processing or a
key step for these algorithms, edge-preserving smoothing
aims to remove trivial details while preserving major image
structures. This makes it the foundation for many vision
and graphics applications, including low-level image analysis (e.g., edge detection, image segmentation), image abstraction/vectorization, content-aware image editing et al.

(a) Input

(b) GF [13]

(c) WLS [7]

(d) L0 -smoothing [23]

(e) TF [2]

(f) Ours

Figure 1: Problems illustrations. (a) Image with high-contrast
details and textures as input. (b) “halo” artifacts around major
edges. (c) WLS [7] distributes the blurring (“halo”) globally. (d)
L0 -smoothing [7] could not smooth out some high-contrast details. (d) “leak” problem at some edges (see arrows). (e) Our method
keeps the image structure very well.

Although many state-of-the-art edge-preserving smoothing techniques have been proposed recently, they may suffer
from various problems, including “halo” artifacts, residual artifacts, “leak” problem and the time-consuming shortcoming. “Halo” artifacts (as shown in Fig.1(b)) usually
appear around the major edges and are shared by a variety of smoothing techniques, including the widely used bilateral filter (BF), guided filter (GF) et al. These methods
do not distinguish trivial details from major image structures, and they use intensity/color as the criterion to smooth
out all contents in the images. Many improved researches
(such as WLS [7], CLMF [16], L0 -smoothing [23] et al.)
attempted to solve the “halo” problem and generate sharper edges. Although they are different from each other, the
common behavior of these operators is to smooth out lowcontrast details from input images. However, they typically
only use pixel color/intensity contrasts (or image gradients)
to distinguish details from major image structures, and as
a result, they will cause new troubles when utilized to remove high-contrast details and textures. For example, L0 smoothing [23] could not remove all of the trivial details (Fig.1(d)). While for WLS [7], the globally distributed
blurring (“halo”) becomes clear again (Fig.1(c)).
1361

