Dense Optical Flow Prediction from a Static Image
Jacob Walker, Abhinav Gupta, and Martial Hebert
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
{jcwalker, abhinavg, hebert}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Given a scene, what is going to move, and in what direction will it move? Such a question could be considered
a non-semantic form of action prediction. In this work, we
present a convolutional neural network (CNN) based approach for motion prediction. Given a static image, this
CNN predicts the future motion of each and every pixel in
the image in terms of optical flow. Our CNN model leverages the data in tens of thousands of realistic videos to train
our model. Our method relies on absolutely no human labeling and is able to predict motion based on the context of
the scene. Because our CNN model makes no assumptions
about the underlying scene, it can predict future optical flow
on a diverse set of scenarios. We outperform all previous
approaches by large margins.

1. Introduction
Consider the images shown in Figure 1. Given the girl in
front of the cake, we humans can easily predict that her head
will move downward to extinguish the candle. The man
with the discus is in a position to twist his body strongly to
the right, and the squatting man on the bottom has nowhere
to move but up. Humans have an amazing ability to not only
recognize what is present in the image but also predict what
is going to happen next. Prediction is an important component of visual understanding and cognition. In order for
computers to react to their environment, simple activity detection is not always sufficient. For successful interactions,
robots need to predict the future and plan accordingly.
There has been some recent work that has focused on this
task. The most common approach to this prediction problem is to use a planning-based agent-centric approach: an
object [10] or a patch [24] is modeled as an agent that performs actions based on its current state and the goal state.
Each action is decided based on compatibility with the environment and how these actions helps the agent move closer
to the goal state. The priors on actions are modeled via
transition matrices. Such an approach has been shown to
produce impressive results: predicting trajectories of humans in parking lots [10] or hallucinating car movements
on streets [24]. There are two main problems with this ap-

(a) Input Image

(b) Prediction

Figure 1: Motion Prediction. Consider single, static input images (a). Our
method can first identify what these actions are and predict (b) correct motion
based on the pose and stage of the action without any video information. We
use the color coding from [1] shown on
the right.

proach. First, the predictions are still sparse, and the motion
is still modeled as a trajectory. Second, and more importantly, these approaches have always been shown to perform
in restrictive domains such as parking lots or streets.
In this paper, we take the next step towards generalized
prediction — a framework that can be learned from tens of
thousands of realistic videos. This framework can work in
indoor and outdoor environments; it can account for one or
12443

