Cluster-based point set saliency
Flora Ponjou Tasse

Jiri Kosinka
The Computer Laboratory, University of Cambridge, UK

Neil Dodgson

Figure 1: Cluster-based point set saliency on a range scan. From left to right: normal map, adaptive fuzzy clustering, cluster
uniqueness, cluster spatial distribution, cluster saliency, and point saliency.

Abstract
We propose a cluster-based approach to point set
saliency detection, a challenge since point sets lack topological information. A point set is first decomposed into
small clusters, using fuzzy clustering. We evaluate cluster uniqueness and spatial distribution of each cluster and
combine these values into a cluster saliency function. Finally, the probabilities of points belonging to each cluster
are used to assign a saliency to each point. Our approach
detects fine-scale salient features and uninteresting regions
consistently have lower saliency values. We evaluate the
proposed saliency model by testing our saliency-based keypoint detection against a 3D interest point detection benchmark. The evaluation shows that our method achieves a
good balance between false positive and false negative error rates, without using any topological information.

1. Introduction
Mesh saliency, a measure of importance of points or regions on a 3D surface, has become a useful tool for several
shape analysis tasks such as keypoint detection [2], shape

similarity [9], mesh simplification [19], and viewpoint selection [20]. The human perceptual system is able to consistently and quickly estimate saliency for known and new
shapes. But designing computational models that simulate
this process remains a problem [15]. Perceptual research
shows that contrast is an important factor in low-level visual saliency [7]. Thus research in both image and surface
saliency is focused on finding better definitions of contrast.
So far, surface-based methods have focused on contrast between vertices [19, 20, 27], whereas a new trend in image
saliency detection uses region-based contrast [5, 25, 4] to
produce significantly better results than local contrast. Inspired by these cluster-based approaches on images, we propose a new approach to point set saliency.
Due to the fact that most shape processing tasks have
been aimed at polygonal meshes in the past, surface
saliency has been mostly studied on such surface representation. These mesh-based methods depend on Gaussian
smoothing, spectral properties [29], or shape descriptors
[20], which all rely on topological information and cannot
be trivially extended to point sets. Point sets are noisy, contain occlusions, and are often sampled at different densities
depending on the position of the depth camera. This makes
1163

