Selecting Relevant Web Trained Concepts for Automated Event Retrieval
Bharat Singh*, Xintong Han*, Zhe Wu, Vlad I. Morariu and Larry S. Davis
Center For Automation Research, University of Maryland, College Park
{bharat,xintong,zhewu,morariu,lsd}@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract
Complex event retrieval is a challenging research problem, especially when no training videos are available. An
alternative to collecting training videos is to train a large
semantic concept bank a priori. Given a text description of
an event, event retrieval is performed by selecting concepts
linguistically related to the event description and fusing the
concept responses on unseen videos. However, defining an
exhaustive concept lexicon and pre-training it requires vast
computational resources. Therefore, recent approaches automate concept discovery and training by leveraging large
amounts of weakly annotated web data. Compact visually
salient concepts are automatically obtained by the use of
concept pairs or, more generally, n-grams. However, not
all visually salient n-grams are necessarily useful for an
event query–some combinations of concepts may be visually compact but irrelevant–and this drastically affects performance. We propose an event retrieval algorithm that
constructs pairs of automatically discovered concepts and
then prunes those concepts that are unlikely to be helpful for retrieval. Pruning depends both on the query and
on the specific video instance being evaluated. Our approach also addresses calibration and domain adaptation
issues that arise when applying concept detectors to unseen
videos. We demonstrate large improvements over other vision based systems on the TRECVID MED 13 dataset.

1. Introduction
Complex event retrieval from databases of videos is difficult because in addition to the challenges in modeling the
appearance of static visual concepts–e.g., objects, scenes–
modeling events also involves modeling temporal variations. In addition to the challenges of representing motion
features and time, one particularly pernicious challenge is
that the number of potential events is much greater than
the number of static visual concepts, amplifying the well*The first two authors contributed equally to this paper.

known long-tail problem associated with object categories.
Identifying and collecting training data for a comprehensive
set of objects is difficult. For complex events, however, the
task of even enumerating a comprehensive set of events is
daunting, and collecting curated training video datasets for
them is entirely impractical.
Consequently, a recent trend in the event retrieval community is to define a set of simpler visual concepts that are
practical to model and then combine these concepts to define and detect complex events. This is often done when no
examples of the complex event of interest are available for
training. In this setting, training data is still required, but
only for the more limited and simpler concepts. For example, [5, 21] discover and model concepts based on single
words or short phrases, taking into account how visual the
concept is. Others model pairs of words or n-grams in order to disambiguate between the multiple visual meanings
of a single word [9] and take advantage of co-occurrences
present in the visual world [23]. An important aspect of recent work [29, 5] is that concept discovery and training set
annotation is performed automatically using weakly annotated web data. Event retrieval is performed by selecting
concepts linguistically related to the event description and
computing an average of the concept responses as a measure
for event detection.
Based on recent advances, we describe a system that
ranks videos based on their similarity to a textual description of a complex event, using only web resources and without additional human supervision. In our approach, the textual description is represented by and detected through a
set of concepts. Our approach builds on [5] for discovering concepts given a textual description of a complex event,
and [9] for automatically replacing the initial concepts with
concept pairs that are visually salient and capture specific
visual meanings.
However, we observe that many visually salient concepts
generated from an event description are not useful for detecting the event. In fact, we find that removing certain concepts is a key step that significantly improves event retrieval
performance. Some concepts should be removed at training
time because they model visually salient concepts that are

4561

