Discriminative Pose-Free Descriptors for Face and Object Matching
Soubhik Sanyal, Sivaram Prasad Mudunuri and Soma Biswas
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India.
{soubhiksanyal,sivaram.prasad,soma.biswas} @ee.iisc.ernet.in

Abstract
Pose invariant matching is a very important and challenging problem with various applications like recognizing faces in uncontrolled scenarios, matching objects taken
from different view points, etc. In this paper, we propose a
discriminative pose-free descriptor (DPFD) which can be
used to match faces/objects across pose variations. Training examples at very few representative poses are used to
generate virtual intermediate pose subspaces. An image or
image region is then represented by a feature set obtained
by projecting it on all these subspaces and a discriminative transform is applied on this feature set to make it suitable for classification tasks. Finally, this discriminative feature set is represented by a single feature vector, termed
as DPFD. The DPFD of images taken from different viewpoints can be directly compared for matching. Extensive experiments on recognizing faces across pose, pose and resolution on the Multi-PIE and Surveillance Cameras Face
datasets and comparisons with state-of-the-art approaches
show the effectiveness of the proposed approach. Experiments on matching general objects across viewpoints show
the generalizability of the proposed approach beyond faces.

1. Introduction
Matching objects across pose is a very important area of
research in the field of computer vision with many applications. For example, in surveillance setting, the face of a
person captured by the overhead cameras may be in any uncontrolled pose and resolution as opposed to the frontal image under high resolution that is typically captured during
enrolment (Figure 1 left). For object matching, the images
captured during testing can be taken from a different viewpoint compared to the images stored in the database which
again requires comparing objects present in different poses
(Figure 1 right).
In this paper, we propose a discriminative pose-free
descriptor (DPFD) for matching objects across different
poses. In the training phase, training images from few poses

Figure 1. Applications of pose invariant matching. (Left) Face
recognition in uncontrolled setting; (Right) Object recognition
across viewpoint.

(two/three) are used to generate virtual subspaces for the intermediate poses. Treating the subspaces generated by the
training data as points on the Grassmann manifold, intermediate subspaces are generated by sampling the shortest
geodesic path between those points. An image or image region is then represented by a set of features, computed by
projecting its feature vector onto all the intermediate subspaces. This will ensure that at least one or more of the
features from the entire feature set will match when we try
to match images with different poses. Since the final goal
is recognition, a discriminative transform learned using the
class labels of the training data is used to transform the
feature set. Then a single compact discriminative feature
vector termed discriminative pose-free descriptor (DPFD)
is computed from the feature set which can be directly used
for matching.
In this paper, we focus on the face recognition application where the gallery consists of frontal images captured
during enrolment and the probe images can be in any uncontrolled pose. We also extend the approach when in addition to non-frontal pose, the probe images also have lowresolution as is usually the case in surveillance setting when
the images are taken from a large distance from the subject.
We perform extensive experiments on the CMU PIE, MultiPIE and the Surveillance Cameras Face Database. Comparisons with state-of-the-art metric learning, cross-pose
methods, domain adaptation and coupled dictionary learning approaches show the effectiveness of the proposed approach. We also show the usefulness of the proposed approach for matching general objects across pose. The nov-

3837

