Shape Interaction Matrix Revisited and Robustified: Efficient Subspace
Clustering with Corrupted and Incomplete Data
Pan Ji1 , Mathieu Salzmann2,3 , and Hongdong Li1,4
1
Australian National University, Canberra
2
CVLab, EPFL, Switzerland; 3 NICTA, Canberra
4
ARC Centre of Excellence for Robotic Vision (ACRV)

Abstract
The Shape Interaction Matrix (SIM) is one of the earliest approaches to performing subspace clustering (i.e.,
separating points drawn from a union of subspaces). In
this paper, we revisit the SIM and reveal its connections to
several recent subspace clustering methods. Our analysis
lets us derive a simple, yet effective algorithm to robustify
the SIM and make it applicable to realistic scenarios where
the data is corrupted by noise. We justify our method by
intuitive examples and the matrix perturbation theory. We
then show how this approach can be extended to handle
missing data, thus yielding an efficient and general subspace clustering algorithm. We demonstrate the benefits
of our approach over state-of-the-art subspace clustering
methods on several challenging motion segmentation and
face clustering problems, where the data includes corrupted
and missing measurements.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we tackle the problem of subspace clustering, which consists of finding the subspace memberships
of points drawn from a union of subspaces. This problem
has attracted a lot of attention in the community due to
its applicability to many different tasks, such as motion
segmentation and face clustering.
Most of the research in this area takes its roots in the pioneering work of Costeira and Kanade [5], which introduced
the Shape Interaction Matrix (SIM) to solve the motion
segmentation problem, i.e., the problem of clustering point
trajectories into the motions of multiple rigid objects. More
specifically, the SIM was defined as the orthogonal projection matrix onto the row space of the trajectory matrix, and
was proven to directly encode the motion membership of
each trajectory. This result was later shown to extend to the
general problem of subspace clustering [16, 17].
While the SIM provably yields perfect clusters given

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1: Subspace clustering example: (a) Two motions,
each forming one subspace; (b) Shape Interaction Matrix
of the trajectories in (a), which is sensitive to noise; (c)
Affinity matrix obtained by our method: a much clearer
block-diagonal structure.

ideal measurements from independent subspaces, the quality of the clusters quickly degrades in the presence of
noise, as illustrated by Fig. 1. As a consequence, many
algorithms have been proposed to improve the robustness
of subspace clustering. However, these methods typically
work either by using discriminant criteria to reduce the
effects of noise [14, 34], which may be sensitive to the
noise level, or by formulating subspace clustering as a
regularized optimization problem [9, 10, 15, 20, 21], thus
requiring to tune the regularization weight to the data at
hand. Furthermore, little work has been done to address the
missing data scenario, for which, to the best of our knowledge, expensive two-steps methods (i.e., data completion
followed by clustering) are typically employed [27, 32].
In this paper, we revisit the use of the SIM for subspace
clustering and study its connections to several recent algorithms. Based on our analysis, we show that simple, yet
effective modifications of the SIM can significantly improve
its robustness to data corruptions. This, in turn, lets us
introduce an efficient approach to handling missing data,
whose presence is inevitable in real-world scenarios.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithms on
motion segmentation and face clustering in different scenarios, including the presence of noise, outliers and missing
data. Our experiments evidence the benefits of our approach
14687

