Semi-Supervised Normalized Cuts for Image Segmentation
Selene E. Chew and Nathan D. Cahill
School of Mathematical Sciences, Rochester Institute of Technology
sec6971@rit.edu, nathan.cahill@rit.edu

Abstract
Since its introduction as a powerful graph-based method
for image segmentation, the Normalized Cuts (NCuts) algorithm has been generalized to incorporate expert knowledge about how certain pixels or regions should be grouped,
or how the resulting segmentation should be biased to be
correlated with priors. Previous approaches incorporate
hard must-link constraints on how certain pixels should
be grouped as well as hard cannot-link constraints on how
other pixels should be separated into different groups. In
this paper, we reformulate NCuts to allow both sets of constraints to be handled in a soft manner, enabling the user to
tune the degree to which the constraints are satisﬁed. An approximate spectral solution to the reformulated problem exists without requiring explicit construction of a large, dense
matrix; hence, computation time is comparable to that of
unconstrained NCuts. Using synthetic data and real imagery, we show that soft handling of constraints yields better results than unconstrained NCuts and enables more robust clustering and segmentation than is possible when the
constraints are strictly enforced.

1. Introduction
One of the most popular algorithms for image segmentation and clustering is Normalized Cuts [13, 14] (NCuts),
which generates segments by partitioning a graph that models the image. Although NCuts has been successful in many
settings, it is a fully automatic algorithm, and no fully automatic segmentation algorithm currently exists that is as
good as the human brain at handling the complexity and variety inherent in real-world images. Because of this, one vibrant area of research over the last decade has been into the
development of interactive image segmentation algorithms
that rely on user input to help guide the segmentation process.
Like NCuts, many of the modern interactive image segmentation techniques are based on graph partitioning and
labeling algorithms [4, 3, 6, 8, 12, 18]. User input about
pixels or regions of the image can be provided as must-link

or cannot-link constraints [16], which specify that two or
more vertices of the graph should be grouped in the same
partition or separated into different partitions.
Two extensions of NCuts have been developed that handle hard constraints: Yu and Shi [18] enable hard mustlink constraints, and Eriksson et al. [6] enable both hard
must-link and cannot-link constraints. A different generalization is the Biased Normalized Cut, by Maji et al. [10],
in which the resulting clustering or segmentation can be biased towards being correlated with some predeﬁned template or function. If this function is deﬁned by the user to
indicate pixels/regions that should be linked, Biased Normalized Cuts can be thought of as a way of modifying the
NCuts solution towards satisfying must-link constraints in
a soft manner.
In this paper, we present a different generalization of
NCuts that allows soft versions of both must-link and
cannot-link constraints to be satisﬁed, enabling an expert
user to vary the desired inﬂuence of speciﬁc constraints on
the partitioning process. Soft versions of the constraints allow for ﬂexibility to be robust to situations when user input is not guaranteed to be completely accurate. Our generalization, which we refer to as Semi-Supervised Normalized Cuts (SSNCuts), has an approximate spectral solution
that does not require explicit construction of a large, dense
matrix; hence, computation time is comparable to that of
the original NCuts algorithm. Furthermore, it directly computes the constrained solution without relying on an initial
unconstrained solution (as opposed to the approach of Biased NCuts). If desired, SSNCuts can form the basis of a
foreground extraction system like GrabCuts [12], by iteratively updating the manual labels and then estimating the
alpha-matte around the region border.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the original NCuts algorithm, and Section 3
shows how to generalize it to incorporate soft must-link and
cannot-link constraints. Section 4 uses the toy problem presented in [10] to explore the behavior of our generalization
compared to methods requiring strict constraint satisfaction
[6, 18]. Section 5 illustrates image segmentation results on
a variety of images from the PASCAL VOC dataset [7].
11716

