Variational Depth Superresolution using Example-Based Edge Representations
David Ferstl, Matthias Rüther and Horst Bischof
Graz University of Technology
Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision
Inffeldgasse 16, 8010 Graz, AUSTRIA
{ferstl, ruether, bischof}@icg.tugraz.at

Abstract
In this paper we propose a novel method for depth image superresolution which combines recent advances in example based upsampling with variational superresolution
based on a known blur kernel. Most traditional depth superresolution approaches try to use additional high resolution intensity images as guidance for superresolution. In
our method we learn a dictionary of edge priors from an
external database of high and low resolution examples. In
a novel variational sparse coding approach this dictionary
is used to infer strong edge priors. Additionally to the traditional sparse coding constraints the difference in the overlap of neighboring edge patches is minimized in our optimization. These edge priors are used in a novel variational
superresolution as anisotropic guidance of a higher order
regularization. Both the sparse coding and the variational
superresolution of the depth are solved based on the primaldual formulation. In an exhaustive numerical and visual
evaluation we show that our method clearly outperforms
existing approaches on multiple real and synthetic datasets.

depth images from nearby locations [23]. However, in previous works it has been shown that it is possible to superresolve intensity images either by interpolation and deblurring with a known Point Spread Function (PSF) [26] or by
previously learned relationships between low and high resolution image examples, that are stored in dictionaries [30].
On the one side, superresolution (SR) approaches based on
a known PSF have the advantage to deal with input noise
and create a dense result but the quality is highly dependent on knowing the exact filter kernel. On the other side,
approaches based on a learned dictionary do not need the
accurate PSF but are more likely to fail at higher levels of
noise.

1. Introduction
In recent years, once prohibitively expensive range sensors reached their way to the mass market with the introduction of Microsoft Kinect, ASUS Xtion Pro or the Creative
Senz3D camera. These cameras can now capture scene
depth in real time and enable a variety of different applications in computer vision including 3D reconstruction, pose
estimation or driver assistance. Acquisitions made by such
consumer depth cameras, however, remain afflicted by less
than ideal attributes. Most of these inexpensive technologies reached a natural upper limit on the spatial resolution
and the precision of each depth sample. It may seem that
increasing the spatial resolution and apparent measurement
accuracy requires additional data from the scene itself, such
as a high resolution intensity image [8], or multiple aligned

Figure 1. Variational Depth Superresolution using Example-Based
Edge Representations. Our method estimates strong edge priors
from a given LR depth image and a learned dictionary using a
novel sparse coding approach (blue part). The learned HR edge
prior is used as anisotropic guidance in a novel variational SR using higher order regularization (red part).

Recent approaches based on learned dictionaries reach a
high level of quality for noise free intensity images. However, depth images usually contain higher noise due to sen1513

