Learning Complexity-Aware Cascades for Deep Pedestrian Detection
Zhaowei Cai
UC San Diego

Mohammad Saberian
Yahoo Labs

Nuno Vasconcelos
UC San Diego

zwcai@ucsd.edu

saberian@yahoo-inc.com

nuno@ucsd.edu

Abstract
The design of complexity-aware cascaded detectors,
combining features of very different complexities, is considered. A new cascade design procedure is introduced, by
formulating cascade learning as the Lagrangian optimization of a risk that accounts for both accuracy and complexity. A boosting algorithm, denoted as complexity aware cascade training (CompACT), is then derived to solve this optimization. CompACT cascades are shown to seek an optimal trade-off between accuracy and complexity by pushing
features of higher complexity to the later cascade stages,
where only a few difficult candidate patches remain to be
classified. This enables the use of features of vastly different complexities in a single detector. In result, the feature
pool can be expanded to features previously impractical for
cascade design, such as the responses of a deep convolutional neural network (CNN). This is demonstrated through
the design of a pedestrian detector with a pool of features
whose complexities span orders of magnitude. The resulting cascade generalizes the combination of a CNN with an
object proposal mechanism: rather than a pre-processing
stage, CompACT cascades seamlessly integrate CNNs in
their stages. This enables state of the art performance on
the Caltech and KITTI datasets, at fairly fast speeds.

1. Introduction
Pedestrian detection is an important problem in computer vision. Many of its applications, e.g. smart vehicles
or surveillance, require real-time detection. Since, under
the popular sliding window paradigm, there are close to a
million windows per 640×480 pixel image, detection complexity can easily become intractable. This is an impediment to the deployment of sophisticated classifiers, such
as deep learning models, in the pedestrian detection arena.
The most popular architecture for real-time object detection
is the detector cascade of [32]. It exploits the fact that most
image patches can be assigned to the background class by
evaluation of a few simple cascade stages. This guarantees
computational efficiency without compromising accuracy,

since the few resulting false positives can be rejected by
more complex detectors, in the late cascade stages. Given
that these are rarely used, their complexity is not an impediment to high detection speeds. In result, it is possible to
have both efficient and accurate detection.
While the cascade detection principle is intuitive, its implementation is far from trivial. Early cascade designs required extensive heuristics to determine the cascade configuration [32, 35, 3], lacking the ability to explicitly optimize
the trade-off between detection accuracy and complexity. A
commonly used assumption is that all features have equivalent complexity. This significantly simplifies the design,
which reduces to choosing the features that maximize detection accuracy. In fact, popular methods [3, 4] simply use
a boosting algorithm (typically AdaBoost [8]) to design a
non-cascaded classifier and then transform it into a cascade,
by addition of thresholds. These approaches suffer from
two main problems. First, they do not aim to select features
that optimize the trade-off between detection accuracy and
complexity. Second, the “equivalent feature complexity”
hypothesis only produces sensible cascades when applied
to features that indeed have similar complexity. This constraint is, however, frequently violated [1, 23, 37].
In fact, it has been remarkably difficult to accommodate, in cascade learning, features significantly heavier than
those in common use. This problem is particularly pressing
given the recent success of deep learning in object recognition [17, 29]. The intractable computation of a deep learning model under the sliding window paradigm is usually addressed with recourse to object proposal mechanisms [31],
giving rise to a two-stage cascade that is far from optimal,
in terms of the trade-off between detection accuracy and
speed. For pedestrian detection, object proposals are frequently implemented with weak pedestrian detectors, sometimes cascaded detectors themselves [15]. Due to the adhoc nature of these solutions, deep learning models have
not been competitive for pedestrian detection, contradicting
their recognition and classification performance [17, 29].
In this work, we address these problems by seeking an algorithm for optimal cascade learning under a criterion that
penalizes both detection errors and complexity. For the lat-

3361

