A Randomized Ensemble Approach to Industrial CT Segmentation
Hyojin Kim ∗ Jayaraman J. Thiagarajan
Peer-Timo Bremer
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
7000 East Avenue, Livermore, CA, USA
{kim63, jayaramanthi1, bremer5}@llnl.gov

Abstract
Tuning the models and parameters of common segmentation approaches is challenging especially in the presence
of noise and artifacts. Ensemble-based techniques attempt
to compensate by randomly varying models and/or parameters to create a diverse set of hypotheses, which are subsequently ranked to arrive at the best solution. However, these
methods have been restricted to cases where the underlying
models are well established, e.g. natural images. In practice, it is difficult to determine a suitable base-model and the
amount of randomization required. Furthermore, for multiobject scenes no single hypothesis may perform well for all
objects, reducing the overall quality of the results.
This paper presents a new ensemble-based segmentation framework for industrial CT images demonstrating that
comparatively simple models and randomization strategies can significantly improve the result over existing techniques. Furthermore, we introduce a per-object based ranking, followed by a consensus inference that can outperform
even the best case scenario of existing hypothesis ranking
approaches. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach using a set of noise and artifact rich CT images from
baggage security and show that it significantly outperforms
existing solutions in this area.

1. Introduction
Broadly speaking, the goal of image segmentation is to
use the low level information at each voxel to infer high
level semantics such as objects. However, in applications
where the source data contains large amounts of noise and
∗ This work was performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department
of Energy by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under Contract
DE-AC52-07NA27344. LLNL-PROC-677352. This material is based
upon work supported by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Science and Technology Directorate, Office of University Programs, under
Grant Award 2013-ST-061-ED0001. The views and conclusions contained
in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as
necessarily representing the official policies, either expressed or implied,
of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security.

Figure 1. The difficulty in choosing the optimal parameters limits
the performance of industrial CT segmentation. From left to right,
the original CT image, ground-truth segmentation, region-growing
method which wrongly merges two objects even after careful parameter tuning, and the proposed segmentation.

artifacts low level features such as edges or voxel values
become unreliable. A common solution is to require additional domain knowledge, i.e. the shape of an organ in medical CT segmentation, to constrain the segmentation [14, 19].
However, many applications do not readily admit a parameterized model, for example due to the sheer variety of objects to consider. In such cases the additional information
is typically given in form of training data, providing examples of objects of interest. Traditionally, the training data
is used to tune parameters of the segmentation algorithm,
e.g. thresholds, energy functionals, etc. However, this process can be labor intensive, is difficult to control, and the
results typically do not generalize gracefully. Despite sophisticated optimization tools for inference with segmentation models (e.g., Markov Random Fields), the underlying
model, learned from a finite training set, is often insufficient
to produce accurate results. In order to bridge this gap, approaches that learn multiple hypotheses to produce an overall more accurate solution have been developed [9, 24]. In
these techniques both model and/or parameters are varied
to create an ensemble of possible solutions. These are then
ranked using information from the training data to choose
the best hypothesis from the ensemble.
Ensemble approaches are attractive since their randomized nature can compensate for some level of noise and
artifacts. However, adapting these ideas to new applications can be challenging. In particular, picking an appropriate base-model to vary is difficult as is understanding the
amount of diversity required to produce good results. Furthermore, for complex, multi-object segmentations no sin-

1707

