Direct, Dense, and Deformable: Template-Based Non-Rigid 3D Reconstruction
from RGB Video
Rui Yu
Chris Russell
University College London

Neill D. F. Campbell
University of Bath

Lourdes Agapito
University College London

http://visual.cs.ucl.ac.uk/pubs/ddd/

Abstract
In this paper we tackle the problem of capturing the
dense, detailed 3D geometry of generic, complex non-rigid
meshes using a single RGB-only commodity video camera
and a direct approach. While robust and even real-time solutions exist to this problem if the observed scene is static,
for non-rigid dense shape capture current systems are typically restricted to the use of complex multi-camera rigs,
take advantage of the additional depth channel available in
RGB-D cameras, or deal with specific shapes such as faces
or planar surfaces. In contrast, our method makes use of
a single RGB video as input; it can capture the deformations of generic shapes; and the depth estimation is dense,
per-pixel and direct. We first compute a dense 3D template
of the shape of the object, using a short rigid sequence, and
subsequently perform online reconstruction of the non-rigid
mesh as it evolves over time. Our energy optimization approach minimizes a robust photometric cost that simultaneously estimates the temporal correspondences and 3D deformations with respect to the template mesh. In our experimental evaluation we show a range of qualitative results on
novel datasets; we compare against an existing method that
requires multi-frame optical flow; and perform a quantitative evaluation against other template-based approaches on
a ground truth dataset.

1. Introduction
The recent emergence of low cost depth sensors, has
brought easy and fast acquisition of 3D geometry closer to
reality. Systems such as KinectFusion [20] allow users to
scan the detailed 3D shape of rigid scenes. The use of RGBD sensors has also been extended to markerless capture of
non-rigid shapes [14, 15] even in real time [18, 37]. At the
same time, many multi-camera techniques for marker-less
high-end dynamic 3D shape acquisition have been developed over the last decade [8, 33].
In contrast, the acquisition of dense 3D models of

Figure 1: An automatically generated template is warped
(top two rows) in a physically plausible manner consistent
with a video sequence (bottom) generating rich dynamic 3D
meshes, that capture emotive deformations of the mouth and
eyes. Each column corresponds to different views of the
same frame.

generic deformable meshes from a monocular RGB-only
video stream is significantly harder. The ability to acquire
time-varying dense shapes from monocular RGB video
would open the door to easy, lightweight non-rigid capture
and, perhaps more importantly, from existing video footage
or web-based video libraries such as YouTube.
1918

