Learning Spatially Regularized Correlation Filters for Visual Tracking
Martin Danelljan, Gustav Häger, Fahad Shahbaz Khan, Michael Felsberg
Computer Vision Laboratory, Linköping University, Sweden
{martin.danelljan, gustav.hager, fahad.khan, michael.felsberg}@liu.se

Abstract
Robust and accurate visual tracking is one of the most
challenging computer vision problems. Due to the inherent
lack of training data, a robust approach for constructing a
target appearance model is crucial. Recently, discriminatively learned correlation filters (DCF) have been successfully applied to address this problem for tracking. These
methods utilize a periodic assumption of the training samples to efficiently learn a classifier on all patches in the target neighborhood. However, the periodic assumption also
introduces unwanted boundary effects, which severely degrade the quality of the tracking model.
We propose Spatially Regularized Discriminative Correlation Filters (SRDCF) for tracking. A spatial regularization component is introduced in the learning to penalize
correlation filter coefficients depending on their spatial location. Our SRDCF formulation allows the correlation filters to be learned on a significantly larger set of negative
training samples, without corrupting the positive samples.
We further propose an optimization strategy, based on the iterative Gauss-Seidel method, for efficient online learning of
our SRDCF. Experiments are performed on four benchmark
datasets: OTB-2013, ALOV++, OTB-2015, and VOT2014.
Our approach achieves state-of-the-art results on all four
datasets. On OTB-2013 and OTB-2015, we obtain an absolute gain of 8.0% and 8.2% respectively, in mean overlap
precision, compared to the best existing trackers.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking is a classical computer vision problem
with many applications. In generic tracking the task is to
estimate the trajectory of a target in an image sequence,
given only its initial location. This problem is especially
challenging. The tracker must generalize the target appearance from a very limited set of training samples to achieve
robustness against, e.g. occlusions, fast motion and deformations. Here, we investigate the key problem of learning a
robust appearance model under these conditions.
Recently, Discriminative Correlation Filter (DCF) based

(a) Original image.

(b) Periodicity in correlation filters.

Figure 1. Example image (a) and the underlying periodic assumption (b) employed in the standard DCF methods. The periodic
assumption (b) leads to a limited set of negative training samples,
that fails to capture the true image content (a). As a consequence,
an inaccurate tracking model is learned.

approaches [5, 8, 10, 19, 20, 24] have successfully been applied to the tracking problem [23]. These methods learn a
correlation filter from a set of training samples. The correlation filter is trained to perform a circular sliding window
operation on the training samples. This corresponds to assuming a periodic extension of these samples (see figure 1).
The periodic assumption enables efficient training and detection by utilizing the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT).
As discussed above, the computational efficiency of the
standard DCF originates from the periodic assumption at
both training and detection. However, this underlying assumption produces unwanted boundary effects. This leads
to an inaccurate representation of the image content, since
the training patches contain periodic repetitions. The induced boundary effects mainly limit the standard DCF formulation in two important aspects. Firstly, inaccurate negative training patches reduce the discriminative power of the
learned model. Secondly, the detection scores are only accurate near the center of the region, while the remaining
scores are heavily influenced by the periodic repetitions of
the detection sample. This leads to a very restricted target
search region at the detection step.
The aforementioned limitations of the standard DCF for-

4310

