From Emotions to Action Units with Hidden and Semi-Hidden-Task Learning
Adria Ruiz
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona

Joost Van de Weijer
Centre de Visio per Computador
Barcelona

Xavier Binefa
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Barcelona

adria.ruiz@upf.es

joost@cvc.uab.es

xavier.binefa@upf.es

Abstract
Limited annotated training data is a challenging problem in Action Unit recognition. In this paper, we investigate
how the use of large databases labelled according to the
6 universal facial expressions can increase the generalization ability of Action Unit classifiers. For this purpose, we
propose a novel learning framework: Hidden-Task Learning. HTL aims to learn a set of Hidden-Tasks (Action Units)
for which samples are not available but, in contrast, training data is easier to obtain from a set of related VisibleTasks (Facial Expressions). To that end, HTL is able to exploit prior knowledge about the relation between Hidden
and Visible-Tasks. In our case, we base this prior knowledge on empirical psychological studies providing statistical correlations between Action Units and universal facial
expressions. Additionally, we extend HTL to Semi-Hidden
Task Learning (SHTL) assuming that Action Unit training
samples are also provided. Performing exhaustive experiments over four different datasets, we show that HTL and
SHTL improve the generalization ability of AU classifiers by
training them with additional facial expression data. Additionally, we show that SHTL achieves competitive performance compared with state-of-the-art Transductive Learning approaches which face the problem of limited training
data by using unlabelled test samples during training.

1. Introduction
During years, automatic facial behavior analysis has focused on the recognition of universal facial expressions or
Action Units. These two problems are motivated by the
well-known studies of the psychologist Paul Ekman. Ekman showed that there exist 6 universal emotions (anger,
happiness, fear, surprise, sadness, and disgust) and that each
of them has a corresponding prototypical facial expression
[7]. Despite their cross-cultural universality, it has been
demonstrated that people can perform many other non-basic
expressions representing contempt, embarrassment or concentration and that combinations of these expressions are

Figure 1: Hidden-Task Learning and Semi-Hidden-Task
Learning frameworks applied to Action Unit recognition.
HTL aims to learn AU classifiers (Hidden-Tasks) by using
only training samples labelled with universal facial expressions (Visible-Tasks). For this purpose, HTL exploits prior
knowledge about the relation between Hidden and VisibleTask outputs. In this work, the relation between Action Unit
and facial expressions is modelled based on empirical results obtained in psychological studies. SHTL is an extension of HTL assuming that samples from the Hidden-Tasks
(Action Units) can also be provided. We show that the use
of additional facial expression training samples increases
the generalization ability of the learned AU classifiers.

usual in our every-day life [5]. For these reasons, a more
objective method to categorize expressions is by using the
Facial Action Coding System (FACS) [6]. In FACS, Ekman
defined a set of 45 Action Units which are atomic movements in the face caused by the activation of one or more
facial muscles. Since any expression that humans can do
can be characterized by a concrete combination of Action
Units, its automatic recognition is one of the most interest13703

