FlowNet: Learning Optical Flow with Convolutional Networks
Alexey Dosovitskiy∗, Philipp Fischer† ,∗ Eddy Ilg∗, Philip Häusser, Caner Hazırbaş, Vladimir Golkov†
University of Freiburg
Technical University of Munich
{fischer,dosovits,ilg}@cs.uni-freiburg.de, {haeusser,hazirbas,golkov}@cs.tum.edu

Patrick van der Smagt
Technical University of Munich

Daniel Cremers
Technical University of Munich

Thomas Brox
University of Freiburg

smagt@brml.org

cremers@tum.de

brox@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have recently
been very successful in a variety of computer vision tasks,
especially on those linked to recognition. Optical flow estimation has not been among the tasks CNNs succeeded at. In
this paper we construct CNNs which are capable of solving
the optical flow estimation problem as a supervised learning
task. We propose and compare two architectures: a generic
architecture and another one including a layer that correlates feature vectors at different image locations. Since
existing ground truth data sets are not sufficiently large to
train a CNN, we generate a large synthetic Flying Chairs
dataset. We show that networks trained on this unrealistic
data still generalize very well to existing datasets such as
Sintel and KITTI, achieving competitive accuracy at frame
rates of 5 to 10 fps.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks have become the method
of choice in many fields of computer vision. They are classically applied to classification [25, 24], but recently presented architectures also allow for per-pixel predictions like
semantic segmentation [28] or depth estimation from single
images [10]. In this paper, we propose training CNNs endto-end to learn predicting the optical flow field from a pair
of images.
While optical flow estimation needs precise per-pixel localization, it also requires finding correspondences between
two input images. This involves not only learning image
feature representations, but also learning to match them at
different locations in the two images. In this respect, optical
flow estimation fundamentally differs from previous applications of CNNs.
∗ These authors contributed equally
† Supported by the Deutsche Telekom Stiftung

Figure 1. We present neural networks which learn to estimate optical flow, being trained end-to-end. The information is first spatially compressed in a contractive part of the network and then
refined in an expanding part.

Since it was not clear whether this task could be solved
with a standard CNN architecture, we additionally developed an architecture with a correlation layer that explicitly
provides matching capabilities. This architecture is trained
end-to-end. The idea is to exploit the ability of convolutional networks to learn strong features at multiple levels of
scale and abstraction and to help it with finding the actual
correspondences based on these features. The layers on top
of the correlation layer learn how to predict flow from these
matches. Surprisingly, helping the network this way is not
necessary and even the raw network can learn to predict optical flow with competitive accuracy.
Training a network to predict generic optical flow requires a sufficiently large training set. Although data augmentation does help, the existing optical flow datasets are
still too small to train a network on par with state of the art.
Getting optical flow ground truth for realistic video material
is known to be extremely difficult [7]. Trading in realism
12758

