Dense Semantic Correspondence where Every Pixel is a Classifier
Hilton Bristow,1 Jack Valmadre1 and Simon Lucey2
1
Queensland University of Technology, Australia
2
Carnegie Mellon University, USA

Abstract
Determining dense semantic correspondences across
objects and scenes is a difficult problem that underpins
many higher-level computer vision algorithms. Unlike
canonical dense correspondence problems which consider images that are spatially or temporally adjacent,
semantic correspondence is characterized by images
that share similar high-level structures whose exact appearance and geometry may differ.
Motivated by object recognition literature and recent work on rapidly estimating linear classifiers, we
treat semantic correspondence as a constrained detection problem, where an exemplar LDA classifier is
learned for each pixel. LDA classifiers have two distinct benefits: (i) they exhibit higher average precision
than similarity metrics typically used in correspondence
problems, and (ii) unlike exemplar SVM, can output
globally interpretable posterior probabilities without calibration, whilst also being significantly faster to train.
We pose the correspondence problem as a graphical model, where the unary potentials are computed via
convolution with the set of exemplar classifiers, and
the joint potentials enforce smoothly varying correspondence assignment.

1. Introduction
Unlike canonical dense correspondence problems
which consider images that are spatially (stereo) or
temporally (optical flow) adjacent, semantic correspondence is characterized by images that stem from the
same visual class (e.g. elephants, lammergeiers, carlined streets) whilst exhibiting individual appearance
and geometric properties.
For example, given two images of elephants (see Figure 1), we would like to predict where each pixel on the
first elephant corresponds to on the second. This is
particularly challenging because the space of elephants
exhibits significant intra-class appearance and geometric variation. A related problem is that of pose estimation [17, 24], which considers a smaller fixed set
of landmarks stemming from a labelled dataset of a

Figure 1. Dense semantic correspondence estimates how
points are related between images that stem from the same
visual class. Here, we wish to predict where each pixel on
the first elephant corresponds to on the second, whilst being robust to appearance, pose and background variation.
The points labelled are representative of the dense correspondence field estimated by our method.

known object class. From this dataset, one can learn
(i) the geometric dependency between landmarks, and
(ii) local detectors that discriminate the appearance of
each landmark from the background. When presented
with a new image, one can then estimate the landmark
locations by solving a graphical inference problem.
14024

