Scene-Domain Active Part Models for Object Representation
Zhou Ren1
Chaohui Wang2
Alan Yuille1
1
2
University of California, Los Angeles
Université Paris-Est, LIGM - CNRS UMR 8049
zhou.ren@cs.ucla.edu

chaohui.wang@u-pem.fr

Abstract
In this paper, we are interested in enhancing the expressivity and robustness of part-based models for object representation, in the common scenario where the training data
are based on 2D images. To this end, we propose scenedomain active part models (SDAPM), which reconstruct
and characterize the 3D geometric statistics between object’s parts in 3D scene-domain by using 2D training data
in the image-domain alone. And on top of this, we explicitly
model and handle occlusions in SDAPM. Together with the
developed learning and inference algorithms, such a model
provides rich object descriptions, including 2D object and
parts localization, 3D landmark shape and camera viewpoint, which offers an effective representation to various image understanding tasks, such as object and parts detection,
3D landmark shape and viewpoint estimation from images.
Experiments on the above tasks show that SDAPM outperforms previous part-based models, and thus demonstrates
the potential of the proposed technique.

1. Introduction
Object representation is a key problem in computer vision. Coarse-grained representation, such as detecting objects by bounding boxes [12], is important for tasks such as
object tracking [5] and scene understanding [21]. For example, deep learning approaches [19, 42], based on Convolutional Neural Networks, have validated their ability to extract strong image features and obtain such coarse-grained
representation. Moreover, fine-grained representation, such
as locating object parts in 2D image-domain and 3D scenedomain, is helpful for further applications such as action
analysis [40] and human-computer interaction [31, 32]. For
example, part-based models [3, 41] have demonstrated elegant performance in obtaining fine-grained representation.
In this paper, we are interested in enhancing part-based
models for fine-grained object representation. Although
various part-based object models have been developed in
the literature (e.g., [3, 6, 13, 35, 41]) and demonstrated elegant performance in obtaining fine-grained object representation, it is still far from satisfactory to robustly represent generic objects under significant “geometric varia-

yuille@stat.ucla.edu

2D object and parts localization

Geometric variations lead to
varying part configurations

camera viewpoint

SDAPM

3D landmark shape

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) A motivation of SDAPM: geometric variations lead
to varying part configurations. Thus, by modeling in the scenedomain, SDAPM can better capture objects’ geometric statistics
and provides richer object descriptions, including 2D parts localization, 3D landmark shape as well as camera viewpoint estimation, in addition to the 2D object bounding box, as shown in (b).

tions” (this term refers to camera viewpoint changes, nonrigid deformations, intra-class variations, and occlusions in
this paper). We observe that one main reason for this arises
from the fact that in most of the existing applications of
generic objects, the available training data are based on 2D
images1 . In such a scenario, it is natural that one resorts
to modeling objects in the 2D image-domain (e.g., by a collection of 2D parts deforming around the corresponding part
anchor positions) and the 3D information is discarded.
However, by modeling part deformations in the 2D
image-domain, it is actually difficult to well-capture the important statistics on geometric properties of an object, due
to the fact that those “geometric variations” can cause very
complicated 2D variations (because of the 3D-2D projection) and make such geometric properties highly complex
to be described. For instance, human arms can be foreshortened to varying sizes in different viewpoints. Furthermore,
a richer description of an object in the 3D scene-domain, is
increasingly in demand for further applications such as action detection, scene understanding, etc. For instance, it is
beneficial to have the 3D part localization and camera viewpoint for scene understanding.
Accordingly, we are particularly interested in proposing such an even finer-grained object representation that
1 Only for some specific objects such as human body, human hand, car,
bed, etc., their models have been built in 3D by learning from CAD data
or depth data (e.g., [14, 26]), due to the data availability.

2497

