Understanding deep features with computer-generated imagery
Mathieu Aubry
UC Berkeley Université Paris-Est, LIGM (UMR CNRS 8049), ENPC

Bryan C. Russell
Adobe Research

mathieu.aubry@imagine.enpc.fr

brussell@adobe.com

Abstract
We introduce an approach for analyzing the variation of
features generated by convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
with respect to scene factors that occur in natural images.
Such factors may include object style, 3D viewpoint, color,
and scene lighting configuration. Our approach analyzes
CNN feature responses corresponding to different scene factors by controlling for them via rendering using a large
database of 3D CAD models. The rendered images are presented to a trained CNN and responses for different layers
are studied with respect to the input scene factors. We perform a decomposition of the responses based on knowledge
of the input scene factors and analyze the resulting components. In particular, we quantify their relative importance
in the CNN responses and visualize them using principal
component analysis. We show qualitative and quantitative
results of our study on three CNNs trained on large image
datasets: AlexNet [18], Places [43], and Oxford VGG [8].
We observe important differences across the networks and
CNN layers for different scene factors and object categories.
Finally, we demonstrate that our analysis based on computergenerated imagery translates to the network representation
of natural images.

1. Introduction
The success of convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) [18, 21] raises fundamental questions on
how their learned representations encode variations in
visual data. For example, how are different layers in a deep
network influenced by different scene factors, the task for
which the network was trained for, or the choice in network
architecture? These questions are important as CNNs with
different architectures and trained/fine tuned for different
tasks have shown to perform differently [17, 43] or have
different feature response characteristics [42]. An analysis
of the features may help with understanding the tradeoffs
across different trained networks and may inform the design
of new architectures. It may also help the choice of CNN
features for tasks where training or fine tuning a network is

not possible, e.g. due to lack of labeled data.
Prior work has focused on a part-based analysis of the
learned convolutional filters. Examples include associating filters with input image patches having maximal response [12], deconvolution starting from a given filter response [41], or by masking the input to recover the receptive field of a given filter [42] to generate “simplified images” [6, 34]. Such visualizations typically reveal the parts
of an object [41] (e.g. “eye” of a cat) or scene [42] (e.g.
“toilet” in bathroom). While these visualizations reveal the
nature of learned filters, they largely ignore the question of
the dependence of the CNN representation on continuous
factors that may influence the depicted scene, such as 3D
viewpoint, scene lighting configuration, and object style.
In this paper, we study systematically how different scene
factors that arise in natural images are represented in a
trained CNN. Example factors may include those intrinsic to an object or scene, such as category, style, and color,
and extrinsic ones, such as 3D viewpoint and scene lighting
configuration. Studying the variations associated with such
factors is a nontrivial task as it requires (i) input data where
the factors can be independently controlled and (ii) a procedure for detecting, visualizing, and quantifying each factor
in a trained CNN.
To overcome the challenges associated with obtaining
input data, we leverage computer-generated (CG) imagery
to study trained CNNs. CG images offer several benefits.
First, there are stores of 3D content online (e.g. Trimble 3D
Warehouse), with ongoing efforts to curate and organize the
data for research purposes (e.g. ModelNet [38]). Such data
spans many different object categories and styles. Moreover,
in generating CG images we have control over all rendering
parameters, which allows us to systematically and densely
sample images for any given factor. A database of natural
images captured in controlled conditions and spanning different factors of variations, e.g. the NORB [22], ETH-80 [23]
and RGB-D object [20] datasets, where different objects are
rotated on a turntable and lighting is varied during image
capture, are difficult and costly to collect. Moreover they
do not offer the same variety of object styles present in 3D
model collections, nor the flexibility given by rendering.

2875

