Learning Shape, Motion and Elastic Models in Force Space
Antonio Agudo1
Francesc Moreno-Noguer2
1
Instituto de Investigación en Ingenierı́a de Aragón (I3A), Universidad de Zaragoza, Spain
2
Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial (CSIC-UPC), Barcelona, Spain

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problem of simultaneously
recovering the 3D shape and pose of a deformable and potentially elastic object from 2D motion. This is a highly ambiguous problem typically tackled by using low-rank shape
and trajectory constraints. We show that formulating the
problem in terms of a low-rank force space that induces the
deformation, allows for a better physical interpretation of
the resulting priors and a more accurate representation of
the actual object’s behavior. However, this comes at the
price of, besides force and pose, having to estimate the elastic model of the object. For this, we use an Expectation
Maximization strategy, where each of these parameters are
successively learned within partial M-steps, while robustly
dealing with missing observations. We thoroughly validate
the approach on both mocap and real sequences, showing
more accurate 3D reconstructions than state-of-the-art, and
additionally providing an estimate of the full elastic model
with no a priori information.

1. Introduction
The goal of the Non-Rigid Structure from motion
(NRSfM) is to simultaneously recover the camera motion
and 3D shape of a deformable object from monocular
images. It is known to be a severely under-constrained
problem, typically solved by introducing prior information through shape deformation models or camera trajectory
constraints. Along these lines, early approaches extended
the rigid factorization algorithm [37] to the non-rigid domain [7, 12, 39], and approximated the shape by a linear
combination of basis estimated on-the-fly. Alternatively,
other approaches have represented the evolution over time
of each point on the object through a set of pre-defined trajectory basis [6, 29, 41]. Both these constraints are commonly referred to as statistical priors, as they do not have a
direct physical interpretation.
In this paper, we introduce a new constraint based on a
low-rank force prior. This prior has a direct physical interpretation, as it models the interaction between the object

Figure 1. Low-rank force space. Non-rigid shape can be represented by means of the object elastic model and the force field
acting on it. In turn, the full force field can be approximated by a
low-rank basis. In this work, we simultaneously learn the elastic
model (compliance matrix) and estimate the low-rank force space,
while recovering shape and camera motion. In the figure we represent the full force-space and its corresponding shapes in red. The
low-rank forces and shapes are shown in blue.

and the underlying forces that deform it. Interestingly, we
also show its connection with the aforementioned shape and
trajectory models, turning these, into physical priors too.
The essence of our approach is described in Fig. 1. Let
us consider N points on the object, which is deformed under the action of external forces. Following continuum mechanics, the relation between the acting forces and the deformation field can be characterized by an elastic model.
Regarding the force space, we can fully define it by 3N independent forces, whose combination allows mapping the
shape from a rest configuration to a wide variety of arbitrary
arrangements. Yet, to represent realistic deformations, only
a few of these forces, conforming a low-rank force space,
are necessary. Based on this idea, we propose a new formulation of the NRSfM problem in which, given 2D point
tracks, we estimate camera trajectory and force parameters
(and consequently shape). Even though reasoning on the
force space introduces the compliance matrix as new unknown, we are able to simultaneously solve for all parameters using Expectation Maximization (EM), with partial M steps. By thorough testing on mocap and real sequences we
1756

