Conditioned Regression Models for Non-Blind Single Image Super-Resolution
Gernot Riegler

Samuel Schulter

Matthias Rüther

Horst Bischof

Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision, Graz University of Technology
{riegler,schulter,ruether,bischof}@icg.tugraz.at

Abstract
Single image super-resolution is an important task in the
field of computer vision and finds many practical applications. Current state-of-the-art methods typically rely on machine learning algorithms to infer a mapping from low- to
high-resolution images. These methods use a single fixed
blur kernel during training and, consequently, assume the
exact same kernel underlying the image formation process
for all test images. However, this setting is not realistic for
practical applications, because the blur is typically different
for each test image. In this paper, we loosen this restrictive
constraint and propose conditioned regression models (including convolutional neural networks and random forests)
that can effectively exploit the additional kernel information during both, training and inference. This allows for
training a single model, while previous methods need to be
re-trained for every blur kernel individually to achieve good
results, which we demonstrate in our evaluations. We also
empirically show that the proposed conditioned regression
models (i) can effectively handle scenarios where the blur
kernel is different for each image and (ii) outperform related approaches trained for only a single kernel.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) is a classical problem in computer vision and has attracted a lot of attention in
recent years. The task is to recover a high-resolution image
h given the corresponding low-resolution image l. These
two quantities are related as
l = ↓ (k ∗ h) ,

(a) Original

(b) Bicubic: 32.15, 2.88

(c) A+ [28]: 32.60, 3.11

(d) SRF-CAB: 36.59, 5.61

Figure 1: Low-resolution images can underlie different blur
kernels in their formation process and should be treated accordingly [18]. This figure illustrates the effect of a wrong
blur kernel assumption on the super-resolution quality (the
original blur kernel is depicted in the top left corner of (a)).
Not only standard bicubic upscaling but also state-of-the-art
methods like [28] trained on a wrong kernel yield clearly inferior results (PSNR and IFC [26] are given) compared to
our conditioned regression model (SRF-CAB).

(1)

where k is a blur kernel, ∗ denotes the convolution operator,
and ↓ the down-sampling operator. The problem is inherently ill-posed as a single low-resolution image can map to
several high-resolution images. One way to tackle this problem is by assuming some prior on the high-resolution image h, e.g., smoothness [10, 30], or by learning a mapping
from low- to high-resolution in a data-driven manner. The

latter approach is typically used in recent state-of-the-art
methods, where dictionary learning approaches [28], random forests [24], or neural networks [6] are employed.
SISR can be divided into two different sub-problems.
First, blind super-resolution algorithms consider k and h
unknown and try to recover both quantities from the lowresolution image l. Second, non-blind super-resolution algorithms assume k to be known and only recover h from

522

