Single Image Pop-Up from Discriminatively Learned Parts
Menglong Zhu∗ Xiaowei Zhou∗ Kostas Daniilidis
Computer and Information Science, University of Pennsylvania
{menglong,xiaowz,kostas}@cis.upenn.edu

Abstract
We introduce a new approach for estimating a fine
grained 3D shape and continuous pose of an object from
a single image. Given a training set of view exemplars,
we learn and select appearance-based discriminative parts
which are mapped onto the 3D model through a facility location optimization. The training set of 3D models is summarized into a set of basis shapes from which we can generalize by linear combination. Given a test image, we detect
hypotheses for each part. The main challenge is to select
from these hypotheses and compute the 3D pose and shape
coefficients at the same time. To achieve this, we optimize
a function that considers simultaneously the appearance
matching of the parts as well as the geometric reprojection
error. We apply the alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) to minimize the resulting convex function. Our
main and novel contribution is the simultaneous solution
for part localization and detailed 3D geometry estimation
by maximizing both appearance and geometric compatibility with convex relaxation.

1. Introduction
Recovering 3D geometry from 2D imaginary of an object is one of the most fundamental and challenging problems in computer vision. Geometric features were the main
representation of objects in the 20th century and have long
been used to establish correspondence between vertices and
edges of a 3D model and their image projections [14]. Although such representation was successful with geometric
invariance it could not cope with the complexity of appearance of 3D object categories in the real world which could
only be learned from exemplars.
As soon as massive 2D image exemplars became available on the Internet and through tedious annotation, the
computer vision community has harnessed fruitful results
as the state of the art in detecting object categories has
improved dramatically [8, 11]. More recently, researchers
∗ These authors contributed equally to this work

have focused on combining such approaches with 3D geometry to build more powerful object detectors that are also
able to provide weak 3D information such as viewpoint
[29, 30, 40, 25, 19]. In this paper, we go beyond viewpoint estimation to establishing the actual 3D shape of an
object for the sake of fine grained classification or 3D interaction such as grasping and manipulation. Very few efforts
have been devoted to such combined estimation of pose and
shape from a single image [18, 27].
Recent advances in recognition have opened doors to
better understanding of 3D in the wild, but there are three
main challenges in the marriage of 2D appearance and 3D
geometry: (1) how to learn a representation that captures
appearance variation of geometric features across instances
and poses, (2) how to establish the 3D shape of an object
without exhaustively comparing to all possible instances or
when that instance has not been seen before, and (3) how
to optimize for appearance and correspondence compatibility as well as 3D shape and pose at the same time, without
splitting the problem into subproblems.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach that marries
the power of discriminative parts with an explicit 3D geometric representation with the goal to infer 3D shape and
continuous pose of an object (or pop-up) from a single image. Part descriptors are discriminatively learned in training images. Such parts are centered around projections of
3D landmarks which are given in abundance on the training 3D models. To establish a compact representation we
minimize the number of needed landmarks by solving a
facility-location problem. To deal with geometric deformation, we summarize the training set of 3D models into
a shape dictionary from which we can generalize by linear
combination. Given a test image we detect top location hypotheses of each part. The challenge is how to fit best these
parts by maximizing the geometric consistency. This entails
the selection among the hypotheses of each part and the
shape/pose computation. Unlike other approaches which
rely on local optimization and initialize pose by DPM-based
discretized pose estimation [40, 27], we compute the selection as well as the shape and pose parameters in one step
using a convex program solved with the alternating direc1927

