Guaranteed Outlier Removal for Rotation Search
Álvaro Parra Bustos Tat-Jun Chin
School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide, South Australia
{aparra, tjchin}@cs.adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Rotation search has become a core routine for solving
many computer vision problems. The aim is to rotationally
align two input point sets with correspondences. Recently,
there is significant interest in developing globally optimal
rotation search algorithms. A notable weakness of global
algorithms, however, is their relatively high computational
cost, especially on large problem sizes and data with a high
proportion of outliers. In this paper, we propose a novel
outlier removal technique for rotation search. Our method
guarantees that any correspondence it discards as an outlier does not exist in the inlier set of the globally optimal
rotation for the original data. Based on simple geometric
operations, our algorithm is deterministic and fast. Used as
a preprocessor to prune a large portion of the outliers from
the input data, our method enables substantial speed-up
of rotation search algorithms without compromising global
optimality. We demonstrate the efficacy of our method in
various synthetic and real data experiments1 .

1. Introduction
N
Given two point sets X = {xi }N
i=1 and Y = {yi }i=1
in 3D, we aim to find the 3D rotation R that aligns them,
i.e., such that Rxi ≈ yi for all i. Here, each (xi , yi ) is
a pair of matching points. If there are no false matching
points or outliers, the best rotation in the least squares sense
can be obtained analytically [10, 1]. Otherwise, we seek the
rotation that agrees with as many of the pairs as possible

maximize

|I|

subject to

∠(Rxi , yi ) ≤ ǫ, ∀i ∈ I,

R, I⊆H

(1)

where agreement is up to the inlier threshold ǫ. Here, H =
{1, . . . , N } indexes the set of all point matches, and ∠(·, ·)
denotes the angular distance. The optimal R∗ is consistent
with the largest possible subset I ∗ ⊆ H of the data. Note
that given I ∗ we can easily find R∗ and vice versa, thus, we
may quote I ∗ or R∗ as the solution without ambiguity.
1 Implementation is provided in the supplementary material.

RANSAC [6] can be applied to approximately solve (1).
Candidate rotations are hypothesized from randomly sampled minimal subsets of two point matches [10] and evaluated. Although RANSAC is very efficient, in general it does
not provide the optimal solution I ∗ . Formally, let Ĩ ⊆ H
be the result of RANSAC. We have that |Ĩ| ≤ |I ∗ |, and in
general Ĩ * I ∗ , i.e., genuine inliers may be discarded.
Hartley and Kahl [7] pioneered branch-and-bound (BnB)
as a viable technique for rotation search. BnB systematically partitions and prunes the rotation space until the solution is found. Their algorithm was extended to include a
robust formulation [2] such as the one we use in (1). Unlike RANSAC, BnB is guaranteed to find the globally optimal result. The solution of many computer vision problems have benefited from BnB rotation search as a subroutine [5, 7, 15, 9, 13]; such as essential matrix and camera pose estimation, hand-eye calibration, panoramic image
stitching, and point cloud registration.
Another class of global algorithms [12, 4] leverage on
the fact that the solution to (1) is equal to the solution of
the same problem on a subset of H of size at most d, where
∗
d is 3 for rotation
 search. The result R is found by enuN
merating all p subsets of H for all p ≤ d and solving
each subset for R analytically (note that this differs from
“standard” RANSAC which solves for R via least squares
on subsets of size two). These algorithms have been demonstrated successfully on similar applications.
A general weakness of global algorithms, however, is
their high computational cost, especially for data with large
sizes N and high outlier contamination rates. In the case
of [4], the number of unique subsets to test is enormous
even for moderate N (e.g., for N = 500 there are ≥ 20
million 3-subsets). An outlier rate in excess of 95% is also
frequently encountered in practice, e.g., in point cloud registration where 3D keypoint detection and matching techniques [17, 14, 18] are much less accurate than their 2D
counterparts such as SIFT and SURF. These factors lead to
significant runtimes of BnB rotation search.
Our contribution is a novel guaranteed outlier removal
technique for rotation search. Specifically, our method is
able to reduce H to a subset H′ of point matches, in a way
12165

