SpeDo: 6 DOF Ego-Motion Sensor Using Speckle Defocus Imaging
Kensei Jo
Columbia University

Mohit Gupta
Columbia University

Shree K. Nayar
Columbia University

kenseij@cs.columbia.edu

mohitg@cs.columbia.edu

nayar@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
Sensors that measure their motion with respect to
the surrounding environment (ego-motion sensors) can be
broadly classified into two categories. First is inertial sensors such as accelerometers. In order to estimate position
and velocity, these sensors integrate the measured acceleration, which often results in accumulation of large errors over time. Second, camera-based approaches such as
SLAM that can measure position directly, but their performance depends on the surrounding scenes properties. These
approaches cannot function reliably if the scene has low
frequency textures or small depth variations. We present a
novel ego-motion sensor called SpeDo that addresses these
fundamental limitations. SpeDo is based on using coherent light sources and cameras with large defocus. Coherent light, on interacting with a scene, creates a high
frequency interferometric pattern in the captured images,
called speckle. We develop a theoretical model for speckle
ﬂow (motion of speckle as a function of sensor motion), and
show that it is quasi-invariant to surrounding scenes properties. As a result, SpeDo can measure ego-motion (not
derivative of motion) simply by estimating optical ﬂow at
a few image locations. We have built a low-cost and compact hardware prototype of SpeDo and demonstrated high
precision 6 DOF ego-motion estimation for complex trajectories in scenarios where the scene properties are challenging (e.g., repeating or no texture) as well as unknown.

1. Introduction
Measuring the motion of an object relative to the surrounding world has several applications, such as robot navigation (e.g., self-driving cars and autonomous drones) and
user-interface (e.g., optical mouse and augmented reality
displays). Ego-motion sensors (or odometers) are selfcontained motion sensors that can be attached to the target object itself and thus can measure object motion without requiring any external devices. Current ego-motion sensors can be broadly classiﬁed into two categories. The ﬁrst
class is sensors based on inertia called inertial measurement
units (IMUs) such as accelerometers that measure acceleration. Because of their small size and low cost, IMUs are
now installed on most cell-phones. However, since velocity
is estimated by integrating the measured acceleration, the
measurement errors get accumulated over time, resulting in

large drift errors. Although many methods have been proposed to address this limitation [2, 24], drift remains a fundamental problem of IMUs which limits their applicability
in applications that require high accuracy and resolution.
The second class is visual sensors such as a camera that
captures images of the surrounding world while the object
(to which they are attached) moves. The sensor motion is
estimated by measuring the motion of features in the images. Unfortunately, the image motion depends not only on
the sensor motion but also the scene properties (e.g. depth
or texture). In order to estimate the sensor motion, the effect of scene properties must be factored out. One popular
approach to solve this problem is simultaneous localization
and mapping (SLAM) [7], that simultaneously measures the
3D shape of the surrounding scene, as well as the 6 degreesof-freedom (DOF) camera pose. Although SLAM based
methods are implementable with only simple devices, they
are computationally intensive and their performance is fundamentally limited by the surrounding scene’s properties.
For instance, while they can perform reliably if the scene
has high frequency texture or sharp depth variations, their
accuracy deteriorates if the scene has low frequency or repeated textures or small depth variations.
We propose a novel ego-motion sensor called SpeDo
that addresses these fundamental limitations. SpeDo stands
for Speckle defocus based odometer, and is a visual sensor based on a novel imaging method called speckle defocus imaging, where the surrounding scene is illuminated
by a coherent light source (e.g., a laser), and imaged by
a camera with a large defocus. Coherent light, on interacting with a scene, creates an interferometric intensity pattern
on the sensor image plane, known as “speckle”. The key
theoretical insight underlying our work is that although the
speckle pattern depends on scene characteristics (depths, reﬂectance properties), if the images are captured by a camera
with large defocus, the motion of speckle pattern is quasiinvariant to the scene characteristics.
Theoretical model of speckle flow. We have developed
a theoretical model of speckle ﬂow (movement of speckle
pattern in the captured images) due to camera and light
source motion. We show that speckle ﬂow is quasi-invariant
to scene depths and textures, and depends only on the
camera motion and focus plane’s location. Moreover, the
speckle pattern has a high spatial frequency, and even a
small motion of the light source or the camera results in
14319

