Class-Specific Image Deblurring
Saeed Anwar1 , Cong Phuoc Huynh1,2 , Fatih Porikli1,2
1
The Australian National University∗ Canberra ACT 2601, Australia
2
NICTA, Locked Bag 8001, Canberra ACT 2601, Australia

Abstract
In image deblurring, a fundamental problem is that the
blur kernel suppresses a number of spatial frequencies that
are difficult to recover reliably. In this paper, we explore
the potential of a class-specific image prior for recovering spatial frequencies attenuated by the blurring process.
Specifically, we devise a prior based on the class-specific
subspace of image intensity responses to band-pass filters.
We learn that the aggregation of these subspaces across
all frequency bands serves as a good class-specific prior
for the restoration of frequencies that cannot be recovered
with generic image priors. In an extensive validation, our
method, equipped with the above prior, yields greater image
quality than many state-of-the-art methods by up to 5 dB
in terms of image PSNR, across various image categories
including portraits, cars, cats, pedestrians and household
objects.

1. Introduction
Image deblurring is an important research topic in lowlevel vision, dating back to the middle of the previous century [29]. The amount of image data captured by handheld devices, e.g. smart phones or tablet computers, has increased rapidly thanks to the recent advent of built-in highresolution imaging sensors. In the last decade, there has
been enormous research effort in image quality restoration
from blur due to camera shake, camera motion and defocus [4, 23, 2, 31, 15, 18, 32, 21, 30].
By nature, the deblurring problem is ill-posed, as there
exists an infinite number of pairs of latent image and kernel
that result in the same blurred observation. To resolve this
ambiguity, many previous works have imposed constraints
on the sparsity of image gradients via the hyper-Laplacian
prior [14, 19], the L2 prior [2], the L1 /L2 prior [15], the
Gaussian [16] or Gaussian mixture model [4]. As these
constraints favour constant intensity regions, the resulting
image only contains few spatial details in addition to strong
∗ This research was supported under Australian Research Council’s Discovery Projects funding scheme (project number DP150104645).

edges. This is certainly not the case for many object categories with gradual changes in surface orientation such as
faces, animals, cars etc.
Alternatively, image deblurring methods rely on the implicit or explicit extraction of edge information for kernel
computation [26, 32]. The works in [2] and [31] are related
to the restoration of strong edges for kernel estimation via
edge-preserving image smoothing, shock filtering and gradient magnitude thresholding. Joshi et al. [11] predicted the
underlying step edges for the estimation of spatially varying sub-pixel point-spread functions. A concern about these
approaches is that wrong edges can be mistakenly selected
based on only local information, due to the presence of multiple false edges induced by a large kernel width.
More recently, class-specific information has been employed up to some extent in image deblurring. Joshi et
al. [10] proposed a method of image enhancement, including image deblurring, given a personal photo collection.
HaCohen et al. [9] approached the personal photo deblurring problem with a strong requirement for the dense correspondence between the blurred image and a sharp reference image with similar contents. Pan et al. [21] introduced
a face image deblurring method by selecting an exemplar
with the closest structural similarity to the blurred image.
The above methods are either cumbersome, involving manual image annotations for the training phase, or of limited
applications due to strict requirements for reference or exemplar images. In another work, Sun et al. [27] investigated
context-specific priors to transfer mid and high frequency
details from example scenes for non-blind deconvolution.
In this paper, we address the problem of restoring image frequency components that have been attenuated during
the convolution process using class-specific training examples. Our approach is inspired by the success of using image
statistics for image categorisation [28, 7]. Image statistics
traditionally constitute the power spectra of high-frequency
image gradients. Here, we extend the notion of image statistics to the distribution of band-pass filter responses across
the frequency spectrum. This frequency statistics modelling approach is complementary to the representation of
multiscale image subbands, e.g. multiple resolutions in the
1495

