3D Fragment Reassembly using Integrated Template Guidance and
Fracture-Region Matching
Kang Zhang

Wuyi Yu

Mary Manhein

School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science

Dept. Geography & Anthropology

Louisiana State University

Louisiana State University

Warren Waggenspack

Xin Li∗

Dept. Mechanical & Industrial Engineering

School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science

Louisiana State University

Louisiana State University

Abstract
This paper studies matching of fragmented objects to recompose their original geometry. Solving this geometric reassembly problem has direct applications in archaeology
and forensic investigation in the computer-aided restoration of damaged artifacts and evidence. We develop a
new algorithm to effectively integrate both guidance from
a template and from matching of adjacent pieces’ fractureregions. First, we compute partial matchings between fragments and a template, and pairwise matchings among fragments. Many potential matches are obtained and then selected/refined in a multi-piece matching stage to maximize
global groupwise matching consistency. This pipeline is effective in composing fragmented thin-shell objects containing small pieces, whose pairwise matching is usually unreliable and ambiguous and hence their reassembly remains
challenging to the existing algorithms.

to predict the skull’s ancestry and perform facial reconstruction/superimposition to help identify the body. The skeletal
remains, however, are often incomplete or fragmented due
to trauma or environmental exposure. Therefore, forensic
specialists need to first perform a manual recomposition of
skull fragments before subsequent assessment and analysis.
With effective digital reassembly algorithms, after all the
fragments are digitized, the existing manual skull reassembly procedure can be automated and augmented.
Considering the geometry of a fragment, its boundary
surface consists of two types of regions: the intact regions
and the fracture regions. The intact regions are those from
the original boundary surface of the complete object before
fracturing, and the fracture regions are those generated due
to fracturing. Fig. 1 (c) illustrates the intact and fracture
regions on a fragment.

1. Introduction
Geometric restoration that composes 3D fragmented object into its original shape is a difficult matching problem
that has many direct applications such as archaeological reconstruction, digital heritage archiving, and forensic evidence analysis, to name a few. A few 3D reassembly algorithms have been developed in graphics and computer vision literature. However, difficulty was reported in handling
thin-shell 3D objects and in processing small fragmented
pieces [15][34]. In this work, we explore the reassembly of
fragmented thin-shell objects with general geometric shapes
and small-sized fragments. One application is forensic skull
reassembly. In law enforcement investigation cases, to assist with victim identification, forensic anthropologists need
∗ Corresponding author. Email: xinli@cct.lsu.edu

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. (a,b) A ceramic object is fragmented, (c) intact (blue)
and fracture (red and gray) regions on a fragment.

Existing 3D fragment reassembly algorithms can be generally classified into two types: (1) reassembly based on
fracture-region matching, and (2) reassembly using template guidance. Fracture-region matching approaches exploit similarities in the local fracture geometry of adjacent
fragments [8, 33, 15]. The template guidance approaches
compose fragmented pieces based on their best match to a
complete model [34, 31]. Each approach has advantage and
12138

