Robust Principal Component Analysis on Graphs

Sparse (S)
Outliers

1. Introduction
What is PCA? Given a data matrix X 2 Rp⇥n with n
p-dimensional data vectors, the classical PCA can be formulated as learning the projection Q 2 Rd⇥n of X in a
d-dimensional linear space characterized by an orthonormal basis U 2 Rp⇥d (1st model in Table 1). Traditionally,
U and Q are termed as principal directions and principal

class 1

class 2
Principal
component 1

L,S

Abstract
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is the most widely
used tool for linear dimensionality reduction and clustering.
Still it is highly sensitive to outliers and does not scale well
with respect to the number of data samples. Robust PCA
solves the first issue with a sparse penalty term. The second
issue can be handled with the matrix factorization model,
which is however non-convex. Besides, PCA based clustering can also be enhanced by using a graph of data similarity. In this article, we introduce a new model called ‘Robust
PCA on Graphs’ which incorporates spectral graph regularization into the Robust PCA framework. Our proposed
model benefits from 1) the robustness of principal components to occlusions and missing values, 2) enhanced lowrank recovery, 3) improved clustering property due to the
graph smoothness assumption on the low-rank matrix, and
4) convexity of the resulting optimization problem. Extensive experiments on 8 benchmark, 3 video and 2 artificial
datasets with corruptions clearly reveal that our model outperforms 10 other state-of-the-art models in its clustering
and low-rank recovery tasks.

Low Rank (L) Clustering on Principal
0
0
Components Q
L = U ΣQ
Principal component 2

s.t. X = L + S

z!

Convex Optimization

Normalized Graph
Laplacian Φ

Graph (G)
of data similarity

class 2

class 1

Data (X)
with corruptions

min kLk∗ + λkSk1 + γtr(LΦLT )

Nauman Shahid⇤ , Vassilis Kalofolias⇤ , Xavier Bresson⇤ , Michael Bronstein† , Pierre Vandergheynst⇤
⇤
Signal Processing Laboratory (LTS2), EPFL, Switzerland, firstname.lastname@epfl.ch
†
Universita della Svizzera Italiana, Switzerland, michael.bronstein@usi.ch

components and the product U Q is known as the low-rank
approximation L 2 Rp⇥n of X. .
Applications of PCA: PCA has been widely used for
two important applications.
1. Dimensionality reduction or low-rank recovery.
2. Data clustering using the principal components Q in
the low dimensional space.
However, classical PCA formulation is susceptible to errors in the data because of the quadratic term. Thus, an
outlier in the data might result in erratic principal components Q which can effect both the dimensionality reduction
and clustering.
Robust dimensionality reduction using PCA: Candes
et al. [6] demonstrated that PCA can be made robust to outliers by exactly recovering the low-rank representation L
even from grossly corrupted data X by solving a simple
convex problem, named Robust PCA (RPCA, 2nd model in
Table 1). In this model, the data corruptions are represented
by the sparse matrix S 2 Rp⇥n . Extensions of this model
for inexact recovery [25] and outlier pursuit [22] have been
proposed.
The clustering quality of PCA can be significantly
improved by incorporating the data manifold information
in the form of a graph G [10, 24, 11, 20]. The underlying assumption is that the low-dimensional embedding of
data X lies on a smooth manifold [2]. Let G = (V, E, A)
be the graph with vertex set V as the samples of X, E
This work is supported by the Swiss National Foundation (SNF) grant
200021 154350/1 for the project “Towards Signal Processing on Graphs.”

12812

