Point triangulation through polyhedron collapse using the ℓ∞ norm
Simon Donné, Bart Goossens, Wilfried Philips
Ghent University
iMinds-IPI-UGent
Simon.Donne@telin.ugent.be, Bart.Goossens@telin.ugent.be, philips@telin.ugent.be

Abstract
Multi-camera triangulation of feature points based on
a minimisation of the overall ℓ2 reprojection error can get
stuck in suboptimal local minima or require slow global optimisation. For this reason, researchers have proposed optimising the ℓ∞ norm of the ℓ2 single view reprojection errors, which avoids the problem of local minima entirely. In
this paper we present a novel method for ℓ∞ triangulation
that minimizes the ℓ∞ norm of the ℓ∞ reprojection errors:
this apparently small difference leads to a much faster but
equally accurate solution which is related to the MLE under the assumption of uniform noise. The proposed method
adopts a new optimisation strategy based on solving simple quadratic equations. This stands in contrast with the
fastest existing methods, which solve a sequence of more
complex auxiliary Linear Programming or Second Order
Cone Problems. The proposed algorithm performs well:
for triangulation, it achieves the same accuracy as existing
techniques while executing faster and being straightforward
to implement.

1. Introduction
Multiview triangulation is the problem of estimating the
3D location of a physical point from observations in multiple camera views. In low-complexity people tracking methods for example, these feature points are the centroids of
foreground blobs in a foreground/background segmented
video sequence. In more complex methods, the features are
computed using SURF [14] or similar detectors.
In realistic applications, confusion is possible between
feature points corresponding to different points. This correspondence problem can be handled by grouped features
according to their similarity and for each group triangulated
the corresponding physical point. If the error of this triangulated point is too large, features are re-assigned after
which the process is repeated until a satisfactory solution is
reached. Clearly the performance of these methods depends
crucially on that of the triangulation of separate points.

We propose a method based on minimizing the ℓ∞ norm
of the ℓ∞ reprojection error, based on geometric insights of
the 3D space. Each camera k ∈ {1, . . . , K} has a cameraspecific coordinate system defined by a rotation matrix Rk
and a translation ck . The relationship between the global
T
coordinates r = (X, Y, Z) of a physical point and its coorT
dinates in camera k’s reference system rk = (Xk , Yk , Zk )
is given by the linear relationship rk (r) = Rk r + ck .
Assuming a pinhole camera model [10], the unknown r
would – under ideal circumstances – be observed by camera k as a feature point with homogeneous
pixelcoordinates

Xk (r) Yk (r)
uk (r) = (xk (r), yk (r), 1) = Zk (r) , Zk (r) , 1 .
In reality – due to noisy observations – camera k will observe a feature at coordinates ũk = (x̃k , ỹk , 1) rather than
the ideal coordinates uk (r). The corresponding single view
reprojection error γk (r) for camera k is
△

γk (r) = kũk − uk (r)k ,

(1)

where k.k is a suitably chosen norm.
Many methods in literature quantify the single view reprojection error in terms of the ℓ2 norm, i.e. the euclidean
distance between the measurement and the reprojection of a
hypothesized location. In this paper, we will however adopt
the ℓ∞ norm:
△

γk (r) = max(|x̃k − xk (r)|, |ỹk − yk (r)|).

(2)

In any case, triangulation methods minimize the aggregated reprojection error
γ(r) = k(γ1 (r), . . . , γK (r))k .

(3)

Traditionally, the ℓ2 norm is used to aggregate reprojection
errors. However, ℓ∞ methods use the ℓ∞ norm instead –
accordingly, so does our proposed method. Due to the nonlinearity of the camera projection, γ(r) can have multiple
local minima when defined in terms of the ℓ2 norm [2,6,9].
In contrast, aggregating the reprojection errors with the ℓ∞
norm always results in a convex set of stationary points because of its pseudo-convex character [1, 3, 5, 12, 16, 17].
1792

