Compositional Hierarchical Representation of Shape Manifolds for Classification
of Non-manifold Shapes
Mete Ozay
Graduate School of Information Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai, Miyagi, 980-8579, Japan.
ozay.mete.b4@tohoku.ac.jp

Umit Rusen Aktas, Jeremy L. Wyatt and Aleš Leonardis
School of Computer Science, The University of Birmingham, Birmingham, B15 2TT, United Kingdom.
{u.aktas, j.l.wyatt, a.Leonardis}@cs.bham.ac.uk

Abstract
We address the problem of statistical learning of shape
models which are invariant to translation, rotation and
scale in compositional hierarchies when data spaces of
measurements and shape spaces are not topological manifolds. In practice, this problem is observed while modeling shapes having multiple disconnected components, e.g.
partially occluded shapes in cluttered scenes. We resolve
the aforementioned problem by first reformulating the relationship between data and shape spaces considering the
interaction between Receptive Fields (RFs) and Shape Manifolds (SMs) in a compositional hierarchical shape vocabulary. Then, we suggest a method to model the topological
structure of the SMs for statistical learning of the geometric transformations of the shapes that are defined by group
actions on the SMs. For this purpose, we design a disjoint
union topology using an indexing mechanism for the formation of shape models on SMs in the vocabulary, recursively. We represent the topological relationship between
shape components using graphs, which are aggregated to
construct a hierarchical graph structure for the shape vocabulary. To this end, we introduce a framework to implement the indexing mechanisms for the employment of the vocabulary for structural shape classification. The proposed
approach is used to construct invariant shape representations. Results on benchmark shape classification outperform state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Representation of shapes using manifolds has been studied for a long decade in Computer Vision [6, 14, 15, 19,
22, 26, 27, 29, 31, 36] and Statistical Shape Theory (SST)
[6, 11, 16, 17, 30]. In these works, shapes are assumed

Figure 1: Consider the figure of ∞ in (a), and subparts of it
in (b) and (c). Each red line is a set of measurements. Of
these neither (a) nor (b) can be modeled on a shape manifold, however the line in (c) can be modeled on a one dimensional manifold. Many such hard to model shapes are
observed in the natural world, due to having multiple disconnected components, e.g. due to occlusion in (d, e), or
occurrence of multiple objects as in (f, g).

to be represented in shape spaces with manifold structures.
However, this assumption fails if the shape spaces are not
manifolds because of the local singularities that occur in
the shape spaces [6, 16, 30].
In addition to the aforementioned singularity problem
[6, 16, 30], we address a case where the manifold assumption1 of data2 and shape spaces fails as depicted in Figure 1.
For instance, we consider a scenario where data (measurements) are obtained from a Receptive Field (RF)3 depicted
1 In this work, a space is called a topological manifold if it is a i) locally
Euclidean, ii) second countable, iii) Hausdorff space.
2 A set of all possible measurements is called a data space.
3 We define a Receptive Field (RF) as co-domain of a shape manifold,
i.e. a spatial region covering measurements made from an image which is
used to represent a local component of a shape on a manifold in a shape
vocabulary. See Section 2.1.2 for the formal definition.

11662

