Towards Pointless Structure from Motion:
3D reconstruction and camera parameters from general 3D curves
Irina Nurutdinova
Technische Universität Berlin

Andrew Fitzgibbon
Microsoft, Cambridge, UK

irina.nurutdinova@tu-berlin.de

awf@microsoft.com

Abstract
Modern structure from motion (SfM) remains dependent
on point features to recover camera positions, meaning that
reconstruction is severely hampered in low-texture environments, for example scanning a plain coffee cup on an uncluttered table.
We show how 3D curves can be used to refine camera
position estimation in challenging low-texture scenes. In
contrast to previous work, we allow the curves to be partially observed in all images, meaning that for the first time,
curve-based SfM can be demonstrated in realistic scenes.
The algorithm is based on bundle adjustment, so needs
an initial estimate, but even a poor estimate from a few point
correspondences can be substantially improved by including curves, suggesting that this method would benefit many
existing systems.

1. Introduction
While 3D reconstruction from 2D data is a mature field,
with city-scale and highly dense reconstruction now almost
commonplace, there remain some serious gaps in our abilities. One such is the dependence on texture to resolve the
aperture problem by supplying point features. For largescale outdoor scanning, or for cameras with a wide field of
view, this is not an onerous requirement, as there is typically enough texture in natural scenes to obtain accurate
camera poses and calibrations. However, many common
environments in which a naı̈ve user might wish to obtain a
3D reconstruction do not supply enough texture to compute
accurate cameras. In short, we cannot yet scan a “simple”
scene such as a coffee cup on a plain table.
Consider figure 1, showing a simple scene captured with
a consumer camera. Without the calibration markers, which
are there so that we can perform ground-truth experiments,
there are no more than a few dozen reliable interest points.
Furthermore, some of those points are on T-junctions, so
correspond to no real 3D point, further hindering standard

a

b

c

d

Figure 1: (a) A typical low-texture scene (one of 21 “Cups”
images, markers are for ground-truth experiments). Sparse
point features lead to poor cameras, and poor PMVS2 reconstruction (b). Reprojection of the 16 curves used to upgrade cameras (c), yielding better dense reconstruction (d).

SfM reconstruction. However, the curves in the images are a
rich source of 3D information. For curved surfaces, reconstructing surface markings provides dense depth information on the surface. Even in areas where no passive system
can recover depth, such as the white tabletop in this example, the fact of having a complete curve boundary, which is
planar, is a strong cue to the planarity of the interior. The
silhouette curves (which we do not exploit in this work) are
yet another important shape cue.
Related work is covered in detail in §2 but in brief,
while some previous research has looked at reconstruction
of space curves, and other efforts have considered camera
pose estimation from line features, very few papers address
the simultaneous recovery of general curve shape and camera pose. Those that do have either assumed fully visible
curves (or precisely, known visibility masks) in each image,
or have shown only qualitative camera recovery under an
12363

