Polarized 3D: High-Quality Depth Sensing with Polarization Cues
Achuta Kadambi∗1 , Vage Taamazyan1,2 , Boxin Shi1,3 , and Ramesh Raskar1
1

MIT Media Lab

2

Skoltech

Abstract
Coarse depth maps can be enhanced by using the shape
information from polarization cues. We propose a framework to combine surface normals from polarization (hereafter polarization normals) with an aligned depth map. Polarization normals have not been used for depth enhancement before. This is because polarization normals suffer
from physics-based artifacts, such as azimuthal ambiguity,
refractive distortion and fronto-parallel signal degradation.
We propose a framework to overcome these key challenges,
allowing the benefits of polarization to be used to enhance
depth maps. Our results demonstrate improvement with respect to state-of-the-art 3D reconstruction techniques.

• Passive capture: assuming light incident on an object
is unpolarized, the surface normals can be obtained by
rotating a polarizer at the imaging sensor.
∗ achoo@mit.edu

SUTD

• Robustness to diffuse interreflections: unlike SfS and
PS, diffuse interreflections do not significantly corrupt
the estimated shape.
• Material invariant capture: the physics of the shape
from polarization problem hold for materials ranging
from dielectrics to metals to translucent objects.
• Lighting robust capture: if the incident light is unpolarized shape estimation is robust and can be conducted
indoors, outdoors, or under patterned illumination.
However, obtaining surface normals through polarization is
not yet a mature technique. The obtained normals are drastically distorted. Specific open problems [24, 3] include:
1. Ambiguity: The azimuth component of the surface
normal contains an ambiguity of π radians, which
leads to ambiguous flips in the 3D shape.
2. Refractive distortion: Obtaining the zenith component of the surface normal requires knowledge of the
refractive index to estimate accurate 3D shape.
3. Fronto-parallel surfaces: When the zenith angle is
close to zero, the obtained normals are noisy.
4. Depth discontinuities: Even if the normals are obtained correctly, integration of gradients must be performed to recover the 3D shape.
5. Relative depth: Integrating surface normals obtains
only relative 3D shape, up to offset and scaling constants.

1. Introduction
Today, consumer 3D cameras produce depth maps that
are often noisy and lack sufficient detail. Enhancing 3D
depth maps obtained from compact sensors such as the
Kinect is therefore an increasingly popular research area.
One of the most promising solutions is to combine the captured, coarse depth map with surface normals obtained from
photometric stereo (PS) or shape-from-shading (SfS). This
depth-normal fusion is logical—the coarse depth map provides the geometric structure and the surface normals capture fine detail to be fused. There are dozens of papers
that combine low-quality depth maps with surface normal
maps obtained from SfS or PS. Well-regarded papers include [44, 14, 43] using SfS, and [31, 15] using PS. As a
complementary technique, we propose the first use of surface normals from polarization to enhance depth maps.
The shape of an object causes small changes in the polarization of reflected light, best visualized by rotating a polarizing filter in front of a digital camera. Obtaining surface
normals through polarization has potential advantages over
SfS and PS, including:

3

In this paper, we address each of these challenges by starting with a coarse depth map as a constraint to correct the
normals obtained from polarization. While we do not solve
all open problems, our correction is sufficient to use the polarization normals to enhance the depth map. An overview
of our approach is summarized in Figure 1.

1.1. Contributions
Conceptually, we propose the only technique that exploits normals from polarization cues to enhance the quality
of a coarse depth map. We devise a physics-based framework, wherein the coarse depth map is used to resolve azimuthal ambiguity (addressing problem 1) and correct for
13370

