Video Super-Resolution via Deep Draft-Ensemble Learning
Renjie Liao†

Xin Tao†

Ruiyu Li†

Ziyang Ma§

Jiaya Jia†

†

§

The Chinese University of Hong Kong
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

http://www.cse.cuhk.edu.hk/leojia/projects/DeepSR/

Abstract
We propose a new direction for fast video superresolution (VideoSR) via a SR draft ensemble, which is defined as the set of high-resolution patch candidates before
final image deconvolution. Our method contains two main
components – i.e., SR draft ensemble generation and its optimal reconstruction. The first component is to renovate
traditional feedforward reconstruction pipeline and greatly
enhance its ability to compute different super-resolution results considering large motion variation and possible errors arising in this process. Then we combine SR drafts
through the nonlinear process in a deep convolutional neural network (CNN). We analyze why this framework is proposed and explain its unique advantages compared to previous iterative methods to update different modules in passes.
Promising experimental results are shown on natural video
sequences.

1. Introduction
Video super-resolution (VideoSR), a.k.a. multi-frame
super-resolution (MFSR), refers to the process of estimating
a high resolution (HR) image from a sequence of low resolution (LR) observations. It is fundamental in visual processing, as several applications, including video enhancement and text/object recognition in surveillance and phone
videos, can benefit from it. Although effective strategies
have been proposed, VideoSR remains a difficult problem
for real-world natural image sequences.
Previous methods [17, 7, 18, 5, 6, 15, 14, 16, 12, 13] in
this area involve a few key components for pixel-level motion estimation on LR images, warping each LR image to
the HR space, and final deconvolution given the physical
LR generation process from HR images. They are similarly
important since any of them being the bottleneck could degrade system performance and lower the result quality.

Difficulties It has been observed for long time that motion estimation critically affects MFSR. Erroneous motion
inevitably distorts local structure and misleads final reconstruction. Albeit essential, in natural video sequences, sufficiently high quality motion estimation is not easy to obtain even with state-of-the-art optical flow methods. On
the other hand, the reconstruction and point spread function (PSF) kernel estimation steps could introduce visual
artifacts given any errors produced in this process or the
low-resolution information is not enough locally.
These difficulties make methods finely modeling all constraints in e.g., [12], generatively involve the process with
sparse regularization for iteratively updating variables –
each step needs to solve a set of nonlinear functions. The
computation cost is high.
Our Non-iterative Framework Our idea is to reduce the
majority of the computation by employing a non-iterative
procedure. It is essentially different from other solutions
for VideoSR.
Our principled strategy is to decompose the overall procedure of VideoSR into only two components – unlike conventional methods – based on an ensemble of SR drafts in
generation and discrimination respectively. SR draft is defined as a HR image patch candidate before the final deconvolution. Our first component in the framework thus is
draft-ensemble generation, which quickly produces a set of
SR drafts from the input LR sequence.
The second component, which is similarly important, is
to determine the optimal portfolio among the proposed SR
drafts. We propose a deep convolutional neural network
(CNN) for its learning. This SR draft-ensemble CNN also
integrates the function of deconvolution to form the final
HR image with minimal visual artifacts.
Our SR draft-ensemble CNN considers contextual information provided from external data for super-resolution.
Note in several previous methods, optimal states have to be
reached via iterative processing based on the image generation principle. Our method is along another line to pro1531

