Beyond White: Ground Truth Colors for Color Constancy Correction
Dongliang Cheng1
1

Brian Price2

Scott Cohen2
2

National University of Singapore

A limitation in color constancy research is the inability to establish ground truth colors for evaluating corrected
images. Many existing datasets contain images of scenes
with a color chart included; however, only the chart’s
neutral colors (grayscale patches) are used to provide the
ground truth for illumination estimation and correction.
This is because the corrected neutral colors are known to
lie along the achromatic line in the camera’s color space
(i.e. R=G=B) ; the correct RGB values of the other color
patches are not known. As a result, most methods estimate
a 3×3 diagonal matrix that ensures only the neutral colors
are correct. In this paper, we describe how to overcome
this limitation. Specifically, we show that under certain illuminations, a diagonal 3×3 matrix is capable of correcting not only neutral colors, but all the colors in a scene.
This finding allows us to find the ground truth RGB values
for the color chart in the camera’s color space. We show
how to use this information to correct all the images in existing datasets to have correct colors. Working from these
new color corrected datasets, we describe how to modify
existing color constancy algorithms to perform better image correction.

1. Introduction
The goal of computational color constancy is to mimic
the human visual system’s ability to perceive scene objects
as the same color when they are viewed under different illuminations. Cameras do not intrinsically have this ability
and color changes due to scene illumination must be corrected. This is a fundamental pre-processing step applied to
virtually every image.
Color constancy is typically a two-step procedure: 1) estimate the color of the illumination; 2) apply a transform
to remove the effects of the illumination. The majority of
published literature addresses step 1. Several datasets have
been created to assist in evaluating illumination estimation
(e.g. [1, 9, 12, 24, 32]). The basic idea is to place a neu-

Adobe Research

{bprice, scohen}@adobe.com

{dcheng, brown}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract

Michael S. Brown1

A

Input Image
(pre-correction)

Diagonal Correction

B (neutral patches only)

>6o Reproduction error
4 of color patches
2 (mean: 22.29°)

Reproduction error
of color patches
(mean: 2.94°)

Our Full Correction

C (all colors considered)

Reproduction error
of color patches
(mean: 0.77°)

Figure 1. (A) input image before illumination correction. (B)
corrected image using a conventional diagonal 3×3 matrix (i.e.
white-balancing). (C) corrected image using a full 3×3 matrix estimated from the ground truth colors obtained by our approach.
The reproduction angular errors for each 24 color patches are
shown below each image as a heat map (red=high error, blue=low
error).

tral (white) calibration object in the imaged scene. Under
ideal white light, the neutral object should remain achromatic in the camera’s color space. A chromatic color cast
on the neutral object is considered to be the color of the illumination in the camera’s color space. While most methods
do not elaborate on image correction, the de facto approach
is to compute a 3×3 diagonal matrix to map the estimated
illumination RGB values to lie along R=G=B. This is effectively known as white-balancing and ensures the neutral
colors appear “white” in the corrected image. However, the
ability of this diagonal matrix to correct non-neutral colors
is ignored (Fig. 1).
This is a significant limitation, because the goal of color
constancy is to make all colors correct, not just neutral colors. Early color constancy datasets are suitable only for
illumination estimation as they only contain a neutral calibration pattern. Newer datasets, such as the widely used
Gelher-Shi [24, 32] and the recent NUS dataset [9] include
a color rendition chart in every image. However, only the
neutral patches on these color charts are used for performance evaluation. The problem is that unlike a neutral material, the ground truth RGB values of the color patches are
not known in the camera’s color space. While color ren-

298

