Unsupervised Object Discovery and Tracking in Video Collections
Suha Kwak1,∗
1

Minsu Cho1,∗

Inria

2

Ivan Laptev1,∗

Jean Ponce2,∗

Cordelia Schmid1,†

École Normale Supérieure / PSL Research University

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of automatically localizing dominant objects as spatio-temporal tubes in a
noisy collection of videos with minimal or even no supervision. We formulate the problem as a combination of two
complementary processes: discovery and tracking. The
first one establishes correspondences between prominent
regions across videos, and the second one associates similar object regions within the same video. Interestingly, our
algorithm also discovers the implicit topology of frames associated with instances of the same object class across different videos, a role normally left to supervisory information in the form of class labels in conventional image and
video understanding methods. Indeed, as demonstrated by
our experiments, our method can handle video collections
featuring multiple object classes, and substantially outperforms the state of the art in colocalization, even though it
tackles a broader problem with much less supervision.

1. Introduction
Visual learning and interpretation usually have been formulated as a supervised classification problem, with manually selected bounding boxes acting as (strong) supervisory
signal [8, 10]. To reduce human effort and subjective biases
in manual annotation, recent work has addressed the discovery and localization of objects from weakly-annotated
or even unlabelled datasets [4, 5, 9, 30, 32]. However, this
task is difficult, and most approaches today still lag significantly behind strongly-supervised methods. With the ever
growing popularity of video sharing sites such as YouTube,
recent research has started to address similar problems in
videos [17, 27, 29, 38], and has shown that exploiting
the space-time structure of the world, which is absent in
static images (e.g., motion information), may be crucial for
achieving object discovery or localization with less super∗ WILLOW project-team, Département d’Informatique de l’Ecole Normale Supérieure, ENS/Inria/CNRS UMR 8548.
† LEAR project-team, Inria Grenoble Rhône-Alpes, Laboratoire Jean
Kuntzmann, CNRS, Univ. Grenoble Alpes, France.

Object Discovery across Videos

Tracking Object within Video

Figure 1. Given a noisy collection of videos, dominant objects are
automatically localized as spatio-temporal “tubes”. A discovery
process establishes correspondences between prominent regions
across videos (left), and a tracking process associates similar object regions within the same video (right). (Best viewed in color.)

vision.
Concretely, this paper addresses the problem of spatiotemporal object localization in videos with minimal supervision or even no supervision. Given a noisy collection of
videos with multiple object classes, dominant objects are
identified as spatio-temporal “tubes” (see definition in Section 1.2) for each video. We formulate the problem as a
combination of two complementary processes: object discovery and tracking (Fig. 1). Object discovery establishes
correspondences between regions depicting similar objects
in frames of different videos, and object tracking temporally
associates prominent regions within individual videos. Better object discovery enhances tracking, which in turn corrects erroneous discovery results and improves the correspondences across videos. Building upon recent advances
in efficient matching [4] and tracking [26], we combine
region matching across different videos and region tracking within each video into a joint optimization framework.
We demonstrate that the proposed method substantially outperforms the state of the art in colocalization [17] on the
YouTube-Object dataset, even though it tackles a broader
problem with much less supervision.

1.1. Related work
Our approach combines object discovery and tracking.
The discovery part establishes correspondences between
13173

