Contour Box: Rejecting Object Proposals Without Explicit Closed Contours∗
Cewu Lu‡,♯
§

Shu Liu†

Jiaya Jia†

Chi-Keung Tang§

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
†

♯

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Closed contour is an important objectness indicator. We
propose a new measure subject to the completeness and
tightness constraints, where the optimized closed contour
should be tightly bounded within an object proposal. The
closed contour measure is defined using closed path integral, and we solve the optimization problem efficiently in
polar coordinate system with a global optimum guaranteed. Extensive experiments show that our method can reject a large number of false proposals, and achieve over
6% improvement in object recall at the challenging overlap
threshold 0.8 on the VOC 2007 test dataset.

1. Introduction
Object detection benefits from object proposal generation. A reasonable number of object proposals can speed up
the detection process and avoids exhaustive sliding window
search.
Closed contour is a useful cue in generating object proposals. To find image contours, in [5], the observation that
objects with closed boundaries can be discriminated by the
norm of gradients in patches was made use of. In [26], a
simple box objectness score was proposed to measure the
number of edges in the box excluding those who overlap
with the box boundary. Albeit effective, these methods do
not explicitly output a closed contour, because of the intrinsic challenge that there exist an exponential number of ways
for pixels to connect to form closed curves.
This paper explicitly seeks an optimal closed contour for
object proposal generation. There are two issues to consider, i.e., the mathematical definition of a closed contour in
the context of object proposals, and an efficient optimization algorithm to compute the optimal closed contour given
the large number of candidates within a given image window.
∗ This research is supported by the Research Grant Council of the Hong
Kong Special Administrative Region under grant numbers 619711 and
412911.

‡

Stanford University

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

The subclass of closed contours we interested in is modeled using the closed path integral subject to the completeness and tightness constraints. We compute the optimal
contour by transforming the solution space to the polar coordinate system. A spatial closed contour becomes a continuous path in polar coordinate system. Interestingly, this
problem becomes the shortest path searching, which can
be solved exactly and efficiently by dynamic programming.
The result is guaranteed to be a global optimum with the
time cost insignificant compared to naive search and comparison. Every optimized contour is assigned a contour score to reflect the confidence.
Our second contribution is to employ the contour scores in object proposal generation. Unlike previous work,
which prefers high-scoring proposals to indicate objectness,
we use the contour score to prune non-object proposals.
The reason for not accepting high-score proposals is that
a closed contour satisfying both the completeness and tightness constraints does not always correspond to a semantic
object. On the other hand, if a proposal does not have such
a closed contour, it stands a high probability that this is a
non-object proposal. Figure 1 shows a number of examples.
Our empirical study over 50K proposals shows that 99.1%
of low-score windows are regarded as non-object proposals.
Based on this finding, we propose a new objectness scheme
that rejects proposals unlikely to be an object. At the time
of submitting this paper, our method yields an improvement of 6% over the best one regarding object recall with the
intersection-over-union (IoU) overlap set at 0.8. Our evaluation is done on the PASCAL VOC dataset [9].

2. Related Work
The goal of generating object proposals is to produce a
set of reliable bounding boxes that likely to contain objects.
With a significant reduction in the number of candidate boxes, computationally expensive classifiers [21, 23, 10] can be
employed in object detection to achieve state-of-the-art detection performance. This pipeline has been widely adopted
in object detection, which further motivates research on improving object proposal generation. Previous methods can
12021

