Exploiting Object Similarity in 3D Reconstruction
Chen Zhou1,2
Fatma Güney3
Yizhou Wang1,2
Andreas Geiger3
1
Nat’l Engineering Laboratory for Video Technology
2
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Peking University, China
3
MPI for Intelligent Systems Tübingen
{zhouch,yizhou.wang}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite recent progress, reconstructing outdoor scenes
in 3D from movable platforms remains a highly difficult endeavour. Challenges include low frame rates, occlusions,
large distortions and difficult lighting conditions. In this
paper, we leverage the fact that the larger the reconstructed
area, the more likely objects of similar type and shape will
occur in the scene. This is particularly true for outdoor
scenes where buildings and vehicles often suffer from missing texture or reflections, but share similarity in 3D shape.
We take advantage of this shape similarity by localizing objects using detectors and jointly reconstructing them while
learning a volumetric model of their shape. This allows us
to reduce noise while completing missing surfaces as objects of similar shape benefit from all observations for the
respective category. We evaluate our approach with respect
to LIDAR ground truth on a novel challenging suburban
dataset and show its advantages over the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction is one of the fundamental problems in
computer vision and has consequently received a lot of attention over the last decades. Today’s hardware capabilities
allow for robust structure-from-motion pipelines capable of
reconstructing sparse 3D city models from millions of internet images [10] or dense models from video sequences in
real time [42]. With the advent of the Kinect sensor, depth
information has become available indoors and approaches
based on volumetric fusion [31] or mesh optimization [46]
are able to produce reconstructions with fine details given a
large number of RGB-D observations.
However, obtaining accurate reconstructions outdoors
and in less constrained environments observed during urban
driving [13, 33] remains highly challenging: RGB-D sensors (e.g., Kinect) can’t be employed outdoors due to their
very limited range and expensive LIDAR-based mobile so-

{fatma.guney,andreas.geiger}@tue.mpg.de

lutions result in relatively sparse 3D point clouds. Besides,
lighting conditions are difficult, occlusions are omnipresent
and many objects are only visible in a few frames as illustrated in Fig. 1. In this work, we address these difficulties by taking advantage of a fact which hitherto has been
largely ignored: The larger the reconstructed area, the more
likely objects of similar type and shape (e.g., buildings or
vehicles) will occur in the scene. Furthermore, man-made
environments are designed to be visually pleasing. Therefore, reoccuring structures like buildings often exhibit similar shapes in local neighborings.
Inspired by the impressive capability of toddlers to learn
about objects from very few observations [3], we ask the
following question: Can we exploit recurring objects of
similar 3D shapes for jointly learning a shape model while
reconstructing the scene? Such a system would be useful in
many ways: First, we can expect increased completeness of
the 3D reconstruction by regularizing across shapes using
the principle of parsimony (i.e., by limiting the number of
models and parameters). Second, we obtain a decomposition of a scene into its constituent objects in terms of 3D
bounding boxes and segments. And finally, other tasks such
as recognition or synthesis could benefit from the learned
3D shape models as well.
Our approach is summarized as follows: We first obtain
an initial 3D reconstruction by structure-from-motion and
volumetric fusion of disparity maps using a memory efficient representation based on voxel hashing [31]. Next, we
train several generic 3D object detectors by extending exemplar SVMs [29] to truncated signed distance functions
(TSDF) in 3D. Given the 3D box proposals from these
detectors, we formulate a discrete-continuous optimization
problem which we solve using block coordinate descent.
More specifically, we minimize the difference between the
TSDF values of the initial reconstruction and the predicted
TSDF values by jointly assigning each proposal to a volumetric 3D shape model, optimizing for the pose of the
3D proposals and the latent shape variables, and finding
the shape model parameters. Furthermore, we contribute
12201

