A Nonparametric Bayesian Approach Toward Stacked Convolutional
Independent Component Analysis
Sotirios P. Chatzis
Cyprus University of Technology
Limassol 3036, Cyprus

Dimitrios Kosmopoulos
University of Patras
Agrinion 30100, Greece

sotirios.chatzis@eecei.cut.ac.cy

dkosmo@upatras.gr

Abstract
Unsupervised feature learning algorithms based on convolutional formulations of independent components analysis (ICA) have been demonstrated to yield state-of-the-art
results in several action recognition benchmarks. However,
existing approaches do not allow for the number of latent
components (features) to be automatically inferred from the
data in an unsupervised manner. This is a significant disadvantage of the state-of-the-art, as it results in considerable burden imposed on researchers and practitioners, who
must resort to tedious cross-validation procedures to obtain
the optimal number of latent features. To resolve these issues, in this paper we introduce a convolutional nonparametric Bayesian sparse ICA architecture for overcomplete
feature learning from high-dimensional data. Our method
utilizes an Indian buffet process prior to facilitate inference
of the appropriate number of latent features under a hybrid variational inference algorithm, scalable to massive
datasets. As we show, our model can be naturally used
to obtain deep unsupervised hierarchical feature extractors,
by greedily stacking successive model layers, similar to existing approaches. In addition, inference for this model is
completely heuristics-free; thus, it obviates the need of tedious parameter tuning, which is a major challenge most
deep learning approaches are faced with. We evaluate our
method on several action recognition benchmarks, and exhibit its advantages over the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised feature learning from high-dimensional
data using deep sparse feature extractors has been shown
to yield state-of-the-art performance in a number of benchmark datasets. The major advantage of these approaches
consists in the fact that they alleviate the need of manually tuning feature design each time we consider a different
sensor modality, contrary to conventional approaches, such

as optical flow-based ones (e.g., HOG3D [15], HOG/HOF
[35]), methods maximizing saliency functions in the spatiotemporal domain (e.g., Cuboid [5] and ESURF [37]),
methods based on dense trajectory sampling (e.g., [34] and
[36]), and methods based on hierarchical template matching
after Gabor filtering and max pooling (e.g., [11]).
Indeed, unsupervised feature extractors are highly generalizable, being capable of seamlessly learning effective
feature representations from observed data, irrespectively
of the data nature and/or origin. Due to this fact, there is
a growing interest in such methods from the computer vision and machine learning communities, with characteristic approaches including sparse coding (SC) [19, 28], deep
belief networks (DBNs) [9], stacked autoencoders (SAEs)
[1], and methods based on independent component analysis
(ICA) and its variants (e.g., ISA [18] and RICA [17]).
In this work, we focus on unsupervised feature extractors based on stacked convolutional ICA architectures, with
application to action recognition in video sequences. Our
interest in these methods is motivated by both experimental
results, where such approaches have been shown to yield
state-of-the-art performance, as well as results from neuroscience, where it has been shown that these algorithms can
learn receptive fields similar to the V1 area of visual cortex when applied to static images and the MT area of visual
cortex when applied to sequences of images [10, 31, 26].
A major drawback of existing deep learning architectures for feature extraction concerns the requirement of a
priori provision of the number of extracted latent features
[20, 27, 14, 7, 18]. This need imposes considerable burden
to researchers and practitioners, as it entails training multiple alternative model configurations to choose from, and
application of cross-validation to determine optimal model
configuration for the applications at hand. Therefore, enabling automatic data-driven determination of the most appropriate number of latent features would represent a significant leap forward in the field of deep unsupervised feature
extraction approaches.
To address these issues, in this paper we initially intro12803

