Robust Facial Landmark Detection under Signiﬁcant Head Poses and Occlusion

Yue Wu

Qiang Ji

ECSE Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
110 8th street, Troy, NY, USA
{wuy9,jiq}@rpi.edu

Abstract
There have been tremendous improvements for facial
landmark detection on general “in-the-wild” images. However, it is still challenging to detect the facial landmarks on
images with severe occlusion and images with large head
poses (e.g. profile face). In fact, the existing algorithms
usually can only handle one of them. In this work, we propose a unified robust cascade regression framework that can
handle both images with severe occlusion and images with
large head poses. Specifically, the method iteratively predicts the landmark occlusions and the landmark locations.
For occlusion estimation, instead of directly predicting the
binary occlusion vectors, we introduce a supervised regression method that gradually updates the landmark visibility
probabilities in each iteration to achieve robustness. In addition, we explicitly add occlusion pattern as a constraint to
improve the performance of occlusion prediction. For landmark detection, we combine the landmark visibility probabilities, the local appearances, and the local shapes to iteratively update their positions. The experimental results
show that the proposed method is significantly better than
state-of-the-art works on images with severe occlusion and
images with large head poses. It is also comparable to other
methods on general “in-the-wild” images.

1. Introduction
Facial landmark detection refers to the localization of the
fiducial points on facial images. With the detected points,
human facial shape and appearance information can be utilized for facial analysis. Recently, there are tremendous improvements of the facial landmark detection algorithms on
general “in-the-wild” images (Figure 1(a)). However, it is
still challenging to detect the facial landmarks on images
with severe occlusion and large head poses (e.g. pose > 60
degree, self-occlusion)(Figure 1(b)(c)).

(a) General “in-the-wild”images (b) occlusion (c) Profile face
Figure 1. Predicted landmark locations and occlusions (red dots in
(c) indicate occluded points) with the proposed method. Images
are from Helen [16], LFPW [2], COFW [4], and FERET [19] sets.

The existing algorithms usually can only handle either
images with occlusion [4][11][28][10][14] or images with
large head poses [27][30]. In addition, they treat them differently. For example, pose dependent [30] or occlusion dependent [4][28] models are trained to handle different cases.
However, if we regard the landmarks on the self-occluded
facial parts as occluded points, where the face itself is the
occluder, we can consider images with large head poses as
special cases of images with occlusion and treat them similarly. Based on this intuition, we propose a novel method to
handle both images with severe occlusion and images with
large head poses.
The general framework of the proposed robust cascade
regression method is shown in Figure 2 and 3. First, we
initialize the landmark locations using the mean face shape
and assume all the points are visible in the first iteration.
Then, to achieve robustness, instead of directly predicting
the binary landmark occlusion vectors and landmark locations, we gradually update the landmark visibility probabilities and locations iteratively in a coarse to fine manner. When updating the visibility probability, we utilize
the appearance and shape information that depend on the
currently estimated landmark locations. In addition, we explicitly add occlusion pattern as a constraint. When updating the landmark locations, we consider the appearance and
13658

