Illumination Robust Color Naming via Label Propagation
Yuanliu Liu, Zejian Yuan, Badong Chen, Jianru Xue, Nanning Zheng
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics
Xi’an Jiaotong University
liuyuanliu88@gmail.com, {yuan.ze.jian, chenbd, jrxue, nnzheng}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Color composition is an important property for many
computer vision tasks like image retrieval and object classification. In this paper we address the problem of inferring
the color composition of the intrinsic reflectance of objects,
where the shadows and highlights may change the observed
color dramatically. We achieve this through color label
propagation without recovering the intrinsic reflectance
beforehand. Specifically, the color labels are propagated
between regions sharing the same reflectance, and the
direction of propagation is promoted to be from regions
under full illumination and normal view angles to abnormal
regions. We detect shadowed and highlighted regions as
well as pairs of regions that have similar reflectance. A
joint inference process is adopted to trim the inconsistent
identities and connections. For evaluation we collect
three datasets of images under noticeable highlights and
shadows. Experimental results show that our model can
effectively describe the color composition of real-world
images.

1. Introduction
Color is a basic characteristic of visual objects. We use
colors to distinguish one object from another in our daily
life. Each human language has many words for describing
the colors. According to [5], several color names are
shared by most of the languages, which are called basic
color terms. In English, they are black, blue, brown, grey,
green, orange, pink, purple, red, white, and yellow. Color
naming usually maps the observed colors to these basic
color terms. Color names are widely used in computer
vision, e.g., Google Image Search and object detection
[22]. Recently, automatic color name labeling becomes
important for online shopping [4] and online art galleries.
Visual objects look quite different under varying illuminations and view angles. See Fig. 1 for an example.
Highlights make some parts of the strawberry appear white,
while shadows make some regions nearly black. Conse-

White
Green
Black+Green
White
Red
Black

Figure 1: The regions appear very different from their original
reflectance (in purple boxes) under highlights (in blue boxes) or
shadows (in yellow boxes). If we know which regions have the
same material (e.g., bottom three boxes), we can infer the color
names of highlights or shadows regions by propagating the labels
of normal regions to them. (Best viewed in color.)

quently, the color naming results will be totally different
for different parts of the same surface. This will limit
its usage in computer vision tasks like object detection,
which desires consistent description of the same object.
Traditional chip-based methods [3][14] generate flat color
chips under controlled lighting environment. These color
chips are totally unaware of the light condition and the
view angle, so the annotation of them cannot be migrated
to natural images directly.
Barrow and Tenenbaum proposed to decompose an image into a set of intrinsic images, each containing a single
physical characteristic [2]. Typical intrinsic images include
the reflectance, shading and specular reflection [7]. Especially, the reflectance describes how the light is reflected
from the body of the object, which is invariant to the
illumination and the view angle. In this paper we label the
color of the intrinsic reflectance instead of the raw image
under shadows and highlights.
Given a natural image, our goal is to tell the color
composition of the intrinsic reflectance for each image
region. However, decomposing a single image into several
intrinsic components is an ill-posed problem. Instead of
using some prior knowledge to get the reflectance first
1621

