Inferring M-Best Diverse Labelings in a Single One
Alexander Kirillov1 , Bogdan Savchynskyy1 , Dmitrij Schlesinger1 , Dmitry Vetrov2 , Carsten Rother1
1
TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany; 2 Skoltech, Moscow, Russia; vetrovd@yandex.ru
{alexander.kirillov,bogdan.savchynskyy,dmytro.shlezinger,carsten.rother}@tu-dresden.de

Abstract
We consider the task of finding M -best diverse solutions
in a graphical model. In a previous work by Batra et al. an
algorithmic approach for finding such solutions was proposed, and its usefulness was shown in numerous applications. Contrary to previous work we propose a novel formulation of the problem in form of a single energy minimization problem in a specially constructed graphical model.
We show that the method of Batra et al. can be considered
as a greedy approximate algorithm for our model, whereas
we introduce an efficient specialized optimization technique
for it, based on alpha-expansion. We evaluate our method
on two application scenarios, interactive and semantic image segmentation, with binary and multiple labels. In both
cases we achieve considerably better error rates than stateof-the art diversity methods. Furthermore, we empirically
discover that in the binary label case we were able to reach
global optimality for all test instances.

1. Introduction
A large variety of computer vision tasks can be formulated in the form of an energy minimization problem,
known also as maximium a posteriori (MAP) inference in
an undirected graphical models (related to Markov or conditional random fields). Its modeling power and importance
are well-recognized, which recently resulted into specialized benchmarks for its solvers [31, 17]. This underlines
the importance of finding the most probable variable configuration. Following [4] we argue, however, that finding
M > 1 diverse configurations with low energies is also
of importance in a number of scenarios, such as: (a) Expressing uncertainty of the found solution [27]; (b) Faster
training of model parameters [14]; (c) Ranking of inference
results [35]; (d) Empirical risk minimization [26].
It is important to note that in many application scenarios,
This project has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Unions Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement No 647769). D. Vetrov was supported
by RFBR proj. (No. 15-31-20596) and by Microsoft (RPD 1053945).

such as [35], the diverse solutions are computed for an energy that has been trained in a discriminative fashion such
that the solution with lowest energy should correspond to
the most accurate result. We will also use such pre-trained
energies. However, we observe that at test time a result
which is different to the lowest energy solution, but still
has a low energy, can achieve higher accuracy. This has
also been observed in previous works. The task of training one or more energies for producing optimal M diverse
solutions, as e.g. in [13, 15], is not the subject of this work.
In this work we propose a novel formulation for the problem of finding M-best-diverse solutions as a MAP-inference
problem in a specially constructed graphical model. Any
variable configuration in this model corresponds to M solutions of the original problem and the best configuration then
corresponds to the M best diverse solutions. We introduce
an efficient, specialized solver for our model, although other
standard MAP-inference techniques are potentially applicable as well. In fact, we empirically observe that with this
solver is able to reach global optimality for all test instances
of a binary labelling problem.
Related work. The importance of the considered problem
is demonstrated by the number of works addressing it from
different perspectives.
A procedure of computing M -best solutions to discrete
optimization problems was proposed in [21], which dates
back to 1972. Later, more efficient specialized procedures
were introduced for MAP-inference on a tree [30, Ch. 8],
junction-trees [22] and general graphical models [36, 11, 3].
These methods are well-suited for certain scenarios, however in typical structured computer vision problems (like
e.g. pixel-level image segmentation) M -best solutions differ from each other only by a small number of variables
(pixels) and from an application point of view are all equivalent and hence practically useless.
Sampling methods allow to approximate marginal probabilities and therefore can be used for estimating solutions
uncertainty. Though the methods like [24, 33] are designed
to address different modes of the underlying distribution,
they do not enforce diversity explicitly, hence can hardly be
used for faster discriminative training of model parameters
11814

