Shell PCA: statistical shape modelling in shell space
Chao Zhang1 , Behrend Heeren2 , Martin Rumpf2 , and William A.P. Smith1
1

2

Department of Computer Science, The University of York, UK
Institute for Numerical Simulation, University of Bonn, Germany
2

1
{cz679, william.smith }@york.ac.uk
{heeren, martin.rumpf }@ins.uni-bonn.de

Abstract

are plausibly members of the object class being modelled.

In this paper we describe how to perform Principal Components Analysis in “shell space”. Thin shells are a physical model for surfaces with non-zero thickness whose deformation dissipates elastic energy. Thin shells, or their
discrete counterparts, can be considered to reside in a shell
space in which the notion of distance is given by the elastic
energy required to deform one shape into another. It is in
this setting that we show how to perform statistical analysis of a set of shapes (meshes in dense correspondence),
providing a hybrid between physical and statistical shape
modelling. The resulting models are better able to capture
nonlinear deformations, for example resulting from articulated motion, even when training data is very sparse compared to the dimensionality of the observation space.

Often, the dimensionality of the observations is orders
of magnitude greater than the number of samples in the
training set. With modern shape capture techniques, typical meshes may contain tens of thousands of vertices. In
contrast, the number of training samples that can feasibly be
collected is typically only in the tens or hundreds. Hence,
the underlying shape space is sampled very sparsely.

1. Introduction

In this paper, we use a physically-motivated, nonlinear
model of surfaces: thin shells that can undergo tangential
and bending distortion. Geodesics in the space of shells
have already shown great promise in realistically interpolating and extrapolating between sparse samples of shapes
undergoing complex deformations [21, 19, 16]. In other
words, shell space potentially provides a useful constraint
in modelling the nonlinear variability in a sparsely sampled
set of shapes. This motivates our idea of performing statistical shape analysis in shell space. We define a notion of
covariance based on the Hessian of an elastic energy term.
In analogy to PCA, we extract principal components based
on an eigendecomposition of the resulting covariance matrix. The resulting principal components are able to capture
nonlinear articulations and complex deformations.

Statistical models of the shape or appearance of a class of
objects are widely used in computer vision and graphics to
model the variability over the object class. They can be used
to constrain synthesis or analysis problems and their parameter space provides a compact representation which can be
used for classification or intuitive editing. Human faces and
bodies have proven particularly amenable to statistical modelling. In this case, the source of shape variability is usually
changes in identity or dynamic deformation.
Such models seek to satisfy a number of competing
goals. The first is to capture the variability in the training
data as efficiently as possible, measured by the compactness
of the model. Hence, one purpose of statistical modelling
is dimensionality reduction. The second is to approximate
unseen data as accurately as possible, measured by the generalisation ability of the model. Finally, we require that the
model have specificity, i.e. can only generate instances that

In this scenario, the quality of the model is dependent on
the validity of the assumed or learnt structure of the manifold on which the data is assumed to lie. For example, PCA
assumes that the input data lies on (or can be well approximated by) a hyper-planar manifold, the axes of which are
those that capture maximal variance. This makes it optimal
with respect to compactness in Euclidean space but a poor
choice when the data contains highly nonlinear variations.

We provide results on human face and body data and
evaluate the resulting models in terms of compactness, generalisation and specificity.
11671

