Large Displacement 3D Scene Flow with Occlusion Reasoning
Andrei Zanfir1 and Cristian Sminchisescu2,1
1
Institute of Mathematics of the Romanian Academy
2
Department of Mathematics, Faculty of Engineering, Lund University
andrei.zanfir@imar.ro, cristian.sminchisescu@math.lth.se

Abstract
The emergence of modern, affordable and accurate
RGB-D sensors increases the need for single view approaches to estimate 3-dimensional motion, also known as
scene flow. In this paper we propose a coarse-to-fine,
dense, correspondence-based scene flow formulation that
relies on explicit geometric reasoning to account for the effects of large displacements and to model occlusion. Our
methodology enforces local motion rigidity at the level of
the 3d point cloud without explicitly smoothing the parameters of adjacent neighborhoods. By integrating all geometric and photometric components in a single, consistent, occlusion-aware energy model, defined over overlapping, image-adaptive neighborhoods, our method can process fast motions and large occlusions areas, as present
in challenging datasets like the MPI Sintel Flow Dataset,
recently augmented with depth information. By explicitly
modeling large displacements and occlusion, we can handle difficult sequences which cannot be currently processed
by state of the art scene flow methods. We also show that by
integrating depth information into the model, we can obtain correspondence fields with improved spatial support
and sharper boundaries compared to the state of the art,
large-displacement optical flow methods.

1. Introduction
The scene flow is a 3-dimensional translation field of an
observed scene, and can be predicted from a variety of inputs which encode depth and color information: RGB and
depth from stereo or multiple cameras, depth from sensors
(structured light, time-of-flight) or even synthetic depth.
Computing a 3d motion field is useful for several computer vision applications such as 3d segmentation, navigation, scene understanding and interaction[16, 1, 7, 32, 21].
The idea of estimating a 3d motion field is relatively new
in contrast with considerably more work focused on estimating an optical flow field[10, 3, 30, 15, 23, 31, 13, 29].
An open question raised by the emergence of sensors cap-

turing appearance augmented with depth is how to efficiently exploit this additional source of information.
In this paper, we show that by reasoning based on a 3d
point cloud representation, we can produce physically plausible explanations of the scene motion across successive
RGB-D frames separated by large displacements and under
significant occlusion. Instead of linearizing infinitesimal
motion explicitly, which may be difficult or invalid, we initially estimate large-displacement correspondences that act
as anchors. We then rely on local rigidity by constraining
3d point cloud neighborhoods to individually follow rigid
transformations. In order to explain the observed data, the
anchors and the geometric terms based on local rigidity are
augmented with constraints on the appearance of the point
cloud. Appearance is used such that points in correspondence match, whereas depth alignment constraints are used
to prevent the estimated solution from drifting away from
the target point cloud. Traditionally, the entire 3d motion
field has been regularized to obtain smooth solutions, but
we show that by just using rigid, geometric constraints on
overlapping, large and image-adaptive neighborhoods, reliable results can be obtained. The links between neighbors
are based on depth and occlusion estimates in order to preserve structure and correctly pass or block information.
The main contribution of this work is the design of
a scene flow solver that can handle large displacements,
uses explicit 3d occlusion reasoning, and integrates largedisplacement and geometric terms. The model is distinct
with respect to classical state of the art approaches in both
variational optical flow and scene flow optimization. By establishing correspondences constrained by local rigid transformation, and without explicitly enforcing the smoothness
of the motion field, we can obtain reliable scene flows with
good consistency with the RGB-D input data.

2. Related Work
The scene flow was introduced in the seminal work of
Vedula [25] as the 3d motion field of the scene. Since
then, several computational approaches have been developed. Whenever a stereo or a multi-view camera system is

4417

