A Collaborative Filtering Approach to Real-Time Hand Pose Estimation
Chiho Choi, Ayan Sinha, Joon Hee Choi, Sujin Jang, Karthik Ramani
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA
{chihochoi, sinha12, choi240, jang64, ramani}@purdue.edu

Abstract
Collaborative filtering aims to predict unknown user ratings in a recommender system by collectively assessing
known user preferences. In this paper, we first draw analogies between collaborative filtering and the pose estimation
problem. Specifically, we recast the hand pose estimation
problem as the cold-start problem for a new user with unknown item ratings in a recommender system. Inspired by
fast and accurate matrix factorization techniques for collaborative filtering, we develop a real-time algorithm for estimating the hand pose from RGB-D data of a commercial
depth camera. First, we efficiently identify nearest neighbors using local shape descriptors in the RGB-D domain
from a library of hand poses with known pose parameter
values. We then use this information to evaluate the unknown pose parameters using a joint matrix factorization
and completion (JMFC) approach. Our quantitative and
qualitative results suggest that our approach is robust to
variation in hand configurations while achieving real time
performance (≈ 29 FPS) on a standard computer.

1. Introduction
The easy availability of commercial depth cameras
marked the advent of real time solutions to the human pose
estimation problem [27]. However, the hand pose estimation problem has proved far more challenging. The manifold challenges to robust hand skeleton tracking are that (1)
the hand is a highly articulated object, (2) has many degrees
of freedom (DOF) with self-similar parts which often occlude each other, (3) all ﬁngers are ﬂexible, and (4) there
exists intra-ﬁnger and inter-ﬁnger motion constraints [9].
Noise in data acquired from depth sensors further confounds all current methods for hand tracking. Consequently,
a robust real time solution to the hand pose estimation problem remains elusive.
The success of hand tracking naturally depends on synthesizing our knowledge of the hand (e.g., geometric shape,
constraints on pose conﬁgurations) and latent features of

the RGB-D data stream (e.g., region of interest, key feature points like ﬁnger tips, and temporal continuity) [2].
In this paper, we propose a novel method to achieve this
synthesis by drawing on collaborative ﬁltering approaches
for recommender systems [12]. Our main insight is that a
recommender system (e.g., Netﬂix) [22] is very similar to
a pose tracking system. Both systems have some intrinsic and extrinsic information about its constituent objects,
the users in a recommender system and individual poses
in a tracking system. The intrinsic knowledge of the hand
in a tracking system corresponds to known user ratings in
a recommender system. Similarly, the extrinsic RGB-D
point cloud information corresponds to the metadata available about users (e.g., geographical locations, background,
and interest). Speciﬁcally, the hand pose estimation problem is analogous to the cold-start problem in recommender
systems.
The cold-start problem in recommender systems is to
suggest personalized items to a new user with unknown
preferences [23]. In analogy to a tracking system, the hand
pose estimation problem is to evaluate the unknown pose
parameters of the kinematic hand model for a new point
clouds appearing at every instant of time via a RGB-D sensor. A common technique to alleviate the cold-start problem
is to suggest items to a new user based on recommendations
available for like-minded users [19]. The like-mindedness
or similarity between users is evaluated using metadata such
as age, gender, geographical location, interests, etc [24].
Following a similar approach, we efﬁciently ﬁnd the nearest neighbors to an arriving point cloud using local shape
descriptors from a large database of hand poses with known
parameter values. Subsequently, the unknown pose parameters for this point cloud are estimated by collaboratively
regressing the known parameters of all neighborhood poses.
Our contributions include:
1. Our main contribution is a joint matrix factorization
and completion (JMFC) algorithm to estimate the unknown pose parameters from the nearest neighbors on
a per frame basis.
12336

