Predicting Good Features for Image Geo-Localization Using Per-Bundle VLAD
Hyo Jin Kim, Enrique Dunn, Jan-Michael Frahm
Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
{hyojin,dunn,jmf}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
We address the problem of recognizing a place depicted
in a query image by using a large database of geo-tagged
images at a city-scale. In particular, we discover features
that are useful for recognizing a place in a data-driven manner, and use this knowledge to predict useful features in a
query image prior to the geo-localization process. This allows us to achieve better performance while reducing the
number of features. Also, for both learning to predict features and retrieving geo-tagged images from the database,
we propose per-bundle vector of locally aggregated descriptors (PBVLAD), where each maximally stable region
is described by a vector of locally aggregated descriptors
(VLAD) on multiple scale-invariant features detected within
the region. Experimental results show the proposed approach achieves a significant improvement over other baseline methods.

1. Introduction
Image geo-localization is the process of determining the
capturing viewpoint’s positioning w.r.t. a geographic reference [43]. The recent availability of large scale geo-tagged
image collections, enables the use of image retrieval frameworks to transfer geo-tag data from a reference dataset into
an input query image. Applications of these capabilities
include adding and refining geotags in image collections
[15, 41], navigation [26], photo editing [44], and 3D reconstruction [11]. However, geo-localization of an image is a
challenging task because the query image and the reference
images in the database vary significantly due to changes in
scale, illumination, viewpoint, and occlusion.
Image retrieval techniques based on local image features [27] can achieve increased robustness against photometric and geometric changes [24, 42]. However, not
all local features are useful for geo-localization [21]. For
example, features extracted from transient scene elements
(pedestrians, cars, billboards) and ubiquitous objects (trees,
fences, signage) can introduce obfuscating cues into the
geo-localization process. Many approaches have been pro-

posed to address this issue by focusing on the uniqueness of
a feature by removing and reweighting non-unique features
within the reference data [21, 32] or in the query image [2].
Indeed, unique features are helpful, but a non-unique feature may actually help increase the chance of correct localization, either by itself or in combination with others.
We exploit a data-driven notion of good features for
geo-localization. That is, we aim to foster features having relatively high matching scores in correct localization
outcomes, in contrast to their relatively low score for negative outcomes. Further, we cast feature score prediction
as a classification problem, assuming the characteristics are
shared in a reasonably-scaled geographic region. We use a
separate set of geo-tagged Internet images to generate training data, computing matches against database images. To
cope with noise and high intra-class variation among the
training data, we adopt recent bottom-up clustering techniques for visual element discovery [8, 9] that involves iterative training of linear support vector machines (SVM). At
the query phase, the algorithm selects features in a query
image prior to the geo-localization process by accumulating predictions from the bank of linear SVMs. Our results
show improved performance is achieved by using only features that are predicted as useful, while reducing the number
of features significantly.
The feature representation for such a task should not
only be robust to photometric and geometric changes, but
also have a high discriminative power as we want to learn
features over a large area, e.g. a city. Therefore, we avoid
using low-level features for learning, which are hard to be
discriminative over a large area. We propose a per-bundle
vector of locally aggregated descriptors (PBVLAD) for feature representation, where each maximally stable (MSER)
[28] region is described with a vector of locally aggregated
descriptors (VLAD) on multiple scale-invariant features detected within the region. This allows us to represent multiple features with a fixed-size vector such that it can be used
in various classification methods such as an SVM. We show
in the experiments that this feature representation has significant improvement over low level features in both learning to predict features and retrieving images.

1170

