TransCut: Transparent Object Segmentation from a Light-Field Image
Yichao Xu, Hajime Nagahara, Atsushi Shimada, Rin-ichiro Taniguchi
Kyushu University, Japan
{xu,nagahara,atsushi,rin}@limu.ait.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Abstract
The segmentation of transparent objects can be very useful in computer vision applications. However, because they
borrow texture from their background and have a similar
appearance to their surroundings, transparent objects are
not handled well by regular image segmentation methods.
We propose a method that overcomes these problems using the consistency and distortion properties of a light-field
image. Graph-cut optimization is applied for the pixel labeling problem. The light-field linearity is used to estimate
the likelihood of a pixel belonging to the transparent object or Lambertian background, and the occlusion detector
is used to find the occlusion boundary. We acquire a light
field dataset for the transparent object, and use this dataset
to evaluate our method. The results demonstrate that the
proposed method successfully segments transparent objects
from the background.

Figure 1. Input and output of our system. The left side shows the
captured light-field image, and the right-hand side is a magnification of the central viewpoint. The output after segmentation of the
transparent object is shown on the bottom-right.

bowls, bottles, and jars. One way of detecting these transparent objects is to segment them from captured images of
the scene. The appearance of a transparent object is highly
dependent on the background, from which its texture and
colors are largely borrowed. Thus, it is extremely challenging to separate the transparent object from the background.

1. Introduction
Image segmentation is a fundamental problem in computer vision. The goal of segmentation is to simplify and/or
change the representation of an image into something that
is more meaningful and easier to analyze [26]. For example, it is very important to separate foreground objects from the background in applications such as object detection, object recognition [19], and surveillance tasks [8].
Numerous methods have been developed to deal with the
image segmentation problem, including techniques based
on thresholding [20], partial differential equations [7], and
graph partitioning [27, 4]. However, none of these methods are suitable for the segmentation of transparent objects
from an image. The difficulty of dealing with such objects means that transparent object segmentation is a relatively
untouched field.
Although there are few techniques for separating transparent objects from an image, many tasks in our everyday
life deal with transparent objects. For example, when a machine is operating in kitchens, living rooms, and offices, it
should avoid touching fragile objects such as glasses, vases,

It is almost impossible to achieve stable transparent object segmentation in a 2D image using conventional image
segmentation approaches. In this paper, we utilize a lightfield camera to capture 4D light-field images, and propose
a method that can segment the transparent objects from the
captured 4D light-field image (see Fig. 1). Our method can
automatically segment the transparent objects without any
interaction. The main idea is to take advantage of the lightfield distortion (LFD) feature [14] that has been proposed
for transparent object recognition. LFD does not rely on the
appearance of the background, and LFD features from the
Lambertian and non-Lambertian areas have different properties. As shown in Fig. 2, the features from the Lambertian area are almost linearly distributed with respect to the
viewpoints, unlike features from transparent objects. We
call this property light-field linearity (LF-linearity). However, features from the background will be nonlinear when
occlusion occurs, and features from the transparent object
will be linear when the distortion is relatively mild. This
1
3442

