Live Repetition Counting
Ofir Levy
Lior Wolf
The Blavatnik School of Computer Science
Tel Aviv University

Abstract
The task of counting the number of repetitions of approximately the same action in an input video sequence
is addressed. The proposed method runs online and not
on the complete pre-captured video. It analyzes sequentially blocks of 20 non-consecutive frames. The cycle length
within each block is evaluated using a convolutional neural
network and the information is then integrated over time.
The entropy of the network’s predictions is used in order to
automatically start and stop the repetition counter and to
select the appropriate time scale. Coupled with a region of
interest detection mechanism, the method is robust enough
to handle real world videos, even when the camera is moving. A unique property of our method is that it is shown
to successfully train on entirely unrealistic data created by
synthesizing moving random patches.

1. Introduction
Given an input video capturing a scene in which the same
action is repeated multiple times in consecutive cycles, we
seek to count the number of repetitions. The video can depict a bird flapping its wings, a hand playing a guitar, a
person performing multiple repetitions of the same exercise
etc. We place no restrictions on the nature of the performed
action, and are able to deal with camera motion.
Our method does not assume that the video is segmented
in time. It automatically detects the start and end points of
the sequence of repetitive actions, and counts the repetitions
on a live video stream: the repetitive nature is identified
early on and counts commence and update automatically.
Despite working online, counts are not lost during the time
that the method detects the repetitive nature of the video.
Our method successfully handles live real world video
inputs as well as video collected from youtube and other
sources. There are significant challenges. In many videos,
there are only a handful of repetitions; the cycle length
changes significantly throughout the video and each repetition is often visually different from the other repetitions.
We propose a novel online scheme that employs a shift-

ing window in time. Every window is examined and the
number of repetitions is estimated. We pose this as a multiclass classification problem. The information is then integrated smoothly across multiple shifting windows to produce the ongoing counts.
The underlying classification mechanism employs a
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). Since the problem
is well defined regardless of the content of the video, we are
able to train the network on a completely unrealistic synthetic video. This is the first work that we are aware of,
which is able to build a real world system based entirely on
such data (previous successful usage of synthetic data relied on realistic computer graphics data). This is noteworthy: the generalization capability of CNNs is high enough
to enable a new venue of defining computer vision tasks by
creating synthetic data that does not resemble any real world
signal. Moreover, the probability estimation is valid enough
to allow for the entropy of the network’s output to be used
as a score for detecting the start and end of the action and
the appropriate time scale.
The CNN is the only learned part in our system. No real
images or videos were used for training. There are a few
time scale parameters and thresholds that are set once globally based on observing a few videos. The method is robust to the choice of these parameters. Not training on real
world data, makes the resulting system extremely general
and it can be used without any modifications on a variety of
datasets. The entire implementation runs at a frame rate of
50 frames per second on live video on a conventional PC.

1.1. Previous work
The task that we solve is well defined at the semantic
level. Moreover, it seems that humans are able to perform
this task relatively easily (depending on the input) and that
the task has applications in high throughput biological experiments, activity monitoring, sports, and gaming. It is,
therefore, not surprising that the problem has already gained
some attention. However, our method is very different from
all previous work. While most previous approaches were
based on frequency domain analysis or on matching, our
method is based on a novel approach of cycle length esti13020

