Variational PatchMatch MultiView Reconstruction and Refinement
Philipp Heise, Brian Jensen, Sebastian Klose, Alois Knoll
Department of Informatics, Technische Universität München, Germany
{heise,kloses,jensen,knoll}@in.tum.de

Abstract
In this work we propose a novel approach to the problem
of multi-view stereo reconstruction. Building upon the previously proposed PatchMatch stereo and PM-Huber algorithm we introduce an extension to the multi-view scenario
that employs an iterative refinement scheme. Our proposed
approach uses an extended and robustified volumetric truncated signed distance function representation, which is advantageous for the fusion of refined depth maps and also for
raycasting the current reconstruction estimation together
with estimated depth normals into arbitrary camera views.
We formulate the combined multi-view stereo reconstruction and refinement as a variational optimization problem.
The newly introduced plane based smoothing term in the
energy formulation is guided by the current reconstruction
confidence and the image contents. Further we propose an
extension of the PatchMatch scheme with an additional KLT
step to avoid unnecessary sampling iterations. Improper
camera poses are corrected by a direct image alignment
step that performs robust outlier compensation by means of
a recently proposed kernel lifting framework. To speed up
the optimization of the variational formulation an adapted
scheme is used for faster convergence.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of performing a dense 3d reconstruction from a set of calibrated 2d images. Many algorithms have been proposed to solve this problem with encouraging results. The widespread availability of 3d printing increases the demand for accurate reconstruction of objects using a set of camera images. It is worth considering
that often camera poses are in practice not perfectly accurate, even for externally tracked cameras, and that the manual selection of well-suited camera views is not feasible.
Therefore any reconstruction algorithm should not only try
to find a dense 3d reconstruction that minimizes the photometric reprojection error between views, but also refine
the camera poses for enhanced photo consistency. Also the
computational feasibility has to be considered, especially

Figure 1: Reconstruction result of the proposed algorithm
applied to the Bunny dataset provided
by Kolev et al. [23]
.
for reconstructions involving many high resolution images.
The efficiency of massively parallel systems in combination
with parallel algorithms seem to be well suited for processing such big amounts of visual data. Our algorithm tries to
address all of the aforementioned challenges of multi-view
stereo reconstruction. Typical results for our algorithm are
shown in figure 1.

1.1. Related work
The method of Furukawa and Ponce [14] uses a strategy
that matches image patches, expands the correspondences
in the neighbourhood and filters based on visibility constraints starting with sparse matches in the images resulting in a semi-dense point-cloud. Kolev et al. [23, 24] try to
solve the reconstruction problem by minimization of convex energy functionals. In [37] an algorithm based on the
fusion of range images is proposed by Zach et al. Fusion
of depthmaps for reconstruction and meshing has also been
proposed in the approach of Curless and Levoy [12].
The estimation of range images from two or views is
a widely considered problem on its own and we consider
only some closely related works. Similar to the image patch
matching and expansion by Furukawa and Ponce [14] is the
PatchMatch stereo algorithm by Bleyer et al. [9] that tries
to perform dense stereo matching using sampling and propagation. Several variants of this algorithm have been proposed that introduce explicit regularization like PMBP by
Besse et al. [6] and PM-Huber by Heise et al. [18].
The problem of pose estimation given image and depth
1882

