3D Hand Pose Estimation Using Randomized Decision Forest with
Segmentation Index Points
Peiyi Li 1,2

Haibin Ling 2,∗

Xi Li 3

Chunyuan Liao 1

1

2

Meitu HiScene Lab, HiScene Information Technologies, Shanghai, China
Computer and Information Sciences Department, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA USA
3
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China

lipy@hiscene.com, xilizju@zju.edu.cn, liaocy@hiscene.com, hbling@temple.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a real-time 3D hand pose estimation algorithm using the randomized decision forest
framework. Our algorithm takes a depth image as input
and generates a set of skeletal joints as output. Previous
decision forest-based methods often give labels to all points
in a point cloud at a very early stage and vote for the joint
locations. By contrast, our algorithm only tracks a set of
more flexible virtual landmark points, named segmentation
index points (SIPs), before reaching the final decision at a
leaf node. Roughly speaking, an SIP represents the centroid of a subset of skeletal joints, which are to be located
at the leaves of the branch expanded from the SIP. Inspired
by recent latent regression forest-based hand pose estimation framework (Tang et al. 2014), we integrate SIP into
the framework with several important improvements: First,
we devise a new forest growing strategy, whose decision is
made using a randomized feature guided by SIPs. Second,
we speed-up the training procedure since only SIPs, not
the skeletal joints, are estimated at non-leaf nodes. Third,
the experimental results on public benchmark datasets show
clearly the advantage of the proposed algorithm over previous state-of-the-art methods, and our algorithm runs at
55.5 fps on a normal CPU without parallelism.

1. Introduction
Skeleton detection and pose estimation on highly articulated object are always a challenging topic in computer
vision. For example, accurate estimation for hand gesture
or human body pose plays a very important role in humancomputer interaction. Because of the practical value associated with this topic, it has been attracting efforts from both
the industry and academia. In the past few years, by using high-speed depth sensor [1] at a low cost, the applica∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Our algorithm can be seen as a divide-and-conquer
search process. We recursively cluster skeletal joints and divide
the part under exploration into two finer sub-regions until reaches
a leaf node, which represents the position of a skeletal joint. This
figure shows two examples of locating the index finger tip. Different hand posture leads to different hand sub-region segmentation,
therefore different SIPs and different tree structure. For simplicity, we only show the searching process for one joint. This figure
is best viewed in color.

tion of real-time body pose estimation has become a reality in domestic use. Since then, human body pose estimation has received an increasing amount of attention. With
the provision of new low-cost source input, depth imagery,
many new algorithms have outperformed traditional RGBbased human pose estimation algorithms. Similar observa-

819

