Adaptive Dither Voting for Robust Spatial Verification
Xiaomeng Wu and Kunio Kashino
Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation
{wu.xiaomeng,kashino.kunio}@lab.ntt.co.jp

Abstract
Hough voting in a geometric transformation space allows us to realize spatial verification, but remains sensitive
to feature detection errors because of the inflexible quantization of single feature correspondences. To handle this
problem, we propose a new method, called adaptive dither
voting, for robust spatial verification. For each correspondence, instead of hard-mapping it to a single transformation, the method augments its description by using multiple dithered transformations that are deterministically generated by the other correspondences. The method reduces
the probability of losing correspondences during transformation quantization, and provides high robustness as regards mismatches by imposing three geometric constraints
on the dithering process. We also propose exploiting the
non-uniformity of a Hough histogram as the spatial similarity to handle multiple matching surfaces. Extensive experiments conducted on four datasets show the superiority
of our method. The method outperforms its state-of-the-art
counterparts in both accuracy and scalability, especially
when it comes to the retrieval of small, rotated objects.

1. Introduction
Local feature-based image encoding has been shown to
be successful in particular object retrieval. However, local
features do not offer sufficient discriminative power and so
their direct matching leads to massive mismatches. Of the
methods used to handle this problem, Hough voting (HV)
has received considerable attention because of its better balance between accuracy and scalability [3, 8]. Here, consistent feature correspondences are found in a geometric transformation space via a Hough transform. Despite its success,
HV remains sensitive to feature detection errors generating
noise during transformation estimation. Since a correspondence is hard-mapped to a single transformation, confident
correspondences (Fig. 1a) are never identified if they are affected by noise and fall into disjunct bins (Fig. 1b).
To address noise sensitivity, we first consider an unadaptable solution, called dither voting (DV), where an observed

(a) Correspondences

(b) Hough voting

(c) Dither voting

(d) Adaptive dither voting

Figure 1: Comparison of ADV with HV and DV. The correspondences in (a) are voted as filled circles in a 4D transformation
space. Only one 2D projection is depicted for normalized translation (x, y). We show a close-up of the 5 × 5 bins where the
correspondences fall. Crosses represent dithered votes that are
randomly sampled according to a Gaussian distribution (c) or deterministically obtained for each correspondence concerned (d).
Common dithered votes are represented in black.

transformation is polled to a Hough space as a probability
density distribution rather than a single vote (Fig. 1c). The
distribution can be Gaussian if the noise is assumed to be
normally distributed with a zero mean. Provided that the
Gaussian can be sampled by a number of random transformations, called dithered votes, HV is converted into polling
the dithered votes to multiple bins in the transformation
space. However, straightforward DV is highly sensitive to
mismatches because a Gaussian distribution is assumed to
have the same dispersion for all tentative correspondences.
In this study, we propose a novel adaptive dither voting
(ADV) method for robust spatial verification. For the distribution of true transformations, instead of assuming it to
be Gaussian, we sample it by using the other correspondences that satisfy certain geometric constraints responding
to the observed correspondence. Dithered votes can thus be

1877

