FollowMe: Efficient Online Min-Cost Flow Tracking
with Bounded Memory and Computation
Philip Lenz
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology

Andreas Geiger
MPI Tübingen

Raquel Urtasun
University of Toronto

lenz@kit.edu

andreas.geiger@tue.mpg.de

urtasun@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
One of the most popular approaches to multi-target
tracking is tracking-by-detection. Current min-cost flow
algorithms which solve the data association problem optimally have three main drawbacks: they are computationally expensive, they assume that the whole video is given
as a batch, and they scale badly in memory and computation with the length of the video sequence. In this paper,
we address each of these issues, resulting in a computationally and memory-bounded solution. First, we introduce a
dynamic version of the successive shortest-path algorithm
which solves the data association problem optimally while
reusing computation, resulting in faster inference than standard solvers. Second, we address the optimal solution to the
data association problem when dealing with an incoming
stream of data (i.e., online setting). Finally, we present our
main contribution which is an approximate online solution
with bounded memory and computation which is capable of
handling videos of arbitrary length while performing tracking in real time. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
algorithms on the KITTI and PETS2009 benchmarks and
show state-of-the-art performance, while being significantly
faster than existing solvers.

1. Introduction
In recent years the performance of object detectors has
improved substantially, reaching levels which nowadays
make them applicable to real-world problems. A notable
example is face recognition where algorithms that employ
deep learning features have attained human performance
[39]. Many aspects have been key for the success of object recognition. The creation of benchmarks such as PASCAL [18] and ImageNet [36] made experimentation more
rigorous and stimulated the development of key algorithms
such as the deformable part-based model (DPM) [19] and
more recently deep learning approaches based on convolutional nets such as [26] and R-CNN [23].

With the success of object detection came also the success of tracking-by-detection approaches [2, 10, 11, 32, 35,
43, 46] which track an unknown number of objects over
time. The idea is to first detect objects independently in
each frame, followed by an association step linking individual detections to form trajectories. The association problem is difficult due to the presence of occlusions, noisy
detections as well as false negatives. The simplest approach is to independently establish associations between
all pairs of consecutive frames, a problem which can be
solved optimally in polynomial time using the Hungarian
method. However, in challenging situations ambiguities are
hard to resolve using local information alone and early errors cannot be corrected at later frames leading to globally
inconsistent tracks. More recently, sophisticated discretecontinuous optimization schemes have been proposed [2],
which alternate between optimizing trajectories and performing data association over the whole sequence by assigning detections to the set of trajectory hypotheses. Unfortunately, the resulting problems are highly non-convex,
hard to optimize and provide no guarantees of optimality.
In their seminal work, Zhang et al. [46] showed how
multi-frame data association can be cast as a network flow
problem. The optimal solution can be found by a min-cost
flow algorithm, solving simultaneously for the number of
objects and their trajectories according to a cost-function
which incorporates the likelihood of a detection as well as
pairwise relationships between detections for all consecutive frames. Recent extensions [3, 6, 11, 35] demonstrate
speedups by using more elaborate graph solvers, and show
how higher-order motion models can be incorporated into
the formulation at the cost of giving up global optimality.
In this paper we are interested in making min-cost flow
solutions applicable to real-world scenarios such as autonomous driving. Towards this goal two main problems
need to be addressed: (i) current approaches assume a batch
setting, where all detections must be available a priori, and
(ii) their memory and computation requirements grow unbounded with the size of the input video. As a consequence existing min-cost flow techniques cannot be em14364

