Recurrent Network Models for Human Dynamics
Katerina Fragkiadaki

Sergey Levine
Panna Felsen
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA

Jitendra Malik

{katef,svlevine@eecs,panna@eecs,malik@eecs}.berkeley.edu

Abstract
We propose the Encoder-Recurrent-Decoder (ERD)
model for recognition and prediction of human body pose in
videos and motion capture. The ERD model is a recurrent
neural network that incorporates nonlinear encoder and decoder networks before and after recurrent layers. We test
instantiations of ERD architectures in the tasks of motion
capture (mocap) generation, body pose labeling and body
pose forecasting in videos. Our model handles mocap training data across multiple subjects and activity domains, and
synthesizes novel motions while avoiding drifting for long
periods of time. For human pose labeling, ERD outperforms a per frame body part detector by resolving left-right
body part confusions. For video pose forecasting, ERD predicts body joint displacements across a temporal horizon of
400ms and outperforms a first order motion model based on
optical flow. ERDs extend previous Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) models in the literature to jointly learn representations and their dynamics. Our experiments show such
representation learning is crucial for both labeling and prediction in space-time. We find this is a distinguishing feature between the spatio-temporal visual domain in comparison to 1D text, speech or handwriting, where straightforward hard coded representations have shown excellent results when directly combined with recurrent units [31] .

1. Introduction
Humans have a remarkable ability to make accurate
short-term predictions about the world around them conditioned on prior events [41]. Predicting the movements
of other humans is an important facet of these predictions.
Although the number of possible movements is enormous,
conditioning on visual history can reduce the range of probable outcomes to a manageable degree of variation. For example, a walking pedestrian will most likely continue walking, and will probably not begin dancing spontaneously.
Short term predictions of human kinematics allows people to adjust their behavior, plan their actions, and properly

direct their attention when interacting with others. Similarly, for Computer Vision algorithms, predicting human
motion is important for timely human-computer interaction [17], obstacle avoidance [22], and people tracking [8].
While simpler physical phenomena, such as the motion of
inanimate objects, can be predicted using known physical
laws, there is no simple equation that governs the conscious
movements of a person. Predicting the motion of humans
instead calls for a statistical approach that can model the
range of variation of future behavior, and presents a tremendous challenge for machine learning algorithms.
We address this challenge by introducing EncoderRecurrent-Decoder (ERD) networks, a type of Recurrent
Neural Network (RNN) model [49, 24] that combines representation learning with learning temporal dynamics. We
apply this model to generation, labeling, and forecasting of
human kinematics. We consider two data domains: motion capture (“mocap”) and video sequences. For mocap,
conditioning on a mocap sequence so far, we learn a distribution over mocap feature vectors in the subsequent frame.
At test time, by supplying mocap samples as input back to
the model, long sequences are synthesized. For video, conditioning on a person bounding box sequence, we predict
the body joint locations in the current frame or, for the task
of body pose forecasting, at a specific point in the future.
In the mocap case, the input and output domains coincide
(3D body joint angles). In the video case, the input and
output domains differ (raw video pixels versus body joint
locations).
RNNs are network models that process sequential data
using recurrent connections between their neural activations
at consecutive time steps. They have been successfully applied in the language domain for text and handwriting generation [16, 30, 9], image captioning [43], action recognition [6]. Ranzato et al. [23] applies RNNs for visual prediction by quantizing the visual signal into a vocabulary of
visual words, and predicts a distribution over those words
in the next frame, given the visual word sequence observed
at a particular pixel location.
We advocate a visual predictive model that is “La14346

