Joint Camera Clustering and Surface Segmentation
for Large-scale Multi-view Stereo
Runze Zhang

Shiwei Li

Tian Fang1

Siyu Zhu

rzhangaj@cse.ust.hk

slibc@cse.ust.hk

tianft@cse.ust.hk

szhu@cse.ust.hk

Long Quan
quan@cse.ust.hk

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an decomposition approach to
large-scale multi-view stereo from an initial sparse reconstruction. The success of the approach depends on the introduction of surface-segmentation-based camera clustering
rather than sparse-point-based camera clustering, which
suffers from the problems of non-uniform reconstruction
coverage ratio and high redundancy. In details, we introduce three criteria for camera clustering and surface segmentation for reconstruction, and then we formulate these
criteria into an energy minimization problem under constraints. To solve this problem, we propose a joint optimization in a hierarchical framework to obtain the final surface segments and corresponding camera clusters. On each level of the hierarchical framework, the camera clustering problem is formulated as a parameter estimation problem of a probability model solved by a General Expectation-Maximization algorithm and the surface
segmentation problem is formulated as a Markov Random
Field model based on the probability estimated by the previous camera clustering process. The experiments on several Internet datasets and aerial photo datasets demonstrate
that the proposed approach method generates more uniform and complete dense reconstruction with less redundancy,
resulting in more efficient multi-view stereo algorithm.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, the scale of multi-view stereo (MVS) grows
dramatically because of the emerging of high resolution imagery and automatic imaging devices, such as unmanned
vehicles mounted with video cameras. Given a large scale
dataset with thousands of high resolution images, modern
1 Tian Fang is the corresponding author.

multi-view stereo usually takes camera poses and sparse
point clouds reconstructed by structure from motion (SFM)
as the input and generates dense point clouds with multiple
images simultaneously. For such datasets, it is impractical and unnecessary to put all images into MVS algorithms
at a time, because each image only correlates with several
image locally in spaces. Taking the advantage of the localities in camera clusters, there have been several algorithms [3, 6, 7, 12, 14] to improve the scalability of multi-view
stereo. In such methods, the visibility and quality of sparse
SFM points are used to evaluate the locality of camera clusters. The whole reconstruction problem is then divided into
several sub-problems in terms of camera clusters. Finally
the MVS algorithm is performed in each camera cluster.
However, there are two major problems in these methods. Firstly, the reconstruction region is not uniformly sampled in 3D space. Since these methods conduct clustering
merely based on cameras, regions seen by multiple clusters will be reconstructed many times with inconsistent qualities. Secondly, because of occlusions in the reconstruction scene and mismatching of image features, sparse SFM
points can hardly provide true visibility and quality assessment for camera clustering.
Instead of using sparse SFM points, our approach takes a
coarse mesh reconstructed from the sparse points as input.
Such coarse meshes interpolate the regions of lower point
density, and give more robust occlusion and shape information for the evaluation of the quality of camera clusters.
Meanwhile, it provides a clean segmentation on surface level, which significantly reduces the redundancy of the MVS
reconstruction, ensures a complete coverage of the reconstructed scene and improves the quality of the MVS reconstruction.
More concretely, we formulate the joint camera clustering and mesh segmentation as a constrained energy minimization problem to fulfill three criteria of quality control-

2084

