Realtime edge-based visual odometry for a monocular camera
Juan José Tarrio, Sol Pedre
Instituto Balseiro - CNEA
Bustillo 9500, Bariloche, Rio Negro, Argentina
juan.tarrio@gmail.com, sol.pedre@cab.cnea.gov.ar

Abstract
In this work we present a novel algorithm for realtime
visual odometry for a monocular camera. The main idea is
to develop an approach between classical feature-based visual odometry systems and modern direct dense/semi-dense
methods, trying to benefit from the best attributes of both.
Similar to feature-based systems, we extract information
from the images, instead of working with raw image intensities as direct methods. In particular, the information extracted are the edges present in the image, while the rest
of the algorithm is designed to take advantage of the structural information provided when pixels are treated as edges.
Edge extraction is an efficient and higly parallelizable operation. The edge depth information extracted is dense
enough to allow acceptable surface fitting, similar to modern semi-dense methods. This is a valuable attribute that
feature-based odometry lacks. Experimental results show
that the proposed method has similar drift than state of the
art feature-based and direct methods, and is a simple algorithm that runs at realtime and can be parallelized. Finally,
we have also developed an inertial aided version that successfully stabilizes an unmanned air vehicle in complex indoor environments using only a frontal camera, while running the complete solution in the embedded hardware on
board the vehicle.

1. Introduction
Monocular Visual Odometry (VO) and visual SLAM
have received a great deal of attention from the vision community in recent years, mainly because of its application
to robot navigation, virtual reality and 3D reconstruction.
Classical SLAM algorithms have relied on feature extraction and matching techniques [21] [9], creating sparse maps
that are useful for trajectory tracking but no that much for
world interaction. In recent years, as the growth of computational power has allowed it, direct dense methods have
been developed. These algorithms operate directly on all
pixels of the image, without doing any kind of data selection

Figure 1. Edge reconstruction for the fr2/desk scene. Top left picture shows the scene with edge detection and uncertainty coded
in colour. Top right picture shows the edge map depth. Bottom
pictures shows simple surface fitting over the edge-maps for in
camera and off camera view.

through feature extraction. The main advantage of these algorithms is that they generate full maps that are more useful
for robot navigation and other applications. Other advantages include robustness to camera blurring and fast movement. Even though some of these algorithms are able to run
in real time in modern cpu+gpu equipment [19] [18] their
computational cost is still too high for embedded solutions,
in which the processing power is limited by weight (in the
case of light aerial vehicles), power consumption or simply by commercial price when thinking of a solution for the
massive market. This led to semidense methods [6] [7] that,
while applying similar techniques as fully dense, do pixel
importance selection in order to reduce computational cost.
In our work we tried to find a middle point between these
two approaches, mainly looking for a fast and simple algorithm to work on embedded control of Unmanned Air Vehicles, but that can also be applied to other areas of computer vision such as augmented reality and a wider branch
of robotics navigation. A key idea is to give importance
to the structural information provided by feature extraction,
edges in particular. Edge recognition is known to be a part
1702

