An Adaptive Data Representation for Robust Point-Set Registration and Merging
Dylan Campbell and Lars Petersson
Australian National University
National ICT Australia (NICTA)∗
{dylan.campbell,lars.petersson}@nicta.com.au

Abstract
This paper presents a framework for rigid point-set registration and merging using a robust continuous data representation. Our point-set representation is constructed by
training a one-class support vector machine with a Gaussian radial basis function kernel and subsequently approximating the output function with a Gaussian mixture model.
We leverage the representation’s sparse parametrisation
and robustness to noise, outliers and occlusions in an efficient registration algorithm that minimises the L2 distance
between our support vector–parametrised Gaussian mixtures. In contrast, existing techniques, such as Iterative
Closest Point and Gaussian mixture approaches, manifest
a narrower region of convergence and are less robust to occlusions and missing data, as demonstrated in the evaluation on a range of 2D and 3D datasets. Finally, we present
a novel algorithm, GMMerge, that parsimoniously and equitably merges aligned mixture models, allowing the framework to be used for reconstruction and mapping.

1. Introduction
Point-set registration, the problem of finding the transformation that best aligns one point-set with another, is fundamental in computer vision, robotics, computer graphics
and medical imaging. A general-purpose point-set registration algorithm operates on unstructured point-sets and may
not assume other information is available, such as labels or
mesh structure. Applications include merging multiple partial scans into a complete model [16]; using registration results as fitness scores for object recognition [2]; registering
a view into a global coordinate system for sensor localisation [22]; and finding relative poses between sensors [36].
The dominant solution is the Iterative Closest Point
(ICP) algorithm [3] and variants due to its conceptual simplicity, usability and good performance in practice. However, these are local techniques that are very susceptible to
local minima and outliers and require a significant amount
of overlap between point-sets. To mitigate the problem of
∗

NICTA is funded by the Australian Government through the Department of Communications and the Australian
Research Council through the ICT Centre of Excellence Program.

local minima, other solutions have widened the region of
convergence [14], performed heuristic global search [25],
used feature-based coarse alignment [24] or used branchand-bound techniques to find the global minimum [37].
Our method widens the region of convergence and is robust to occlusions and missing data, such as those arising
when an object is viewed from different locations. The
central idea is that the robustness of registration is dependent on the data representation used. We present a
framework for robust point-set registration and merging using a continuous data representation, a Support Vector–
parametrised Gaussian Mixture (SVGM). A discrete pointset is mapped to the continuous domain by training a Support Vector Machine (SVM) and mapping it to a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM). Since an SVM is parametrised
by a sparse intelligently-selected subset of data points, an
SVGM is compact and robust to noise, fragmentation and
occlusions [33], crucial qualities for efficient and robust
registration. The motivation for a continuous representation
is that a typical scene comprises a single, seldom-disjoint
continuous surface, which cannot be fully modelled by a
discrete point-set sampled from the scene.
Our Support Vector Registration (SVR) algorithm minimises an objective function based on the L2 distance between SVGMs. Unlike the benchmark GMM registration
algorithm GMMReg [17], SVR uses an adaptive and sparse
representation with non-uniform and data-driven mixture
weights, enabling faster performance and improving the robustness to outliers, occlusions and partial overlap.
Finally, we propose a novel merging algorithm, GMMerge, that parsimoniously and equitably merges aligned
mixtures. Merging SVGM representations is useful for applications where each point-set may contain unique information, such as reconstruction and mapping. Our registration and merging framework is visualised in Figure 1.

2. Related Work
The large volume of work published on ICP, its variants
and other registration techniques precludes a comprehensive list, however the reader is directed to recent surveys
on ICP variants [23] and 3D point-set and mesh registration
14292

