Domain Generalization for Object Recognition with Multi-task Autoencoders
Muhammad Ghifary

W. Bastiaan Kleijn Mengjie Zhang
Victoria University of Wellington

David Balduzzi

{muhammad.ghifary,bastiaan.kleijn,mengjie.zhang}@ecs.vuw.ac.nz, david.balduzzi@vuw.ac.nz

Abstract
The problem of domain generalization is to take knowledge acquired from a number of related domains where
training data is available, and to then successfully apply
it to previously unseen domains. We propose a new feature learning algorithm, Multi-Task Autoencoder (MTAE),
that provides good generalization performance for crossdomain object recognition.
Our algorithm extends the standard denoising autoencoder framework by substituting artificially induced corruption with naturally occurring inter-domain variability in
the appearance of objects. Instead of reconstructing images
from noisy versions, MTAE learns to transform the original
image into analogs in multiple related domains. It thereby
learns features that are robust to variations across domains.
The learnt features are then used as inputs to a classifier.
We evaluated the performance of the algorithm on
benchmark image recognition datasets, where the task is
to learn features from multiple datasets and to then predict
the image label from unseen datasets. We found that (denoising) MTAE outperforms alternative autoencoder-based
models as well as the current state-of-the-art algorithms for
domain generalization.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen dramatic advances in object
recognition by deep learning algorithms [23, 11, 32]. Much
of the increased performance derives from applying large
networks to massive labeled datasets such as PASCAL
VOC [14] and ImageNet [22]. Unfortunately, dataset bias
– which can include factors such as backgrounds, camera
viewpoints and illumination – often causes algorithms to
generalize poorly across datasets [35] and significantly limits their usefulness in practical applications. Developing
algorithms that are invariant to dataset bias is therefore a
compelling problem.
Problem definition. In object recognition, the “visual
world” can be considered as decomposing into views (e.g.
perspectives or lighting conditions) corresponding to do-

mains. For example, frontal-views and 45◦ rotated-views
correspond to two different domains. Alternatively, we can
associate views or domains with standard image datasets
such as PASCAL VOC2007 [14], and Office [31].
The problem of learning from multiple source domains
and testing on unseen target domains is referred to as domain generalization [6, 26]. A domain is a probability
k
distribution Pk from which samples {xi , yi }N
i=1 are drawn.
Source domains provide training samples, whereas distinct
target domains are used for testing. In the standard supervised learning framework, it is assumed that the source and
target domains coincide. Dataset bias becomes a significant
problem when training and test domains differ: applying a
classifier trained on one dataset to images sampled from another typically results in poor performance [35, 18]. The
goal of this paper is to learn features that improve generalization performance across domains.
Contribution. The challenge is to build a system that recognizes objects in previously unseen datasets, given one
or multiple training datasets. We introduce Multi-task Autoencoder (MTAE), a feature learning algorithm that uses a
multi-task strategy [8, 34] to learn unbiased object features,
where the task is the data reconstruction.
Autoencoders were introduced to address the problem
of ‘backpropagation without a teacher’ by using inputs as
labels – and learning to reconstruct them with minimal
distortion [28, 5]. Denoising autoencoders in particular
are a powerful basic circuit for unsupervised representation
learning [36]. Intuitively, corrupting inputs forces autoencoders to learn representations that are robust to noise.
This paper proposes a broader view: that autoencoders
are generic circuits for learning invariant features. The
main contribution is a new training strategy based on naturally occurring transformations such as: rotations in viewing angle, dilations in apparent object size, and shifts in
lighting conditions. The resulting Multi-Task Autoencoder
learns features that are robust to real-world image variability, and therefore generalize well across domains. Extensive experiments show that MTAE with a denoising criterion outperforms the prior state-of-the-art in domain generalization over various cross-dataset recognition tasks.

2551

