SOWP: Spatially Ordered and Weighted Patch Descriptor for Visual Tracking
Han-Ul Kim1 , Dae-Youn Lee2 , Jae-Young Sim3 , and Chang-Su Kim1
1
3

School of Electrical Engineering, Korea University 2 Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd.

School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology

{hanulkim, daeyounlee}@mcl.korea.ac.kr, jysim@unist.ac.kr, changsukim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
A simple yet effective object descriptor for visual tracking is proposed in this paper. We first decompose the bounding box of a target object into multiple patches, which are
described by color and gradient histograms. Then, we concatenate the features of the spatially ordered patches to represent the object appearance. Moreover, to alleviate the impacts of background information possibly included in the
bounding box, we determine patch weights using random
walk with restart (RWR) simulations. The patch weights
represent the importance of each patch in the description
of foreground information, and are used to construct an object descriptor, called spatially ordered and weighted patch
(SOWP) descriptor. We incorporate the proposed SOWP descriptor into the structured output tracking framework. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm
yields significantly better performance than the state-of-theart trackers on a recent benchmark dataset, and also excels
in another recent benchmark dataset.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking has drawn much attention for its various
applications, such as self-driving cars, security and surveillance systems, and augmented reality. With recent advances
in machine learning, numerous tracking-by-detection algorithms [16, 17, 3, 4, 24, 18, 33, 40] have been proposed,
which yield promising performances. A typical trackingby-detection algorithm detects a target object over time,
while updating a classifier using tracking results. Positive
and negative samples, which correspond to foreground and
background image regions, respectively, are employed to
train the classifier. However, when training samples are
assigned false labels or when sample descriptors cannot
clearly distinguish between positive and negative samples,
a classifier may be corrupted, degrading the tracking-bydetection performance.
To overcome these drawbacks, lots of algorithms have
been proposed to reduce the impacts of false labeling [17,

4, 18, 24, 40] and to describe positive and negative samples
distinguishably [33, 10]. However, it is still challenging to
develop a reliable object descriptor, since the bounding box
of a target object often contains background features due to
deformation, occlusion, and object size variation. Attempts
have been made to alleviate the effects of undesirable background features [7, 19, 31], but these approaches require
prior knowledge or predefined parameters, the validity of
which is hard to be verified.
We propose a novel object descriptor, called spatially ordered and weighted patch (SOWP) descriptor, to represent
the appearance of an object faithfully and suppress background information in a bounding box systematically. To
construct the SOWP descriptor, we divide the bounding box
of a target object into non-overlapping patches and then
describe each patch using an RGB histogram and a gradient histogram. We then concatenate the patch descriptors
within the bounding box to convey structural information of
the object. Moreover, to reduce the effects of background,
we scale each patch descriptor with a weight, which represents the importance of the patch in the object description.
For the patch weight computation, we perform two random
walk with restart (RWR) simulations: one for foreground
clustering and the other for background clustering. We incorporate this SOWP descriptor into the structured output
tracking framework [18]. When updating the classifier, we
use only the samples with high confidence scores to prevent
bad updates. Experimental results show that the proposed
tracker achieves the best performance on the CVPR2013
visual tracking benchmark dataset [38], and improves the
performance of [18] by 36.3% in precision and 30.6%
in success rate. Moreover, the proposed tracker also provides a competitive performance in the VOT2014 challenge
dataset [28].
This work has three main contributions: First, we experimentally find a simple yet effective method to construct a spatially ordered patch descriptor for visual tracking. Second, we develop an RWR scheme to suppress the
impacts of background information in an object bounding
box through adaptive weighting. Third, the proposed al13011

