Cross-domain Image Retrieval with a Dual Attribute-aware Ranking Network
Junshi Huang1 , Rogerio Feris2 , Qiang Chen3 , Shuicheng Yan1
1

National University of Singapore, 2 IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, 3 IBM Research, Australia

{junshi.huang, eleyans}@nus.edu.sg, rsferis@us.ibm.com, qiangchen@au1.ibm.com

Abstract
We address the problem of cross-domain image retrieval,
considering the following practical application: given a
user photo depicting a clothing image, our goal is to retrieve the same or attribute-similar clothing items from online shopping stores. This is a challenging problem due
to the large discrepancy between online shopping images,
usually taken in ideal lighting/pose/background conditions,
and user photos captured in uncontrolled conditions. To
address this problem, we propose a Dual Attribute-aware
Ranking Network (DARN) for retrieval feature learning.
More speciﬁcally, DARN consists of two sub-networks, one
for each domain, whose retrieval feature representations
are driven by semantic attribute learning. We show that this
attribute-guided learning is a key factor for retrieval accuracy improvement. In addition, to further align with the
nature of the retrieval problem, we impose a triplet visual
similarity constraint for learning to rank across the two subnetworks. Another contribution of our work is a large-scale
dataset which makes the network learning feasible. We exploit customer review websites to crawl a large set of online
shopping images and corresponding offline user photos with
ﬁne-grained clothing attributes, i.e., around 450,000 online
shopping images and about 90,000 exact offline counterpart
images of those online ones. All these images are collected
from real-world consumer websites reflecting the diversity
of the data modality, which makes this dataset unique and
rare in the academic community. We extensively evaluate
the retrieval performance of networks in different conﬁgurations. The top-20 retrieval accuracy is doubled when using
the proposed DARN other than the current popular solution
using pre-trained CNN features only (0.570 vs. 0.268).

1. Introduction
Cross-domain image retrieval is an important task for
many practical applications. For example, mobile product
image search [36] aims at identifying a product, or retrieving similar products from the online shopping domain based
on a photo captured in unconstrained scenarios by a mobile
phone camera. In surveillance applications, a security guard
may be interested in retrieving images of a suspect from a

(a) Query Image

(b) Top-6 Retrieval Results

Figure 1. Cross-domain clothing retrieval. (a) Query image from
daily photos. (b) Top-6 product retrieval results from the online
shopping domain. The proposed system ﬁnds the exact match
clothing (ﬁrst two images) and ranks the ones with similar attributes as top results.

speciﬁc camera given a query image from another camera.
In this paper, we address the problem of cross-domain
product retrieval by taking clothing products as a concrete
use case. Given an ofﬂine clothing image from the “street”
domain, our goal is to retrieve the same or similar clothing items from a large-scale gallery of professional online
shopping images, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Due to the huge impact for e-commerce applications,
there is a growing interest in methods for clothing retrieval
[20, 33, 31, 44] and outﬁt recommendation [18]. The majority of these methods, however, do not model the discrepancy between the user photos and clothing images from
online shopping stores. Though metric learning methods
[24, 15] can be used for domain adaptation, their performance largely depends on the existing features. Another
barrier also occurs because of the lack of large annotated
training sets containing user photos and desired retrieved
images from online shopping.
In order to tackle the training data issue, we observe
that there is a large number of customer review websites,
where people post their pictures wearing the clothing they
have purchased. Therefore, it is possible to crawl the ofﬂine clothing images uploaded by the users with the links
to the online shopping product images. As a result, we created a dataset containing tens of thousands of online-ofﬂine
clothing image pairs obtained from the user review pages.
These image pairs are very rare in both academic and industry as they reveal the real discrepancy of images across
11062

