An Efficient Statistical Method for Image Noise Level Estimation
Guangyong Chen1 , Fengyuan Zhu1 , and Pheng Ann Heng1,2
1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problem of estimating noise
level from a single image contaminated by additive zeromean Gaussian noise. We first provide rigorous analysis on
the statistical relationship between the noise variance and
the eigenvalues of the covariance matrix of patches within
an image, which shows that many state-of-the-art noise estimation methods underestimate the noise level of an image.
To this end, we derive a new nonparametric algorithm for
efficient noise level estimation based on the observation that
patches decomposed from a clean image often lie around a
low-dimensional subspace. The performance of our method
has been guaranteed both theoretically and empirically.
Specifically, our method outperforms existing state-of-theart algorithms on estimating noise level with the least executing time in our experiments. We further demonstrate that
the denoising algorithm BM3D algorithm achieves optimal
performance using noise variance estimated by our algorithm.

1. Introduction
Noise level is an important parameter to many algorithms in different areas of computer vision, including image denoising [3, 5, 6, 7, 16], optical flow [12, 26], image
segmentation [1, 4] and super resolution [9]. However, in
real world situations the noise level of particular images
can be unavailable and is required to be estimated. So far,
it still remains to be a challenge to accurately estimate the
noise level for different noisy images, especially for those
with rich textures. Therefore, a robust noise level estimation
method is highly demanded.
One important noise model widely used in different computer vision problems, including image denoising, is the
additive, independent and homogeneous Gaussian noise
model, where “homogeneous” means that the noise variance is a constant for all pixels within an image and does

not change over the position or color intensity of a pixel.
The goal of noise level estimation is to estimate the unknown standard deviation σ of the Gaussian noise with a
single observed noisy image.
The problem of estimating noise level from a single image is fundamentally ill-posed. During last decades, numerous noise estimating methods [2, 17, 13, 20, 24] have been
proposed. However, all of these methods are based on the
assumption that the processed image contains a sufficient
amount of flat areas, which is not always the case for natural image processing. Recently, new algorithms have been
proposed in [19, 23] with state-of-the-art performance. The
authors of [19, 23] claim that these methods can accurately
estimate the noise level of images without homogeneous areas. However, these methods suffer from the following two
weaknesses. Firstly, as concluded in [19], the convergence
and performance of selecting low-rank patches is not theoretically guaranteed and does not have high accuracy empirically. Secondly, as theoretically explained in Sec. 2.2 of
this paper, both [19] and [23] underestimate the noise level
for processed images, since they take the smallest eigenvalue of the covariance of selected low-rank patches as their
noise estimation result.
To tackle these problems, we propose a new algorithm
for noise level estimation. Our work is based on the observation that patches taken from the noiseless image often lie
in a low-dimensional subspace, instead of being uniformly
distributed across the ambient space. This property has been
widely used in subspace clustering methods [8, 29]. The
low-dimensional subspace can be learned by the method of
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) [14]. As analyzed in
2.1, the noise variance can be estimated from the eigenvalues of redundant dimensions. In this way, the problem of
noise level estimation is reformulated to the issue of selecting redundant dimensions for PCA. This problem has been
investigated as a model selection problem in the fields of
statistics and signal processing, including [10, 15, 21, 28].
However, these methods focus on using less latent components to represent observed signals. As a result, their meth-

477

