Web-scale image clustering revisited
Yannis Avrithis† , Yannis Kalantidis‡ , Evangelos Anagnostopoulos† , Ioannis Z. Emiris†
†
University of Athens, ‡ Yahoo! Labs

Abstract
Large scale duplicate detection, clustering and mining
of documents or images has been conventionally treated
with seed detection via hashing, followed by seed growing
heuristics using fast search. Principled clustering methods, especially kernelized and spectral ones, have higher
complexity and are difficult to scale above millions. Under
the assumption of documents or images embedded in Euclidean space, we revisit recent advances in approximate
k-means variants, and borrow their best ingredients to introduce a new one, inverted-quantized k-means (IQ-means).
Key underlying concepts are quantization of data points and
multi-index based inverted search from centroids to cells.
Its quantization is a form of hashing and analogous to seed
detection, while its updates are analogous to seed growing,
yet principled in the sense of distortion minimization. We
further design a dynamic variant that is able to determine
the number of clusters k in a single run at nearly zero additional cost. Combined with powerful deep learned representations, we achieve clustering of a 100 million image
collection on a single machine in less than one hour.

(a) Ranked retrieval [8]

(b) DRVQ [1]

(c) EGM [2]

(d) This work: IQ-means

Figure 1. Different k-means variants. ( ) Data points; ( ) centroids; ( ) search range; ( ) estimated cluster extent, used to dynamically determine k.

1. Introduction

N

EARLY two decades ago [6], discovering duplicates

among millions of web documents was the motivation behind one of the first locality sensitive hashing (LSH)
schemes, later known as MinHash [7]. The same method
was subsequently used to select seeds which, followed by
efficient search and spatial verification, would lead to clustering and mining in collections of up to 105 images [10].
Many approaches followed, but problems have remained
such as failing to discover infrequent documents, seed
growing relying on heuristics, or more principled methods
like medoid shift still being too costly to scale up [38].
Pairwise matching remains a problem that is inherently
quadratic in the number of documents, and approximate
nearest neighbor (ANN) search has been employed to help.
Approximate k-means (AKM) is one such attempt [26],
where each data point is assigned to the nearest centroid
by ANN search. Binary k-means (BKM) [14] is another

recent alternative where points and centroids are binarized
and ANN search follows in Hamming space. But in this
work we focus our attention on the inverse process.
Observing that data points remain fixed during k-means
iterations, ranked retrieval [8] chooses to search for nearest data points using centroids as queries, as illustrated in
Fig. 1a. This choice dispenses the need to rebuild an index at each iteration, and requires less queries because centroids are naturally fewer than data points. Points are examined more than once and not all points are assigned to
centroids; it is observed however that distortion is not influenced much. If range queries were used, this method would
be very similar to mean shift [9], except that centroid displacement is not independent here.
Dimensionality-recursive vector quantization (DRVQ)
[1] relies on the same inverted centroid-to-data queries.

1502

