Nighttime Haze Removal with Glow and Multiple Light Colors
Yu Li1,3
Robby T. Tan2,1
1
National University of Singapore 2 Yale-NUS College

Michael S. Brown1
3
Advanced Digital Sciences Center

liyu@u.nus.edu | robby.tan@yale-nus.edu.sg | brown@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
This paper focuses on dehazing nighttime images. Most
existing dehazing methods use models that are formulated to describe haze in daytime. Daytime models assume a
single uniform light color attributed to a light source not
directly visible in the scene. Nighttime scenes, however,
commonly include visible lights sources with varying colors. These light sources also often introduce noticeable
amounts of glow that is not present in daytime haze. To
address these effects, we introduce a new nighttime haze
model that accounts for the varying light sources and their
glow. Our model is a linear combination of three terms: the
direct transmission, airlight and glow. The glow term represents light from the light sources that is scattered around
before reaching the camera. Based on the model, we propose a framework that first reduces the effect of the glow
in the image, resulting in a nighttime image that consists of
direct transmission and airlight only. We then compute a
spatially varying atmospheric light map that encodes light
colors locally. This atmospheric map is used to predict the
transmission, which we use to obtain our nighttime scene
reflection image. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
nighttime haze model and correction method on a number
of examples and compare our results with existing daytime
and nighttime dehazing methods’ results.

1. Introduction
The presence of haze significantly degrades the quality
of an image captured at night. Similar to daytime haze, the
appearance of nighttime haze is due to tiny particles floating
in the air that adversely scatters the line of sight of lights
rays entering the imaging sensor. In particular, light rays
are scattered-out to directions other than the line of sight,
while other light rays are scattered-in to the line of sight.
The scattering-out process causes the scene reflection to be
attenuated. The scattering-in process creates the appearance of a particles-veil (also known as airlight) that washes
out the visibility of the scene. These combined scattering
effects adversely affect scene visibility that in turns nega-

Input

Daytime dehazing [13]

Nighttime dehazing [25]
Ours
Figure 1. A daytime dehazing method [13] fails to handle glow and
haze. A nighttime dehazing method [25] is erroneous in dealing
with glow and boosts the intensity unrealistically. Our result shows
reduced haze and looks more natural.

tively impacts subsequent processing for computer vision
applications.
A number of methods have been developed to address
visibility enhancement for hazy or foggy scenes from a
single image (e.g. [5, 6, 8, 13, 21, 22]). The key to their
success relies on the optical model and the possible estimation of its parameters, particularly the atmospheric light
and transmission. The standard haze model [10] describes
a hazy scene as a linear combination of the direct transmission and airlight, where the direct transmission represents the reflection of a scene whose intensity is reduced
by the scattering-out process, and the airlight represents the
intensity resulted from the scattering-in process of the surrounding atmospheric light. In the model, the transmission
conveys the fraction of the scene reflection that reaches the
camera (as the other fractions are scattered out from the line
of sight).
Based on the model, existing daytime dehazing methods
first estimate the atmospheric light. Most of methods (except [20]) assume that the atmospheric light is present in the
input image and can be estimated by the brightest region in

226

