BoxSup: Exploiting Bounding Boxes to Supervise Convolutional Networks
for Semantic Segmentation
Jifeng Dai

Kaiming He

Jian Sun

Microsoft Research
{jifdai,kahe,jiansun}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Recent leading approaches to semantic segmentation
rely on deep convolutional networks trained with humanannotated, pixel-level segmentation masks. Such pixelaccurate supervision demands expensive labeling effort and
limits the performance of deep networks that usually benefit
from more training data. In this paper, we propose a method
that achieves competitive accuracy but only requires easily obtained bounding box annotations. The basic idea is
to iterate between automatically generating region proposals and training convolutional networks. These two steps
gradually recover segmentation masks for improving the
networks, and vise versa. Our method, called “BoxSup”,
produces competitive results (e.g., 62.0% mAP for validation) supervised by boxes only, on par with strong baselines
(e.g., 63.8% mAP) fully supervised by masks under the same
setting. By leveraging a large amount of bounding boxes,
BoxSup further yields state-of-the-art results on PASCAL
VOC 2012 and PASCAL-CONTEXT [26].

1. Introduction
In the past few months, tremendous progress has been
made in the field of semantic segmentation [13, 24, 14, 7, 6,
25]. Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [21, 20]
that play as rich hierarchical feature extractors are a key to
these methods. These networks are trained on large-scale
datasets [8, 29] as classifiers, and transferred to the semantic segmentation tasks based on the annotated segmentation
masks as supervision.
But pixel-level mask annotations are time-consuming,
frustrating, and in the end commercially expensive to obtain. According to the annotation report of the large-scale
Microsoft COCO dataset [23], the workload of labeling segmentation masks is more than 15 times heavier than that of
spotting object locations. Further, the crowdsourcing annotators need to be specially trained for the tedious and difficult task of labeling per-pixel masks. These facts limit the

amount of available segmentation mask annotations, and
thus hinder the performance of CNNs that in general desire large-scale data for training. On the contrary, bounding
box annotations are more economical than masks. There
have already existed a large number of available box-level
annotations in datasets like ImageNet [29] and Microsoft
COCO. Though these box-level annotations are less precise than pixel-level masks, their amount may help improve
training deep networks for semantic segmentation.
In addition, current leading approaches have not fully
utilized the detailed pixel-level annotations. For example,
in the Convolutional Feature Masking (CFM) method [7],
the fine-resolution masks are used to generate very lowresolution (e.g., 6 × 6) masks on the feature maps. In the
Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) method [24], the network predictions are regressed to the ground-truth masks
using a large stride (e.g., 8 pixels). These methods yield
competitive results without explicitly harnessing the finer
masks. If we consider the box-level annotations as very
coarse masks, can we still retain comparably good results
without using the segmentation masks?
In this work, we investigate bounding box annotations
as an alternative or extra source of supervision to train convolutional networks for semantic segmentation1 . We resort
to region proposal methods [4, 33, 2] to generate candidate
segmentation masks. The convolutional network is trained
under the supervision of these approximate masks. The updated network in turn improves the estimated masks used
for training. This process is iterated. Although the masks
are coarse at the beginning, they are gradually improved and
then provide useful information for network training. Fig. 1
illustrates our training algorithm.
We extensively evaluate our method, called “BoxSup”,
on the PASCAL segmentation benchmarks [9, 26]. Our
box-supervised (i.e., using bounding box annotations)
method shows a graceful degradation compared with its
mask-supervised (i.e., using mask annotations) counterpart.
1 The idea of using bounding box annotations for CNN-based semantic
segmentation is developed concurrently and independently in [27].

11635

