HICO: A Benchmark for Recognizing Human-Object Interactions in Images
Yu-Wei Chao, Zhan Wang, Yugeng He, Jiaxuan Wang, and Jia Deng
Computer Science and Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
{ywchao,wangzhan,daranday,jiaxuan,jiadeng}@umich.edu

Abstract
We introduce a new benchmark “Humans Interacting
with Common Objects” (HICO) for recognizing humanobject interactions (HOI). We demonstrate the key features
of HICO: a diverse set of interactions with common object categories, a list of well-defined, sense-based HOI categories, and an exhaustive labeling of co-occurring interactions with an object category in each image. We perform
an in-depth analysis of representative current approaches
and show that DNNs enjoy a significant edge. In addition,
we show that semantic knowledge can significantly improve
HOI recognition, especially for uncommon categories.

1. Introduction
Visual recognition of Human-Object Interactions (HOI)
(e.g. “riding a bike”, “boarding an airplane”) in still images
is a fundamental problem in computer vision. Successful
HOI recognition is a prerequisite for generating rich image descriptions and retrieving images by sentences. HOI
recognition is also an important subset of the larger problem
of action and activity recognition, which also includes categories involving no direct interactions with objects, such as
“walking”, or high-level events, such as “concerts”. 1
HOI recognition differs from object/person recognition
in that the key is to distinguish a variety of different interactions with the same object category. In other words, in
addition to recognizing the presence of the a person and an
object, it is critical to understand what the person is doing
to the object. Is the person riding, walking, or repairing a
bike? Is the person feeding, hunting, or watching a bear?
Without an accurate understanding of the interaction, we
will not be able to generate informative image descriptions
besides a bag of objects.
Despite significant advances in recognizing humans [2]
and objects [14], the state of the art of HOI recognition in
images is still far from the demands of real-world applications. A key bottleneck is the limited number of HOI cate1 In this paper, we will use “actions” and “human-object interactions”
interchangeably.

gories and limited interactions in current datasets.
In a literature survey, Guo and Lai [8] reported that the
top-used dataset for still image based action recognition (including HOIs) between 2006 and 2013 is Pascal VOC 2010
[6], which contains only 9 categories. Stanford 40 Actions
[35], which is the largest image-based action dataset before
2013, contains only 40 action categories. The recently released MPII Human Pose Dataset [1] contains annotated human poses from 410 human activities. While it is an excellent resource for human pose estimation and general action
recognition, as will be analyzed in detail, it has limited diversity of interactions with each individual object category.
Popular video-based action datasets, such as UCF 101 [28]
and HMDB [15], share similar limitations. Without different interactions with the same object category, HOI recognition cannot be properly evaluated because a system can
“cheat” by simply recognizing the objects.
Some image datasets are annotated with free-form texts
[19, 17, 22, 37] that may include HOI descriptions. Although these datasets can in principle be used to evaluate
HOI recognition, the utility is limited due to a number of
fundamental challenges in computational linguistics. First,
automatic extraction and parsing of phrases (e.g. verb-noun
pairs) that describe human-object interactions are still unsolved. Second, even with the extracted verb-noun pairs,
there is still the challenging problem of mapping words to
meanings (senses). The same human-object interaction can
be described in various forms (e.g. “repairs a bike”, “doing bike repair”, “fix a bicycle”, “bike being repaired”), not
to mention spelling errors. Thus while these datasets are
ideal for evaluating image captioning, they are not suitable
as benchmarks for HOI recognition—it would be hard to
disentangle errors of language understanding and errors of
HOI recognition.
In this paper, we introduce a new dataset for humanobject interaction, “Humans Interacting with Common Objects” (HICO). It has a total of 47,774 images, covering 600 categories of human-object interactions (i.e.
verb-object pairs such as “ride-bike”) over 117 common actions (e.g. “ride”, “feed”, including one “no interaction” class) performed on 80 common objects (e.g.

1017

