A Versatile Learning-based 3D Temporal Tracker: Scalable, Robust, Online
David Joseph Tan1 , Federico Tombari1,2 , Slobodan Ilic1,3 , Nassir Navab1
1
CAMP, Technische Universität München
2
DISI, Università di Bologna
3
Siemens AG
{tanda,tombari,ilics,navab}@in.tum.de, federico.tombari@unibo.it, slobodan.ilic@siemens.com

Scalable

Abstract
This paper proposes a temporal tracking algorithm
based on Random Forest that uses depth images to estimate
and track the 3D pose of a rigid object in real-time. Compared to the state of the art aimed at the same goal, our
algorithm holds important attributes such as high robustness against holes and occlusion, low computational cost
of both learning and tracking stages, and low memory consumption. These are obtained (a) by a novel formulation of
the learning strategy, based on a dense sampling of the camera viewpoints and learning independent trees from a single
image for each camera view; as well as, (b) by an insightful
occlusion handling strategy that enforces the forest to recognize the object’s local and global structures. Due to these
attributes, we report state-of-the-art tracking accuracy on
benchmark datasets, and accomplish remarkable scalability with the number of targets, being able to simultaneously
track the pose of over a hundred objects at 30 fps with an
off-the-shelf CPU. In addition, the fast learning time enables us to extend our algorithm as a robust online tracker
for model-free 3D objects under different viewpoints and
appearance changes as demonstrated by the experiments.

1. Introduction
This paper focuses on 3D object temporal tracking to
find the pose of a rigid object, with three degrees of freedom for rotation and three for translation, across a series
of depth frames in a video sequence. Contrary to trackingby-detection, which assumes the frames independent from
each other such that it detects the object and estimate its
pose in each frame, object temporal tracking relies on the
transformation parameters at the previous frame to estimate
the pose at the current frame. Theoretically, by temporally relaying the transformation parameters, it localizes the
object within the frame instead of re-detecting the object,
and it only requires to estimate the changes in the transformation parameters from one frame to the next instead

(a) Multiple Object Tracking

Robust

Online

(b) Occlusion Handling (c) 3D Online Tracking

Figure 1. Qualitative evaluations for (a) multiple object tracking,
(b) occlusion handling and (c) 3D online tracking for head pose
estimation. More evaluations are in the Supplementary Materials.

of searching in the entire pose space. As a result, most
object temporal tracking algorithms are significantly faster
than tracking-by-detection. Real-time 3D tracking is now
the enabling technology for a range of applications in the
field of augmented reality, robotic perception as well as
human-machine interaction. In these cases, tracking multiple objects at real-time becomes an inherent requirement.
Moreover, when using 3D sensors on mobile devices, low
computational cost and memory consumption are required.
In this paper, we propose a general 3D real-time object
temporal tracking algorithm from depth images that is inherently scalable, being able to track more than a hundred
3D objects at 30 fps (Fig. 1(a)), and robust to high levels of
occlusions (Fig. 1(b)). Our approach is versatile to be used
for both model-based as well as online model-free tracking,
where the tracker initializes the geometry of the target from
a single depth frame and adapts it to changing geometry and
unseen camera viewpoints while tracking (Fig. 1(c)).
More specifically, to achieve generalization, our tracker
requires the following attributes in order to satisfy the diverse requirements of most 3D tracking applications:
(1) Robustness. To avoid tracking failures, the tracker must
be robust against sensor noise such as holes and artifacts, commonly present in depth data, as well as robust
against partial occlusion from the environment.
(2) Tracking time and computational cost. Due to the theoretical efficiency, the tracker must be faster than any
tracking-by-detection method. Moreover, it must spec-

693

