Love Thy Neighbors: Image Annotation by Exploiting Image Metadata
Justin Johnson∗
Lamberto Ballan∗
Li Fei-Fei
Computer Science Department, Stanford University
{jcjohns,lballan,feifeili}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Some images that are difficult to recognize on their own
may become more clear in the context of a neighborhood
of related images with similar social-network metadata. We
build on this intuition to improve multilabel image annotation. Our model uses image metadata nonparametrically
to generate neighborhoods of related images using Jaccard
similarities, then uses a deep neural network to blend visual
information from the image and its neighbors. Prior work
typically models image metadata parametrically; in contrast, our nonparametric treatment allows our model to perform well even when the vocabulary of metadata changes
between training and testing. We perform comprehensive
experiments on the NUS-WIDE dataset, where we show that
our model outperforms state-of-the-art methods for multilabel image annotation even when our model is forced to
generalize to new types of metadata.

1. Introduction
Take a look at the image in Figure 1a. Might it be a
flower petal, or a piece of fruit, or perhaps even an octopus
tentacle? The image on its own is ambiguous. Take another
look, but this time consider that the images in Figure 1b
share social-network metadata with Figure 1a. Now the answer is clear: all of these images show flowers. The context of additional unannotated images disambiguates the visual classification task. We build on this intuition, showing
improvements in multilabel image annotation by exploiting
image metadata to augment each image with a neighborhood of related images.
Most images on the web carry metadata; the idea of using it to improve visual classification is not new. Prior work
takes advantage of user tags for image classification and retrieval [19, 5, 23, 38], uses GPS data [20, 35, 48] to improve
image classification, and utilizes timestamps [26] to both
improve recognition and study topical evolution over time.
The motivation behind much of this work is the notion that
images with similar metadata tend to depict similar scenes.
One class of image metadata where this notion is par∗ Indicates equal contribution.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: On its own, the image in (a) is ambiguous - it
might be a flower petal, but it could also be a piece of fruit or
possibly an octopus tentacle. In the context of a neighborhood (b) of images with similar metadata, it is more clear
that (a) shows a flower. Our model utilizes image neighborhoods to improve multilabel image annotation.
ticularly relevant is social-network metadata, which can be
harvested for images embedded in social networks such as
Flickr. These metadata, such as user-generated tags and
community-curated groups to which an image belongs, are
applied to images by people as a means to communicate
with other people; as such, they can be highly informative as to the semantic contents of images. McAuley and
Leskovec [37] pioneered the study of multilabel image annotation using metadata, and demonstrated impressive results using only metadata and no visual features whatsoever.
Despite its significance, the applicability of McAuley
and Leskovec’s method to real-world scenarios is limited
due to the parametric method by which image metadata
is modeled. In practice, the vocabulary of metadata may
shift over time: new tags may become popular, new image
groups may be created, etc. An ideal method should be able
to handle such changes, but their method assumes identical
vocabularies during training and testing.
In this paper we revisit the problem of multilabel image
annotation, taking advantage of both metadata and strong
visual models. Our key technical contribution is to generate
neighborhoods of images (as in Figure 1) nonparametrically
using image metadata, then to operate on these neighbor14624

