Secrets of Matrix Factorization:
Approximations, Numerics, Manifold Optimization and Random Restarts
Je Hyeong Hong
University of Cambridge

Andrew Fitzgibbon
Microsoft, Cambridge, UK

jhh37@cam.ac.uk

awf@microsoft.com

Abstract
Matrix factorization (or low-rank matrix completion)
with missing data is a key computation in many computer
vision and machine learning tasks, and is also related to a
broader class of nonlinear optimization problems such as
bundle adjustment. The problem has received much attention recently, with renewed interest in variable-projection
approaches, yielding dramatic improvements in reliability
and speed. However, on a wide class of problems, no one
approach dominates, and because the various approaches
have been derived in a multitude of different ways, it has
been difficult to unify them. This paper provides a unified derivation of a number of recent approaches, so that
similarities and differences are easily observed. We also
present a simple meta-algorithm which wraps any existing
algorithm, yielding 100% success rate on many standard
datasets. Given 100% success, the focus of evaluation must
turn to speed, as 100% success is trivially achieved if we do
not care about speed. Again our unification allows a number of generic improvements applicable to all members of
the family to be isolated, yielding a unified algorithm that
outperforms our re-implementation of existing algorithms,
which in some cases already outperform the original authors’ publicly available codes.

1. Introduction
Many problems in computer vision and machine learning
involve finding low-rank factors of a given m × n matrix M,
where some of the values are unobserved or, more generally,
are weighted by another m × n matrix W. This involves
minimization of the error function
f (U, V) = kW ⊙ (UV⊤ − M)k2F + µ(kUk2F + kVk2F )

(1)

over unknown matrices U, V each with rank r. The operator ⊙ is Hadamard or elementwise product, and the norms
are Frobenius. For this paper, we will focus on the L2 problem as stated above which includes the nuclear norm formulation [24, 17, 6]. Investigations on the L1-norm and other

variants are for future work. We further note that although
the question of choice of hyperparameters r, µ is of great
interest, our focus here is on finding the global optimum
of (1), assuming the hyperparameters have been chosen.
When the number of nonzero entries of W is small, and
particularly when entries are not missing uniformly, this is
a hard problem. In recent years, the revival of algorithms
based on variable projection (VarPro) and the Wiberg algorithm has yielded great advances in success rates (that is,
percentage of runs from random starting points that reach
the global optimum), so that many once-difficult benchmarks are now solved by almost all current algorithms.
For many other benchmarks, however, even the best current algorithms succeed only occasionally, with only a small
fraction of runs successful. However, success rates for any
algorithm X are easily improved through the use of a metaalgorithm, which we call “RUSSO-X”, which simply runs
algorithm X from different random starting points until the
same best-so-far optimum value is seen twice. (RUSSOX stands for “Restart X Until Seen Same Optimum”.)
We show that this procedure dramatically increases success
rate. On five of 13 benchmarks, it yields the best known
optimum nearly 100% of the time. On other benchmarks,
where there are other local optima with large basins of convergence, one might nevertheless hope to choose the best
from several runs of RUSSO, and indeed simply repeating
it five times brings the number of successes up to 11. The
final two benchmarks are not solved by any algorithm we
tested.
The natural question then is how to select algorithm X.
This must depend on both its success rate and its runtime.
For example if X has a 5% success rate and runs in one
second, RUSSO-X has an expected runtime of about 44
seconds. If Y has a 95% success rate, and takes an hour,
RUSSO-Y will take two hours, so algorithm X is clearly
preferable. Thus, the criterion for comparison of candidates
must ultimately be mean runtime, and must be wall-clock
time. Any proxy, such as iteration counts, may not reflect
real-world practice. Even floating point operation counts
(FLOPs) may not reflect real-world performance due to
14130

