Leave-One-Out Kernel Optimization for Shadow Detection
Tomás F. Yago Vicente, Minh Hoai, Dimitris Samaras
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA
{tyagovicente, minhhoai, samaras}@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
The objective of this work is to detect shadows in images. We pose this as the problem of labeling image regions, where each region corresponds to a group of superpixels. To predict the label of each region, we train a kernel
Least-Squares SVM for separating shadow and non-shadow
regions. The parameters of the kernel and the classifier are
jointly learned to minimize the leave-one-out cross validation error. Optimizing the leave-one-out cross validation
error is typically difficult, but it can be done efficiently in
our framework. Experiments on two challenging shadow
datasets, UCF and UIUC, show that our region classifier
outperforms more complex methods. We further enhance
the performance of the region classifier by embedding it in
an MRF framework and adding pairwise contextual cues.
This leads to a method that significantly outperforms the
state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Shadow removal is desirable in many situations. Shadows are common in natural scenes, and they are known to
wreak havoc in many computer vision tasks such as image
segmentation and object detection. Therefore the ability
to generate shadow-free images would benefit many computer vision algorithms. Furthermore, for aesthetic reasons,
shadow removal can benefit image editing and computational photography algorithms.
Automatic shadow detection and removal from single
images, however, are very challenging. A shadow is cast
whenever an object occludes an illuminant of the scene; it
is the outcome of complex interactions between the geometry, illumination, and reflectance present in the scene. Identifying shadows is therefore difficult because of the limited
information about the scene’s properties.
There have been a number of approaches for shadow detection. Purely physics-based methods such as the illumination invariant approaches of [5, 6] only work on high quality images. For consumer photographs and web quality images, statistical learning-based approaches [8, 9, 19, 34, 36]

Figure 1. Shadow detection as a region labeling problem. topleft: input image, top-right: superpixels, bottom-left: regions obtained by merging superpixels, bottom-right: shadow prediction.

appear more successful, but results are still far from perfect.
In this paper, we propose a novel algorithm for shadow
detection. We pose shadow detection as an image labeling
problem, similar to some statistical learning-based methods [8, 10, 34]. Given an image, we first divide it into multiple regions, where each region is a group of superpixels,
as illustrated in Fig. 1. We use a region classifier to estimate the shadow probability of each region based on its
appearance features. Subsequently, we improve shadow detection by considering contextual cues between neighboring
regions. The contextual cues are incorporated in our framework as pairwise potentials in a Markov Random Field
(MRF). We solve the optimization with QPBO [18, 24] to
produce the final shadow labels.
One particular novelty of our approach is the framework
for training a strong shadow region classifier that can effectively integrate multiple types of local cues. In particular,
we jointly learn a classifier and a discriminative kernel that
combines chromatic, intensity, and texture properties for
shadow detection. Unlike existing approaches for shadow
detection [8, 9, 14, 34], we propose to use Least Square Support Vector Machine (LSSVM). LSSVM has been shown to
13388

