Multiple Granularity Descriptors for Fine-grained Categorization
Dequan Wang1 , Zhiqiang Shen1 , Jie Shao1 , Wei Zhang1 , Xiangyang Xue1 and Zheng Zhang2
1

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
Department of Computer Science, New York University Shanghai
1

{dqwang12; zhiqiangshen13; shaojie; weizh; xyxue}@fudan.edu.cn 2 zz@nyu.edu

Abstract
Fine-grained categorization, which aims to distinguish
subordinate-level categories such as bird species or dog
breeds, is an extremely challenging task. This is due to
two main issues: how to localize discriminative regions for
recognition and how to learn sophisticated features for representation. Neither of them is easy to handle if there is
insufficient labeled data.
We leverage the fact that a subordinate-level object already has other labels in its ontology tree. These “free” labels can be used to train a series of CNN-based classifiers,
each specialized at one grain level. The internal representations of these networks have different region of interests,
allowing the construction of multi-grained descriptors that
encode informative and discriminative features covering all
the grain levels.
Our multiple granularity framework can be learned with
the weakest supervision, requiring only image-level label
and avoiding the use of labor-intensive bounding box or
part annotations. Experimental results on three challenging
fine-grained image datasets demonstrate that our approach
outperforms state-of-the-art algorithms, including those requiring strong labels.

1. Introduction
Psychologists have showed that humans do well in
basic-level recognition before developing their ability of
subordinate-level recognition[20]. Perhaps not coincidentally, researches in the field of computer vision have
followed a twin trajectory, moving from coarse-grained
to fine-grained. Fine-grained categorization, referring to
subordinate-level recognition, has emerged as a popular research area in the computer vision community. In contrast
to basic-level categorization, subordinate-level classification needs to explicitly discriminate against subtle differ-

Figure 1. Any subordinate-level label has its parenting labels in
the ontology tree that are informative and discriminative for classification, with respect to their grain levels. Acorn Woodpecker,
Downy Woodpecker and Nuttall’s woodpecker are three distinguish species, but all of them belong to the same family.

ences among similar subcategories. Progress in fine-grained
categorization not only expands the scope of generic object
recognition, but also directly benefits domain experts.
In general, fine-grained categorization is extremely challenging. This is due to two main issues: how to 1) localize discriminative regions and 2) learn their corresponding
representations. Identifying such regions is critical, as they
contain informative details for subordinate-level categorization. As an example, domain experts always characterize
bird species with some special parts such as spotted chest
and white back. Basic-level classification only requires the
“where” of the object, while fine-grained one additionally
asks for the “where” of the most discriminative parts.
Classification at subordinate-level is difficult because
of large inner-class variations and inter-class confusions,
which could be resolved if sufficient labels were available.
Unfortunately, unlike basic-level classification where little domain expertise is required to label the data and tools
such as crowd-sourcing can be leveraged, subordinate-level
recognition demands well-annotated data which is comparatively scarce and expensive to acquire.

2399

