Learning to Divide and Conquer for Online Multi-Target Tracking
Francesco Solera

Simone Calderara Rita Cucchiara

Department of Engineering
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia
name.surname@unimore.it

Abstract
Online Multiple Target Tracking (MTT) is often addressed
within the tracking-by-detection paradigm. Detections are
previously extracted independently in each frame and then
objects trajectories are built by maximizing specifically designed coherence functions. Nevertheless, ambiguities arise
in presence of occlusions or detection errors. In this paper
we claim that the ambiguities in tracking could be solved by
a selective use of the features, by working with more reliable
features if possible and exploiting a deeper representation of
the target only if necessary. To this end, we propose an online
divide and conquer tracker for static camera scenes, which
partitions the assignment problem in local subproblems and
solves them by selectively choosing and combining the best
features. The complete framework is cast as a structural
learning task that unifies these phases and learns tracker
parameters from examples. Experiments on two different
datasets highlights a significant improvement of tracking
performances (MOTA +10%) over the state of the art.

1. Introduction
Multiple Target Tracking (MTT) is the task of extracting the continuous path of relevant objects across a set of
subsequent frames. Due to the recent advances in object
detection [9, 4], the problem of MTT is often addressed
within the tracking-by-detection paradigm. Detections are
previously extracted independently in each frame and then
objects trajectories are built by maximizing specifically designed coherence functions [17, 5, 19, 2, 8, 22]. Tracking
objects through detections can mitigate drifting behaviors introduced by prediction steps but, on the other hand, it forces
the tracker to work in adverse conditions, due to the frequent
occurrence of false and miss detections.
The majority of approaches address MTT offline, i.e. by
exploiting detections from a set of frames [17, 5, 8] through
global optimization. Offline methods benefit from the bigger portion of video sequence they dispose of to establish

Figure 1: The scene is partitioned in local zones. Green zones is
where the same number of tracks and detections are present. Red
zones, where miss and false detections (white dashed contours)
are discovered and solving the associations may call for complex
appearance or motion features.

spatio-temporal coherence, but can not be used in real-time
applications. Conversely, online methods track the targets
frame-by-frame; they have a larger spectra of application
but must be both accurate and fast despite working with less
data. In this context, the robustness of the features play a
major role in the online MTT task. Some approaches claim
the adoption of complex targets models [2, 22] to be the
solution, while others argue that this complexity may affect
the long-term robustness [21]. For instance, in large crowds
people appearance is rarely informative. As a consequence,
tracking robustness is often achieved by focusing on spatial
features [19], finding them more reliable than visual ones.
We do believe that many of the ambiguities in tracking
could be solved by a selective use of the features, by working
with more reliable features if possible and exploiting a deeper
representation of the target only if necessary. In fact, a
simple spatial association is often sufficient while, as clutter
or confusion arise, an improved association scheme on more
complex features is needed (Fig. 1).
In this paper a novel approach for online MTT in static
camera scenes is proposed. The method selects the most
suitable features to solve the frame-by-frame associations
depending on the surrounding scene complexity.
14373

