Aggregating Deep Convolutional Features for Image Retrieval
Artem Babenko
Yandex
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology

Victor Lempitsky
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
(Skoltech)

artem.babenko@phystech.edu

lempitsky@skoltech.ru

Abstract
Several recent works have shown that image descriptors
produced by deep convolutional neural networks provide
state-of-the-art performance for image classification and
retrieval problems. It has also been shown that the activations from the convolutional layers can be interpreted as
local features describing particular image regions. These
local features can be aggregated using aggregation approaches developed for local features (e.g. Fisher vectors),
thus providing new powerful global descriptors.
In this paper we investigate possible ways to aggregate
local deep features to produce compact global descriptors for image retrieval. First, we show that deep features and traditional hand-engineered features have quite
different distributions of pairwise similarities, hence existing aggregation methods have to be carefully re-evaluated.
Such re-evaluation reveals that in contrast to shallow features, the simple aggregation method based on sum pooling
provides arguably the best performance for deep convolutional features. This method is efficient, has few parameters,
and bears little risk of overfitting when e.g. learning the
PCA matrix. Overall, the new compact global descriptor
improves the state-of-the-art on four common benchmarks
considerably.

1. Introduction
Image descriptors based on the activations within deep
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [13] have emerged
as state-of-the-art generic descriptors for visual recognition [18, 21, 4]. Several recent works [2, 21, 7] proposed
to use the outputs of last fully-connected network layers as
global image descriptors and demonstrate their advantage
over prior state-of-the-art when the dimensionality of descriptors is limited.
Recently, research attention shifted from the features extracted from the fully-connected layers to the features from
the deep convolutional layers of CNNs [5, 22, 14] (below
we refer to these features as deep convolutional features).

These features possess very useful properties, e.g. they can
be extracted straightforwardly and efficiently from an image of any size and aspect ratio. Also, features from the
convolutional layers have a natural interpretation as descriptors of local image regions corresponding to receptive fields
of the particular features. Such features can thus be considered as an analogy of “shallow” hand-crafted features
such as dense SIFT [16, 26]. Perhaps inspired by this analogy, [15] suggested to use such features to identify meaningful object parts, while [5] proposed to use Fisher vector
[23] constructed on these local features to produce a global
image descriptor that provides state-of-the-art classification
performance on external datasets.
The focus of this paper is image retrieval and in particular the construction of global descriptors for image retrieval. Following recent papers [2, 7, 21, 22], we consider descriptors based on activations of pretrained deep
CNNs, and specifically deep convolutional layers of CNNs.
Given the emerging perception of the features in the convolutional layers as “new dense SIFT” [15, 22, 5, 14], it seems
natural to reuse state-of-the-art embedding-and-aggregation
frameworks for dense SIFT such as VLAD [9], Fisher vectors [19] or triangular embedding [10], and apply them to
deep convolutional features. Our first contribution is the
evaluation of these approaches (specifically, Fisher vectors
and triangular embeddings) alongside simpler aggregation
schemes such as sum pooling and max pooling.
Perhaps surprisingly, we have found that the relative performance of the aggregation methods for deep convolutional features is rather different from the case of shallow
descriptors. In particular, a simple global descriptor based
on sum pooling aggregation without high-dimensional embedding and with simple postprocessing performs remarkably well. Such descriptors based on sum-pooled convolutional features (SPoC descriptors) improve considerably the
state-of-the-art for compact global descriptors on standard
retrieval datasets, and perform much better than deep global
descriptors for retrieval previously suggested in [2, 7, 22].
In addition to the excellent retrieval accuracy, SPoC features
are efficient to compute, simple to implement and have al4321
1269

