Pan-sharpening with a Hyper-Laplacian Penalty
Yiyong Jiang, Xinghao Ding, Delu Zeng, Yue Huang, John Paisley†
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City, Xiamen University
†
Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University

Abstract
Pan-sharpening is the task of fusing spectral information in low resolution multispectral images with spatial information in a corresponding high resolution panchromatic
image. In such approaches, there is a trade-off between
spectral and spatial quality, as well as computational efficiency. We present a method for pan-sharpening in which
a sparsity-promoting objective function preserves both spatial and spectral content, and is efficient to optimize. Our
objective incorporates the ℓ1/2 -norm in a way that can
leverage recent computationally efficient methods, and ℓ1
for which the alternating direction method of multipliers
can be used. Additionally, our objective penalizes image
gradients to enforce high resolution fidelity, and exploits
the Fourier domain for further computational efficiency. Visual quality metrics demonstrate that our proposed objective function can achieve higher spatial and spectral resolution than several previous well-known methods with competitive computational efficiency.

1. Introduction
Multispectral (MS) data provided by satellite optical sensors are useful for many practical applications such as environmental monitoring, object positioning and classification. Because of physical constraints, most remote sensors measure a panchromatic (PAN) image (i.e., gray-scale
image) that is high-resolution, and several low resolution
multispectral (LRMS) images containing information about
RGB colors and the non-visible spectrum. Pan-sharpening
is the problem of fusing this low resolution spectral information with the spatial structure in the PAN image to output
an approximation of the unmeasured high resolution multispectral (HRMS) images [2]. The trade-offs encountered by
such methods are spectral versus structural preservation, as
well as computational efficiency.
Various pan-sharpening methods have been developed,
the most common being based on a projection-substitution
approach where the PAN image is assumed to be equivalent
to a linear combination of the HRMS images [18]. Many

of these methods are appealing for their straightforward implementation and fast computation [23, 21, 12], but exhibit
spectral distortion as a trade-off [29].
To address the spectral distortion problem, methods
based on the concept of Amélioration de la Résolution Spatiale par Injection de Structures (ARSIS) have been proposed [22, 19, 20], in which multi-resolution tools such as
wavelets and Laplacian pyramids are used to extract details from the PAN image and inject them into the MS images. A suite of model-based fusion methods have also been
proposed to address the spectral distortion issue. These
methods treat the fusion problem as an image restoration model, with several additional regularization schemes
[25, 4, 11, 7, 3]. Another model-based line of work has
considered dictionary learning [18, 9, 15], which requires
substantial computational resources.
Pan-sharpening methods often use the ℓ2 -norm to enforce spatial resolution, or switch to ℓ1 when sparsity is desired. When used to penalize image gradients, it has been
shown that according to empirical image statistics, such
Gaussian (ℓ2 ) or Laplacian (ℓ1 ) assumptions are not as appropriate as hyper-Laplacian assumptions [17], which correspond to ℓp -norms with 0 < p < 1. Nevertheless, as with
a variety of signal processing applications, ℓ1 is often used
as the closest convex relaxation of the sparser non-convex
ℓp norms, with compressed sensing being a prominent example. Indeed, in the compressed sensing problem it has
been shown that the ℓ1 convex relaxation often shares the
same solution with the desired ℓ0 norm [10].
In this paper we consider the hyper-Laplacian penalty
for the pan-sharpening problem as part of a larger objective function. We apply the ℓ1/2 penalty on the gradients of
the reconstruction error to enforce structural preservation.
Using a recently developed efficient learning algorithm for
ℓp penalties when p = 1/2 [17], we demonstrate that the
statistically more appropriate hyper-Laplacian penalty does
indeed translate to an improvement in performance for pansharpening. In other words, though the solutions are only
locally optimal, they are consistently better than the global
optimal solutions afforded by a less statistically appropriate
convex ℓ1 penalty.

540

