Discrete Tabu Search for Graph Matching
Kamil Adamczewski

Yumin Suh

kamil.m.adamczewski@gmail.com

n12345@snu.ac.kr

Kyoung Mu Lee
kyoungmu@snu.ac.kr

Department of ECE, ASRI, Seoul National University

Abstract
Graph matching is a fundamental problem in computer
vision. In this paper, we propose a novel graph matching algorithm based on tabu search [13]. The proposed
method solves graph matching problem by casting it into
an equivalent weighted maximum clique problem of the
corresponding association graph, which we further penalize through introducing negative weights. Subsequent tabu
search optimization allows for overcoming the convention
of using positive weights. The method’s distinct feature is
that it utilizes the history of search to make more strategic decisions while looking for the optimal solution, thus
effectively escaping local optima and in practice achieving superior results. The proposed method, unlike the existing algorithms, enables direct optimization in the original discrete space while encouraging rather than artificially enforcing hard one-to-one constraint, thus resulting
in better solution. The experiments demonstrate the robustness of the algorithm in a variety of settings, presenting the state-of-the-art results. The code is available at
http://cv.snu.ac.kr/research/˜DTSGM/.

forward to combine into the IQP optimization process. As
a result, various methods have been developed to approximate the optimal solution of the graph matching problem
based on different approaches, including eigenvector analysis [27, 20], random walk [7], stochastic methods [26] and
other optimization techniques [21, 32].

1. Introduction

Conventionally, two stage procedure has been used to
approximate the solution of IQP: first, solve the optimization problem in continuous domain by relaxing integer constraint, and then project the intermediate solution into the
original feasible space of IQP [20, 7, 14]. Nonetheless, recent research [21, 30] devises methods that produce discrete
solutions and suggests that post-processing discretization
leads to substantial loss in accuracy, especially that the discretization step is independent of the optimization of IQP.
The approach to one-to-one constraint is three-fold. The
first way, which enforces one-to-one constraint in the postprocessing stage, suffers from the above-mentioned postprocessing loss [2, 20]. The second approach, bistochastic
normalization, in continuous space softly enforces the constraint during the optimization procedure [7, 14]. Finally,
incorporating hard one-to-one during optimization results
in overly restrictive search of the solution space. [19, 26]

Graph matching is an important problem in both theoretical computer science, and practical applications of computer vision and machine learning. In computer vision, it
has been proven to effectively deal with the problem of
matching two sets of visual features making it the approach
of choice in shape matching [4], object recognition [8, 25]
and tracking [18]. Typically, graph matching is formulated
as an integer quadratic program (IQP) with an additional
one-to-one constraint. The formulation is popular due to its
generality to allow complex but more informative affinity
measures between node correspondences such as transfer
error [6]. Nonetheless, there are two main theoretical issues
with optimizing this graph matching formulation; (1) IQP
is generally an NP-hard non-convex problem with multiple
local minima; (2) the one-to-one constraint is not straight-

In this work we propose a novel method for the graph
matching based on tabu search, which solves the IQP problem effectively incorporating the one-to-one constraint. The
contributions of this paper are manyfold: (1) It proposes
the penalized association graph framework which softly encourages the one-to-one constraint while directly searching
in the discrete solution space. (2) Given the above framework, it adopts tabu search as an optimization technique.
Tabu search, thanks to its strategic approach to searching
the solution space has become a successful tool in optimizing hard combinatorial problems, while not being popular
yet in computer vision. (3) It extends the proposed framework to work with repeated structure graph matching, enhancing its usage in practice. (4) Presents experimental results which prove outstanding robustness of the algorithm
1109

