The HCI Stereo Metrics:
Geometry-Aware Performance Analysis of Stereo Algorithms
Katrin Honauer1
1

Lena Maier-Hein2
2

HCI, Heidelberg University

firstname.lastname@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

http://hci.iwr.uni-heidelberg.de/stereometrics

1. Introduction
Disparity maps computed from stereo image pairs often
serve as crucial input for higher level vision tasks such as
object detection, 3D reconstruction, and image based rendering, which are in turn used in applications such as driver
assistance [31] and computer assisted surgery [24].
Fueled by the renowned Middlebury benchmark [34],
stereo matching algorithms have made tremendous progress
in the past decade. Since then, stereo benchmarks have
become increasingly challenging, diverse and realistic
with datasets such as the new Middlebury dataset [33],

German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)
l.maier-hein@dkfz-heidelberg.de

depth
discontinuities

planar
surfaces

fine
structures

best

ground truth

Abstract

A3

A1

A3

A1

A3

A1

A2

A2

second

A2

third

Performance characterization of stereo methods is
mandatory to decide which algorithm is useful for which application. Prevalent benchmarks mainly use the root mean
squared error (RMS) with respect to ground truth disparity
maps to quantify algorithm performance.
We show that the RMS is of limited expressiveness for
algorithm selection and introduce the HCI Stereo Metrics.
These metrics assess stereo results by harnessing three semantic cues: depth discontinuities, planar surfaces, and
fine geometric structures. For each cue, we extract the relevant set of pixels from existing ground truth. We then apply
our evaluation functions to quantify characteristics such as
edge fattening and surface smoothness.
We demonstrate that our approach supports practitioners in selecting the most suitable algorithm for their application. Using the new Middlebury dataset, we show
that rankings based on our metrics reveal specific algorithm strengths and weaknesses which are not quantified by
existing metrics. We finally show how stacked bar charts
and radar charts visually support multidimensional performance evaluation. An interactive stereo benchmark based
on the proposed metrics and visualizations is available at:

Daniel Kondermann1

Figure 1: The same three algorithms A1-A3 rank differently, depending on which of our proposed performance
metrics is used. For example, A1 is “the best algorithm”
according to the widely used RMS measure. Yet, A1 yields
the lowest performance at depth discontinuities. The column rankings show that our metrics allow for a more expressive and semantically intuitive assessment of stereo results with respect to depth discontinuities, planar surfaces,
and fine structures. (Black denotes occluded regions.)

KITTI [10], HeiSt [20] and the new SINTEL stereo data [5].
Top ranking algorithms on these benchmarks have long left
behind purely pixel-based approaches. Instead, they hypothesize on local geometry, including segment-wise plane
fitting [16], explicit support for slanted and curved surfaces [2, 39] as well as integrating sophisticated shape priors
and object recognition [3, 4, 12]. Even though this evolution
12120

