Augmenting Strong Supervision Using Web Data for Fine-grained Categorization
Zhe Xu1,2 , Shaoli Huang2 , Ya Zhang1 , and Dacheng Tao2
1

Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center and the Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multimedia Processing and Transmissions, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, China
2
Centre for Quantum Computation and Intelligent Systems, Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology, University of
Technology, Sydney, Ultimo, NSW 2007, Australia
{xz3030,ya zhang}@sjtu.edu.cn, {shaoli.huang@student.,dacheng.tao@}uts.edu.au

Abstract
We propose a new method for fine-grained object recognition that employs part-level annotations and deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in a unified framework.
Although both schemes have been widely used to boost
recognition performance, due to the difficulty in acquiring
detailed part annotations, strongly supervised fine-grained
datasets are usually too small to keep pace with the rapid
evolution of CNN architectures. In this paper, we solve
this problem by exploiting inexhaustible web data. The
proposed method improves classification accuracy in two
ways: more discriminative CNN feature representations are
generated using a training set augmented by collecting a
large number of part patches from weakly supervised web
images; and more robust object classifiers are learned using a multi-instance learning algorithm jointly on the strong
and weak datasets. Despite its simplicity, the proposed
method delivers a remarkable performance improvement on
the CUB200-2011 dataset compared to baseline part-based
R-CNN methods, and achieves the highest accuracy on this
dataset even in the absence of test image annotations.

1. Introduction
Fine-grained object categorization has become increasingly popular over the last few years. In contrast to basiclevel recognition, fine-grained categorization aims to distinguish between subordinate categories such as different
animal species [18, 29] or man-made products [22]. Classifying objects at the subordinate level generally requires expert knowledge, which is not always available from a random human annotator. Therefore, automatic fine-grained
recognition systems would be of huge value in real-world
applications.
There are two strategies widely used in existing finegrained categorization algorithms. First, as stated by Rosch
et al. [26], basic-level categories are principally defined

Strongly-supervised Dataset

BBOX CNN

HEAD CNN

BODY CNN

Weakly-supervised
WEB IMAGES

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed method. Our goal is to solve
the problem of insufficient training data due to the difficulty in
acquiring detailed part annotations and the required data size for
training robust CNNs. We introduce weakly supervised web images to augment the training set and design a new algorithm that
iteratively updates feature representations and object classifiers
on the augmented training data. The proposed method achieves
84.6% accuracy in the CUB200-2011 dataset without using any
additional annotation at the testing stage.

by object parts, whereas subordinate-level categories are
distinguished according to the unique properties of these
parts. This discovery encourages the use of part-based algorithms that rely on localizing object parts and assigning
them detailed attributes. Various methods have been used
to define object parts such as unsupervised patch discovery [32, 8], human-in-the-loop methods [12, 10], or direct
reliance on strongly supervised datasets with part-level annotations [21, 4, 33, 20].
The second strategy is to introduce more discriminative
feature representations [5, 4, 34], which is particularly attractive given by the recent success of deep convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) [19, 11] in visual recognition. By
employing deep feature CNN extractors pre-trained on large
datasets (such as ImageNet [9]) and domain-specific finetuning approaches, considerable improvements in a wide
12524

