Minimizing Human Effort in Interactive Tracking by Incremental Learning of
Model Parameters
Arridhana Ciptadi and James M. Rehg
School of Interactive Computing
Georgia Institute of Technology
arridhana,rehg@gatech.edu

Abstract
We address the problem of minimizing human effort in interactive tracking by learning sequence-specific model parameters. Determining the optimal model parameters for
each sequence is a critical problem in tracking. We demonstrate that by using the optimal model parameters for each
sequence we can achieve high precision tracking results
with significantly less effort. We leverage the sequential nature of interactive tracking to formulate an efficient method
for learning model parameters through a maximum margin framework. By using our method we are able to save
∼60 − 90% of human effort to achieve high precision on
two datasets: the VIRAT dataset and an Infant-Mother Interaction dataset.

1. Introduction
The past decade has seen an explosive growth of video
data. The ability to easily annotate/track objects in videos
has the potential for tremendous impact across multiple application domains. For example, in computer vision annotated video data can be used as an extremely valuable
source of information for the training and evaluation of object detectors (video provides continuous view of how an
object’s appearance might change due to viewpoint effects).
In sports, video-based analytics is becoming increasingly
popular (e.g. the Italian company Deltatre employed 96 people to pour over multiple video footage for live player tracking during the 2014 World Cup). In behavioral science,
video has been used to assist the coding of children’s behavior (e.g. for studying infant attachment [1], typical development [12] and autism [8]).
The problem of object tracking in video has a long history in computer vision. The tracking problem is challenging because of the often dramatic appearance variations in
the object being tracked (e.g., due to lighting and viewpoint
change) and occlusions. As a result, fully-automated high

precision object tracking remains an open problem. Note
that getting accurate object tracks is important in many applications. For example, biologists who use video to monitor the movement of animals care about accurately tracking these animals at all times. Errors in tracking are unacceptable since they can contaminate the research findings. To obtain practically useful accurate tracking, several
interactive approaches have been pursued (e.g., LabelMe
Video [22] and the crowdsourcing method of Vondrick et
al. [18]). Unfortunately, most existing interactive tracking
approaches are not optimized for human effort. However,
minimizing human annotation effort is extremely important
in practice since video can be prohibitively expensive to label (e.g., twenty six hours of surveillance video cost tens of
thousands of dollars to annotate despite using a state-of-theart annotation system [10]).
In this paper, we propose an interactive tracking system
that is designed to minimize the amount of human effort required to obtain high precision tracking results. We achieve
this by leveraging user annotations for incrementally learning instance specific model parameters within the tracking
cost function. This is in contrast to the common practice of
hand-tuning the model parameters on a training set and applying the same fixed parameters on any new testing data.
This approach is both time consuming (due to hand-tuning)
and gives suboptimal accuracy on individual tracking instances. We cast the problem of learning the optimal model
parameters as the problem of learning a structured prediction model in a maximum margin framework. Our key insight is that the incremental nature of an interactive tracking
process is particularly well-suited for efficient maximum
margin learning of model parameters. We show that our
approach significantly outperforms the current best practice of using hand-tuned model parameters on two datasets:
the VIRAT challenge dataset and the Infant-Mother Interaction dataset recently introduced in [11]. The main contribution of this paper is an annotation-driven maximum margin
framework for efficiently learning instance-specific model
parameters.
14382

