Learning like a Child:
Fast Novel Visual Concept Learning from Sentence Descriptions of Images
Junhua Mao1

Wei Xu2
Yi Yang2
Jiang Wang2
1
University of California, Los Angeles

Zhiheng Huang2
Alan L. Yuille1
2
Baidu Research

mjhustc@ucla.edu, {wei.xu,yangyi05,wangjiang03,huangzhiheng}@baidu.com, yuille@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract

Model-base

a group of people playing a
game of soccer

Train using “quidditch” images with sentence descriptions

In this paper, we address the task of learning novel visual concepts, and their interactions with other concepts,
from a few images with sentence descriptions. Using linguistic context and visual features, our method is able to
efficiently hypothesize the semantic meaning of new words
and add them to its word dictionary so that they can be
used to describe images which contain these novel concepts. Our method has an image captioning module based
on [38] with several improvements. In particular, we propose a transposed weight sharing scheme, which not only
improves performance on image captioning, but also makes
the model more suitable for the novel concept learning task.
We propose methods to prevent overfitting the new concepts. In addition, three novel concept datasets are constructed for this new task, and are publicly available on the
project page. In the experiments, we show that our method
effectively learns novel visual concepts from a few examples without disturbing the previously learned concepts.
The project page is: www.stat.ucla.edu/˜junhua.
mao/projects/child_learning.html.

1. Introduction
Recognizing, learning and using novel concepts is one
of the most important cognitive functions of humans. When
we were very young, we learned new concepts by observing the visual world and listening to the sentence descriptions of our parents. The process was slow at the beginning,
but got much faster after we accumulated enough learned
concepts [4]. In particular, it is known that children can
form quick and rough hypotheses about the meaning of new
words in a sentence based on their knowledge of previous
learned words [5, 21], associate these words to the objects
or their properties, and describe novel concepts using sentences with the new words [4]. This phenomenon has been
researched for over 30 years by the psychologists and linguists who study the process of word learning [52].
For the computer vision field, several methods are proposed [16, 46, 53, 31] to handle the problem of learning new

...
Model-NVCS

a group of people is playing
quidditch with a red ball

Figure 1: An illustration of the Novel Visual Concept learning from Sentences (NVCS) task. We start with a model
(i.e. model-base) trained with images that do not contain
the concept of “quidditch” 1 . Using a few “quidditch” images with sentence descriptions, our method is able to learn
that “quidditch” is played by people with a ball.
categories of objects from a handful of examples. This task
is important in practice because we sometimes do not have
enough data for novel concepts and hence need to transfer
knowledge from previously learned categories. Moreover,
we do not want to retrain the whole model every time we
add a few images with novel concepts, especially when the
amount of data or model parameters is very big.
However, these previous methods concentrate on learning classifiers, or mappings, between single words (e.g. a
novel object category) and images. We are unaware of any
computer vision studies into the task of learning novel visual concepts from a few sentences and then using these
concepts to describe new images – a task that children seem
to do effortlessly. We call this the Novel Visual Concept
learning from Sentences (NVCS) task (see Figure 1).
In this paper, we present a novel framework to address
the NVCS task. We start with a model that has already
been trained with a large amount of visual concepts. We
propose a method that allows the model to enlarge its word
dictionary to describe the novel concepts using a few examples and without extensive retraining. In particular, we
do not need to retrain models from scratch on all of the data
(all the previously learned concepts and the novel concepts).
We propose three datasets for the NVCS task to validate our
1 “quidditch” is a sport created in “Harry Potter”. It is played by teams
of people holding brooms with a ball (see Figure 1).

12533

