Im2Calories: towards an automated mobile vision food diary
Austin Myers, Nick Johnston, Vivek Rathod, Anoop Korattikara, Alex Gorban
Nathan Silberman, Sergio Guadarrama, George Papandreou, Jonathan Huang, Kevin Murphy
amyers@umd.edu, (nickj, rathodv, kbanoop, gorban)@google.com
(nsilberman, sguada, gpapan, jonathanhuang, kpmurphy)@google.com

We present a system which can recognize the contents
of your meal from a single image, and then predict its nutritional contents, such as calories. The simplest version
assumes that the user is eating at a restaurant for which we
know the menu. In this case, we can collect images offline
to train a multi-label classifier. At run time, we apply the
classifier (running on your phone) to predict which foods
are present in your meal, and we lookup the corresponding
nutritional facts. We apply this method to a new dataset of
images from 23 different restaurants, using a CNN-based
classifier, significantly outperforming previous work. The
more challenging setting works outside of restaurants. In
this case, we need to estimate the size of the foods, as
well as their labels. This requires solving segmentation and
depth / volume estimation from a single image. We present
CNN-based approaches to these problems, with promising
preliminary results.

1. Introduction
Many people are interested in tracking what they eat to
help them achieve weight loss goals or manage their diabetes or food allergies. However, most current mobile
apps (MyFitnessPal, LoseIt, etc) require manual data entry,
which is tedious and time consuming. Consequently, most
users do not use such apps for very long [9]. Furthermore,
amateur self-reports of calorie intake typically have an error
rate that exceeds 400 calories per day [31, 5].
Rather than rely purely on data entry, several approaches
make use of a mobile camera to aid in this task. Cordeiro et
al. [8] records a photo of the meal but does not perform any
visual analysis of the image. Several previous approaches
[23] [29] rely on an expert nutritionists to analyse the image offline (at the end of each day). Other approaches [26]
[25] use crowd sourcing to interpret the image, in lieu of an
expert. However, crowd sourcing is both costly and slow,
which hinders widespread adoption.
Several existing works [39, 21, 37] do use computer vision algorithms to reason about meals but only work in laboratory conditions where the food items are well separated
and the number of categories is small. Furthermore, most of

these methods use traditional, hand-crafted visual features,
and only use machine learning at the classification stage.
The holy grail is an automatic method for estimating the
nutritional contents of a meal from one or more images. Unfortunately, even a perfect visual interpretation of the scene
cannot perfectly predict what is inside many foods, e.g., a
burrito. Consequently, an ideal system is one which correctly infers what is knowable and prompts the user for
feedback on inherantly ambiguous components of a meal.
Our goal is to minimize user effort for completing food diaries by offering smart ”auto-complete” functionality, rather
than complete automation.
In this paper, we take some initial steps towards such
a system. Our approach utilizes several deep learning algorithms, tailored to run on a conventional mobile phone,
trained to recognize food items and predict the nutrional
contents meals from images taken “in the wild”. We refer to this task as the “Im2Calories” problem, by analogy to
the recent line of work on the “Im2Text” problem. It should
be stressed, however, that we are interested in estimating
various other properties of a meal (such as fat and carbohydrates) and not just calories.
We start by building on [1], who developed a system
that can predict the calorie content of a meal from a single image. Their key insight (also made in [2]) was that the
problem becomes much simpler if we restrict the setting to
one where the user is eating in a restaurant whose menu is
known. In this case, the problem reduces to one of detecting
which items, out of the K possible items on the menu, the
user has chosen. Each item typically has a standard serving size1 , and we typically know its nutritional contents.2 ,
whereas getting nutritional information for arbitrary cooked
foods is much harder, as discussed in Section 7.
In Section 3, we show that by simply replacing the handcrafted features used in [1] with a convolutional neural network (CNN), we can significantly improve performance,
1 There may be variants, but these are typically few in number (e.g.,
small, medium or large fries). Hence we an treat these as different items.
2 The US Food and Drug Administration has passed a law requiring
all major chain restaurants to post the nutritional contents of their meals,
starting in December 2016. See [15] for details.

1233

