Multiple Hypothesis Tracking Revisited
Chanho Kim †

Fuxin Li ‡ †

Arridhana Ciptadi †

† Georgia Institute of Technology
Abstract
This paper revisits the classical multiple hypotheses
tracking (MHT) algorithm in a tracking-by-detection framework. The success of MHT largely depends on the ability to maintain a small list of potential hypotheses, which
can be facilitated with the accurate object detectors that are
currently available. We demonstrate that a classical MHT
implementation from the 90’s can come surprisingly close
to the performance of state-of-the-art methods on standard
benchmark datasets. In order to further utilize the strength
of MHT in exploiting higher-order information, we introduce a method for training online appearance models for
each track hypothesis. We show that appearance models
can be learned efficiently via a regularized least squares
framework, requiring only a few extra operations for each
hypothesis branch. We obtain state-of-the-art results on
popular tracking-by-detection datasets such as PETS and
the recent MOT challenge.

1. Introduction
Multiple Hypotheses Tracking (MHT) is one of the earliest successful algorithms for visual tracking. Originally
proposed in 1979 by Reid [36], it builds a tree of potential track hypotheses for each candidate target, thereby providing a systematic solution to the data association problem. The likelihood of each track is calculated and the most
likely combination of tracks is selected. Importantly, MHT
is ideally suited to exploiting higher-order information such
as long-term motion and appearance models, since the entire track hypothesis can be considered when computing the
likelihood.
MHT has been popular in the radar target tracking community [6]. However, in visual tracking problems, it is generally considered to be slow and memory intensive, requiring many pruning tricks to be practical. While there was
considerable interest in MHT in the vision community during the 90s, for the past 15 years it has not been a mainstream approach for tracking, and rarely appears as a base‡ This work was conducted while the 2nd author was at Georgia Tech.

James M. Rehg †

‡ Oregon State University

line in tracking evaluations. MHT is in essence a breadthfirst search algorithm, hence its performance strongly depends on the ability to prune branches in the search tree
quickly and reliably, in order to keep the number of track
hypotheses manageable. In the early work on MHT for visual tracking [12], target detectors were unreliable and motion models had limited utility, leading to high combinatoric
growth of the search space and the need for efficient pruning
methods.
This paper argues that the MHT approach is well-suited
to the current visual tracking context. Modern advances in
tracking-by-detection and the development of effective feature representations for object appearance have created new
opportunities for the MHT method. First, we demonstrate
that a modern formulation of a standard motion-based MHT
approach gives comparable performance to state-of-the-art
methods on popular tracking datasets. Second, and more
importantly, we show that MHT can easily exploit highorder appearance information which has been difficult to
incorporate into other tracking frameworks based on unary
and pairwise energies. We present a novel MHT method
which incorporates long-term appearance modeling, using
features from deep convolutional neural networks [20, 16].
The appearance models are trained online for each track
hypothesis on all detections from the entire history of the
track. We utilize online regularized least squares [25] to
achieve high efficiency. In our formulation, the computational cost of training the appearance models has little dependency on the number of hypothesis branches, making it
extremely suitable for the MHT approach.
Our experimental results demonstrate that our scoring
function, which combines motion and appearance, is highly
effective in pruning the hypothesis space efficiently and accurately. Using our trained appearance model, we are able
to cut the effective number of branches in each frame to
about 50% of all branches (Sec. 5.1). This enables us to
make less restrictive assumptions on motion and explore a
larger space of hypotheses. This also makes MHT less sensitive to parameter choices and heuristics (Fig. 3). Experiments on the PETS and the recent MOT challenge illustrate
the state-of-the-art performance of our approach.
14696

