StereoSnakes: Contour Based Consistent Object Extraction For Stereo Images
Ran Ju
Tongwei Ren
Gangshan Wu
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology
Nanjing University, China
juran@smail.nju.edu.cn, {rentw,gswu}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Consistent object extraction plays an essential role for
stereo image editing with the population of stereoscopic
3D media. Most previous methods perform segmentation
on entire images for both views using dense stereo correspondence constraints. We find that for such kind of
methods the computation is highly redundant since the
two views are near-duplicate. Besides, the consistency
may be violated due to the imperfectness of current stereo
matching algorithms. In this paper, we propose a contour
based method which searches for consistent object contours
instead of regions. It integrates both stereo correspondence
and object boundary constraints into an energy minimization framework. The proposed method has several advantages compared to previous works. First, the searching
space is restricted in object boundaries thus the efficiency
significantly improved. Second, the discriminative power of
object contours results in a more consistent segmentation.
Furthermore, the proposed method can effortlessly extend
existing single-image segmentation methods to work in
stereo scenarios. The experiment on the Adobe benchmark shows superior extraction accuracy and significant
improvement of efficiency of our method to state-of-the-art.
We also demonstrate in a few applications how our method
can be used as a basic tool for stereo image editing.

1. Introduction
The enthusiasm on stereoscopic media has been lit up by
the population of 3D movies and TV programs in recent
years. With the increasing amount of stereoscopic data,
tools to handle such a kind of media turns to be an urgent
demand to support television broadcasting, film industry
and even daily life photo editing. Among the tasks for
stereo media handling, one of the most essential tools is
to consistently extract objects from stereo image pairs, as
shown in Fig. 1.
Extracting objects from stereo images with single-image
tools usually causes inconsistency, because they need to be
applied view by view, let alone the doubled workload. How-

Figure 1. Consistent object extraction for stereo images. First row:
the interactions on stereo images and the resultant object contours.
Second row: object masks generated from contours. Our method
can effortlessly make single-image segmentation methods work
for stereo scenarios with only one view interaction, e.g. graph
cuts [6] (left) and GrabCut [27] (right).

ever, inter-view consistency is of great importance to supply
good 3D experience. To overcome the problems, some
previous methods apply stereo correspondence constraints
to single image models and perform segmentation jointly
or successively [21, 24]. We find that the computational
cost for these models are quite high as they perform at
least double operations. Since the two views of a stereo
image pair are naturally near-duplicate, we believe that
once the contour of one view is given, the extraction for
the other view could be obtained with very little cost.
Besides, previous methods suffer from the inaccuracy of
current stereo matching algorithms, which may also lead
to inconsistent extractions.
In this paper, we propose a contour based method to
overcome the above limitations. First, after investigating the
results of previous methods, it is obvious to conclude that
most of the ground-truth regions can be covered by a rough
segmentation, while errors usually occur on boundaries.
Consequently, matching contours from one view to another
seems to be a smarter choice other than matching entire
images. Since the search space for contours is much smaller
than pixels from entire images, the cost for consistent
extraction is significantly reduced.
The second improvement is the relaxation of stereo
correspondence constraint. Previous models apply im-

1724

