Human Action Recognition using Factorized Spatio-Temporal
Convolutional Networks
Lin Sun †§, Kui Jia ♯, Dit-Yan Yeung ‡†, Bertram E. Shi †
† Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
‡ Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
♯ Faculty of Science and Technology, University of Macau
§ Lenovo Corporate Research Hong Kong Branch
lsunece@ust.hk, kuijia@gmail.com, dyyeung@cse.ust.hk, eebert@ust.hk

Abstract
Human actions in video sequences are threedimensional (3D) spatio-temporal signals characterizing
both the visual appearance and motion dynamics of the
involved humans and objects. Inspired by the success of
convolutional neural networks (CNN) for image classification, recent attempts have been made to learn 3D CNNs for
recognizing human actions in videos. However, partly due
to the high complexity of training 3D convolution kernels
and the need for large quantities of training videos, only
limited success has been reported. This has triggered us to
investigate in this paper a new deep architecture which can
handle 3D signals more effectively. Specifically, we propose
factorized spatio-temporal convolutional networks (FST CN)
that factorize the original 3D convolution kernel learning
as a sequential process of learning 2D spatial kernels
in the lower layers (called spatial convolutional layers),
followed by learning 1D temporal kernels in the upper
layers (called temporal convolutional layers). We introduce
a novel transformation and permutation operator to make
factorization in FST CN possible. Moreover, to address
the issue of sequence alignment, we propose an effective
training and inference strategy based on sampling multiple
video clips from a given action video sequence. We have
tested FST CN on two commonly used benchmark datasets
(UCF-101 and HMDB-51). Without using auxiliary training videos to boost the performance, FST CN outperforms
existing CNN based methods and achieves comparable
performance with a recent method that benefits from using
auxiliary training videos.

1. Introduction
Human actions can be categorized by the visual appearance and motion dynamics of the involved humans and ob-

jects. The design of many popular human action recognition
datasets [26, 14, 25] is based on this intrinsic property. To
recognize human actions in video sequences, computer vision researchers have been developing better visual features
to characterize the spatial appearance [32, 20] and temporal
motion [16, 24, 35]. Since video sequences can naturally be
viewed as three-dimensional (3D) spatio-temporal signals,
many existing methods seek to develop different spatiotemporal features for representing spatially and temporally
coupled action patterns [12, 31, 8, 5]. Thus far, although
these methods are robust against some real-world human action conditions, when applied to more realistic, complex human actions, their performance often degrades significantly
due to the large intra-category variations within action categories and inter-category ambiguities between action categories. A number of factors can cause large intra-category
variations. Some major ones include large variations in visual appearance and motion dynamics of the constituent humans and objects, arbitrary illumination and imaging conditions, self-occlusion, and cluttered background. To address
these challenges, some methods [15, 30] extract trajectories
of interest points from video sequences to characterize the
salient spatial regions and their motion dynamics. However,
in general, the challenge of recognizing complex human actions has not been well addressed.
Most of the above methods use handcrafted features and
relatively simple classifiers. More recently, the end-to-end
approach of learning features directly from raw observations using deep architectures shows great promise in many
computer vision tasks, including object detection [4], semantic segmentation [2] and so forth. Using massive training datasets, these deep architectures are able to learn a hierarchy of semantically related convolution filters (or kernels), giving highly discriminative models and hence better classification accuracy [34]. In fact, even directly applying these image-based models to individual frames of

4597

