Unsupervised Generation of a Viewpoint Annotated Car Dataset from Videos
Nima Sedaghat, Thomas Brox
Computer Vision Group
University of Freiburg, Germany
{nima,brox}@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract
Object recognition approaches have recently been extended to yield, aside of the object class output, also viewpoint or pose. Training such approaches typically requires
additional viewpoint or keypoint annotation in the training
data or, alternatively, synthetic CAD models. In this paper,
we present an approach that creates a dataset of images annotated with bounding boxes and viewpoint labels in a fully
automated manner from videos. We assume that the scene
is static in order to reconstruct 3D surfaces via structure
from motion. We automatically detect when the reconstruction fails and normalize for the viewpoint of the 3D models
by aligning the reconstructed point clouds. Exemplarily for
cars we show that we can expand a large dataset of annotated single images and obtain improved performance when
training a viewpoint regressor on this joined dataset.

1. Introduction
The viewpoint of an object is an important attribute in
2D recognition approaches. This is because the appearance
of the 2D projection varies a lot with the changing viewpoint and because the viewpoint has an important semantic meaning. In the past, many viewpoint specific detectors
have been proposed [3, 11, 4, 5, 23, 7] which aim on better detection performance. Another direction of research is
on building explicit viewpoint classifiers that can infer the
viewpoint for a given detection [21]. Recent approaches regard detector training and accurate viewpoint classification
as a joint problem [19, 26].
Training viewpoint specific detectors or viewpoint classifiers usually requires images with viewpoint annotation to
work well. As an alternative to explicit viewpoint annotation, keypoint annotation was proposed to infer the viewpoint and pose [3]. Automated viewpoint clustering approaches [6, 11, 5] provide only approximate viewpoint labels and can introduce many erroneous labels to the training.
As an alternative to a collection of single images, videos

Figure 1: Two videos of different class instances are sought
to be registered temporally such that frames showing the
same viewpoint are in correspondence. We solve this problem via an explicit 3D reconstruction to automatically generate viewpoint and bounding box annotation for a video
dataset.

are a good data source to infer viewpoints. Walking with a
video camera around an object, images from many viewpoints can be collected very efficiently. Even with low
frame rates, the sampling density in a video is very high
compared to image collections.
The challenging part is again the viewpoint annotation in
these videos. Assume we get several videos showing many
different object instances from the same class. The camera
could have been moved along very different paths. In order
to train viewpoint classifiers in the end, we are interested in
the corresponding frames in the videos, i.e., those frames
that show the same (or very close) viewpoints. We can also
regard this as a clustering problem. Given the collection of
all the frames in all the videos, we are searching for viewpoint specific clusters exploiting the sequential nature of the
recorded videos.
Retrieving such a clustering was first approached by Mei
et al. [16]. It is still very challenging for multiple reasons:
(1) In each of the videos we see a different object instance.
The appearance of instances can vary a lot. (2) If the dataset
does not provide a segmentation or bounding box (in videos
such annotation is rare), there is much clutter in the background that may confuse clustering. (3) Not all videos will

1314

