Probabilistic Label Relation Graphs with Ising Models
Nan Ding
Google Inc.

Jia Deng
University of Michigan

Kevin P. Murphy
Google Inc.

Hartmut Neven
Google Inc.

dingnan@google.com

jiadeng@umich.edu

kpmurphy@google.com

neven@google.com

Abstract
We consider classification problems in which the label space has structure. A common example is hierarchical label spaces, corresponding to the case where one
label subsumes another (e.g., animal subsumes dog).
But labels can also be mutually exclusive (e.g., dog vs
cat) or unrelated (e.g., furry, carnivore). To jointly
model hierarchy and exclusion relations, the notion of a
HEX (hierarchy and exclusion) graph was introduced in
[8]. This combined a conditional random field (CRF)
with a deep neural network (DNN), resulting in state
of the art results when applied to visual object classification problems where the training labels were drawn
from different levels of the ImageNet hierarchy (e.g.,
an image might be labeled with the basic level category
”dog”, rather than the more specific label ”husky”). In
this paper, we extend the HEX model to allow for soft
or probabilistic relations between labels, which is useful
when there is uncertainty about the relationship between
two labels (e.g., an antelope is ”sort of ” furry, but not
to the same degree as a grizzly bear). We call our new
model pHEX, for probabilistic HEX. We show that the
pHEX graph can be converted to an Ising model, which
allows us to use existing off-the-shelf inference methods
(in contrast to the HEX method, which needed specialized inference algorithms). Experimental results show
significant improvements in a number of large-scale visual object classification tasks, outperforming the previous HEX model.

1. Introduction
Classification is a fundamental problem in machine
learning and computer vision. In this paper, we consider how to extend the standard approach to exploit
structure in the label space. For example, consider the
problem of classifying images of animals. The labels
may be names of animal types (e.g., dog, puppy, cat),
or attribute labels (e.g., yellow, furry, has-stripes).
Many of these labels are not semantically independent

of each other. For example, a puppy is also a dog,
which is a hierarchical or subsumption relation; an animal cannot be both a dog and a cat, an exclusive relation; but an animal can be yellow and furry, which is
a non-relation.
In [8], an approach called Hierarchy and EXclusion
(HEX) graphs was proposed for compactly representing such constraints between the labels. In particular,
a probabilistic graphical model with deterministic or
hard constraints between the binary label nodes was
proposed. These hard constraints cut down the feasible set of labels from 2n (where n is the number of
labels) to something much smaller, allowing for efficient
exact inference. For example, if all labels are mutually
exclusive, the HEX graph is a clique, and there are
only n + 1 valid label configurations. This graphical
model can be combined with any standard discriminative classifier (such as deep neural networks), resulting
in a conditional random field (CRF) model with label
constraints.
In this paper, we extend the HEX model by allowing for “soft” relationships between the labels. We
call this the pHEX model. The pHEX model has five
main advantages compared to the HEX model. First,
it is a more realistic model, since the relationship between most labels is “soft”. For example, a lion may
be mostly yellow, but it could also be another color.
Second, the pHEX model is easier to train, since the
likelihood function is smoother. Third, we show how to
perform inference in the pHEX model by converting it
to an Ising model, and then using standard off-the-shelf
tools such as belief propagation, or the emerging quantum optimization technology [11]. This is in contrast to
the HEX case, which needed a specialized (and rather
complex) algorithm to perform inference. Fourth, we
show how to combine binary labels with k-ary labels,
something that wasn’t possible with the original HEX
model. Finally, we show that the pHEX model outperforms the HEX model on a variety of visual object
classification tasks.
11161

