Constrained Convolutional Neural Networks for
Weakly Supervised Segmentation
Deepak Pathak
Philipp Krähenbühl
Trevor Darrell
University of California, Berkeley
{pathak,philkr,trevor}@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
We present an approach to learn a dense pixel-wise labeling from image-level tags. Each image-level tag imposes
constraints on the output labeling of a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) classifier. We propose Constrained CNN
(CCNN), a method which uses a novel loss function to optimize for any set of linear constraints on the output space
(i.e. predicted label distribution) of a CNN. Our loss formulation is easy to optimize and can be incorporated directly
into standard stochastic gradient descent optimization. The
key idea is to phrase the training objective as a biconvex optimization for linear models, which we then relax to nonlinear deep networks. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
generality of our new learning framework. The constrained
loss yields state-of-the-art results on weakly supervised semantic image segmentation. We further demonstrate that
adding slightly more supervision can greatly improve the
performance of the learning algorithm.

Input Image

Predicted labeling
Person

CNN

Car
Network
Output

Person
Car
Weak Labels

Latent
Distribution

Constrained Region

Figure 1: We train convolutional neural networks from a set
of linear constraints on the output variables. The network
output is encouraged to follow a latent probability distribution, which lies in the constraint manifold. The resulting
loss is easy to optimize and can incorporate arbitrary linear
constraints.

1. Introduction
In recent years, standard computer vision tasks, such
as recognition or classification, have made tremendous
progress. This is primarily due to the widespread adoption of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [11,19,20].
Existing models excel by their capacity to take advantage
of massive amounts of fully supervised training data [28].
This reliance on full supervision is a major limitation on
scalability with respect to the number of classes or tasks.
For structured prediction problems, such as semantic segmentation, fully supervised, i.e. pixel-level, labels are both
expensive and time consuming to obtain. Summarization
of the semantic-labels in terms of weak supervision, e.g.
image-level tags or bounding box annotations, is often less
costly. Leveraging the full potential of these weak annotaThe implementation code and trained models are available at the author’s website.

tions is challenging, and existing approaches are susceptible
to diverging into bad local optima from which recovery is
difficult [6, 16, 25].
In this paper, we present a framework to incorporate
weak supervision into the learning procedure through a series of linear constraints. In general, it is easier to express
simple constraints on the output space than to craft regularizers or adhoc training procedures to guide the learning.
In semantic segmentation, such constraints can describe the
existence and expected distribution of labels from imagelevel tags. For example, given a car is present in an image,
a certain number of pixels should be labeled as car.
We propose Constrained CNN (CCNN), a method which
uses a novel loss function to optimize convolutional networks with arbitrary linear constraints on the structured output space of pixel labels. The non-convex nature of deep
11796

