Training a Feedback Loop for Hand Pose Estimation
Markus Oberweger
Paul Wohlhart
Vincent Lepetit
Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision
Graz University of Technology, Austria
{oberweger,wohlhart,lepetit}@icg.tugraz.at

Abstract
Add update

We propose an entirely data-driven approach to estimating the 3D pose of a hand given a depth image. We show
that we can correct the mistakes made by a Convolutional
Neural Network trained to predict an estimate of the 3D
pose by using a feedback loop. The components of this feedback loop are also Deep Networks, optimized using training data. They remove the need for fitting a 3D model to
the input data, which requires both a carefully designed fitting function and algorithm. We show that our approach
outperforms state-of-the-art methods, and is efficient as our
implementation runs at over 400 fps on a single GPU.

Pose

2

3

Synthesizer
CNN

Initialize

Synthesized Image
Updater
CNN
1

Predictor
CNN

Input Image

1. Introduction
Accurate hand pose estimation is an important requirement for many Human Computer Interaction or Augmented
Reality tasks [10], and has been steadily regaining ground
as a focus of research interest in the past few years [13, 14,
19, 23, 26, 30, 31, 37], probably because of the emergence
of 3D sensors. Despite 3D sensors, however, it is still a very
challenging problem, because of the vast range of potential
freedoms it involves, and because images of hands exhibit
self-similarity and self-occlusions.
A popular approach is to use a discriminative method
to predict the position of the joints [13, 21, 30, 31, 35],
because they are now robust and fast. To refine the pose
further, they are often used to initialize an optimization
where a 3D model of the hand is fit to the input depth
data [1, 8, 23, 24, 26, 28, 29, 36]. Such an optimization
remains complex, however, and typically requires the maintaining of multiple hypotheses [22, 23, 26]. It also relies on
a criterion to evaluate how well the 3D model fits to the input data, and designing such a criterion is not a simple and
straightforward task [1, 8, 29].
In this paper, we first show how we can get rid of the 3D
model of the hand altogether and build instead upon recent
work that learns to generate images from training data [9].
We then introduce a method that learns to provide updates

Pose Update

Figure 1: Overview of our method. We use a first CNN 1
to predict an initial estimate of the 3D pose given an input
depth image of the hand. The pose is used to synthesize an
image 2 , which is used together with the input depth image
to derive a pose update 3 . The update is applied to the pose
and the process is iterated.
for improving the current estimate of the pose, given the input image and the image generated for this pose estimate as
shown in Fig. 1. By iterating this method a number of times,
we can correct the mistakes of an initial estimate provided
by a simple discriminative method. All the components are
implemented as Deep Networks with simple architectures.
Not only is it interesting to see that all the components
needed for hand registration that used to require careful design can be learned instead, but we will also show that our
approach has superior performance when compared to the
state-of-the-art methods. It is also efficient; our implementation runs at over 400 fps on a single GPU.
Our approach is related to generative approaches [3], in
particular [32] which also features a feedback loop reminiscent of ours. However, our approach is deterministic and
does not require an optimization based on distribution sampling, on which generative approaches generally rely, but
which tend to be inefficient.
13316

