Co-interest Person Detection from Multiple Wearable Camera Videos
Yuewei Lin1

Kareem Abdelfatah1 Youjie Zhou1 Xiaochuan Fan1
Hongkai Yu1 Hui Qian2 Song Wang1
1
University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208
2
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China

ywlin.cq@gmail.com, ker00@fayoum.edu.eg, {zhou42,fan23,yu55}@email.sc.edu
qianhui@zju.edu.cn, songwang@cec.sc.edu

Video 1

Abstract
Wearable cameras, such as Google Glass and Go Pro,
enable video data collection over larger areas and from different views. In this paper, we tackle a new problem of locating the co-interest person (CIP), i.e., the one who draws
attention from most camera wearers, from temporally synchronized videos taken by multiple wearable cameras. Our
basic idea is to exploit the motion patterns of people and
use them to correlate the persons across different videos, instead of performing appearance-based matching as in traditional video co-segmentation/localization. This way, we
can identify CIP even if a group of people with similar appearance are present in the view. More specifically, we detect a set of persons on each frame as the candidates of
the CIP and then build a Conditional Random Field (CRF)
model to select the one with consistent motion patterns in
different videos and high spacial-temporal consistency in
each video. We collect three sets of wearable-camera videos
for testing the proposed algorithm. All the involved people
have similar appearances in the collected videos and the
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
algorithm.

1. Introduction
Video-based individual, interactive, and group activity
recognition has attracted more and more interests in the
computer vision community. Using fixed cameras for collecting videos suffers from the problem of only covering
very limited areas. This problem will get even worse when
recognizing activities in a social event, such as a concert,
ceremony or party, where multiple people are present and
move from time to time. Recently, wearable cameras, such
as Google Glass or Go Pro, provide a new solution, where
all or part of the involved persons wear a camera over head
to record what they see over time [8, 21, 23].

Video 2

Video 3

Video 4

Video 5

Video 6

(a) A co-interest person (in red boxes) identified in the same frame across different videos.
Frame 1

Frame 2

Frame 3

Frame 4

Frame 5

Frame 6

(b) A co-interest person (in red boxes) identified along the same video.

Figure 1. An illustration of the basic idea underlying the proposed
CIP detection approach. (a) A CIP (in red boxes) always shows
consistent 3D motion patterns across all the videos in which he/she
is present. (b) A CIP (in red boxes) usually shows high spatialtemporal consistency along a video. Our proposed algorithm considers the consistency in both (a) and (b) for CIP detection. Note
that Video 3 in (a) is an egocentric video of the CIP.

By combining the temporally synchronized videos from
different wearers, we can recognize the activity occurred
in a large area, because camera wearers can walk or move
the head to follow the people or event of interest [35].
An important problem arising from this setting is to identify the co-interest person (CIP) that attracts the attentions
from multiple wearers since this person usually plays a central role in ongoing event of interest [12]. The CIP and
his/her activities are of particular importance for surveillance, anomaly detection and social network construction.
For examples, in a public scenario such as an airport, CIP
can be a person with abnormal behavior or activity who usually draws attention from multiple camera-wearing security
guards and the quick detection of such CIPs can promote
the public security. In a kindergarten, CIP may be a kid
with strange behavior that continuously draws joint attentions from camera-wearing teachers or other kids. In this
case, the CIP detection can facilitate the early findings of
various child development issues. In a group discussion,
people usually focus on the person who leads or gives the
speech at any time and the identification of such CIPs over
time can help summarize and edit all the videos from the
attendee’s cameras for more effective information manage-

4426

