Unsupervised Domain Adaptation for Zero-Shot Learning
Elyor Kodirov, Tao Xiang, Zhenyong Fu, Shaogang Gong
Queen Mary University of London, London E1 4NS, UK
{e.kodirov, t.xiang, z.fu, s.gong}@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) can be considered as a special
case of transfer learning where the source and target domains have different tasks/label spaces and the target domain is unlabelled, providing little guidance for the knowledge transfer. A ZSL method typically assumes that the two
domains share a common semantic representation space,
where a visual feature vector extracted from an image/video
can be projected/embedded using a projection function. Existing approaches learn the projection function from the
source domain and apply it without adaptation to the target
domain. They are thus based on naive knowledge transfer
and the learned projections are prone to the domain shift
problem. In this paper a novel ZSL method is proposed
based on unsupervised domain adaptation. Speciﬁcally,
we formulate a novel regularised sparse coding framework
which uses the target domain class labels’ projections in the
semantic space to regularise the learned target domain projection thus effectively overcoming the projection domain
shift problem. Extensive experiments on four object and action recognition benchmark datasets show that the proposed
ZSL method signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-of-the-arts.

L

tiger
bear

zebra
whale

Label Embedding

L – Label Space
A – Attribute Space
F – Feature Space
Prototypes

A

F à A
Feature Embedding
F

Source Domain

Target Domain

1. Introduction

Figure 1: An illustration of the visual feature projection approach and how it suffers from the domain shift problem
[28] without domain adaptation. For the two classes in the
source domain and the two in the target, both their visual
feature vectors and class names are embedded in a semantic
space (attribute in this case) shared between the two domains. When the low-level feature projection function is
learned from the source and applied without adaptation to
the target, the target domain data and their class prototypes
are well separated, resulting in poor classiﬁcation. This is
due to domain shift – although both tiger and zebra have the
‘has stripe’ attribute, their stripes are visually very different.

Conventional approaches to visual recognition are based
on supervised learning. That is, given a large labelled training dataset of a known set of classes (e.g. hundreds of instances per class), a classiﬁer is learned to classify each instance in a test dataset into the same set of classes. Collecting large quantities of annotated instances for each class is
a bottleneck, especially when visual recognition research is
moving towards a ﬁner granularity [3]. For example, naming many ﬁne-grained bird classes (e.g. Snowy Egret) is
very challenging for most people except bird experts, let
alone collecting instances. Inspired by humans’ ability to
recognise a new object category (class) without ever seeing
a visual instance, zero-shot learning (ZSL) has received increasing interests [18, 9, 19, 23, 15, 1, 36, 11, 2]. Given
a labelled training dataset containing seen classes, visual
recognition by ZSL aims to recognise a visual instance of a
new class that has never been seen before (hence zero-shot),

which greatly reduces the annotation cost and makes visual
recognition more scalable.
A machine learning approach to ZSL requires to extract
the knowledge from the labelled training (source) dataset
and to transfer that knowledge to the test (target) dataset.
ZSL can thus be considered as a special case of transfer
learning [28]. However it differs from conventional inductive transfer learning [28] such as multi-task learning in
that the target domain is unlabelled, and transductive transfer learning such as domain adaptation [16] because the
two domains have different tasks and non-overlapping label
spaces. This unique setting renders most existing transfer
learning methods inapplicable.
Since the target domain has no labelled data, existing
ZSL methods adopt a naive transfer learning approach by

2452

