Continuous Pose Estimation with a Spatial Ensemble of Fisher Regressors
Michele Fenzi1 , Laura Leal-Taixé2 , Jörn Ostermann1 , Tinne Tuytelaars3
1

Institut für Informationsverarbeitung (TNT), Leibniz Universität Hannover
{fenzi,ostermann}@tnt.uni-hannover.de
2

Institute of Geodesy and Photogrammetry, ETH Zurich
leal@geod.baug.ethz.ch
3

KU Leuven, ESAT - PSI, iMinds

Tinne.Tuytelaars@esat.kuleuven.be

Abstract
In this paper, we treat the problem of continuous pose
estimation for object categories as a regression problem on
the basis of only 2D training information. While regression
is a natural framework for continuous problems, regression methods so far achieved inferior results with respect to
3D-based and 2D-based classification-and-refinement approaches. This may be attributed to their weakness to high
intra-class variability as well as to noisy matching procedures and lack of geometrical constraints.
We propose to apply regression to Fisher-encoded vectors computed from large cells by learning an array of
Fisher regressors. Fisher encoding makes our algorithm
flexible to variations in class appearance, while the array
structure permits to indirectly introduce spatial context information in the approach. We formulate our problem as
a MAP inference problem, where the likelihood function is
composed of a generative term based on the prediction error generated by the ensemble of Fisher regressors as well
as a discriminative term based on SVM classifiers.
We test our algorithm on three publicly available
datasets that envisage several difficulties, such as high
intra-class variability, truncations, occlusions, and motion
blur, obtaining state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we focus on the problem of continuous
pose estimation for object categories. This task takes on a
great importance in many applications, where the exact pose
of targeted objects is necessary for the accomplishment of
broader tasks, such as autonomous driving and scene understanding.
Several works address this problem by exploiting 3D in-

Figure 1. Two shortcomings of [6]: (i) in the top row, two feature
regressors (drawn as single feature points in magenta) are wrongly
clustered together; (ii) the feature in the test image (bottom row)
is wrongly matched to a regression cluster (dashed ellipse). On
the contrary, we learn a regressor for each cell according to a fixed
grid. For example, we learn a regressor that predicts the Fisher
vector representation of the bottom left part of the car (represented
in green) for any viewpoint. (Figure best viewed in color.)

formation during training and testing, whereas other works
propose 2D-based methods, thus removing the need for 3D
CAD models of the classes of interest. Among continuous
2D-based approaches, some employ a classify-and-refine
paradigm by letting a refinement step follow a rough viewpoint classification in order to obtain a real-valued pose
[12, 15]. More naturally, others argue that pose estimation
is inherently a continuous problem and set it in a regression
framework [6, 8, 13, 4, 28]. Although regression appears
to be a sound approach, most regression-based methods to
date are still not able to outperform 3D-based and 2D-based
classify-and-refine approaches. In this paper, we start from
the promising idea of feature regression [6], we address

1035

