Entropy-based Latent Structured Output Prediction
Diane Bouchacourt
CentraleSupélec and INRIA Saclay

Sebastian Nowozin
Microsoft Research

diane.bouchacourt@ecp.fr

Sebastian.Nowozin@microsoft.com

M. Pawan Kumar
CentraleSupélec and INRIA Saclay
pawan.kumar@ecp.fr

Abstract
Recently several generalizations of the popular latent
structural SVM framework have been proposed in the literature. Broadly speaking, the generalizations can be divided into two categories: (i) those that predict the output
variables while either marginalizing the latent variables or
estimating their most likely values; and (ii) those that predict the output variables by minimizing an entropy-based
uncertainty measure over the latent space. In order to aid
their application in computer vision, we study these generalizations with the aim of identifying their strengths and
weaknesses. To this end, we propose a novel prediction criterion that includes as special cases all previous prediction
criteria that have been used in the literature. Specifically,
our framework’s prediction criterion minimizes the Aczél
and Daròczy entropy of the output. This in turn allows us
to design a learning objective that provides a unified framework (UF) for latent structured prediction. We develop a
single optimization algorithm and empirically show that it
is as effective as the more complex approaches that have
been previously employed for latent structured prediction.
Using this algorithm, we provide empirical evidence that
lends support to prediction via the minimization of the latent space uncertainty.

1. Introduction
Structured output prediction methods [2, 19] have
gained popularity in computer vision due to their ability to
provide an elegant formulation for systems that perform
various important visual tasks such as object detection [4]
or semantic segmentation [13]. In the supervised setting
these methods assume that training data is fully labeled.
However in many computer vision tasks it can be very expensive, or even impossible, to gather such fully supervised
datasets. For example when performing action recognition,
we may know that a person is performing an action in the
image. However, the exact location of the person may not

be known as it is more expensive to obtain bounding box
annotations compared to image-level annotations.
In order to learn from weakly supervised datasets
(that is, datasets whose samples contain missing information in the annotation), a popular approach is to use
the latent structural support vector machine (LSSVM)
framework [10, 28]. The LSSVM framework models
the missing information of weakly supervised datasets
with latent/hidden variables. Its prediction criterion is the
maximization of the joint posterior probability over the
output and hidden variables. Its learning objective is an
upper bound on a user-specified loss function that provides
a measure of the prediction risk. Recently, several generalizations of the LSSVM framework have been proposed.
While the generalized frameworks share the common
characteristic that their parameters are estimated by minimizing the prediction risk, they differ from each other in
the prediction criterion. Specifically, the methods can be
separated into two categories. The first category predicts
the output while marginalizing over the latent variable or
setting it to its most likely value, and the second performs
prediction while minimizing the uncertainty over the latent
space with the use of an entropy-based uncertainty measure.
In this paper, our goal is to study the LSSVM framework and its generalizations in order to aid their application
in computer vision. We propose a natural unified framework that contains all previous loss-based latent structured
prediction frameworks as special cases. The UF performs
inference of the output variable by minimizing the uncertainty over the hidden variable as measured by the Aczél
and Daròczy (AD) entropy. We derive an optimization
algorithm based on the concave convex procedure (CCCP)
presented in [29] for learning the parameters of the UF.
This allows us to compare the prediction criterion of
all frameworks presented in Section 2 by discounting
any variability that may arise due to differences in the
optimization algorithm. We tested the UF, LSSVM, and
12920

