Generic Promotion of Diffusion-Based Salient Object Detection
Peng Jiang 1

Nuno Vasconcelos 2

Jingliang Peng 1 ∗

1
2

Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China
University of California, San Diego, CA, USA

jump@mail.sdu.edu.cn, nuno@ucsd.edu, jpeng@sdu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this work, we propose a generic scheme to promote
any diffusion-based salient object detection algorithm by
original ways to re-synthesize the diffusion matrix and construct the seed vector. We first make a novel analysis of
the working mechanism of the diffusion matrix, which reveals the close relationship between saliency diffusion and
spectral clustering. Following this analysis, we propose to
re-synthesize the diffusion matrix from the most discriminative eigenvectors after adaptive re-weighting. Further, we
propose to generate the seed vector based on the readily
available diffusion maps, avoiding extra computation for
color-based seed search.
As a particular instance, we use inverse normalized
Laplacian matrix as the original diffusion matrix and promote the corresponding salient object detection algorithm,
which leads to superior performance as experimentally
demonstrated.

1. Introduction
The aim of saliency detection is to identify the most
salient pixels or regions in a digital image which attract
humans’ first visual attention. Results of saliency detection can be applied to other computer vision tasks such as
image resizing, thumbnailing, image segmentation and object detection. Due to its importance, saliency detection has
received intensive research attention resulting in many recently proposed algorithms.
In the field of saliency detection, two branches have developed, which are visual saliency detection [4,9,10,12–15,
19,29,34,39,41] and salient object detection [1,5–7,11,16–
18,20–25,27,32,33,35,37,38,40,42]. While the former tries
to predict where the human eye focuses on, the latter aims to
detect the whole salient object in an image. Saliency in both
branches can be computed in a bottom-up fashion using low
level features [1, 6, 7, 9, 10, 12–16, 21, 22, 25, 29, 32–34, 37,
∗ Corresponding author.

38, 40–42], in a top-down fashion by training with certain
samples driven by specific tasks [4,17,19,20,23,24,27,39],
or in a way of combining both low level and high level features [5, 11, 18, 35]. In this paper, we focus on bottom-up
salient object detection.
Salient object detection algorithms usually generate
bounding boxes, binary foreground and background segmentation,or saliency maps which indicate the saliency likelihood of each pixel. Over the past several years, contrast based methods [1, 6, 11, 32] significantly promote the
benchmark of salient object detection. However, these
methods usually miss small local salient regions or bring
some outliers such that the resultant saliency maps tend to
be nonuniform. To tackle these problems, diffusion-based
methods [16, 24, 33, 38] use diffusion matrices to propagate
saliency information of seeds to the whole salient object.
While most of them focus on how to generate good seed
vectors, they have made little investigation on how to generate good diffusion matrices.
In this work, we aim at a generic scheme that promotes
any diffusion-based salient object detection algorithm by
constructing a good diffusion matrix and a good seed vector
at the same time. First of all, we investigate the working
mechanism of the diffusion matrix through eigen-analysis
to find that the final saliency of a node (called focus node)
is equal to a weighted sum of all the non-zero seed saliency
values, with the weights determined by the similarity in diffusion map (see Sec. 2.2) between the corresponding seed
node and the focus node. Further, since the diffusion map is
formed by the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of the diffusion
matrix, the process of saliency diffusion has a close relationship with spectral clustering. Inspired by the theories of
spectral clustering [26, 31], we propose to re-synthesize the
diffusion matrix using only the most discriminative eigenvectors after adaptive re-weighting. Further, with the highly
discriminative diffusion maps at hand, we propose to construct the seed vector based on the correlations between the
non-border nodes, as measured by the similarities between
their diffusion maps, which is time-efficient by avoiding an
extra pass on color-based seed search.

217

