Image Matting with KL-Divergence Based Sparse Sampling
Levent Karacan Aykut Erdem
Erkut Erdem
Department of Computer Engineering, Hacettepe University
Beytepe, Ankara, TURKEY, TR-06800
{karacan,aykut,erkut}@cs.hacettepe.edu.tr

Abstract
Previous sampling-based image matting methods typically rely on certain heuristics in collecting representative
samples from known regions, and thus their performance
deteriorates if the underlying assumptions are not satisfied.
To alleviate this, in this paper we take an entirely new approach and formulate sampling as a sparse subset selection
problem where we propose to pick a small set of candidate
samples that best explains the unknown pixels. Moreover,
we describe a new distance measure for comparing two
samples which is based on KL-divergence between the distributions of features extracted in the vicinity of the samples.
Using a standard benchmark dataset for image matting, we
demonstrate that our approach provides more accurate results compared with the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Accurately estimating foreground and background layers of an image plays an important role for many image and
video editing applications. In the computer vision literature,
this problem is known as image matting or alpha matting,
and mathematically, refers to the problem of decomposing
a given image I into two layers, the foreground F and the
background B, which is defined in accordance with the following linear image composition equation:
I = ↵F + (1 − ↵)B

(1)

where ↵ represents the unknown alpha matte which defines
the true opacity of each pixel and whose values lies in [0, 1]
with ↵ = 1 denoting a foreground pixel and ↵ = 0 indicating a background pixel. This is a highly ill-posed problem
since for each pixel we have only three inputs but seven unknowns (↵ and the RGB values of F and B). The general
approach to resolve this issue is to consider a kind of prior
knowledge about the foreground and background in form of
user scribbles or a trimap to simplify the problem and use
the spatial and photometric relations between these known
pixels and the unknown ones.

Image matting methods can be mainly categorized into
two groups: propagation-based methods [23, 10, 16, 15, 3,
22, 11] and sampling-based methods [6, 27, 9, 12, 20, 21,
25, 13]. The first group defines an affinity matrix representing the similarity between pixels and propagate the alpha
values of known pixels to the unknown ones. These approaches mostly differ from each other in their propagation
strategies or affinity definitions. The latter group, on the
other hand, collects color samples from known foreground
and background regions to represent the corresponding
color distributions and determine the alpha value of an unknown pixel according to its closeness to these distributions.
Early examples of sampling-based matting methods [6, 27]
fit parametric models to color distributions of foreground
and background regions. Difficulties arise, however, when
an image contains highly textured areas. Thus, virtually all
recent sampling-based approaches [9, 12, 20, 21, 25, 13]
consider a non-parametric setting and employ a particular
selection criteria to collect a subset of known F and B samples.Then, for each unknown pixel, they search for the best
(F, B) pair within the representative samples, and once the
best pair is found, the final alpha matte is computed as
↵
ˆ=

(I − B).(F − B)
.
kF − Bk2

(2)

The recent sampling-based approaches mentioned above
also apply local smoothing as a post-processing step to further improve the quality of the estimated alpha matte. Apart
from the two main types of approaches, there are also some
hybrid methods which consider a combination of propagation and sampling based formulations [4], or some supervised machine learning based methods which learn proper
matting functions from a training set of examples [29]. For
a more comprehensive up-to-date survey of image matting
methods, we refer the reader to [30, 26].
The matting approach we present in this paper belongs
to the group of sampling-based methods that rely on a nonparametric formulation. As will be discussed in more detail
in the next section, these methods typically exploit different
strategies to gather the representative foreground and back1424

