Fast Orthogonal Projection Based on Kronecker Product
Xu Zhang1,2 , Felix X. Yu2,3 , Ruiqi Guo3 , Sanjiv Kumar3 , Shengjin Wang1 , Shih-Fu Chang2
1
Tsinghua University, 2 Columbia University, 3 Google Research

Abstract
We propose a family of structured matrices to speed
up orthogonal projections for high-dimensional data commonly seen in computer vision applications. In this, a
structured matrix is formed by the Kronecker product of
a series of smaller orthogonal matrices. This achieves
O(d log d) computational complexity and O(log d) space
complexity for d-dimensional data, a drastic improvement
over the standard unstructured projections whose computational and space complexities are both O(d2 ). We also
introduce an efficient learning procedure for optimizing
such matrices in a data dependent fashion. We demonstrate the significant advantages of the proposed approach
in solving the approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) image
search problem with both binary embedding and quantization. Comprehensive experiments show that the proposed
approach can achieve similar or better accuracy as the existing state-of-the-art but with significantly less time and
memory.

1. Introduction
Linear projection is one of the most widely used operations, fundamental to many algorithms in computer vision.
Given a vector x ∈ Rd , and a projection matrix R ∈ Rk×d ,
the linear projection computes h(x) ∈ Rk :
h(x) = Rx.

In the area of large-scale search and retrieval in computer
vision, linear projection is usually followed by quantization to convert high dimensional image features into binary embeddings [15, 23, 34, 25] or product codes [16, 26].
These compact codes have been used to speed up search
and reduce storage in image retrieval [32], feature matching [31], attribute recognition [28], and object categorization [6] among others. For example, the popularly used Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH) technique applies a linear
This work was supported by the National Science and Technology
Support Program under Grant No. 2013BAK02B04 and Initiative Scientic
Research Program of Tsinghua University under Grant No. 20141081253.
Felix X. Yu was supported in part by the IBM PhD Fellowship Award when
working on this project.

projection to the input data before converting it into a binary or a non-binary code. For instance, a k-bit binary code
is simply given as,
h(x) = sign(Rx).

(1)

However, the projection operation becomes expensive as the
input dimensionality d increases. In practice, to achieve
high recall in retrieval tasks, it is often desirable to use long
codes with a large k such that k = O(d) [22, 8, 29]. In this
case, the space and computational complexity of projection
is O(d2 ), and such a high cost often becomes the bottleneck
at both learning and prediction time. For instance, when
k = d = 50, 000, projection matrix alone takes 10 GB (single precision) and projecting one vector can take 800 ms on
a single core.
In addition, in many applications, it is desired that the
projection matrix is orthogonal. An orthogonal transformation preserves the Euclidean distance between points.
And it can also distribute the variance more evenly across
the dimensions. These properties are important to make
several well-known techniques perform well on real-world
data [10, 26]. Another motivation for orthogonal projection comes from the goal of learning maximally uncorrelated bits while learning data-dependent binary codes.
One way to achieve that is by imposing orthogonal (or
near orthogonal) constraints on the projections [10, 37].
In binary embedding, many independent empirical experiments [18, 15, 31, 10] have shown that imposing orthogonality constraint on the projection achieves better results for
approximate nearest neighbor search. Ji et al. [19] provided
theoretical analysis to support the use of orthogonal projection. While in quantization, the orthogonality constraint
of the projection matrix makes some critical optimization
problems possible to solve [26, 35]. However, the main
challenge is that the computational complexity of building
an orthogonal matrix is O(d3 ) while space and projection
complexity is O(d2 ), both of which are expensive for large
d.
In order to speed up projection for high-dimensional
data, researchers have studied various types of structured
matrices, including Hadamard matrix, Toeplitz matrix and
Circulant matrix. The idea behind projecting with structured matrices instead of the traditional unstructured matri-

2929

