Storyline Representation of Egocentric Videos with
an Application to Story-based Search
Bo Xiong
The University of Texas at Austin

Gunhee Kim
Seoul National University

Leonid Sigal
Disney Research

bxiong@cs.utexas.edu

gunhee@snu.ac.kr

lsigal@disneyresearch.com

Abstract
Egocentric videos are a valuable source of information
as a daily log of our lives. However, large fraction of egocentric video content is typically irrelevant and boring to
re-watch. It is an agonizing task, for example, to manually
search for the moment when your daughter first met Mickey
Mouse from hours-long egocentric videos taken at Disneyland. Although many summarization methods have been
successfully proposed to create concise representations of
videos, in practice, the value of the subshots to users may
change according to their immediate preference/mood; thus
summaries with fixed criteria may not fully satisfy users’
various search intents. To address this, we propose a storyline representation that expresses an egocentric video as
a set of jointly inferred, through MRF inference, story elements comprising of actors, locations, supporting objects
and events, depicted on a timeline. We construct such a storyline with very limited annotation data (a list of map locations and weak knowledge of what events may be possible at
each location), by bootstrapping the process with data obtained through focused Web image and video searches. Our
representation promotes story-based search with queries in
the form of AND-OR graphs, which span any subset of story
elements and their spatio-temporal composition. We show
effectiveness of our approach on a set of unconstrained
YouTube egocentric videos of visits to Disneyland.

1. Introduction
The recent emergence of lightweight and wearable egocentric cameras allows collection of vast volumes of data
that visualize our experiences and social interactions [8].
The point-of-view data are potentially valuable as they
have been shown to be useful in estimating gaze [25] or
eye contact [44], and simplifying recognition of activities
[7, 18, 27] and object-person interactions [9, 27, 31]. Despite its appeal, however, the challenge with egocentric data
is that it consists of long and unstructured content, most
of which is boring for the users. Hence, recently, there has
been a large focus on efficient summarization techniques for

Figure 1. Motivation for storyline representation of egocentric
videos. (a) An input video. (b) Storyline representation with four
story elements (i.e. actors, events, locations, objects) on a timeline. (c) Story-based video search for a query represented by an
AND-OR graph that combines any subsets of story elements.

egocentric videos [20, 23]. However, such methods may be
required to make user- and intent-agnostic decisions about
importance of objects [20] (through pre-trained detectors)
or events in videos [3] and select either keyframes or subshots that maximize the perceived utility and diversity.
In this paper, our objective is somewhat different; we
aim at developing an approach for representing a given egocentric video using a storyline representation, as is exemplified with trip to Disneyland in Fig.1. Inspired by story
research in psychology and AI [37], we extract four story
elements: {Actors, Location, Supporting objects, Events}
on a timeline. We infer these story elements jointly, using
an MRF formulation, based on weakly-supervised online
data (as opposed to annotations, e.g. [20]), and automatically account for the co-occurrences between the various
story elements such as watching wild animals (supporting
14525

