Cascaded Sparse Spatial Bins for Efficient and Effective Generic Object
Detection
David Novotny1,2
Visual Geometry Group
University of Oxford

Jiri Matas2
Center for Machine Perception
Czech Technical University in Prague

david@robots.ox.ac.uk

matas@cmp.felk.cvut.cz

1

Abstract
A novel efficient method for extraction of object proposals is introduced. Its ”objectness” function exploits deep
spatial pyramid features, a novel fast-to-compute HoGbased edge statistic and the EdgeBoxes score [42]. The
efficiency is achieved by the use of spatial bins in a novel
combination with sparsity-inducing group normalized SVM.
State-of-the-art recall performance is achieved on Pascal VOC07, significantly outperforming methods with comparable speed. Interestingly, when only 100 proposals per
image are considered the method attains 78% recall on
VOC07. The method improves mAP of the RCNN stateof-the-art class-specific detector, increasing it by 10 points
when only 50 proposals are used in each image. The system
trained on twenty classes performs well on the two hundred
class ILSVRC2013 set confirming generalization capability.

1. Introduction
Object detectors have often been applied in the sliding
window fashion scoring bounding boxes in all considered
positions, scales and aspect ratios using either an inexpensive classifier [13, 7] or cascades [36, 35]. The development of sophisticated and computationally demanding deep
learning based object detectors [15, 16] stressed the need to
decrease the number of fully scored bounding boxes while
retaining high recall levels.
Similar to the first stages of the cascades, object proposals [3, 1, 34] are class-agnostic high-recall-low-precision
object detectors that tackle computational efficiency by rejecting likely background regions while retaining bounding boxes covering instances of the semantic object classes
which are later classified by the final class-specific object
detector.
The authors were supported by the Czech Science Foundation project
GACR P103/12/G084 and by the Technology Agency of the Czech Republic TE01020415 V3C – Visual Computing Competence Center.

2

State-of-the-art proposal methods either generate candidate boxes from image segments, e.g. groups of superpixels or randomly initialized binary segmentation outputs
[34, 24, 3, 10, 2], or select proposals from a large pool of
densely sampled image regions according to a predefined
”objectness” score [1, 27, 5, 40]. The latter approaches,
also known as ”window scoring” methods [17], utilize diverse types of inexpensive features that most commonly
capture edge statistics along the scored region boundaries
[27, 42, 5].
In this paper we introduce a method for extraction of
object proposals using the window scoring approach. The
key novelty is the use of spatial bins [23] in combination
with group normalized SVM which enables to carry out the
superficially complex proposal score computation surprisingly fast. The proposed objectness function exploits the
following sources of information: the deep spatial pyramid
features introduced in [16], a novel fast-to-compute HoGbased edge statistic which also takes advantage of the spatial bins and the EdgeBoxes score [42]. Optionally, recall of
the method can be boosted by selective search [34] but this
slows down the detection slightly.
We experimentally verified that: (1) The introduced
method gives state-of-the-art results when comparing the
overlap-recall curves. (2) The performance of the state-ofthe-art class-specific RCNN detector [15] on our object proposals improves and the performance is less sensitive to the
number of used proposals in comparison with other stateof-the-art proposal methods. (3) Despite being trained on a
dataset that contains a small set of distinct object classes, it
generalizes to previously unseen classes. These factors result in a proposal method that is as fast as standardly used
Selective Search in ”fast mode” [15, 16] while achieving
better recalls.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Sect. 2
gives brief information about modern proposal approaches.
A concise explanation of our method is provided in Sect. 3.
The details about the features we use are in sections 4, 5,
6. An explanation of the utilized feature selection approach
11152

