Selective Encoding for Recognizing Unreliably Localized Faces
Ang Li, Vlad I. Morariu, Larry S. Davis
University of Maryland, College Park
{angli,morariu,lsd}@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
As face recognition techniques have gradually matured
over the past few decades, the research focus has shifted
from recognizing faces with controlled variations to unconstrained real-world scenarios [3]. Modern approaches based
on high dimensional feature encoding [4, 13, 16, 19] and
deep neural networks [20, 21] have recently emerged and
achieved promising results on unconstrained face databases
[6, 25]. However, most existing face recognition systems
depend on accurate face detection and registration. Unfortunately, these two components are a significant source of
error in real-world environments or real-time applications.
In the application of mobile face authentication, for example, faces recorded from a front-facing smartphone camera often exhibit rare non-horizontal poses (i.e., neither
frontal nor profile) and are often partly outside the camera’s

Percentage of videos

Most existing face verification systems rely on precise
face detection and registration. However, these two components are fallible under unconstrained scenarios (e.g.,
mobile face authentication) due to partial occlusions, pose
variations, lighting conditions and limited view-angle coverage of mobile cameras. We address the unconstrained
face verification problem by encoding face images directly
without any explicit models of detection or registration. We
propose a selective encoding framework which injects relevance information (e.g., foreground/background probabilities) into each cluster of a descriptor codebook. An additional selector component also discards distractive image patches and improves spatial robustness. We evaluate
our framework using Gaussian mixture models and Fisher
vectors on challenging face verification datasets. We apply selective encoding to Fisher vector features, which in
our experiments degrade quickly with inaccurate face localization; our framework improves robustness with no extra
test time computation. We also apply our approach to mobile based active face authentication task, demonstrating its
utility in real scenarios.

0.55
0.5
0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2

5

10

15

20

25

30

Least # of frames with face detected

Figure 1. Performance of Viola-Jones (O PENCV) multi-scale face
detector on a mobile based video face authentication dataset [5]
with a total of 19,158 sampled video clips each 30 frames long.
The x-axis is the number of frames in each video and the y-axis
shows the percentage of video clips with at least the corresponding
number of frames having faces detected. While all of the video
clips contain faces, only 54% of the videos have at least one face
detected and 22% have faces detected across all the 30 frames.

viewpoint. This problem is exacerbated when users are performing other tasks (as opposed to actively ensuring that
their face is within the camera view) in which case the facial video quality becomes even worse, further challenging
existing face detection and registration systems. For example, one of our experiments shows that the popular ViolaJones face detector [23] fails on a significant portion of a
smartphone-recorded face dataset [5] (Fig. 1).
Most current face recognition datasets use images
viewed from a distance for benchmarking. This type of data
involves other challenges, compared to those from mobile
applications: low image resolution and background distractions, because of which we can still expect some degree of
errors in the detection step, i.e., improper estimation of face
centers and bounding box sizes. A statistical illustration of
the face detection errors using FDDB benchmark data [7] is
shown in Fig. 2.
Motivated by these observations, we explore the possibility of addressing unconstrained face verification problems without explicit face detection or registration. The
central idea of our approach is that the codebook can be optimized to encode additional information for discriminating
relevant image patches from irrelevant background distractions. We propose a unified codebook-based framework,
named “selective encoding”, the core of which is a compo-

3613

