Conditional High-order Boltzmann Machine:
A Supervised Learning Model for Relation Learning
Yan Huang1
Wei Wang1
Liang Wang1,2
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition
2
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
1

{yhuang, wangwei, wangliang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Relation learning is a fundamental operation in many
computer vision tasks. Recently, high-order Boltzmann machine and its variants have exhibited the great power of
modelling various data relation. However, most of them
are unsupervised learning models which are not very discriminative and thus cannot server as a standalone solution to relation learning tasks. In this paper, we explore
supervised learning algorithms and propose a new model
named Conditional High-order Boltzmann Machine (CHBM), which can be directly used as a bilinear classifier to assign similarity scores for pairwise images. Then, to better
deal with complex data relation, we propose a gated version of CHBM which untangles factors of variation by exploiting a set of latent variables to gate classification. We
perform four-order tensor factorization for parameter reduction, and present two efficient supervised learning algorithms from the perspectives of being generative and discriminative, respectively. The experimental results of image transformation visualization, binary-way classification
and face verification demonstrate that, by performing supervised learning, our models can greatly improve the performance.

1. Introduction
The goal of relation learning is to measure the similarity
between samples, which is crucial to many retrieval, classification and verification tasks. To deal with that, in the
past few years, researchers adapted the desired similarity
measure to the form of metric and proposed various metric
learning methods [9, 11, 42]. However, the metric assumption is insufficient to cover the diversity of data relation in
the real world [5]. Recently, High-order Boltzmann Machine (HBM) [33] as a powerful relation learning model,

has been applied to a range of tasks, e.g., analogy making
[27], face verification [37], action recognition [39] and motion estimation [40].
The learning algorithms of HBM can be categorized into two main classes: conditional learning and joint learning. Given pairs of samples, the idea behind conditional
learning is to use the latent variables to learn the conditional distribution of one sample given the other one [26, 27].
To overcome the difficulty that the conditional probability
cannot be directly used to measure similarity in matching
applications, joint learning alternatively learns the joint distribution over pairwise samples, where the joint probability
can be used as a similarity score [37].
Both conditional learning and joint learning are performed in an unsupervised way, i.e., without using any relational labels, which is less discriminative for relation learning tasks. Taking face verification as an example, the goal is
to assign a binary relational class (0 for “mismatched” and 1
for “matched”) to a given pair of facial images. For this kind
of binary classification problem, most HBM-based models
just use the matched pairs of samples during training but ignore the mismatched ones [37, 19]. As a result, the learned
models only impose constraints for the intra-label compactness but provide no guarantee for the inter-label separability, which is thus suboptimal for the discriminative tasks.
In fact, the modelling of separability has been extensively studies by other similarity learning and metric learning
methods such as [5, 9].
In this paper, to perform fully supervised learning and
take the inter-label separability into consideration, we
propose the Conditional High-order Boltzmann Machine
(CHBM) which connects relational class labels to pairwise
inputs with multiplicative interactions. The model can be
regarded as a bilinear classifier for similarity, where the underlying assumption is that data relation can be linearly separated, and the probabilities of binary classes can be directly
4321
4265

