A Data-driven Metric for Comprehensive Evaluation of Saliency Models
Jia Li1,2∗ , Changqun Xia1 , Yafei Song1 , Shu Fang3 , Xiaowu Chen1∗
1

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
2

International Research Institute for Multidisciplinary Science, Beihang University

3

Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, School of EE & CS, Peking University

Abstract
In the past decades, hundreds of saliency models have
been proposed for fixation prediction, along with dozens of
evaluation metrics. However, existing metrics, which are often heuristically designed, may draw conflict conclusions in
comparing saliency models. As a consequence, it becomes
somehow confusing on the selection of metrics in comparing new models with state-of-the-arts. To address this problem, we propose a data-driven metric for comprehensive evaluation of saliency models. Instead of heuristically designing such a metric, we first conduct extensive subjective
tests to find how saliency maps are assessed by the humanbeing. Based on the user data collected in the tests, nine
representative evaluation metrics are directly compared by
quantizing their performances in assessing saliency maps. Moreover, we propose to learn a data-driven metric by
using Convolutional Neural Network. Compared with existing metrics, experimental results show that the data-driven
metric performs the most consistently with the human-being
in evaluating saliency maps as well as saliency models.

1. Introduction
Due to the booming of visual saliency models in the past
decades, model benchmarking has become a popular topic in the field of computer vision (e.g., [3, 4, 7]). Usually, such large-scale benchmarking efforts require several evaluation metrics so as to simultaneously assess a saliency
model, especially a fixation prediction model, from multiple perspectives. However, the performance of a saliency
model may change remarkably when different heuristically
designed metrics are used. As a consequence, it becomes
somehow confusing on which metrics should be used and
which models should be compared with in designing new
saliency models.
Actually, this phenomenon has already been noticed by
many researchers, and a lot of efforts have been spent on
* Correspondence should be addressed to Jia Li and Xiaowu Chen.
Email: {jiali, chen}@buaa.edu.cn

Figure 1. A representative question in the subjective tests. Multiple subjects are asked to determine which estimated saliency map
(ESM) is more similar to the ground-truth saliency map (GSM).

refining existing metrics. For each metric, many variants
have been proposed to refine its performance, which, unfortunately, raise new problems. For example, the metric Kullback-Leibler Divergence (KLD) can be computed as the relative entropy between: 1) saliency histograms at recorded fixations and random points [3, 17, 18, 36];
2) saliency histograms at recorded fixations and shuffled
fixations randomly gathered from different images [29, 34,
38]; 3) saliency distributions over the estimated saliency
map (ESM) and the ground-truth saliency map (GSM) [32].
Note that the computation of KLD can also take either the
symmetric form [3] or the asymmetric form [32]. Without
knowing the implementation details of these variants, it becomes difficult to directly compare saliency models, even
though their performances on the same dataset have been
reported by using the same metric (e.g., KLD).
To address this problem, this paper proposes a datadriven metric for comprehensive evaluation on saliency
models. Instead of heuristically designing such a metric, we
first conduct extensive subjective tests to find how saliency
maps are assessed by the human-being. As shown in Fig.
1, subjects are asked to determine which of the two ESMs
performs better in approximating the GSM (i.e., the fixation density map). By collecting 50,400 binary annotations
from 22 subjects, the performances of nine representative
metrics are now quantized, which enables the direct comparisons between metrics. Based on the user data, we also
propose to learn a comprehensive evaluation metric by us-

190

