Person Re-identification with Correspondence Structure Learning
Yang Shen1 , Weiyao Lin1* , Junchi Yan1 , Mingliang Xu2 , Jianxin Wu3 , and Jingdong Wang4
1

Dept. of Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China (∗ Corresponding author)
2
School of Information Engineering, Zhengzhou University, China
3
National Key Lab for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
4
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of handling spatial
misalignments due to camera-view changes or human-pose
variations in person re-identification. We first introduce a
boosting-based approach to learn a correspondence structure which indicates the patch-wise matching probabilities
between images from a target camera pair. The learned correspondence structure can not only capture the spatial correspondence pattern between cameras but also handle the
viewpoint or human-pose variation in individual images.
We further introduce a global-based matching process. It
integrates a global matching constraint over the learned
correspondence structure to exclude cross-view misalignments during the image patch matching process, hence
achieving a more reliable matching score between images.
Experimental results on various datasets demonstrate the
effectiveness of our approach.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) is of increasing importance in visual surveillance. The goal of person Re-ID is to
identify a specific person indicated by a probe image from
a set of gallery images captured from cross-view cameras
(i.e., cameras that are non-overlapping and different from
the probe image’s camera). It remains challenging due to
the large appearance changes in different camera views and
the interferences from background or object occlusion.
One major challenge for person Re-ID is the uncontrolled spatial misalignment between images due to cameraview changes or human-pose variations. For example,
in Fig. 1a, the green patch located in the lower part in
camera A’s image corresponds to patches from the upper
part in camera B’s image. However, most existing works
[31, 12, 13, 8, 9, 10, 24, 21, 34, 3] focus on handling the
overall appearance variations between images, while the

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. (a) and (b): Two examples of using a correspondence
structure to handle spatial misalignments between images from a
camera pair. Images are obtained from the same camera pair: A
and B. The colored squares represent sample patches in each image while the lines between images indicate the matching probability between patches (line width is proportional to the probability values). (c): The correspondence structure matrix including
all patch matching probabilities between A and B (the matrix is
down-sampled for a clearer illustration). (Best viewed in color)

spatial misalignment among images’ local patches is not addressed. Although some patch-based methods [19, 16, 33]
address the spatial misalignment problem by decomposing
images into patches and performing an online patch-level
matching, their performances are often restrained by the online matching process which is easily affected by the mismatched patches due to similar appearance or occlusion.
In this paper, we argue that due to the stable setting of
most cameras (e.g., fixed camera angle or location), each
camera has a stable constraint on the spatial configuration of
its captured images. For example, images in Fig. 1a and 1b
are obtained from the same camera pair: A and B. Due to
the constraint from camera angle difference, body parts in
camera A’s images are located at lower places than those in
camera B, implying a lower-to-upper correspondence pattern between them. Meanwhile, constraints from camera
locations can also be observed. Camera A (which monitors
an exit region) includes more side-view images, while camera B (monitoring a road) shows more front or back-view
images. This further results in a high probability of side-to13200

