Action Localization in Videos through Context Walk
Khurram Soomro, Haroon Idrees, Mubarak Shah
Center for Research in Computer Vision (CRCV), University of Central Florida (UCF)
{ksoomro, haroon, shah}@eecs.ucf.edu

G n ( Vn , En )

H

…

(a) Training Videos
for Action c

G1 ( V1, E1 )

…

The most challenging problems associated with automated analysis of videos are related to actions, with a variety of approaches in computer vision [2, 33] developed
to address them. One of the problems is action recognition which entails classification of a given video in terms
of a set of action labels. With the introduction of uncontrolled datasets, consisting of videos captured in realistic non-experimental settings and longer durations such as
those from YouTube [24, 16], action detection has emerged
as a new problem where the goal is to determine the location of an action in addition to its class. Action detection, which may refer to temporal detection [16] or spatiotemporal action localization [6, 23, 4, 13], is especially dif-

Video n

…

1. Introduction

Video 1

…

This paper presents an efficient approach for localizing
actions by learning contextual relations, in the form of relative locations between different video regions. We begin
by over-segmenting the videos into supervoxels, which have
the ability to preserve action boundaries and also reduce
the complexity of the problem. Context relations are learned
during training which capture displacements from all the
supervoxels in a video to those belonging to foreground actions. Then, given a testing video, we select a supervoxel
randomly and use the context information acquired during
training to estimate the probability of each supervoxel belonging to the foreground action. The walk proceeds to a
new supervoxel and the process is repeated for a few steps.
This “context walk” generates a conditional distribution
of an action over all the supervoxels. A Conditional Random Field is then used to find action proposals in the video,
whose confidences are obtained using SVMs. We validated
the proposed approach on several datasets and show that
context in the form of relative displacements between supervoxels can be extremely useful for action localization.
This also results in significantly fewer evaluations of the
classifier, in sharp contrast to the alternate sliding window
approaches.

Composite Graph (  )

Abstract

(b) Context Graphs

(c) Supervoxel
Action Specificity

Figure 1. This figure illustrates the idea of using context in the
form of spatio-temporal displacements between supervoxels. (a)
Given Nc videos for an action c which have been over-segmented
into supervoxels, we construct a context graph for each video as
shown in (b). Each graph has edges emanating from all the supervoxels to those that belong to foreground action (circumscribed
with dashed green contours). The color of each node in (b) is the
same as that of the corresponding supervoxel in (a). Finally, a
composite graph (Ξ) from all the context graphs is constructed,
implemented efficiently using a kd-tree. (c) We also quantify ’supervoxel action specificity’ which returns the likelihood of a particular supervoxel belonging to an action and use it in conjunction
with context to localize actions.

ficult when background is cluttered, videos are untrimmed
or contain multiple actors or actions. Applications include
video search, action retrieval, multimedia event recounting
[1], and many others related to video understanding.
Many existing approaches [26, 31] learn an action detector on trimmed training videos and then exhaustively search
for each action through the testing videos. However, with
realistic videos having longer durations and higher resolutions, it becomes impractical to use sliding window approach to look for actions or interesting events [38, 13, 18].
Analyzing the videos of datasets used for evaluation of action localization such as UCF-Sports [24], JHMDB [15],
and THUMOS [16] reveals that, on average, the volume occupied by an action (in pixels) is considerably small com-

3280

