Learning to rank based on subsequences
Basura Fernando∗
ACRV, The Australian National University

Efstratios Gavves∗
QUVA Lab, University of Amsterdam, Netherlands

Damien Muselet
Jean Monnet University, St-Etienne, France

Tinne Tuytelaars
KU Leuven, ESAT-PSI, iMinds, Belgium

Abstract
We present a supervised learning to rank algorithm that
effectively orders images by exploiting the structure in image sequences. Most often in the supervised learning to
rank literature, ranking is approached either by analyzing pairs of images or by optimizing a list-wise surrogate loss function on full sequences. In this work we
propose MidRank, which learns from moderately sized
sub-sequences instead. These sub-sequences contain useful structural ranking information that leads to better
learnability during training and better generalization during testing. By exploiting sub-sequences, the proposed
MidRank improves ranking accuracy considerably on an extensive array of image ranking applications and datasets.

1. Introduction
The objective of supervised learning-to-rank is to learn
from training sequences a method that correctly orders unknown test sequences. This topic has been widely studied
over the last years. Some applications include video analysis [28], person re-identification [31], zero-shot recognition
[21], active learning [17], dimensionality reduction [8], 3D
feature analysis [30], binary code learning [18], learning
from privileged information [26] and interestingness prediction [10]. In particular, we focus on image re-ranking.
Image re-ranking is useful in modern image search tools
to facilitate user specific interests by re-ordering images
based on some user specific criteria. In this context, we
re-order the top-k retrieved images from an image search
engine based on some criteria such as interestingness. In
this paper, we propose a new, efficient and accurate supervised learning-to-rank method that uses the information in
image subsequences effectively for image re-ranking.
Most learning-to-rank methods rely on pair-wise cues
and constraints. However, pairs of ranked images provide
rather weak, and often ambiguous, constraints, as illus∗ The work was conducted at KU Leuven, ESAT-PSI.

Figure 1: Imagine you want to learn a ranking function from
the example pairs in the top row. What could be the ranking
criterion implied by the data? Ranking more to less sporty
cars could be a criterion. Ranking more to less colorful cars
could be another. Given an example sequence, however, as
in the bottom row, it becomes clear that the chronological
order is the most plausible ranking criterion. We advocate
the use of such (sub-) sequences, instead of just pairs of images or long sequences, for supervised learning of rankers.

trated in Fig. 1. Especially when complex and structured
data is involved, considering only pairs during training may
confuse the learning of rankers as shown in [6, 19, 35].
Learning-to-rank is in fact a prediction task on lists of
data/images. Treatment of pairs of images as independent
and identically distributed random variables during training
is not ideal [6]. It is, therefore, better, to consider longer
subsequences within a sequence, which contain more information than pair of elements, see Fig. 1.
To exploit the structure in long sequences, list-wise
methods [6, 29, 32, 33, 34, 35] optimize for ranking losses
defined over sequences. Although such an approach can exploit the structure in sequences, working on long sequences
introduces a new problem. More specifically, as the number
of wrong permutations grows exponentially with respect to
the sequence length, list-wise methods often end up with a
more difficult learning problem [19]. Hence, list-wise meth12785

