Higher-order CRF Structural Segmentation of 3D Reconstructed Surfaces
Jingbo Liu Jinglu Wang Tian Fang Chiew-Lan Tai Long Quan
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{jingbo, jwangae, tianft, taicl, quan}@ust.hk

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a structural segmentation algorithm to partition multi-view stereo reconstructed surfaces
of large-scale urban environments into structural segments.
Each segment corresponds to a structural component describable by a surface primitive of up to the second order. This segmentation is for use in subsequent urban object
modeling, vectorization, and recognition.
To overcome the high geometrical and topological noise
levels in the 3D reconstructed urban surfaces, we formulate
the structural segmentation as a higher-order Conditional
Random Field (CRF) labeling problem. It not only incorporates classical lower-order 2D and 3D local cues, but also
encodes contextual geometric regularities to disambiguate
the noisy local cues. A general higher-order CRF is difficult to solve. We develop a bottom-up progressive approach
through a patch-based surface representation, which iteratively evolves from the initial mesh triangles to the final
segmentation. Each iteration alternates between performing a prior discovery step, which finds the contextual regularities of the patch-based representation, and an inference
step that leverages the regularities as higher-order priors to
construct a more stable and regular segmentation.
The efficiency and robustness of the proposed method
is extensively demonstrated on real reconstruction models, yielding significantly better performance than classical
mesh segmentation methods.

1. Introduction
Modern multi-view stereo (MVS) algorithms are capable
of reconstructing a large-scale 3D urban surface with unprecedented scalability and accuracy [1, 6, 7, 16, 27]. Segmenting the reconstructed surfaces is fundamental to higher
level operations like object modeling and understanding a
scene. Different from general clean meshes, the reconstructed meshes contain high geometrical and topological
noises due to the imprecision of the reconstruction process.
Besides, the reconstructed surface is under-sampled due to
the insufficient image resolution or occlusion. Therefore,

Figure 1: An example of the structural segmentation decomposing the reconstructed surface (left) into components,
such as roofs, façades, domes, spires, and chimneys and so
on (right).

the segmentation problem is challenging despite the existence of a vast body of mesh segmentation literature. In
this paper, we investigate the problem of a precise structural partition of a reconstructed urban surface. Each segment is intended to possess homogeneous textures and can
be described by a second order surface patch. Often, such
a segment corresponds to a structural component, such as a
façade, roof, dome or column, as shown in Figure 1.
Related work. A significant number of works have been
devoted to partitioning urban scenes into structural segments. The input can be 2D images [25], 3D points from
LiDAR [20], or 2D and 3D jointly [9, 16, 19]. The point
clouds used in these approaches are unstructured thus these
approaches are less aware of the topology. The approaches
in [9, 16] are closest to ours since we all focus on the MVS
reconstructed surface.
While mesh segmentation has rich literature, existing
methods handle relatively clean input meshes. General purpose methods such as [10, 21] are able to produce semantically meaningful segmentation, however do not guarantee man-made characteristics like piecewise-qudraic, symmetry and the like. Our approach is highly related to the

2093

