Joint Probabilistic Data Association Revisited
Seyed Hamid Rezatofighi1 Anton Milan1 Zhen Zhang2 Qinfeng Shi1 Anthony Dick1 Ian Reid1
1
School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide, Australia
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xian, China
hamid.rezatofighi@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract

4
8

In this paper, we revisit the joint probabilistic data association (JPDA) technique and propose a novel solution
based on recent developments in finding the m-best solutions to an integer linear program. The key advantage
of this approach is that it makes JPDA computationally
tractable in applications with high target and/or clutter
density, such as spot tracking in fluorescence microscopy
sequences and pedestrian tracking in surveillance footage.
We also show that our JPDA algorithm embedded in a
simple tracking framework is surprisingly competitive with
state-of-the-art global tracking methods in these two applications, while needing considerably less processing time.

1. Introduction
Despite significant technical advances made in automated tracking of moving objects, multi-target tracking remains a challenging task. Within computer vision, applications of multi-target tracking are exemplified by the tasks of
surveillance of a crowd of pedestrians [5, 25, 28, 29, 33, 44],
and of tracking dense cellular and sub-cellular structures in
biological sequences [11, 35] (Fig. 1). The main challenge
in these applications is to estimate the state of an unknown
and time-varying number of targets from a set of noisy and
uncertain measurements. Targets often remain undetected
due to occlusion, strong variation in appearance or other
detector failures. Moreover, the observations generally include a set of spurious measurements (clutter) not originating from any target. Therefore, one of the crucial steps in
the development of a reliable multi-target tracking systems
is data association, which assigns the detected measurements to the existing targets in the presence of noise, clutter
and detection uncertainty.
Joint probabilistic data association (JPDA) [16], is an elegant method of associating the detected measurements in
each time frame with existing targets using a joint probabilistic score. Proposed in the early 1980s, it is widely accepted as a reliable data association technique and it has in-

13
12

19
17

14
1615

11

6
11
8
127

5 18
13
6

4 1

9

9

5
1

t=149

3
14
10 7

2

Figure 1. Two sample frames from challenging multi-target tracking applications: Pedestrian tracking in a surveillance camera
(left) and spot tracking in fluorescence microscopy (right).

fluenced a degree of the recent literature in the visual tracking community [11, 28, 29, 32, 35, 39, 42]. However, naive
JPDA suffers from combinatorial complexity as it considers all possible assignments of measurements to targets to
calculate the joint probabilistic score. Therefore, with an
increasing number of targets and/or clutter, the technique is
intractable in almost all practical applications without the
use of heuristics such as gating. Even when gating is used,
for any given gate size there will be a degree of target and/or
clutter density that renders the method impractical. As a result, usually its application domain has been restricted to
multi-target tracking scenarios with few, well separated targets.
In this paper, we revisit the JPDA formulation but address the issue of its complexity by leveraging the latest
developments in finding the m-best solutions of an integer
linear program. We propose a computationally tractable approximation to the original JPDA algorithm and show that it
takes only a fraction of the time to compute without forfeiting performance. We demonstrate its applicability in practical applications with numerous targets and measurements
such as fluorescence spot tracking in biological sequences
and pedestrian tracking in crowded scenes. Moreover, we
show that our JPDA algorithm, along with a simple tracking
framework, can surprisingly perform on par, or even outperform state-of-the art multi-target tracking methods with
a considerable gain in processing time.
We make the following contributions: (i) We reformulate the calculation of individual JPDA assignment scores
13047

