Learning image representations tied to ego-motion
Dinesh Jayaraman
The University of Texas at Austin

Kristen Grauman
The University of Texas at Austin

dineshj@cs.utexas.edu

grauman@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Understanding how images of objects and scenes behave in response to specific ego-motions is a crucial aspect of proper visual development, yet existing visual learning methods are conspicuously disconnected from the physical source of their images. We propose to exploit proprioceptive motor signals to provide unsupervised regularization in convolutional neural networks to learn visual representations from egocentric video. Specifically, we enforce
that our learned features exhibit equivariance i.e. they respond predictably to transformations associated with distinct ego-motions. With three datasets, we show that our
unsupervised feature learning approach significantly outperforms previous approaches on visual recognition and
next-best-view prediction tasks. In the most challenging
test, we show that features learned from video captured on
an autonomous driving platform improve large-scale scene
recognition in static images from a disjoint domain.

1. Introduction
How is visual learning shaped by ego-motion? In their
famous “kitten carousel” experiment, psychologists Held
and Hein examined this question in 1963 [10]. To analyze
the role of self-produced movement in perceptual development, they designed a carousel-like apparatus in which two
kittens could be harnessed. For eight weeks after birth, the
kittens were kept in a dark environment, except for one
hour a day on the carousel. One kitten, the “active” kitten, could move freely of its own volition while attached.
The other kitten, the “passive” kitten, was carried along in
a basket and could not control his own movement; rather,
he was forced to move in exactly the same way as the active kitten. Thus, both kittens received the same visual experience. However, while the active kitten simultaneously
experienced signals about his own motor actions, the passive kitten did not. The outcome of the experiment is remarkable. While the active kitten’s visual perception was
indistinguishable from kittens raised normally, the passive
kitten suffered fundamental problems. The implication is

Figure 2. We learn visual features from egocentric video that respond predictably to observer egomotion.

clear: proper perceptual development requires leveraging
self-generated movement in concert with visual feedback.
We contend that today’s visual recognition algorithms
are crippled much like the passive kitten. The culprit: learning from “bags of images”. Ever since statistical learning
methods emerged as the dominant paradigm in the recognition literature, the norm has been to treat images as i.i.d.
draws from an underlying distribution. Whether learning
object categories, scene classes, body poses, or features
themselves, the idea is to discover patterns within a collection of snapshots, blind to their physical source. So is
the answer to learn from video? Only partially. Without
leveraging the accompanying motor signals initiated by the
videographer, learning from video data does not escape the
passive kitten’s predicament.
Inspired by this concept, we propose to treat visual learning as an embodied process, where the visual experience
is inextricably linked to the motor activity behind it.1 In
particular, our goal is to learn representations that exploit
the parallel signals of ego-motion and pixels. We hypothesize that downstream processing will benefit from a feature
space that preserves the connection between “how I move”
and “how my visual surroundings change”.
To this end, we cast the problem in terms of unsupervised equivariant feature learning. During training, the input image sequences are accompanied by a synchronized
stream of ego-motor sensor readings; however, they need
1 Depending on the context, the motor activity could correspond to ei-

ther the 6-DOF ego-motion of the observer moving in the scene or the
second-hand motion of an object being actively manipulated, e.g., by a
person or robot’s end effectors.

11413

