Flowing ConvNets for Human Pose Estimation in Videos
Tomas Pfister
Dept. of Engineering Science
University of Oxford

James Charles
School of Computing
University of Leeds

Andrew Zisserman
Dept. of Engineering Science
University of Oxford

tp@robots.ox.ac.uk

j.charles@leeds.ac.uk

az@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
The objective of this work is human pose estimation in
videos, where multiple frames are available. We investigate
a ConvNet architecture that is able to benefit from temporal context by combining information across the multiple
frames using optical flow.
To this end we propose a network architecture with the
following novelties: (i) a deeper network than previously investigated for regressing heatmaps; (ii) spatial fusion layers that learn an implicit spatial model; (iii) optical flow
is used to align heatmap predictions from neighbouring
frames; and (iv) a final parametric pooling layer which
learns to combine the aligned heatmaps into a pooled confidence map.
We show that this architecture outperforms a number of
others, including one that uses optical flow solely at the input layers, one that regresses joint coordinates directly, and
one that predicts heatmaps without spatial fusion.
The new architecture outperforms the state of the art
by a large margin on three video pose estimation datasets,
including the very challenging Poses in the Wild dataset,
and outperforms other deep methods that don’t use a
graphical model on the single-image FLIC benchmark (and
also [5, 35] in the high precision region).

1. Introduction
Despite a long history of research, human pose estimation in videos remains a very challenging task in computer
vision. Compared to still image pose estimation, the temporal component of videos provides an additional (and important) cue for recognition, as strong dependencies of pose
positions exist between temporally close video frames.
In this work we propose a new approach for using optical flow for part localisation in deep Convolutional Networks (ConvNets), and demonstrate its performance for human pose estimation in videos. The key insight is that, since
for localisation the prediction targets are positions in the
image space (e.g. (x, y) coordinates of joints), one can use

dense optical flow vectors to warp predicted positions onto
a target image. In particular, we show that when regressing
a heatmap of positions (in our application for human joints),
the heatmaps from neighbouring frames can be warped and
aligned using optical flow, effectively propagating position
confidences temporally, as illustrated in Fig 1.
We also propose a deeper architecture that has additional
convolutional layers beyond the initial heatmaps to enable
learning an implicit spatial model of human layout. These
layers are able to learn dependencies between human body
parts. We show that these ‘spatial fusion’ layers remove
pose estimation failures that are kinematically impossible.
Related work. Traditional methods for pose estimation
have often used pictorial structure models [2, 8, 10, 27, 39],
which optimise a configuration of parts as a function of local image evidence for a part, and a prior for the relative
positions of parts in the human kinematic chain. An alternative approach uses poselets [1, 13]. More recent work has
tackled pose estimation holistically: initially with Random
Forests on depth data [12, 29, 31, 34] and RGB [3, 4, 24],
and most recently with convolutional neural networks.
The power of ConvNets has been demonstrated in a wide
variety of vision tasks – object classification and detection [11, 21, 28, 40], face recognition [32], text recognition [15, 16], video action recognition [20, 30] and many
more [7, 22, 25].
For pose estimation, there were early examples of using
ConvNets for pose comparisons [33]. More recently, [37]
used an AlexNet-like ConvNet to directly regress joint coordinates, with a cascade of ConvNet regressors to improve
accuracy over a single pose regressor network. Chen and
Yuille [5] combine a parts-based model with ConvNets (by
using a ConvNet to learn conditional probabilities for the
presence of parts and their spatial relationship with image
patches). In a series of papers, Tompson, Jain et al. developed ConvNet architectures to directly regress heatmaps for
each joint, with subsequent layers to add an Markov Random Field (MRF)-based spatial model [17, 36], and a pose
refinement model [35] (based on a Siamese network with
shared weights) upon a rougher pose estimator ConvNet.
11913

