Learning Deep Representation with Large-scale Attributes
Wanli Ouyang, Hongyang Li, Xingyu Zeng, Xiaogang Wang
Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
wlouyang, hyli, xyzeng, xgwang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Learning strong feature representations from large scale
supervision has achieved remarkable success in computer
vision as the emergence of deep learning techniques. It is
driven by big visual data with rich annotations. This paper
contributes a large-scale object attribute database 1 that
contains rich attribute annotations (over 300 attributes)
for ∼180k samples and 494 object classes. Based on the
ImageNet object detection dataset, it annotates the rotation, viewpoint, object part location, part occlusion, part
existence, common attributes, and class-specific attributes.
Then we use this dataset to train deep representations and
extensively evaluate how these attributes are useful on the
general object detection task. In order to make better use
of the attribute annotations, a deep learning scheme is proposed by modeling the relationship of attributes and hierarchically clustering them into semantically meaningful mixture types. Experimental results show that the attributes are
helpful in learning better features and improving the object
detection accuracy by 2.6% in mAP on the ILSVRC 2014
object detection dataset and 2.4% in mAP on PASCAL VOC
2007 object detection dataset. Such improvement is well
generalized across datasets.

1. Introduction
Object representations are vital for object recognition
and detection. There is remarkable evolution on representations for objects [20, 17, 43, 35, 15, 37, 34, 11], scenes
[48], and humans [45]. Much of this progress was sparked
by the creation of datasets [33, 6, 42, 29, 31, 45]. We construct a large-scale object attribute dataset. The motivation
is two-folds.
First, it is an important step towards further semantic understanding of images. Since deep learning achieved close
or even better performance than human-level on the ImageNet classiﬁcation dataset [35, 15, 16, 37], semantic understanding of images is drawing much attention [39, 7].
Besides object class names, the attributes of objects pro1 The dataset is available on www.ee.cuhk.edu.hk/ xgwang/
˜
ImageNetAttribute.html

Rotation and Viewpoint

stretcher

Common attribute (having interaction with person)

crutch

Specific attribute

bird
Wing open

car

Wing open Old-fashioned oad
Roadster

Door open Long shaped

Deformation

person

Part existence

otter

Figure 1. Objects of the same class are very different in appearance
caused by the variation in rotation, viewpoint, occlusion, deformation, and other attributes. Some attributes (such as “having interaction with persons”) are common across all the classes. Some
are class-speciﬁc (e.g. “wing open” is only valid for birds). Their
attributes facilitate semantic understanding of images and help to
learn better deep representations.

vide richer semantic meanings. For example, with the attributes, we can recognize that a car is “old-fashioned” and
has its “door open”, an otter is “ﬂoating on the water” and
“facing the camera”. As another example, with the location of object parts, we can estimate the action of an object.
Although ImageNet has become one of the most important
benchmark driving the advance of computer vision because
of its large scale and richness on object classes, attribute annotations on it are much smaller in scale. The annotations
from our dataset largely enrich the semantic description on
ImageNet.
Second, this database provides labels that facilitate analysis on the appearance variation of images. It is well-known
that the intra-class variation is one of the most important
factors that inﬂuence the accuracy in object detection and
recognition. As shown in Fig. 1, objects of the same class
11895

