Minimal Solvers for 3D Geometry from Satellite Imagery
Enliang Zheng, Ke Wang, Enrique Dunn, and Jan-Michael Frahm
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
{ezheng,kewang,dunn,jmf}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract

(X, Y, Z)

(X, Y, Z)

Mapping

(X, Y, Z)

We propose two novel minimal solvers which advance Inverse Mapping
Inverse
using RFM
the state of the art in satellite imagery processing. Our mapping using RPC
mapping
methods are efficient and do not rely on the prior existence
of complex inverse mapping functions to correlate 2D im(r, c)
(r2,c(r21),c1)
(r1,c1)
(r, improves
c)
age coordinates and 3D terrain. Our first solver
on the stereo correspondence problem for satellite imagery,
(a) Inverse mapping
(b) Triangulation
in that we provide an exact image-to-object space mapping (where prior methods were inaccurate). Our second
Figure 1: The two problems solved in our paper.
solver provides a novel mechanism for 3D point triangulation, which has improved robustness and accuracy over
prior techniques. Given the usefulness and ubiquity of satelincluded in the standards of the NITF image format [1], and
lite imagery, our proposed methods allow for improved reis available from most satellite image vendors [2].
sults in a variety of existing and future applications.
However, one challenge faced by many works utilizing
satellite imagery and the RPC model is that the bidirectional mapping between the 3D object and 2D image spaces
1. Introduction
may be unknown. Specifically, vendors supplying the satellite imagery may only provide the one-directional mapping
Commercial satellite imagery, captured on a variety of
function from the 3D object space to 2D image (known as
hardware platforms, has become widely available by multia forward RPC model). The inverse mapping, termed the
ple vendors. It is a valuable source of information and has
inverse RPC model, utilizes 2D image coordinates and an
received much attention by the computer vision community.
associated altitude in order to infer the resulting 3D coordiFor instance, it has driven work on geo-localization [20],
nate. Approaches attempting to solve for this inverse mapmeteorological and oceanographic forecasts [19], urban
ping often lack accuracy [31]. In this work, we propose two
change detection [24], and road detection [25].
novel high-accuracy minimal solvers (see Fig. 1) for use
To effectively leverage this imagery, the relationship bewith satellite imagery only requiring the forward RPC.
tween the underlying 3D scene geometry and its 2D image
has to be known. This is typically provided by a camera
The first minimal solver for the inverse mapping targets
model. However, defining a precise physical camera model
the domain of extracting depth information from pairs of
is complicated due to the complex hardware configuration
satellite images (stereo). Previous works have explored this
and the capture process. It is standard practice to construct
domain [11, 10, 18], but suffer from various limitations.
an approximation to the mapping between the 3D object
For instance, a typical approach relying on volumetric modspace and the image.
els can have high memory requirements [5]. Furthermore,
The representation that has been used to approximate
recent image-to-image approaches rely on the existence of
this mapping for over two decades is the Rational Polyan inverse RPC model, which may be missing or inaccunomial Coefficient (RPC) model. It was first introduced
rate [15, 26, 30]. Our approach avoids these issues by
by Hartley and Saxena [14] and greatly contributed to the
proposing an efficient minimal solver, which bypasses the
thriving of satellite imagery applications. The primary reaissue of explicitly constructing a single inverse RPC model
son for its success is its ability to maintain the full accuracy
for the entire image. Instead, each coordinate is processed
of physical sensor models, its unique characteristic of senindependently, providing a highly-accurate inverse mapping
sor independence, and its real-time calculation [18]. It is
conforming to the provided forward RPC model.
1738

(X, Y, Z)

(r2,c2)

