Objects2action: Classifying and localizing actions without any video example
Mihir Jain⋆
⋆

Jan C. van Gemert⋆‡

University of Amsterdam

‡

Thomas Mensink⋆

Delft University of Technology

†

Cees G. M. Snoek⋆†

Qualcomm Research Netherlands

Abstract
The goal of this paper is to recognize actions in video
without the need for examples. Different from traditional
zero-shot approaches we do not demand the design and
specification of attribute classifiers and class-to-attribute
mappings to allow for transfer from seen classes to unseen
classes. Our key contribution is objects2action, a semantic
word embedding that is spanned by a skip-gram model of
thousands of object categories. Action labels are assigned
to an object encoding of unseen video based on a convex
combination of action and object affinities. Our semantic
embedding has three main characteristics to accommodate
for the specifics of actions. First, we propose a mechanism to exploit multiple-word descriptions of actions and
objects. Second, we incorporate the automated selection
of the most responsive objects per action. And finally, we
demonstrate how to extend our zero-shot approach to the
spatio-temporal localization of actions in video. Experiments on four action datasets demonstrate the potential of
our approach.

1. Introduction
We aim for the recognition of actions such as blow dry
hair and swing baseball in video without the need for examples. The common computer vision tactic in such a challenging setting is to predict the zero-shot test classes from
disjunct train classes based on a (predefined) mutual relationship using class-to-attribute mappings [1, 8, 20, 32, 36].
Drawbacks of such approaches in the context of action
recognition [24] are that attributes like ‘torso twist’ and
‘look-down’ are difficult to define and cumbersome to annotate. Moreover, current zero-shot approaches, be it for image categories or actions, assume that a large, and labeled,
set of (action) train classes is available a priori to guide the
knowledge transfer, but today’s action recognition practice
is limited to at most hundred classes [16, 19, 35, 42]. Different from existing work, we propose zero-shot learning
for action classification that does not require tailored definitions and annotation of action attributes, and not a single
video or action annotation as prior knowledge.

Figure 1. We propose objects2action, a semantic embedding to
classify actions, such as playing football, playing volleyball, and
horse-riding, in videos without using any video data or action annotations as prior knowledge. Instead it relies on commonly available textual descriptions, images and annotations of objects.

We are inspired by recent progress in supervised video
recognition, where several works successfully demonstrated
the benefit of representations derived from deep convolutional neural networks for recognition of actions [14,17,39]
and events [40, 49]. As these nets are typically pre-trained
on images and object annotations from ImageNet [5], and
consequently their final layer represent object category
scores, these works reveal that object scores are wellsuited for video recognition. Moreover, since these objects have a lingual correspondence derived from nouns in
WordNet, they are a natural fit for semantic word embeddings [6,9,26,29,41]. As prior knowledge for our zero-shot
action recognition we consider a semantic word embedding
spanned by a large number of object class labels and their
images from ImageNet, see Figure 1.
Our key contribution is objects2action, a semantic embedding to classify actions in videos without using any
video data or action annotations as prior knowledge. Instead
it relies on commonly available object annotations, images
and textual descriptions. Our semantic embedding has three
main characteristics to accommodate for the specifics of actions. First, we propose a mechanism to exploit multipleword descriptions of actions and ImageNet objects. Sec-

4588

