BubbLeNet: Foveated imaging for visual discovery
Kevin Matzen
Noah Snavely
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, USA
{kmatzen,snavely}@cs.cornell.edu

Original

Abstract
We propose a new method for turning an Internet-scale
corpus of categorized images into a small set of humaninterpretable discriminative visual elements using powerful
tools based on deep learning. A key challenge with deep
learning methods is generating human interpretable models. To address this, we propose a new technique that uses
bubble images—images where most of the content has been
obscured—to identify spatially localized, discriminative content in each image. By modifying the model training procedure to use both the source imagery and these bubble
images, we can arrive at final models which retain much of
the original classification performance, but are much more
amenable to identifying interpretable visual elements. We
apply our algorithm to a wide variety of datasets, including two new Internet-scale datasets of people and places,
and show applications to visual mining and discovery. Our
method is simple, scalable, and produces visual elements
that are highly representative compared to prior work.

1. Introduction
The rapid growth of online imagery and the emergence of
powerful machine learning techniques have led to exciting
developments in computer vision. While many of these
developments have been in visual recognition, these same
trends also enable new approaches to visual discovery. By
visual discovery, we mean a form of visual data mining—
identifying patterns or correlations in visual data that can be
used to propose or validate hypotheses about the world.
Towards this goal, a few recent papers have explored
visual discovery in particular domains. We are especially
inspired by the work of Doersch et al. [6] where visual
elements (i.e., patches) that give cities such as Paris their
distinctive look are automatically mined from a corpus of
Street View photos. This task is an application of a broader
set of methods for mining imagery for distinctive visual elements [18, 5, 11, 1]. Our work also seeks to discover visual
elements in the form of patches. However, while most prior

Foveal

Mask

Blurred

Bubble

Figure 1. Foveated imaging. Our method analyzes the contribution of localized content in images by modifying the data shown to
a CNN during training and at test time. Given an input image (top
left), we apply an alpha mask (center) to produce two representations: a foveal image (top right) and a bubble image (bottom right).
While a bubble image preserves a small amount of spatialized content, a foveal image includes a blurred, grayscale background to
provide additional context.

work uses hand-crafted features such as HoG, we seek to
harness the power of convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
for visual discovery. We believe the time is ripe for studying this problem—just as text analysis can reveal trends on
social networking sites like Twitter, visual discovery driven
by powerful image understanding methods could enable the
automatic identification of visual trends in fashion, design,
art, and many other areas.
CNNs have shown astonishingly good performance for
visual recognition [12, 7]. However, in order to be useful
for visual discovery, we need to be able to extract insight
about what a CNN has learned, and communicate these
insights to humans. Extracting such insights at scale by
analyzing learned networks has proved challenging, because
CNNs tend to be very opaque. For instance, a given learned
unit (neuron) deep in a network can depend on almost all
of the input pixels in a highly non-linear way, making it
very difficult to associate features in the network with visual
elements that are meaningful to humans.
In contrast, rather than trying to interpret a network after
11931

