Frequency-based Environment Matting by Compressive Sensing
Yiming Qian
University of Alberta

Minglun Gong
Memorial University of Newfoundland

Yee-Hong Yang
University of Alberta

yqian3@ualberta.ca

gong@cs.mun.ca

yang@cs.ualberta.ca

Abstract
Extracting environment mattes using existing approaches often requires either thousands of captured images or a long processing time, or both. In this paper, we
propose a novel approach to capturing and extracting the
matte of a real scene effectively and efficiently. Grown out
of the traditional frequency-based signal analysis, our approach can accurately locate contributing sources. By exploiting the recently developed compressive sensing theory,
we simplify the data acquisition process of frequency-based
environment matting. Incorporating phase information in
a frequency signal into data acquisition further accelerates
the matte extraction procedure. Compared with the stateof-the-art method, our approach achieves superior performance on both synthetic and real data, while consuming
only a fraction of the processing time.

1. Introduction
Environment matting is a technique introduced to render
photo-realistic images of objects that are either refractive or
reflective, or both. It focuses on modeling the object’s light
transport characteristics, i.e. the environment matte, and allows the object to be seamlessly composited into a new
background. Typically, to obtain an environment matte, the
object needs to be photographed in front of a series of predesigned backdrops. How the object refracts and reflects
light can then be inferred from the recorded images.
The concept of environment matting is first introduced
in [20]. Since then, several methods [5, 7, 13, 17, 19] have
been proposed to either simplify the data acquisition process or to improve the accuracy of the environment matte.
The main task of environment matting is to decompose
a many-to-one mapping, by which many background pixels are combined into one foreground pixel. Most existing methods decompose the mapping in the spatial domain,
where a foreground pixel can be composited in an infinite
number of ways. To handle the ambiguities, these methods
use additional constraints and time-consuming non-linear
optimization to estimate the mapping, whose physical cor-

rectness cannot be verified. A frequency-based approach is
later proposed and is capable of finding the accurate contributing sources efficiently [19]. However, it requires a
large number of captured images. On the other hand, extracting matte data from a single photo is possible if the object is perfectly specular transparent [5]. A recent spatialdomain method [7] also has low data acquisition requirement at the expense of high computational cost. Both of
these two methods cannot provide high-accuracy environment mattes. Hence, there is a need for an effective algorithm that can accurately and quickly extract the matte data
from a small number of images.
Motivated by the above observations, in this paper, we
present a novel environment matting approach with the following objectives. First, our approach can accurately find
the contributing sources at the pixel level. Second, our approach leverages on the recently developed theory of Compressive Sensing (CS) to reduce the complexity of data acquisition. Finally, we incorporate additional phase information into the frequency-based model, which further reduces
the number of images required and significantly accelerates
the process of environment matte extraction.

2. Related Work
Environment Matting. Zongker et al. [20] first formulate the problem and decompose the many-to-one mapping
by assuming a foreground pixel is only contributed by a single rectangle area of the background. Chuang et al. [5] later
propose two extensions: i) by sweeping different oriented
Gaussian strips across the background to accommodate for
sources that are not axis-aligned rectangles; ii) by extracting the environment mattes of colorless and pure specular
objects using only one image. Wexler et al. [17] present a
probabilistic model based method, which does not rely on
predefined backdrops but requires enough sample images.
It only works for thin transparent objects that do not introduce large optical distortion to the background. Inspired
by image-based relighting, Peers and Dutr [13] use a set
of wavelet basis images to obtain a visually pleasing result
using a large number of sample images.
Inspired by the fact that a signal has a unique decomposi13532

