Similarity Gaussian Process Latent Variable Model
for Multi-Modal Data Analysis
Guoli Song1,2 , Shuhui Wang2 , Qingming Huang1,2 , Qi Tian3
1

Key Lab of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management,
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
Key Lab of Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at San Antonio, TX, 78249, USA
guoli.song@vipl.ict.ac.cn, wangshuhui@ict.ac.cn, qmhuang@jdl.ac.cn, qitian@cs.utsa.edu

Abstract
Data from real applications involve multiple modalities
representing content with the same semantics and deliver
rich information from complementary aspects. However,
relations among heterogeneous modalities are simply treated as observation-to-ﬁt by existing work, and the parameterized cross-modal mapping functions lack flexibility in
directly adapting to the content divergence and semantic
complicacy of multi-modal data. In this paper, we build
our work based on Gaussian process latent variable model
(GPLVM) to learn the non-linear non-parametric mapping
functions and transform heterogeneous data into a shared
latent space. We propose multi-modal Similarity Gaussian
Process latent variable model (m-SimGP), which learns the
nonlinear mapping functions between the intra-modal similarities and latent representation. We further propose multimodal regularized similarity GPLVM (m-RSimGP) by encouraging similar/dissimilar points to be similar/dissimilar
in the output space. The overall objective functions are
solved by simple and scalable gradient decent techniques.
The proposed models are robust to content divergence and
high-dimensionality in multi-modal representation. They
can be applied to various tasks to discover the non-linear
correlations and obtain the comparable low-dimensional
representation for heterogeneous modalities. On two widely used real-world datasets, we outperform previous approaches for cross-modal content retrieval and cross-modal
classiﬁcation.

1. Introduction
Data from real applications often involve multiple
modalities representing content with the same semantics [4]
and deliver rich information from complementary aspects.

For example, in content-based image retrieval, the semantics in an image can be inferred from visual features, such as
color or texture features, and from its associated textual descriptions such as user tags, paragraphs and user comments.
The key problem for multi-modal data analytics is how to
model the correlations across different modalities to facilitate content retrieval of heterogeneous modalities. This motivates latent variable modeling to discover the correlation
information shared by different modalities.
As a possible solution, canonical correlation analysis (CCA) [11, 19, 20] projects multi-modal data into a shared
subspace that guarantees different modalities are maximally correlated. However, CCA-based methods lack probabilistic interpretation on the intra-modal similarities. Topic
models [3, 12, 25] learn latent topics to describe the intrinsic semantic correlations in multi-modal data. Based on Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) [3], a variety of constraints
are imposed. For example, mmLDA [2] enforces that all
modalities share the same topic proportions, and CorrLDA
[2] assumes one-to-one correspondence between the topics
in each modality. These assumptions inherently restrain the
ﬂexibility of correlation models. In general, existing studies take intra-modal similarity and inter-modal similarity indiscriminately as the observations of multi-modal relation,
thus the correlation learning problem is solved by ﬁtting the
mapping function outputs to the observations. However, the
prior constraints are imposed to avoid non-smoothness in
the functional space, lacking ﬂexibility in directly adapting
to the properties of multi-modal data.
Gaussian Process Latent Variable Model (GPLVM) [13,
8, 6] is a well-established generative approach for learning
nonlinear low-dimensional embedding. Instead of specifying a set of deterministic (e.g. CCA-based [1, 11, 19, 20])
or parametric (e.g., univariate Gaussian [27]) mapping func-

4050

