Human Pose Estimation in Videos
Dong Zhang, Mubarak Shah
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida
Orlando, Florida, USA
dzhang@cs.ucf.edu, shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we present a method to estimate a
sequence of human poses in unconstrained videos. In
contrast to the commonly employed graph optimization
framework, which is NP-hard and needs approximate
solutions, we formulate this problem into a unified two
stage tree-based optimization problem for which an efficient
and exact solution exists. Although the proposed method
finds an exact solution, it does not sacrifice the ability
to model the spatial and temporal constraints between
body parts in the video frames; indeed it even models the
symmetric parts better than the existing methods. The
proposed method is based on two main ideas: ‘Abstraction’
and ‘Association’ to enforce the intra- and inter-frame
body part constraints respectively without inducing extra
computational complexity to the polynomial time solution.
Using the idea of ‘Abstraction’, a new concept of ‘abstract
body part’ is introduced to model not only the tree based
body part structure similar to existing methods, but also
extra constraints between symmetric parts. Using the
idea of ‘Association’, the optimal tracklets are generated
for each abstract body part, in order to enforce the
spatiotemporal constraints between body parts in adjacent
frames. Finally, a sequence of the best poses is inferred
from the abstract body part tracklets through the tree-based
optimization. We evaluated the proposed method on three
publicly available video based human pose estimation
datasets, and obtained dramatically improved performance
compared to the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation is crucial for many computer
vision applications, including human computer interaction,
activity recognition and video surveillance. It is a very
challenging problem due to the large appearance variance,
non-rigidity of the human body, different viewpoints,
cluttered background, self occlusion etc. Recently, a
significant progress has been made in solving the human

(a)

… ...

… ...

(b)

Abstraction

(d)

(c)
Association

Figure 1. An abstract high-level illustration of the proposed
method aiming at removing simple cycles from the commonly
employed graph optimization framework for video based human
pose estimation problem. All of the above graphs are relational
graphs for the problems. In (b), each body part in each frame
is represented by a node. Green and blue edges represent
relationships between different body parts in the same frame
(green ones are commonly used edges in the literature, and blue
ones are important edges for symmetric parts); red edges
represent the consistency constraints for the same body part in
adjacent frames. Note that this is only an illustration and not
all edges are shown. In the ‘Abstraction’ stage, symmetric parts
are combined together, and the simple cycles within each single
frame are removed (shown in (c)); and in the ‘Association’ stage,
the simple cycles between adjacent frames are removed (shown in
(d)).

pose estimation problem in unconstrained single images
([39, 23, 36]); however, human pose estimation in videos
([19, 22, 5]) is a relatively new and challenging problem,
which needs significant improvement. Obviously, single
image based pose estimation method can be applied to
each video frame to get an initial pose estimation, and a
further refinement through frames can be applied to make
the pose estimation consistent and more accurate. However,
due to the innate complexity of video data, the problem
formulations of most video based human pose estimation

2012

