Video Restoration against Yin-Yang Phasing ∗
Xiaolin Wu1,2
Zhenhao Li1
Xiaowei Deng1
1
McMaster University, Canada
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
xwu@mail.ece.mcmaster.ca

Abstract
A common video degradation problem, which is largely
untreated in literature, is what we call Yin-Yang Phasing
(YYP). YYP is characterized by involuntary, dramatic flipflop in the intensity and possibly chromaticity of an object
as the video plays. Such temporal artifacts occur under ill
illumination conditions and are triggered by object or/and
camera motions, which mislead the settings of camera’s
auto-exposure and white point. In this paper, we investigate the problem and propose a video restoration technique
to suppress YYP artifacts and retain temporal consistency
of objects appearance via inter-frame, spatially-adaptive,
optimal tone mapping. The video quality can be further improved by a novel image enhancer designed in Weber’s perception principle and by exploiting the second-order statistics of the scene. Experimental results are encouraging,
pointing to an effective, practical solution for a common
but surprisingly understudied problem.

1. Introduction
1.1. The problem and background
A highly irritating type of video degradation, called YinYang Phasing (YYP) in this paper, is spatially patchy and
temporally inconsistent objects appearance, with parts of
the scene turning in and out the state of under-exposure
(yin) or over-exposure (yang), back and forth. Such effects
are quite common in impromptu-made video materials in
daily life. An example is presented in Figure 1: in a short
progression of few video frames, which are produced by
an iPhone 6 camera, the person’s face alters from normally
lit to unintelligibly dark as she moves her head. Moreover,
the involuntary, dramatic changes in the intensity and possibly chromaticity are compounded by low contrast due to
wrongly exposed objects. The YYP effects are caused by
∗ This work was supported by Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, and Natural Science Foundation of China, grant
NSFC 61331014.

{liz87,dengx23}@mcmaster.ca

unevenness of illumination, significant changes in the directions of incident and reflection lights due to object and/or
camera motions, and improper camera operations by amateur users. These scenarios tend to confuse the ubiquitous ”dumb” cameras and lead to incorrect and time-lagged
settings of auto-exposure and white point. Unfortunately,
the above root cause of YYP is an inherent weakness of
mass-produced cameras that will trouble average users for
a foreseeable future, particularly when shooting videos in
unevenly-lit scenes.
In difficult illumination conditions, disabling camera’s
auto-exposure functionality cannot cure but rather aggravate the YYP problem for most users. For example, in
backlit scenes like in Figure 1, without auto-exposure the
person in the foreground, the very focus of the video session, will be severely underexposed in most frames. Also,
out of question is the use of auxiliary lighting to compensate
for problematic illumination in the scene, as it is beyond the
means and knowledge of amateur camera users.
The YYP type of video degradation is becoming a major
culprit of poor video quality, much more so than insufficient spatial resolution, low frame rate, sensor noises, and
compression distortions. Nowadays even consumer-grade
cameras boast very high pixel counts, frame rates of 60Hz
and above, and low senor noise level; furthermore, modern
communication infrastructures can support high throughput
visual data exchanges. While these hardware advances are
making superresolution, frame rate upconversion, denoising, compression artifacts removal, etc., less important in
practice, they can do nothing to repair the YYP degradation
as the lighting conditions in the scene and non-expert video
shooting behaviors are beyond the control of video acquisition and communication equipment. Despite the daily encountering of the YYP video degradation problem in a wide
range of video applications, such as social media, on-line
video sharing, video monitoring, spontaneous video reporting, etc., very little research has been carried out on the
YYP phenomenon and its mitigation. In this paper we investigate how to algorithmically remove the undesired YYP
effects, aiming to restore the video to the state as though it
1549

