An Accurate Iris Segmentation Framework under
Relaxed Imaging Constraints using Total Variation Model
Zijing Zhao, Ajay Kumar

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Hunghom, Kowloon, Hong Kong
jason.zhao@connect.polyu.hk, ajay.kumar@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel and more accurate iris
segmentation framework to automatically segment iris
region from the face images acquired with relaxed imaging
under visible or near-infrared illumination, which provides
strong feasibility for applications in surveillance, forensics
and the search for missing children, etc. The proposed
framework is built on a novel total-variation based
formulation which uses l1 norm regularization to robustly
suppress noisy texture pixels for the accurate iris
localization. A series of novel and robust post processing
operations are introduced to more accurately localize the
limbic boundaries. Our experimental results on three
publicly available databases, i.e., FRGC, UBIRIS.v2 and
CASIA.v4-distance, achieve significant performance
improvement in terms of iris segmentation accuracy over
the state-of-the-art approaches in the literature. Besides,
we have shown that using iris masks generated from the
proposed approach helps to improve iris recognition
performance as well. Unlike prior work, all the
implementations in this paper are made publicly available
to further advance research and applications in biometrics
at-d-distance.

1. Introduction
Iris recognition is one of the most accurate and widely
employed approaches for the automated personal
identification. The performance of iris recognition
algorithms is highly dependent on the effectiveness of
segmenting iris region pixels [7]. However, the traditional
iris segmentation and feature matching approaches adopt
only to near-infrared illumination and require the subjects
to be sampled under strictly constrained condition [6],
which is the major difficulty for deploying iris recognition
system in civilian and surveillance applications on a larger
scale. Automated iris segmentation has been a topic of
considerable research in recent past [21]-[22] and many
methods [2]-[6] have been proposed to address the problem.
However the accuracy of currently available iris
segmentation algorithms is still below the expectations and
requires further improvement for the deployments.
This paper proposes a new framework to automatically
and accurately segment iris images from the distantly
acquired face images. The developed approach can robustly
operate using face or eye images acquired under

3828

less-constrained environments, i.e., using images acquired
from a distance (typically 3-8m) and under near-infrared
(NIR) or visible-wavelength (VW) illumination. The key
contributions from this paper can be summarized as
follows:
1. With the help of earlier studies on gradient dependent
regularizer, such as relative total variation regularizer
[10], we develop a new total variation formulation for
iris segmentation in which the eye structure and
surrounding texture are differently penalized. This
formulation incorporates with an l1 norm which is more
effective and also computationally efficient. Our
experimental results on three publicly available
databases achieve significantly superiors results over
previous approaches presented in the most recent
literature [2]-[3]. Moreover, the method developed in
this paper does not require any training and therefore is
more attractive for the deployment in surveillance
applications.
2. We develop a series robust post-processing operations to
accurately localize limbic boundaries in noisy iris
images. The adaptive and self-correcting methodology
introduced in these operations can independently exploit
the local features as much as possible, and helps to
significantly reduce global errors. The post-processing
operations can effectively use the intermediate results
and adopt dynamic threshold mechanisms. Such robust
strategies help to improve the overall accuracy in the
segmentation of noisy iris images and can also be applied
in other challenging problems in surveillances and
remote sensing.
The performance of the proposed approach * have been
evaluated on three publicly available databases, i.e.,
UBIRIS.v2 [8], FRGC [17] using visible imaging and
CASIA.v4-distance [16] under near infrared. The
experimental results suggest average improvements of
28.82%, 30.98% and 16.05% on iris segmentation accuracy
over state-of-the-art method on respective databases.
Besides, we also illustrate from the experiments that using
iris masks generated from our approach helps improve iris
recognition performance.

1.1. Related Work
Most of the earlier work on iris segmentation uses NIR
*

The implementation codes for our algorithm are available via [24].

