Car that Knows Before You Do:
Anticipating Maneuvers via Learning Temporal Driving Models
Ashesh Jain1,2 , Hema S Koppula1,2 , Bharad Raghavan1 , Shane Soh1 , and Ashutosh Saxena2,3
Stanford University1 , Cornell University2 , Brain Of Things Inc.3
{ashesh,hema,bharadr,shanesoh,asaxena}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS) have made
driving safer over the last decade. They prepare vehicles
for unsafe road conditions and alert drivers if they perform a dangerous maneuver. However, many accidents are
unavoidable because by the time drivers are alerted, it is
already too late. Anticipating maneuvers beforehand can
alert drivers before they perform the maneuver and also
give ADAS more time to avoid or prepare for the danger.
In this work we anticipate driving maneuvers a few seconds before they occur. For this purpose we equip a car
with cameras and a computing device to capture the driving
context from both inside and outside of the car. We propose
an Autoregressive Input-Output HMM to model the contextual information alongwith the maneuvers. We evaluate our
approach on a diverse data set with 1180 miles of natural
freeway and city driving and show that we can anticipate
maneuvers 3.5 seconds before they occur with over 80%
F1-score in real-time.

1. Introduction
Over the last decade cars have been equipped with various assistive technologies in order to provide a safe driving experience. Technologies such as lane keeping, blind
spot check, pre-crash systems etc., are successful in alerting
drivers whenever they commit a dangerous maneuver [19].
Still in the US alone more than 33,000 people die in road
accidents every year, the majority of which are due to inappropriate maneuvers [3]. We need mechanisms that can
alert drivers before they perform a dangerous maneuver in
order to avert many such accidents [28]. In this work we
address this problem of anticipating maneuvers that a driver
is likely to perform in the next few seconds (Figure 1).
Anticipating future human actions has recently been a
topic of interest to both the vision and robotics communities [12, 13, 42]. Figure 1 shows our system anticipating a

Face
Camera

0.2
0.7
Road Camera

0.1

Figure 1: Anticipating maneuvers. Our algorithm anticipates
driving maneuvers performed a few seconds in the future. It uses
information from multiple sources including videos, vehicle dynamics, GPS, and street maps to anticipate the probability of different future maneuvers.

left turn maneuver a few seconds before the car reaches the
intersection. Our system also outputs probabilities over the
maneuvers the driver can perform. With this prior knowledge of maneuvers, the driver assistance systems can alert
drivers about possible dangers before they perform the maneuver, thereby giving them more time to react. Some previous works [10, 17, 24] also predict a driver’s future maneuver. However, as we show in the following sections, these
methods use limited context and do not accurately model
the anticipation problem.
In order to anticipate maneuvers, we reason with the contextual information from the surrounding events, which we
refer to as the driving context. We obtain this driving context from multiple sources. We use videos of the driver inside the car and the road in front, the vehicle’s dynamics,
global position coordinates (GPS), and street maps; from
this we extract a time series of multi-modal data from both
inside and outside the vehicle. The challenge lies in modeling the temporal aspects of driving and in detecting the
contextual cues that help in anticipating maneuvers.
Modeling maneuver anticipation also requires joint reasoning of the driving context and the driver’s intention. The

3182

