Fast R-CNN
Ross Girshick
Microsoft Research
rbg@microsoft.com

Abstract
This paper proposes a Fast Region-based Convolutional
Network method (Fast R-CNN) for object detection. Fast
R-CNN builds on previous work to efficiently classify object proposals using deep convolutional networks. Compared to previous work, Fast R-CNN employs several innovations to improve training and testing speed while also
increasing detection accuracy. Fast R-CNN trains the very
deep VGG16 network 9× faster than R-CNN, is 213× faster
at test-time, and achieves a higher mAP on PASCAL VOC
2012. Compared to SPPnet, Fast R-CNN trains VGG16 3×
faster, tests 10× faster, and is more accurate. Fast R-CNN
is implemented in Python and C++ (using Caffe) and is
available under the open-source MIT License at https:
//github.com/rbgirshick/fast-rcnn.

while achieving top accuracy on PASCAL VOC 2012 [7]
with a mAP of 66% (vs. 62% for R-CNN).1

1.1. R-CNN and SPPnet
The Region-based Convolutional Network method (RCNN) [9] achieves excellent object detection accuracy by
using a deep ConvNet to classify object proposals. R-CNN,
however, has notable drawbacks:
1. Training is a multi-stage pipeline. R-CNN first finetunes a ConvNet on object proposals using log loss.
Then, it fits SVMs to ConvNet features. These SVMs
act as object detectors, replacing the softmax classifier learnt by fine-tuning. In the third training stage,
bounding-box regressors are learned.
2. Training is expensive in space and time. For SVM
and bounding-box regressor training, features are extracted from each object proposal in each image and
written to disk. With very deep networks, such as
VGG16, this process takes 2.5 GPU-days for the 5k
images of the VOC07 trainval set. These features require hundreds of gigabytes of storage.

1. Introduction
Recently, deep ConvNets [14, 16] have significantly improved image classification [14] and object detection [9, 19]
accuracy. Compared to image classification, object detection is a more challenging task that requires more complex methods to solve. Due to this complexity, current approaches (e.g., [9, 11, 19, 25]) train models in multi-stage
pipelines that are slow and inelegant.
Complexity arises because detection requires the accurate localization of objects, creating two primary challenges. First, numerous candidate object locations (often
called “proposals”) must be processed. Second, these candidates provide only rough localization that must be refined
to achieve precise localization. Solutions to these problems
often compromise speed, accuracy, or simplicity.
In this paper, we streamline the training process for stateof-the-art ConvNet-based object detectors [9, 11]. We propose a single-stage training algorithm that jointly learns to
classify object proposals and refine their spatial locations.
The resulting method can train a very deep detection
network (VGG16 [20]) 9× faster than R-CNN [9] and 3×
faster than SPPnet [11]. At runtime, the detection network
processes images in 0.3s (excluding object proposal time)

3. Object detection is slow. At test-time, features are
extracted from each object proposal in each test image.
Detection with VGG16 takes 47s / image (on a GPU).
R-CNN is slow because it performs a ConvNet forward
pass for each object proposal, without sharing computation.
Spatial pyramid pooling networks (SPPnets) [11] were proposed to speed up R-CNN by sharing computation. The
SPPnet method computes a convolutional feature map for
the entire input image and then classifies each object proposal using a feature vector extracted from the shared feature map. Features are extracted for a proposal by maxpooling the portion of the feature map inside the proposal
into a fixed-size output (e.g., 6 × 6). Multiple output sizes
are pooled and then concatenated as in spatial pyramid pooling [15]. SPPnet accelerates R-CNN by 10 to 100× at test
time. Training time is also reduced by 3× due to faster proposal feature extraction.
1 All timings use one Nvidia K40 GPU overclocked to 875 MHz.

1440

