Multi-class Multi-annotator Active Learning with Robust Gaussian Process for
Visual Recognition

⋆

Chengjiang Long⋆
Stevens Institute of Technology
Hoboken, NJ, USA 7030

Gang Hua⋆,†
Microsoft Research Asia
Haidian District Beijing, P.R. China 100080

clong@stevens.edu

ganghua@gmail.com

†

Abstract
Active learning is an effective way to relieve the tedious
work of manual annotation in many applications of visual
recognition. However, less research attention has been focused on multi-class active learning. In this paper, we propose a novel Gaussian process classifier model with multiple annotators for multi-class visual recognition. Expectation propagation (EP) is adopted for efficient approximate
Bayesian inference of our probabilistic model for classification. Based on the EP approximation inference, a generalized Expectation Maximization (GEM) algorithm is derived
to estimate both the parameters for instances and the quality of each individual annotator. Also, we incorporate the
idea of reinforcement learning to actively select both the informative samples and the high-quality annotators, which
better explores the trade-off between exploitation and exploration. The experiments clearly demonstrate the efficacy
of the proposed model.

1. Introduction
Most of the current recognition systems are based on supervised learning with large quantity of labeled training data [15, 29]. In recent years, crowd-sourcing is has been explored to collect large-scale labeled image datasets, such as
ImageNet [4] and LabelMe [28].
There are still several issues raised when using the
current crowd-sourcing systems like Amazon Mechanical
Turk. First of all, the collected labels could be very noisy
from irresponsible or low-quality annotators. Secondly,
there is no mechanism to control the label quality online.
Last but not least, there is no mechanism to prioritize the
data to be labeled. To make the most use of the scarce
human resource and facilitate more efficient data labeling,
active learning has been explored in some previous works
[5, 13, 14, 23, 32, 33] to enhance the efficacy of the labeled
data for a generalizable model.
However, most previous active learning approaches on-

Figure 1: The graphical model of the proposed Gaussian
process classifier, with multiple noisy labels from multiple
annotators in crowdsourcing.
ly investigate the case with a single human oracle on the
assumption that the provided labels are noise-free. Theoretically, due to human perception variations, multiple annotators are likely to provide diverse labels for some inherent ambiguous examples even if they are responsible, not
to mention random behaviors from the irresponsible annotators. Hence, the problem of active learning with multiple annotators under the condition that multiple annotators
may provide noisy labels has not been fully explored, although previous works such as Hua et al. [9] and Long
et al. [21, 22] have studied it under the context of binary
classification.
Indeed, most existing research works in active learning
explore merely on binary classification [7, 9, 10, 21, 27, 40,
42]. Relatively fewer approaches have been investigated for
multi-class active learning as discussed in [11] and many
of them are direct extension of binary active learning approaches to the multi-class scenario [12]. However, many
real visual recognition are multi-class application problems and it is possible that the performance of active learning will be degraded by decomposing a multi-class problem as several independent binary classification subproblems. Therefore, the problem multi-class active learning
algorithms with collaborative multiple annotators deserves
further exploration.
In this paper, we propose a Bayesian multi-class classification model which explicitly models the expertise level of
12839

