Convex Optimization with Abstract Linear Operators
Steven Diamond and Stephen Boyd
Dept. of Computer Science and Electrical Engineering, Stanford University
{stevend2, boyd}@stanford.edu

Abstract
We introduce a convex optimization modeling framework
that transforms a convex optimization problem expressed in
a form natural and convenient for the user into an equivalent cone program in a way that preserves fast linear transforms in the original problem. By representing linear functions in the transformation process not as matrices, but as
graphs that encode composition of abstract linear operators, we arrive at a matrix-free cone program, i.e., one
whose data matrix is represented by an abstract linear operator and its adjoint. This cone program can then be solved
by a matrix-free cone solver. By combining the matrix-free
modeling framework and cone solver, we obtain a general
method for efficiently solving convex optimization problems
involving fast linear transforms.

1. Introduction
Convex optimization modeling systems like YALMIP
[38], CVX [28], CVXPY [16], and Convex.jl [47] provide
an automated framework for converting a convex optimization problem expressed in a natural human-readable form
into the standard form required by a generic solver, calling
the solver, and transforming the solution back to the humanreadable form. This allows users to form and solve convex optimization problems quickly and efficiently. These
systems easily handle problems with a few thousand variables, as well as much larger problems (say, with hundreds
of thousands of variables) with enough sparsity structure,
which generic solvers can exploit.
The overhead of the problem transformation, and the additional variables and constraints introduced in the transformation process, result in longer solve times than can be
obtained with a custom algorithm tailored specifically for
the particular problem. Perhaps surprisingly, the additional
solve time (compared to a custom solver) for a modeling
system coupled to a generic solver is often not as much as
one might imagine, at least for modest sized problems. In
many cases the convenience of easily expressing the problem makes up for the increased solve time using a convex

optimization modeling system.
Many convex optimization problems in applications like
signal and image processing, or medical imaging, involve
hundreds of thousands or many millions of variables, and
so are well out of the range that current modeling systems
can handle. There are two reasons for this. First, the standard form problem that would be created is too large to store
on a single machine, and second, even if it could be stored,
standard interior-point solvers would be too slow to solve it.
Yet many of these problems are readily solved on a single
machine by custom solvers, which exploit fast linear transforms in the problems. The key to these custom solvers is
to directly use the fast transforms, never forming the associated matrix. For this reason these algorithms are sometimes
referred to as matrix-free solvers.
The literature on matrix-free solvers in signal and image processing is extensive; see, e.g., [3, 4, 10, 9, 25, 49].
There has been particular interest in matrix-free solvers for
LASSO and basis pursuit denoising problems [4, 11, 22,
18, 31, 48]. The most general matrix-free solvers target
semidefinite programs [32] or quadratic programs and related problems [43, 26]. The software closest to a convex
optimization modeling system for matrix-free problems is
TFOCS, which allows users to specify many types of convex problems and solve them using a variety of matrix-free
first-order methods [5].
To better understand the advantages of matrix-free
solvers, consider the nonnegative deconvolution problem
minimize kc ∗ x − bk2
subject to x ≥ 0,

(1)

where x ∈ Rn is the optimization variable, c ∈ Rn and
b ∈ R2n−1 are problem data, and ∗ denotes convolution. Note that the problem data has size O(n). There
are many custom matrix-free methods for efficiently solving this problem, with O(n) memory and a few hundred
iterations, each of which costs O(n log n) floating point operations (flops). It is entirely practical to solve instances of
this problem of size n = 107 on a single computer [36].
Existing convex optimization modeling systems fall far
short of the efficiency of matrix-free solvers on problem (1).

675

