Generating Notifications for Missing Actions:
Don’t forget to turn the lights off!
Bilge Soran*, Ali Farhadi*† , Linda Shapiro*
†

*University of Washington
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence

{bilge, ali, shapiro}@cs.washington.edu

Enter room

Wash mug

Take milk box

Pour milk into mug

?

…

…

…

Steam milk
is detected
as missing

Predicted Action:

Enter room

Wash mug

Wash mug

Associated
cost is high

Take milk box

Take milk box

Pour milk into mug
Steam milk

!

Missing Action:

time

Enter room

Recent Action:

Notification:
Don’t forget
to steam milk!

Figure 1: Our purpose is to issue notifications about missing actions given an unsegmented input stream of egocentric video.
For the latte making sequence above, our system recognizes the actions that happened so far, predicts the ongoing action,
reasons about missing actions and the associated cost, and generates notifications for the costly missing actions. In this figure,
the brackets refer to segmented action boundaries, the blue arrows show the prediction points and the graphs below show the
inter-action dependencies. The most recently completed action is marked in red, the predicted action is marked in blue, and
the missing action is marked in orange. In this example, the actor is about to miss an important action: steam milk, and a
reminder for that is given.

Abstract
We all have experienced forgetting habitual actions
among our daily activities. For example, we probably have
forgotten to turn the lights off before leaving a room or turn
the stove off after cooking. In this paper, we propose a solution to the problem of issuing notifications on actions that
may be missed. This involves learning about interdependencies between actions and being able to predict an ongoing
action while segmenting the input video stream. In order
to show a proof of concept, we collected a new egocentric
dataset, in which people wear a camera while making lattes 1 . We show promising results on the extremely challeng1 A latte is a coffee drink made with espresso and steamed milk [1].

ing task of issuing correct and timely reminders. We also
show that our model reliably segments the actions, while
predicting the ongoing one when only a few frames from the
beginning of the action are observed. The overall prediction accuracy is 46.2% when only 10 frames of an action
are seen (2/3 of a sec). Moreover, the overall recognition
and segmentation accuracy is shown to be 72.7% when the
whole activity sequence is observed. Finally, the online prediction and segmentation accuracy is 68.3% when the prediction is made at every time step.

1. Introduction
We all have witnessed prospective memory failures in
our daily activities. How often do we forget to turn the
14669

