Category-blind Human Action Recognition: A Practical Recognition System
Wenbo Li1∗ Longyin Wen2∗ Mooi Choo Chuah1 Siwei Lyu2†
2
1
Department of Computer Science,
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
University at Albany, SUNY
Lehigh University
{lwen,slyu}@albany.edu

{wel514,mcc7}@lehigh.edu

Abstract
Existing human action recognition systems for 3D sequences obtained from the depth camera are designed to
cope with only one action category, either single-person action or two-person interaction, and are difficult to be extended to scenarios where both action categories co-exist.
In this paper, we propose the category-blind human recognition method (CHARM) which can recognize a human action without making assumptions of the action category. In
our CHARM approach, we represent a human action (either a single-person action or a two-person interaction)
class using a co-occurrence of motion primitives. Subsequently, we classify an action instance based on matching
its motion primitive co-occurrence patterns to each class
representation. The matching task is formulated as maximum clique problems. We conduct extensive evaluations
of CHARM using three datasets for single-person actions,
two-person interactions, and their mixtures. Experimental
results show that CHARM performs favorably when compared with several state-of-the-art single-person action and
two-person interaction based methods without making explicit assumptions of action category.

1. Introduction
Human action recognition is a major component of many
computer vision applications, e.g., video surveillance, patient monitoring, and smart homes, to name a few [3]. There
have been many approaches developed for recognizing human actions from monocular videos. However, monocular
videos are insufficient for the practical applicability of action recognition algorithms in the real-world environment,
mainly due to two problems. First, 3D information is lost
in monocular videos. Second, a single camera view usually
cannot fully capture human action due to the occlusion.
The recent advent of cost-effective depth sensors enables
real-time estimation of 3D joint positions of a human skele* indicates equal contributions.
† indicates the corresponding author.

Figure 1. Examples of human actions depicting the complexities
in action recognition: (a) a multi-person action with each individual performing a single-person action; (b) a multi-person action
involving a single-person action and multi-person interaction; (c)
a multi-person action that cannot be reduced to the combination of
two single-person actions. See texts for more details.

ton [17]. The availability of 3D joint positions in real time
spawns approaches with higher practical applicability for
action recognition.
The majority of existing human action recognition methods using sequences of 3D joint positions are designed for
two general categories: single-person action [19, 22, 25]
and multi-person interaction [12, 13, 23]. However, human
actions in real-world scenarios are much more complex because multiple action instances belonging to both categories
usually co-exist in a sequence. For example1 , Figure 1(a)
describes three actions all belonging to the single-person action category: three children are skating without interacting
with each other; Figure 1(b) depicts two actions belonging
to two categories respectively: ”two children are fighting for
a toy” (a two-person interaction) while ”a woman lifts two
hands to hold her forehead” (a single-person action). Thus,
it is more desirable to have a method that can recognize human actions without involving any prior categorization.
However, existing algorithms designed to recognize
single-person actions from sequences of 3D joint positions
[10, 19, 25] cannot be used to recognize multi-person interactions, and vice versa [4, 23]. This is because the two
categories of actions are exclusive by definition. A simple
approach fusing methods for different categories to recognize an action in a competitive manner is unlikely to work as
shown by the example in Figure 1(c). From the perspective
1 We show frames from videos to illustrate the idea, but the same scenario holds for sequences of 3D joint positions.

4444

