Near-Online Multi-target Tracking with Aggregated Local Flow Descriptor
Wongun Choi
NEC Laboratories America, Cupertino, CA, USA
wongun@nec-labs.com

t

Abstract
In this paper, we tackle two key aspects of multiple target
tracking problem: 1) designing an accurate affinity measure
to associate detections and 2) implementing an efficient and
accurate (near) online multiple target tracking algorithm.
As for the first contribution, we introduce a novel Aggregated Local Flow Descriptor (ALFD) that encodes the relative motion pattern between a pair of temporally distant
detections using long term interest point trajectories (IPTs).
Leveraging on the IPTs, the ALFD provides a robust affinity measure for estimating the likelihood of matching detections regardless of the application scenarios. As for another contribution, we present a Near-Online Multi-target
Tracking (NOMT) algorithm. The tracking problem is formulated as a data-association between targets and detections in a temporal window, that is performed repeatedly at
every frame. While being efficient, NOMT achieves robustness via integrating multiple cues including ALFD metric,
target dynamics, appearance similarity, and long term trajectory regularization into the model. Our ablative analysis verifies the superiority of the ALFD metric over the
other conventional affinity metrics. We run a comprehensive experimental evaluation on two challenging tracking
datasets, KITTI [16] and MOT [2] datasets. The NOMT
method combined with ALFD metric achieves the best accuracy in both datasets with significant margins (about 10%
higher MOTA) over the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
The goal of multiple target tracking is to automatically
identify objects of interest and reliably estimate the motion
of targets over the time. Thanks to the recent advancement
in image-based object detection methods [9, 13, 17, 34],
tracking-by-detection [4, 6, 10, 25, 27] has become a popular framework to tackle the multiple target tracking problem. The advantages of the framework are that it naturally
identifies new objects of interest entering the scene, that
it can handle video sequences recorded using mobile platforms, and that it is robust to a target drift. The key challenge in this framework is to accurately group the detec-

t + Δt

Distance: similar
Appearance: similar
Flows: dis4nc4ve

Figure 1. Bounding box distance and appearance similarity are
popularly used affinity metrics in the multiple target tracking literature. However, in real-world crowded scenes, they are often
ambiguous to successfully distinguish adjacent or similar looking targets. Yet, the optical flow trajectories provide more reliable
measure to compare different detections across time. Although individual trajectory may be inaccurate (red line), collectively they
provide strong information to measure the affinity. We propose a
novel Aggregated Local Flow Descriptor that exploits the optical
flow reliably in the multiple target tracking problem.

tions into individual targets with high accuracy (data association), so one target could be fully represented by a single
estimated trajectory. Mistakes made in the identity maintenance could result in a catastrophic failure in many high
level reasoning tasks, such as future motion prediction, target behavior analysis, etc.
To implement a highly accurate multiple target tracking
algorithm, it is important to have a robust data association
model and an accurate measure to compare two detections
across time (pairwise affinity measure). Recently, much
work is done in the design of the data association algorithm
using global (batch) tracking framework [4, 25, 27, 37].
Compared to the online counterparts [6, 7, 10, 22], these
methods have a benefit of considering all the detections
over entire time frames. With a help of clever optimization algorithms, they achieve higher data association accuracy than traditional online tracking frameworks. However,
the application of these methods is fundamentally limited
to post-analysis of video sequences. On the other hand, the
pairwise affinity measure is relatively less investigated in
the recent literature despite its importance. Most methods
adopt weak affinity measures (see Fig. 1) to compare two
detections across time, such as spatial affinity (e.g. bound13029

