Action Recognition by Hierarchical Mid-level Action Elements
Tian Lan∗ , Yuke Zhu∗, Amir Roshan Zamir and Silvio Savarese
Stanford University

Abstract
Realistic videos of human actions exhibit rich spatiotemporal structures at multiple levels of granularity: an action
can always be decomposed into multiple finer-grained elements in both space and time. To capture this intuition, we
propose to represent videos by a hierarchy of mid-level action elements (MAEs), where each MAE corresponds to an
action-related spatiotemporal segment in the video. We introduce an unsupervised method to generate this representation from videos. Our method is capable of distinguishing action-related segments from background segments and
representing actions at multiple spatiotemporal resolutions.
Given a set of spatiotemporal segments generated from the
training data, we introduce a discriminative clustering algorithm that automatically discovers MAEs at multiple levels of granularity. We develop a structured model that captures a rich set of spatial, temporal and hierarchical relations among the segments, where the action label and multiple levels of MAE labels are jointly inferred. The proposed
model achieves state-of-the-art performance in multiple action recognition benchmarks. Moreover, we demonstrate
the effectiveness of our model in real-world applications
such as action recognition in large-scale untrimmed videos
and action parsing.

1. Introduction
In this paper we address the problem of learning models of human actions and using these models for recognizing and parsing human actions from videos. This is a very
challenging problem. Most of the human actions are complex spatiotemporal hierarchical processes. Consider, for
instance, the action in Fig. 1. It is composed of a collection
of spatiotemporal processes ranging from the entire action
sequence, “taking food from fridge” to simple elementary
actions such as “stretching arm” or “grasping a tomato”.
Each of these actions is often characterized by a complex
distribution of motion segments (e.g. open and close), objects (e.g. fridge and food), body parts (e.g. arm) along with
their interactions (e.g. grasp a tomato). Thus, in order to
∗ indicates equal contribution

Figure 1. A representation of hierarchical spatiotemporal segments for action. Our method automatically discovers representative and discriminative mid-level action elements for a given action
class. These elements are encoded in the spatiotemporal segments
which usually cover different aspects of an action at different levels of granularity, ranging from an entire action sequence, which
comprises the actor along with the objects the actor interacts with
(the first row of the hierarchy), to the action elements such as finegrained body part movements and objects (the last row).

achieve a full understanding of the action that takes place in
a scene, one must recognize and parse this complex structure of mid-level action elements (MAEs) at different levels
of semantic and spatiotemporal resolution.
Most of the existing methods cannot do this. A large
body of work focuses on associating the entire video clip
with a single class label from a pre-defined set of action categories (e.g., “take food from fridge” versus “cook food”)
(Fig. 1) [22, 21, 41] – essentially, a video classification
problem. Methods such as [12, 26] do propose methodologies for temporally segmenting or parsing the action (e.g.,
“take food from fridge”) into a sequence of sub-action labels (e.g., open fridge, grasp food, close fridge) but cannot organize these sub-actions into hierarchical structures
of MAEs such as the one in Fig. 1. Critically, most of these
methods assume that the fine-grained action labels or their
temporal structures are pre-defined or hand-specified by an
expert as opposed to being automatically inferred from the
videos in a data-driven fashion. This assumption prevents
such methods from scaling up to a large number of complex actions. Finally, a portion of previous research focuses
14552

