Merging the Unmatchable: Stitching Visually Disconnected SfM Models
Andrea Cohen, Torsten Sattler, Marc Pollefeys
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
{andrea.cohen,torsten.sattler,marc.pollefeys}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Recent advances in Structure-from-Motion not only enable the reconstruction of large scale scenes, but are also
able to detect ambiguous structures caused by repeating elements that might result in incorrect reconstructions. Yet, it
is not always possible to fully reconstruct a scene. The images required to merge different sub-models might be missing or it might be impossible to acquire such images in the
first place due to occlusions or the structure of the scene.
The problem of aligning multiple reconstructions that do
not have visual overlap is impossible to solve in general.
An important variant of this problem is the case in which
individual sides of a building can be reconstructed but not
joined due to the missing visual overlap. In this paper, we
present a combinatorial approach for solving this variant
by automatically stitching multiple sides of a building together. Our approach exploits symmetries and semantic information to reason about the possible geometric relations
between the individual models. We show that our approach
is able to reconstruct complete building models where traditional SfM ends up with disconnected building sides.

1. Introduction
Despite recent advances that make Structure-fromMotion (SfM) methods more scalable [1, 15] and robust,
e.g., to challenges posed by repetitive structures [3,4,6,23],
the fact that there might not always be enough images to
obtain a single reconstruction remains a fundamental problem. For humans, determining the spatial arrangement of
the different sub-models is often rather easy, indicating that
even visually disconnected components contain information
about their spatial relations. Yet, few approaches exist that
attempt to automatically merge these components. There
are multiple reasons why a SfM model can disconnect into
multiple individual components: e.g. images obtained from
photo-collection communities such as Flickr tend to mostly
concentrate on a small set of iconic viewpoints [22]. In
general, for popular landmarks, many pictures are taken of
the front, few photos depict the sides and even fewer the

Figure 1. The Providence dataset from [5] disconnects into multiple sub-models that cannot be connected by feature matching due
to trees blocking the view and missing images. Our method is able
to automatically merge the sub-models by recovering their relative
scales and joining them at the colored points.

back, and the changes of viewpoint are usually too large
between different sides. Consequently, there is often not
enough visual overlap between the different models to connect them through feature matching. Even in a controlled
setting, where an expert familiar with SfM takes photos with
the explicit goal of reconstructing the scene, it might not always be possible to obtain enough data for a complete reconstruction (c.f . Fig. 1). Trees or vegetation might block
the view on different parts of a structure, preventing feature
matching from finding enough correspondences to connect
the parts. Convex building corners also represent a difficult
case, especially in narrow environments where it is hard to
take images with enough visual overlap while guaranteeing
a wide enough baseline to enable a stable reconstruction.
This problem is magnified in crowd-sourced reconstruction
efforts [17], where non-expert users often find it hard to
take enough pictures to enable the reconstructions of corners [16]. In addition, certain areas might not be accessible
or might be hidden behind trees or vegetation.
While a reconstruction can disconnect into multiple sub-

2129

