Deep Colorization
Zezhou Cheng
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
chengzezhou@sjtu.edu.cn

Qingxiong Yang
City University of Hong Kong
qiyang@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
This paper investigates into the colorization problem
which converts a grayscale image to a colorful version. This
is a very difficult problem and normally requires manual
adjustment to achieve artifact-free quality. For instance,
it normally requires human-labelled color scribbles on the
grayscale target image or a careful selection of colorful
reference images (e.g., capturing the same scene in the
grayscale target image). Unlike the previous methods, this
paper aims at a high-quality fully-automatic colorization
method. With the assumption of a perfect patch matching technique, the use of an extremely large-scale reference database (that contains sufficient color images) is the
most reliable solution to the colorization problem. However, patch matching noise will increase with respect to
the size of the reference database in practice. Inspired by
the recent success in deep learning techniques which provide amazing modeling of large-scale data, this paper reformulates the colorization problem so that deep learning
techniques can be directly employed. To ensure artifactfree quality, a joint bilateral filtering based post-processing
step is proposed. Numerous experiments demonstrate that
our method outperforms the state-of-art algorithms both in
terms of quality and speed.

1. Introduction
Image colorization assigns a color to each pixel of
a target grayscale image. Colorization methods can be
roughly divided into two categories: scribble-based colorization [10, 13, 16, 20, 25] and example-based colorization [1, 2, 6, 11, 14, 23]. The scribble-based methods typically require substantial efforts from the user to provide
considerable scribbles on the target grayscale images. It is
thus time-assuming to colorize a grayscale image with finescale structures, especially for a rookie user.
To reduce the burden on user, [23] proposes an examplebased method which is later further improved by [1, 11].
The example-based method typically transfers the color
information from a similar reference image to the target
∗ Correspondence author.

Bin Sheng∗
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
shengbin@sjtu.edu.cn

grayscale image. However, finding a suitable reference image becomes an obstacle for a user. [2, 14] simplify this
problem by utilizing the image data on the Internet and propose filtering schemes to select suitable reference images.
However, they both have additional constraints. [14] requires identical Internet object for precise per-pixel registration between the reference images and the target grayscale
image. It is thus limited to objects with a rigid shape (e.g.
landmarks). [2] requires user to provide a semantic text
label and segmentation cues for the foreground object. In
practice, manual segmentation cues are hard to obtain as
the target grayscale image may contain multiple complex
objects (e.g. building, car, tree, elephant). These methods
share the same limitation − their performance highly depends on the selected reference image(s).
A fully-automatic colorization method is proposed to address this limitation. Intuitively, one reference image cannot
include all possible scenarios in the target grayscale image.
As a result, [1, 2, 11, 23] require similar reference image(s).
A more reliable solution is locating the most similar image patch/pixel in a huge reference image database and then
transferring color information from the matched patch/pixel
to the target patch/pixel. However, the matching noise is too
high when a large-scale database is adopted in practice.
Deep learning techniques have achieved amazing success in modeling large-scale data recently. It has shown
powerful learning ability that even outperforms human to
some extent (e.g. [7]) and deep learning techniques have
been demonstrated to be very effective on various computer vision and image processing applications including
image classification [12], pedestrian detection [17, 26], image super-resolution [4], photo adjustment [24] etc. The
success of deep learning techniques motivates us to explore
its potential application in our context. This paper formulates image colorization as a regression problem and deep
neural networks are used to solve the problem. A large
database of reference images comprising all kinds of objects (e.g. tree, animal, building, sea, mountain etc.) is used
for training the neural networks. Some example reference
images are presented in Figure 1 (b). Although the training is very slow due to the adoption of a large database,
the learned model can be directly used to colorize a target
grayscale image efficiently. The state-of-the-art coloriza1415

