Conditional Convolutional Neural Network for Modality-aware Face Recognition
Chao Xiong1 , Xiaowei Zhao1 , Danhang Tang1 , Karlekar Jayashree3 , Shuicheng Yan2 , and Tae-Kyun Kim1
1

Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Imperial College London
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore
3
Panasonic R&D Center Singapore
{chao.xiong10, x.zhao, d.tang11}@imperial.ac.uk, Karlekar.Jayashree@sg.panasonic.com, eleyans@nus.edu.sg, tk.kim@imperial.ac.uk
2

Abstract
Faces in the wild are usually captured with various
poses, illuminations and occlusions, and thus inherently
multimodally distributed in many tasks. We propose a conditional Convolutional Neural Network, named as c-CNN,
to handle multimodal face recognition. Different from traditional CNN that adopts fixed convolution kernels, samples
in c-CNN are processed with dynamically activated sets of
kernels. In particular, convolution kernels within each layer
are only sparsely activated when a sample is passed through
the network. For a given sample, the activations of convolution kernels in a certain layer are conditioned on its present
intermediate representation and the activation status in the
lower layers. The activated kernels across layers define
the sample-specific adaptive routes that reveal the distribution of underlying modalities. Consequently, the proposed
framework does not rely on any prior knowledge of modalities in contrast with most existing methods. To substantiate the generic framework, we introduce a special case of
c-CNN via incorporating the conditional routing of the decision tree, which is evaluated with two problems of multimodality – multi-view face identification and occluded face
verification. Extensive experiments demonstrate consistent
improvements over the counterparts unaware of modalities.

1. Introduction
It can be commonly assumed that data may appear in
different views or styles in computer vision. For example,
objects of the same class may have different types in object
recognition, e.g., cars may be of various types and brands;
or in human pose estimation, people with the same pose
may have different identities. Similarly, many face related
tasks deal with images with variations in terms of pose, occlusion and lighting, and thus are inherently multimodal.
Such multimodality leads to a large intra-class variation,
which poses a great challenge to most existing approaches

Conv. Kernels

Feature
Maps
Conditional
Activation

Conditional
Activation

Conditional
Activation

Figure 1. Illustration of c-CNN. Each line type stands for one
modality. Each image is passed along with a modality-specific
route indicated by the corresponding colored arrows. Only the kernels along the route are activated and utilized to extract features.
The passing route defines the splitting w.r.t. inherent modalities in
a coarse-to-fine manner: similar modalities, e.g., modality of red
dashed line and blue solid line, may share certain kernels at the
beginning layers.

for face identification or verification.
A general approach to handle multimodal problems is to
find a shared feature space where data of different modalities are directly comparable. Conventional methods, such
as Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) [9] and Partial
Least Squares (PLS) [6], aim at learning modality-specific
projection matrices that lead to maximal covariance among
instances of the same class in the shared latent space. Many
works are specifically designed to deal with two-view data.
In particular, data of one view are carefully projected into
the subspace of the other modality. This idea has seen popular applications in synthesis based approaches in various
problems, such as sketch-photo verification [27], low resolution vs. high resolution face matching [19], etc. Despite
excellent work has been done on synthesis, this may in principle be an ill-posed problem that is more difficult than discriminatively comparing images of two different modalities.

3667

