Attributed Grammars for Joint Estimation of Human Attributes, Part and Pose
Seyoung Park and Song-Chun Zhu
Center for Vision, Cognition, Learning and Autonomy,
Department of Computer Science and Statistics, UCLA
{seypark@cs, sczhue@stat}.ucla.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we are interested in developing compositional models to explicit representing pose, parts and attributes and tackling the tasks of attribute recognition, pose
estimation and part localization jointly. This is different
from the recent trend of using CNN-based approaches for
training and testing on these tasks separately with a large
amount of data. Conventional attribute models typically
use a large number of region-based attribute classifiers on
parts of pre-trained pose estimator without explicitly detecting the object or its parts, or considering the correlations
between attributes. In contrast, our approach jointly represents both the object parts and their semantic attributes
within a unified compositional hierarchy. We apply our attributed grammar model to the task of human parsing by
simultaneously performing part localization and attribute
recognition. We show our modeling helps performance improvements on pose-estimation task and also outperforms
on other existing methods on attribute prediction task.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we design and propose compositional models to explicit representing pose, parts and attributes and
tacking the tasks of attribute recognition, pose estimation
and part localization jointly. It is different from the recent
trend of using Convolutional Neural Networks(CNNs) approaches with large data for training and testing on these
tasks separately. Despite the CNNs-based approaches have
been significantly improving the performance on many vision tasks, but lack explicit models. In contrast, stochastic grammar models have been successfully used in explicit
representing and inferring complex compositional structures for tasks such as object detection[19, 23, 43], hierarchical object representation[7, 14], pose estimation[32, 38],
scene parsing [42], and event prediction[30]. However,
these models do not incorporate any notions of visual attributes. Current attribute models for objects and scenes
are neither compositional nor part-based, and typically

attribute parsing
Gender

attribute prediction

Tshirt

Is male?

body parsing

Gender
Hat
Long Hair

&

part localization

has hat?

Glasses

Jeans

has jeans?

Jeans

has shorts?

Shorts
Long Pants

has long pants?
Jeans
Shorts

input Image

Long Pants

Figure 1. Paring and attribute prediction from an input image using
proposed attributed model. The parse tree represents human body
part appearance, geometry, and attributes for each part. Then, we
aggregate local information for attribute prediction.

employ a large number of independent classifiers to decide which attribute labels to assign to a given bounding
box[3, 9, 25, 28]. Such an approach does not explicitly
capture the relationship between attribute labels, or localize the part regions described by the attributes. So, our
work is now an attempt to propose an unified model that
to strengthen the strength and make up for the weakness
of both stochastic grammar model and attributed model.
Our attribute grammar model is an extension of conventional grammar models: Dependency Grammar(DG), Pharase Structure Grammar(PG), and And-Or Grammar(AOG)
[43]. We use PG for part representation, DG for articulated
relations, and both can be described in AOG. We, then, extend it by including attribute notating for each part as shown
in 1. Since the model output includes representations of object itself and attributes, it allows us to use the model as
the application for attribute classification and pose estimation automatically and simultaneously. This is a novel because previous approaches need n attribute classifier for n
attribute classifications[2, 25, 41], and rely on pre-trained
12372

