RGB-Guided Hyperspectral Image Upsampling
Hyeokhyen Kwon
KAIST
hyeokhyen@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Hyperspectral imaging usually lack of spatial resolution
due to limitations of hardware design of imaging sensors.
On the contrary, latest imaging sensors capture a RGB image with resolution of multiple times larger than a hyperspectral image. In this paper, we present an algorithm to
enhance and upsample the resolution of hyperspectral images. Our algorithm consists of two stages: spatial upsampling stage and spectrum substitution stage. The spatial upsampling stage is guided by a high resolution RGB image of
the same scene, and the spectrum substitution stage utilizes
sparse coding to locally refine the upsampled hyperspectral
image through dictionary substitution. Experiments show
that our algorithm is highly effective and has outperformed
state-of-the-art matrix factorization based approaches.

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral imaging acquires spectral characteristics
of a scene through capturing a number of contiguous narrow band images. It has been a promising tool for applications in geosensing, cultural heritage, and various computer
vision tasks [30, 21, 13]. Due to the hardware design limitations [9], hyperspectral sensors often have a low spatial
resolution, but very fine spectral resolution. In addition, due
to reduced incoming illumination by narrow band filters, it
usually has low signal-to-noise ratio. Consequently, a hyperspectral image is noisy if a long exposure time is not
guaranteed.
Compared with hyperspectral sensors, latest imaging
sensors capture a RGB image with resolution of multiple
times larger than a hyperspectral image and with higher
signal-to-noise ratio given the same exposure time. Because of these attractive properties, various approaches have
been proposed to fuse a low-resolution hyperspectral image and a high-resolution RGB (or gray scale) image to reconstruct a high-resolution hyperspectral image as demonstrated in [12, 2, 9]. In this paper, we follow this direction
and introduce a new algorithm which outperforms state-ofthe-art approaches for hyperspectral image upsampling.

Yu-Wing Tai
SenseTime Group Limited
yuwing@gmail.com

Our algorithm consists of two stages: spatial upsampling
stage and spectrum substitution stage. The spatial upsampling stage increases the spatial resolution of a hyperspectral image through the guidance of the high resolution RGB
image. This is achieved by estimating an optimal linear
combination of exemplar patches for super-resolution reconstruction. The exemplar patches couple hyperspectral
and RGB images with identical structures learnt from training examples. The spatial upsampling stage not only enhance spatial resolution, but also reduce image noise in a
hyperspectral image. In the spectrum substitution stage, we
assume a local region of a scene contains limited number of
materials, and adopt the sparse coding [16] to learn a local
spectrum dictionary. We evaluate the upsampled hyperspectral image after the first stage using the learnt local spectrum
dictionary. The optimal linear combination of spectrum basis functions with sparse coefficients which best describes
the upsampled hyperspectral and RGB images is used to reconstruct our final output. In short, the first stage estimates
a proxy solution which unmix the hyperspectrum observation within a pixel using the guidance from a high resolution
RGB image, and the second stage refines the spectrum of
the proxy solution based on the limited materials assumption within a local region of a scene.
We have evaluated our proposed algorithm extensively
using real world hyperspectral image datasets. The experiments show that our algorithm is highly effective, and has
outperformed state-of-the-art matrix factorization based approaches both qualitatively and quantitatively.

2. Related work
Hyperspectral imaging was first introduced as an application in astronomy and satellite imaging. It aims to capture spectrum power distribution of electromagnetic wavelengths ranged from infrared spectrum to ultraviolet spectrum. Since certain materials have unique spectral signature, it has been very useful in material, agriculture, chemical, and environment analysis [9].
Since hyperspectral images have limited spatial resolution, various techniques have been proposed to increase
resolution of a hyperspectral image. A common tech-

307

