Camera Pose Voting for Large-Scale Image-Based Localization
Bernhard Zeisl
Torsten Sattler
Marc Pollefeys
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
{bernhard.zeisl,torsten.sattler,marc.pollefeys}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Image-based localization approaches aim to determine
the camera pose from which an image was taken. Finding correct 2D-3D correspondences between query image
features and 3D points in the scene model becomes harder
as the size of the model increases. Current state-of-theart methods therefore combine elaborate matching schemes
with camera pose estimation techniques that are able to
handle large fractions of wrong matches. In this work
we study the benefits and limitations of spatial verification compared to appearance-based filtering. We propose
a voting-based pose estimation strategy that exhibits O(n)
complexity in the number of matches and thus facilitates
to consider much more matches than previous approaches
– whose complexity grows at least quadratically. This new
outlier rejection formulation enables us to evaluate pose estimation for 1-to-many matches and to surpass the state-ofthe-art. At the same time, we show that using more matches
does not automatically lead to a better performance.

1. Introduction
Estimating the camera pose from which a given image was
taken is a fundamental problem for many interesting applications such as navigation of autonomous vehicles, Augmented Reality, and (incremental) Structure-from-Motion
(SfM). Given a 3D model of the scene, the camera pose can
be computed from 2D-3D matches between 2D measurements in the image and 3D points in the model by applying
an n-point-pose solver [3] inside a RANSAC loop. Since
RANSAC’s run-time increases exponentially with the percentage of false matches, it is crucial to avoid accepting too
many wrong matches. At the same time, distinguishing between correct and incorrect correspondences is an ill-posed
problem for large datasets, as they contain many points with
(nearly) identical local appearance. This is especially true
for urban scenes which often possess repetitive structures.
Consequently, Lowe’s widely used ratio test [17] is too restrictive and thus often fails in these cases. Many current
state-of-the-art localization algorithms therefore use rather
complicated matching procedures that combine 2D-to-3D
and 3D-to-2D search with filtering based on co-visibility

Figure 1: Given n 2D-3D matches, our approach makes extensive use of geometric filtering and votes for a 4 DoF camera pose (translation and rotation around the gravity direction) in O(n) while naturally integrating location priors if
available (white circle). The heatmaps encode the number
of geometrical correct matches for 2D positions.
information [7, 16, 22]. However, geometric verification is
still only performed on a final, small set of correspondences.
In this work we propose to shift the task of finding correct correspondences from the matching stage to the pose
estimation step, by leveraging geometric cues extensively,
which are local and thus independent of the model size.
First, instead of using 1st nearest neighbors and only retaining matches that are likely to be inliers, we simplify
the matching problem and consider 1-to-many correspondences. This results in a large number of matches with a
very small inlier ratio. Second, we aim to perform extensive
spatial verification early on in the pose estimation procedure. As such the core questions we tackle is: How can we
make geometric verification scalable to thousands of tentative correspondences and what can we expect to gain from
it? To that end, we introduce a voting-based spatial verification process that exploits a known gravity direction and an
approximate knowledge of the camera height using a setup
similar to [27]. Exemplary results of our voting procedure
are illustrated in Fig. 1. Our contributions are as follows:
– We formulate spatial verification as a Hough voting problem in pose parameter space, obtaining a run-time that
grows only linearly in the number of matches.
– We show that we can detect a large fraction of wrong
matches using simple but efficient filtering operations
based on local (image) geometry.

2704

