Fully Connected Guided Image Filtering
Longquan Dai
Mengke Yuan
Feihu Zhang
Xiaopeng Zhang
NLPR-LIAMA, Institute of Automation Chinese Academy of Sciences, BEIJING, CHINA
{longquan.dai, yuanmengke2015}@ia.ac.cn, hi.yexu@gmail.com, xiaopeng.zhang@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
This paper presents a linear time fully connected guided
filter by introducing the minimum spanning tree (MST) to
the guided filter (GF). Since the intensity based filtering kernel of GF is apt to overly smooth edges and the fixed-shape
local box support region adopted by GF is not geometricadaptive, our filter introduces an extra spatial term, the tree
similarity, to the filtering kernel of GF and substitutes the
box window with the implicit support region by establishing all-pairs-connections among pixels in the image and assigning the spatial-intensity-aware similarity to these connections. The adaptive implicit support region composed
by the pixels with large kernel weights in the entire image
domain has a big advantage over the predefined local box
window in presenting the structure of an image for the reason that: 1, MST can efficiently present the structure of an
image; 2, the kernel weight of our filter considers the tree
distance defined on the MST. Due to these reasons, our filter achieves better edge-preserving results. We demonstrate
the strength of the proposed filter in several applications.
Experimental results show that our method produces better
results than state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Edge-preserving image filters are fundamental building
blocks for many computer vision and graphics applications [4, 10, 13] because they smooth out trivial details
while preserving major image structures (edge-preserving).
A common approach
is to pose this problem as the weighted
P
average pi = j∈Ωi Wij qj over an explicit local support
region Ωi around the pixel i, where Wij denotes the weight
kernel, qi and pi are the intensities of the input image q and
the output image I at i, respectively.
Traditional edge-aware filtering methods often explicitly
limit the support region Ωi to a box window and compute
Wij from both intensity similarity and spatial affinity or
only from the intensity similarity between i and j ∈ Ωi .
Since the shape of the most relevant pixels in Fig.1a is irregular, the box window in Fig.1b cannot efficiently capture

(a) Input

(b) GF/BF [9, 19]

(c) CLMF [14]

(d) CLMF [14]

(e) MLPA [18]

(f) Ours

Figure 1: Support regions of a pixel i in the region component C. (a) is input image. (b) (c) (d) (e) are the explicit
support regions determined by BF, GF, CLMF and MLPA,
where (c) (d) show the support regions produced by different scanning orders. (f) is the implicit support region of
ours.
the most relevant pixels of i in the image domain. To solve
this problem, people designed various geometric-adaptive
support regions. However, these sophisticated algorithms
still cannot pick out all the most relevant pixels as shown in
Figs.1c 1d 1e. The shortcoming limits the ability of these
algorithms to model long-range connections as well as the
complicated geometric structures of an image and therefore
results in unsatisfactory smoothing results. But the explicit
support region cannot be easily removed because 1, some
filters do not consider the spatial affinity, the local support
region is used to to block the interconnection of distant pixels; 2, some filters’ computational complexity depends on
the size of support regions, a small window is chosen to
reduce the computational cost.
In order to exploit all information in arbitrary shapes,
we can compute all-pairs-weights Wij of a filter for pixels
i, j in the entire image domain Ω and consider that the implicit support region Ω̃i = {j ∈ Ω | Wij > T } is versatile
and can present the ideal support region as shown in Fig.1f,
where T is a threshold and a plausible value of T is 0.001.
SinceP
Ω̃i contains all pixels
with large weights, we have
P
pi = j∈Ω̃i Wij qj ≈ P
j∈Ω Wij qj which implies that the
fully connected filtering j∈Ω Wij qj is a good approxima1352

