Video Segmentation with Just a Few Strokes
Naveen Shankar Nagaraja
Frank R. Schmidt
Computer Vision Group
University of Freiburg, Germany

Thomas Brox

{nagaraja,schmidt,brox}@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract
As the use of videos is becoming more popular in computer vision, the need for annotated video datasets increases. Such datasets are required either as training data
or simply as ground truth for benchmark datasets. A particular challenge in video segmentation is due to disocclusions, which hamper frame-to-frame propagation, in conjunction with non-moving objects. We show that a combination of motion from point trajectories, as known from
motion segmentation, along with minimal supervision can
largely help solve this problem. Moreover, we integrate a
new constraint that enforces consistency of the color distribution in successive frames. We quantify user interaction
effort with respect to segmentation quality on challenging
ego motion videos. We compare our approach to a diverse
set of algorithms in terms of user effort and in terms of performance on common video segmentation benchmarks.

1. Introduction
An annotated video carries rich information that can be
used in many tasks, such as visual learning or action recognition. Especially an object segmentation is very valuable
as many simpler annotations, such as bounding boxes, can
be derived from a segmentation. However, already manual segmentation of image sets is very tedious. With video
datasets, the large number of frames in each video makes
manual segmentation in all frames intractable. For this reason, all larger benchmark datasets have an annotation only
every few frames, e.g. [9].
Annotation in all frames requires support by an automated process that propagates annotations over time. Since
the content usually changes little from frame to frame, this
propagation looks straightforward, and many techniques
have been proposed in this context, e.g. [29, 1]. Most
of them are based on optical flow or temporal connections
modeled by Markov chains. Apart from drift, the main
challenge in label propagation is due to disocclusion that
comes with viewpoint changes. An object undergoing view-

Figure 1. We propose to combine the motion cues of point trajectories with appearance and volume information. As a result, only
little user annotation is needed to segment a whole video.

point changes in a video is highly challenging for annotation. New parts appear that were not visible in the annotated
frame (cf. Figure 2). Consequently, there is nothing to propagate and a decision must be made which label to assign to
this area. Existing approaches use color to assign labels in
disocclusion areas, but this fails as new colors appear.
In this paper, we emphasize the importance of motion
cues to deal with disocclusions. In contrast to color, the
motion of an object is locally consistent. Motion becomes
even more reliable if it is integrated over time. This has
been demonstrated by Brox and Malik [4] in the scope of
motion segmentation.
However, motion segmentation fails if there is no independent object motion. An important practical case that
cannot be handled by motion segmentation, but by the
framework presented in this paper, is that of a mostly static
object but a moving camera. In such a case, there are significant motion differences between the object and its background except for the base point, where the object is touching the ground. At the base point, the motion on the object
is identical to that of the ground, and a motion segmentation
approach will leak object labels to the background. Often,
appearance cues are unreliable in this region, too, due to
shadows. Sometimes user input is the only reliable source
of information to disambiguate at the base point. Since we
combine many automated concepts into our framework, i.e.,
temporal propagation, long term motion, color distributions
13235

