Predicting Multiple Structured Visual Interpretations
Debadeepta Dey Varun Ramakrishna Martial Hebert J. Andrew Bagnell
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA-15213, USA
{debadeep, vramakri, hebert, dbagnell}@ri.cmu.edu

Abstract
We present a simple approach for producing a small
number of structured visual outputs which have high recall,
for a variety of tasks including monocular pose estimation
and semantic scene segmentation. Current state-of-the-art
approaches learn a single model and modify inference procedures to produce a small number of diverse predictions.
We take the alternate route of modifying the learning procedure to directly optimize for good, high recall sequences of
structured-output predictors. Our approach introduces no
new parameters, naturally learns diverse predictions and is
not tied to any specific structured learning or inference procedure. We leverage recent advances in the contextual submodular maximization literature to learn a sequence of predictors and empirically demonstrate the simplicity and performance of our approach on multiple challenging vision
tasks including achieving state-of-the-art results on multiple predictions for monocular pose-estimation and image
foreground/background segmentation.

1. Introduction
Computer vision tasks such as object recognition [12],
semantic segmentation [4], tracking [18], monocular human
pose estimation [38] and point cloud classification [27], are
often addressed by a pipeline architecture where each module of the pipeline produces several hypotheses as input to
the next module. Considering multiple options at each stage
is good practice as it avoids premature commitment to a single answer which, if wrong, can jeopardize the quality of
decisions made downstream [10, 37]. As an example consider Figure 1 where multiple predictions are generated for
a foreground/background segmentation task. We see that
the prediction with the highest confidence (denoted by prediction 1) can be far from the groundtruth. The principal
requirement of a list is that at least one hypothesis in the
list is close to the groundtruth labeling (high list recall). A
characteristic of lists which achieve high recall in a small
number of hypotheses is diversity [32] which increases the
odds of at least one accurate prediction.

Image

Prediction 1

Prediction 2

Prediction 3

Figure 1: For a given image our method trains a small number of structured predictors in sequence. For a test image,
the list of predictors are invoked to produce multiple hypotheses. Our approach produces high recall lists within a
small number of hypotheses and can use any structured predictor available.
Such fixed length lists with high recall need to be considered in many other non-vision tasks including information
retrieval, server job scheduling, document summarization,
grasping and motion planning. For example in information
retrieval, when a user searches for the term “jaguar” on a
search engine, the user may either intend to search for the
animal, the car, or the football team. Search results must
include highly ranked links to all three possible interpretations [32]. These problems have received much attention
in recent literature [7, 8, 23, 24, 32, 33, 34, 40, 41].
Our central insight is that diversity in a list of structured
predictions need not be enforced, but that it is an emergent
property of optimizing the correct submodular recall objective. Our procedure trains a sequence of predictors, each of
which produces a hypothesis, which constitutes the list.
Submodular functions are characterized by a diminishing returns property that implies that any list that maximizes
a monotone submodular function will implicitly produce diverse hypotheses. This is due to the fact that adding hypotheses which are similar to previously chosen hypotheses
in the list results in small marginal gains. For example, in
the semantic scene labeling problem it is not beneficial to
predict a labeling in the second position of the list which
differs from the first labeling in the list only by a few pixels. Note that the desired property is to achieve high recall,
while diversity is merely a characteristic of lists that achieve
12947

