Resolving Scale Ambiguity Via XSlit Aspect Ratio Analysis
Wei Yang1
Haiting Lin1
Sing Bing Kang2
Jingyi Yu1,3
3
2
1
ShanghaiTech University
Microsoft Research
University of Delaware
{wyangcs,haiting}@udel.edu

yu@eecis.udel.edu

sbkang@microsoft.com

Abstract
In perspective cameras, images of a frontal-parallel 3D
object preserve its aspect ratio invariant to its depth. Such
an invariance is useful in photography but is unique to perspective projection. In this paper, we show that alternative non-perspective cameras such as the crossed-slit or XSlit cameras exhibit a different depth-dependent aspect ratio (DDAR) property that can be used to 3D recovery. We
first conduct a comprehensive analysis to characterize DDAR, infer object depth from its AR, and model recoverable
depth range, sensitivity, and error. We show that repeated
shape patterns in real Manhattan World scenes can be used
for 3D reconstruction using a single XSlit image. We also
extend our analysis to model slopes of lines. Specifically,
parallel 3D lines exhibit depth-dependent slopes (DDS) on
their images which can also be used to infer their depths. We validate our analyses using real XSlit cameras, XSlit
panoramas, and catadioptric mirrors. Experiments show
that DDAR and DDS provide important depth cues and enable effective single-image scene reconstruction.

1. Introduction
A single perspective image exhibits scale ambiguity: 3D
objects of difference sizes can have images of an identical
size under perspective projection, as shown in Fig. 1. In
photography and architecture, the forced perspective technique employs this optical illusion to make an object appear farther away, closer, larger or smaller than its actual
size while preserving the aspect ratio. Fig. 2 shows an example in the film “The Lord of the Rings” where characters
apparently standing next to each other would be displaced
by several feet in depth from the camera. For computer vision, however, such an invariance provides little help, if not
harm, to scene reconstruction.
Prior approaches on resolving the scale ambiguity range
from imposing shape priors [3, 10], extracting local descriptors [16] to analyzing the vanishing points [13]. In
this paper, we approach the problem from a different angle: we analyze aspect ratio changes of an object with re-

Sen

sor
CoP

Pinhole

17 cm
Sen

sor
Sli

t1

Sl

47 cm

Object
Depth

it 2

XSlit

Figure 1: Images of the same object lying at different depths
have an identical aspect ratio (AR) in a perspective camera
(Top) but have very different ARs in an XSlit image (Bottom).

spect to its depth. Consider a frontal-parallel rectangle R
of size sh × sv located d away from the sensor and d > f
where f is the camera’s focal length. Under perspective
projection, its image is an rectangle R′ similar to R of size
f
[sh , sv ]. This implies that the aspect ratio
[s′h , s′v ] = d−f
r = sv /sh of R and R′ remain the same. The property
can termed as aspect-ratio invariance (ARI). ARI is an important property of perspective projection. ARI, however,
no longer holds under non-centric projections, exhibiting
depth-dependent aspect-ratio (DDAR).
In this paper, we explore DDAR in a special type of noncentric cameras called the crossed-slit or XSlit camera [29].
Earlier work in XSlit imaging includes the pushbroom camera used in satellite imaging and XSlit panoramas by stitching a sequence of perspective images. The General Linear Camera theory [28] has shown that the XSlit camera
is generic enough to describe a broad range of non-centric
cameras. In fact, pushbroom, orthographic and perspective
cameras can all be viewed as special XSlit entities. Geometrically, an XSlit camera collects rays that simultaneously pass through two oblique (neither parallel nor coplanar)
slits in 3D space, in contrast to a pinhole camera whose rays

3424

