Wide-Area Image Geolocalization with Aerial Reference Imagery

1

Scott Workman1

Richard Souvenir2

Nathan Jacobs1

scott@cs.uky.edu

souvenir@uncc.edu

jacobs@cs.uky.edu

University of Kentucky

2

University of North Carolina at Charlotte
ground-level
query image

Abstract

1. Introduction
We address the problem of cross-view image geolocalization, which aims to localize ground-level query images
by matching against a database of aerial images (Figure 1).
This contrasts with the majority of existing image localization methods which infer location using visual similarity between the query image and a database of other ground-level
images. The inherent limitation with these approaches is
that they fail in locations where ground-level images are not
accessible. Even with hundreds of millions of geo-tagged
ground-level images available via photo-sharing websites
and social networks, there are still very large geographic
regions with few images; most images are captured in cities
and around famous landmarks [6].
Cross-view image geolocalization is motivated by the
observation that the distribution of geo-tagged ground-level
imagery is relatively sparse in comparison to the abundance of high-resolution aerial imagery. The underlying idea is to learn a mapping between ground-level and
aerial image viewpoints, such that a ground-level query im-

most similar
image

search'

We propose to use deep convolutional neural networks to
address the problem of cross-view image geolocalization, in
which the geolocation of a ground-level query image is estimated by matching to georeferenced aerial images. We
use state-of-the-art feature representations for ground-level
images and introduce a cross-view training approach for
learning a joint semantic feature representation for aerial
images. We also propose a network architecture that fuses
features extracted from aerial images at multiple spatial
scales. To support training these networks, we introduce a
massive database that contains pairs of aerial and groundlevel images from across the United States. Our methods
significantly out-perform the state of the art on two benchmark datasets. We also show, qualitatively, that the proposed feature representations are discriminative at both local and continental spatial scales.

aerial image database

joint semantic
feature space

estimated location

Figure 1: We learn a joint semantic feature representation
for aerial and ground-level imagery and apply this representation to the problem of cross-view image geolocalization.

age can be directly matched against an aerial image reference database. In contrast to previous work [25] which
used hand-engineered features, we propose to learn feature
representations using deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs). Our methods build upon recent success in using
CNNs for ground-level image understanding [20, 44].
We refer to our approach as cross-view training. The idea
is take advantage of existing CNNs for interpreting groundlevel imagery and use a large database of ground-level and
aerial image pairs of the same location to learn to extract
semantic, geo-informative features from aerial images. This
is a general strategy with many potential applications but we
demonstrate it in the context of cross-view geolocalization.
Our work makes the following main contributions: (1)
an extensive evaluation of off-the-shelf CNN network architectures and target label spaces for the problem of crossview localization; (2) cross-view training for learning a
joint semantic feature space from different image sources;
(3) a massive new dataset with multi-scale aerial imagery;
(4) state-of-the-art performance on two smaller-scale evaluation benchmarks for cross-view geolocalization; and (5)
extensive qualitative evaluation, including visualizations,

3961

