Multi-Image Matching via Fast Alternating Minimization
Xiaowei Zhou, Menglong Zhu, Kostas Daniilidis
GRASP Laboratory, University of Pennsylvania
{xiaowz,menglong,kostas}@seas.upenn.edu

Abstract
In this paper we propose a global optimization-based approach to jointly matching a set of images. The estimated
correspondences simultaneously maximize pairwise feature
affinities and cycle consistency across multiple images. Unlike previous convex methods relying on semidefinite programming, we formulate the problem as a low-rank matrix recovery problem and show that the desired semidefiniteness of a solution can be spontaneously fulfilled. The
low-rank formulation enables us to derive a fast alternating
minimization algorithm in order to handle practical problems with thousands of features. Both simulation and real
experiments demonstrate that the proposed algorithm can
achieve a competitive performance with an order of magnitude speedup compared to the state-of-the-art algorithm.
In the end, we demonstrate the applicability of the proposed
method to match the images of different object instances and
as a result the potential to reconstruct category-specific object models from those images.

1. Introduction
Finding feature correspondences between two images is
a fundamental problem in computer vision with various applications such as structure from motion, image registration,
shape analysis, to name a few. While previous efforts were
mostly focused on matching a pair of images, many tasks
require to find correspondences across multiple images. A
typical example is nonrigid structure from motion [3, 12],
where one can hardly reconstruct a nonrigid shape from two
frames. Furthermore, recent work has shown that leveraging multi-way information can dramatically improve matching results compared to pairwise matching [29, 16].
The most important constraint for joint matching is the
cycle consistency, i.e., the composition of matches along a
loop of images should be identity, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Given pairwise matches, one can possibly identify true or
false matches by checking all cycles in the image collection.
But there are many difficulties for this approach [10]. For
example, the input pairwise matches are often very noisy

Figure 1. An illustration of consistent multi-image matching.

with many false matches and missing matches, and the features detected from different images may only have a partial overlap even if the same feature detector is applied [27].
Therefore, it is likely that very few consistent cycles can be
found. Moreover, how to sample cycles is not straightforward due to the huge number of possibilities [16]. Recent
work on joint matching has shown that, if all feature correspondences within multiple images are denoted by a large
binary matrix, the cycle consistency can be translated into
the fact that such a matrix should be positive semidefinite
and low-rank [18, 29, 16]. Based on this observation, convex optimization-based algorithms were proposed, which
achieved the state-of-the-art performances with theoretical
guarantees [16, 10]. But these algorithms rely on semidefinite programming (SDP), which is not computationally efficient to handle image matching problems in practice.
In this paper, we propose a novel algorithm for multiimage matching. The inputs to our algorithm are original
similarities between feature descriptors such as SIFT descriptors [25] and deep features [35], or optimized affinities
provided by existing graph matching solvers [22]. The outputs are feature correspondences between all pairs of images. Unlike many previous methods starting from quantized pairwise matches [29, 10], we postpone the decision
until we optimize for both pairwise affinities and multiimage consistency. Instead of using SDP relaxation, we
formulate the problem as a low-rank matrix recovery problem and employ the nuclear-norm relaxation for rank minimization (Section 4.1). We show that the positive semidefiniteness of a desired solution can be spontaneously fulfilled (Section 4.2). Moreover, we derive a fast alternat14032

