Enhancing Road Maps by Parsing Aerial Images Around the World
Gellért Máttyus
Remote Sensing Technology Institute
German Aerospace Center

Shenlong Wang, Sanja Fidler and Raquel Urtasun
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto

gellert.mattyus@dlr.de

{slwang, fidler, urtasun}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
In recent years, contextual models that exploit maps have
been shown to be very effective for many recognition and localization tasks. In this paper we propose to exploit aerial
images in order to enhance freely available world maps.
Towards this goal, we make use of OpenStreetMap and formulate the problem as the one of inference in a Markov
random field parameterized in terms of the location of the
road-segment centerlines as well as their width. This parameterization enables very efficient inference and returns
only topologically correct roads. In particular, we can segment all OSM roads in the whole world in a single day using
a small cluster of 10 computers. Importantly, our approach
generalizes very well; it can be trained using only 1.5 km2
aerial imagery and produce very accurate results in any location across the globe. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of our approach outperforming the state-of-the-art in two
new benchmarks that we collect. We then show how our
enhanced maps are beneficial for semantic segmentation of
ground images.

1. Introduction
Over the past decades many contextual models have been
developed to improve object recognition [41, 20, 24, 18, 19,
14, 15, 6, 10, 31, 39, 11, 16, 3, 13]. Particularly successful are approaches that use maps to improve localization
[22], layout estimation [22] and holistic scene understanding [36]. Most self-driving cars (e.g., Google car, participants of the DARPA urban challenge) rely on detailed maps
of the environment to facilitate navigation and perception.
These maps are typically obtained via costly manual intervention, limiting the applicability of current approaches.
An alternative are online resources such as the OpenStreetMap (OSM) project 1 , which contains a cartographic
map of the road topology with good coverage over almost
the full world, with around 33,968,739 km of road data.
1 www.openstreetmap.org

This is advantageous as it is freely available on the web and
the quality and quantity of the annotations are growing over
time, as more users contribute to the project. However, the
map information is noisy and partially missing as for example most roads do not contain information about their width.
In this paper we proposed to exploit aerial images in order to enhance open-source maps (e.g., with road geometry). This is not an easy task as despite decades of research,
large-scale automatic road segmentation from aerial images
remains an open problem. Most approaches either do not
deliver a topologically correct road network and/or rely on
classifiers that have to be re-trained for each location in order to properly capture appearance variations. As a consequence they require tedious manual annotation for each
region of the globe to be segmented. This annotation task
takes around 8 hours per km2 , therefore, current approaches
focus on a small set of locations.
In contrast, instead of framing the problem as semantic segmentation, we propose to use OpenStreetMap (OSM)
to formulate the problem as inference in a Markov random
field (MRF) which is directly parameterized in terms of the
centerline of each OSM road segment as well as its width.
This parameterization enables very efficient inference and
returns the same topology as OSM. In particular, we can
segment the OSM roads of the whole world in only 1 day
when using a small cluster of 10 computers. Furthermore,
our approach can be trained using only 1.5 km2 of aerial
imagery over Germany and is able to generalize to the entire world and produce state-of-the-art results without any
further manual interaction. As we reason about the location
of the centerline, we can handle and correct OSM mistakes
as well as geo-localization/projection errors. This is not an
easy task as illustrated in Fig. 1 due to shadows, occlusions and misalignments. Our energy encodes the appearance of roads, edge information, car detection, contextual
features, relations between nearby roads as well as smoothness between the line segments. All our energy terms can
be computed very efficiently via local, non-axis aligned integral images. Learning can also be done very efficiently
using structured SVMs [33] taking 1 minute on a desktop
11689

