Oriented Object Proposals
Shengfeng He and Rynson W.H. Lau
City University of Hong Kong
shengfeng he@yahoo.com, rynson.lau@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new approach to generate
oriented object proposals (OOPs) to reduce the detection
error caused by various orientations of the object. To this
end, we propose to efficiently locate object regions according to pixelwise object probability, rather than measuring
the objectness from a set of sampled windows. We formulate the proposal generation problem as a generative probabilistic model such that object proposals of different shapes
(i.e., sizes and orientations) can be produced by locating the
local maximum likelihoods. The new approach has three
main advantages. First, it helps the object detector handle objects of different orientations. Second, as the shapes
of the proposals may vary to fit the objects, the resulting proposals are tighter than the sampling windows with
fixed sizes. Third, it avoids massive window sampling, and
thereby reducing the number of proposals while maintaining a high recall. Experiments on the PASCAL VOC 2007
dataset show that the proposed OOP outperforms the stateof-the-art fast methods. Further experiments show that the
rotation invariant property helps a class-specific object detector achieve better performance than the state-of-the-art
proposal generation methods in either object rotation scenarios or general scenarios. Generating OOPs is very fast
and takes only 0.5s per image.

1. Introduction
Object detection is one of the main research problems
in computer vision in recent years. In order to detect
and recognize the objects in an image, the sliding window
paradigm is commonly used in the state-of-the-art detectors.
However, exhaustively searching for objects across different
sizes, positions and aspect ratios requires about 106 times
predictions per image, which restricts the detection tasks
from using more sophisticated classifiers.
The object proposal technique (or “objectness estimation”) is proposed recently to cope with this barrier. Instead
of directly recognizing objects in the images, a small set
of object proposals (103 to 104 image windows) are first
produced to cover most of the regions that are likely to contain an object. Taking advantages of recent efforts on this

Figure 1: Examples of oriented object proposals (OOPs).
Blue boxes are the ground truth, and green boxes are the
OOPs. The proposed method is able to tightly locate objects
of different orientations and achieve better detection performance, as OOPs reduce the ambiguity caused by orientation
variation (see the realigned images with green borders).
topic [1, 26, 10, 2, 25, 6, 32], several object detection algorithms use object proposals as input to significantly speed
up the detection process, including the top detectors [28, 15]
in the PASCAL VOC challenge [11].
Notwithstanding the demonstrated success, how proposals may help improve object detection performance is still
being explored. An important problem, which has not been
considered by existing proposal methods, is object rotation.
Most of the object detectors are trained on a dataset with
a small number of object orientations. Thus, objects with
larger orientation differences may not be detected at runtime, as object appearances may vary largely due to orientation changes (see Figure 1). The traditional solution
to this problem is to specifically train multiple classifiers at
different orientations [18]. This, however, may significantly
1280

