Depth Selective Camera: A Direct, On-chip, Programmable Technique for Depth
Selectivity in Photography
Ryuichi Tadano
Sony Corporation
Tokyo, Japan

Adithya Kumar Pediredla, Ashok Veeraraghavan
Rice University
Houston, TX, USA

Ryuichi.Tadano@jp.sony.com

[adithya.k.pediredla, vashok] @rice.edu

Abstract
Time of flight (ToF) cameras use a temporally modulated light source and measure correlation between the reflected light and a sensor modulation pattern, in order to
infer scene depth. In this paper, we show that such correlational sensors can also be used to selectively accept or
reject light rays from certain scene depths. The basic idea is
to carefully select illumination and sensor modulation patterns such that the correlation is non-zero only in the selected depth range – thus light reflected from objects outside
this depth range do not affect the correlational measurements. We demonstrate a prototype depth-selective camera
and highlight two potential applications: imaging through
scattering media and virtual blue screening. This depthselectivity can be used to reject back-scattering and reflection from media in front of the subjects of interest, thereby
significantly enhancing the ability to image through scattering media- critical for applications such as car navigation
in fog and rain. Similarly, such depth selectivity can also
be utilized as a virtual blue-screen in cinematography by
rejecting light reflecting from background, while selectively
retaining light contributions from the foreground subject.

1. Introduction
Time of flight (ToF) cameras, which acquire a threedimensional (3D) representation of a scene based on the
travel time of illuminating photons, have come of age over
the last several years and are poised to revolutionize imaging capabilities. A ToF camera consists of a modulated
light source and a specialized image sensor that correlates
the waveform received from the scene with the modulation
function in order to estimate the amount of time taken, and
hence the depth, for light to travel.
ToF cameras provide unique benefits over competing 3D
scene acquisition technologies. They do not require the
computation of image/feature correspondences, an element
of both multi-view and structured light techniques. They
also do not require a complicated scanning mechanism as
in LIDAR systems. Most importantly, ToF sensors can be

fabricated using traditional CMOS fabrication techniques,
thereby benefiting enormously from the scaling, cost and
efficiency advantages offered through the advances in semiconductor fabrication techniques.
The inexpensive ToF cameras, such as the Kinect from
Microsoft, the CamBoard from PMD Technologies, and
Swissranger from MESA imaging has revolutionized a
range of consumer imaging applications. The 3D imaging
capability offered by these sensors has enabled a new era of
untethered and unconstrained game play in modern video
gaming consoles [4, 23]. In addition, the environment sensing capabilities of these devices makes many head-mounted
augmented, virtual and mixed reality [14] applications realistic and perceptually engaging, without the physiological
discomfort associated with previous generation systems that
were constrained by the effect of small errors in range and
ego motion estimation. Much of the work in ToF sensors
and their potential applications have focussed solely on the
3D imaging capabilities provided by these sensors.
Correlational Sensors for 2D Imaging: We explore an interesting alternate question. Can these modern ToF sensors
that exploit active illumination and correlational sensors be
used to enhance the capabilities of 2D imaging and photography? In this paper, we address two important limitations
of traditional photography, (a) imaging in scattering media
and (b) accurate segmentation of foreground objects for virtual blue-screening. We show that while these two limitations are seemingly unrelated, they both stem from the same
fundamental handicap that plagues traditional imaging: the
inability to reject contributions from photons that are not
from the desired depth range. We show that careful design of the illumination and the sensor codes in correlational
sensors will allow us to accept light contributions from a
user-controlled, selective, programmable depth range while
rejecting all other light. Such depth selectivity may potentially lead to a wide range of imaging and photography applications hitherto not possible as shown in figure 1.
Technical Contributions:
• Enhance 2D imaging using correlational sensors: We
13595

