Intrinsic Decomposition of Image Sequences from Local Temporal Variations
Pierre-Yves Laffont
ETH Zurich

Abstract
We present a method for intrinsic image decomposition,
which aims to decompose images into reflectance and shading layers. Our input is a sequence of images with varying
illumination acquired by a static camera, e.g. an indoor
scene with a moving light source or an outdoor timelapse.
We leverage the local color variations observed over time to
infer constraints on the reflectance and solve the ill-posed
image decomposition problem. In particular, we derive an
adaptive local energy from the observations of each local
neighborhood over time, and integrate distant pairwise constraints to enforce coherent decomposition across all surfaces with consistent shading changes. Our method is solely
based on multiple observations of a Lambertian scene under varying illumination and does not require user interaction, scene geometry, or an explicit lighting model. We compare our results with several intrinsic decomposition methods on a number of synthetic and captured datasets.

Jean-Charles Bazin
ETH Zurich

age decomposition, where the input is an image sequence of
a static scene with fixed viewpoint under varying illumination. We show that the observation of temporal variations in
local neighborhoods provides us with all the necessary information to relate the reflectance of multiple pixels, both at
the local level and across pairs of distant pixels. This allows
us to solve the decomposition problem and obtain intrinsic
layers without the need of geometry, user interaction, an
explicit lighting model, or assumptions on light color and
reflectance sparsity.
We formulate the intrinsic decomposition as an optimization problem where our energies are derived directly
from the Lambertian image formation model. Specifically,
we make the following contributions:
• we derive a local energy that relates reflectance values within each neighborhood by analyzing the local
color variations observed over time. This term is locally adaptive as it enforces smooth shading only on
the relevant pixels, and automatically detects regions
with sudden shading changes due to shadows or normal/depth discontinuities (Sec. 4);

1. Introduction
Intrinsic image decomposition aims to express an image of a Lambertian scene as the per-pixel product of reflectance and shading layers [3]. The reflectance component, also called albedo, represents how a diffuse surface
reflects light (i.e., the material color), while the shading
component represents the lighting effects such as shadows
and indirect lighting. This decomposition is useful for several image editing applications such as recolorization [25],
re-texturing [7], and relighting [20], among many others.
Intrinsic image decomposition is ill-posed because an
infinite number of reflectance-shading combinations could
produce the observed image color. Recent methods have
successfully tackled this problem by incorporating priors on
local shading [22, 33], enforcing sparse reflectance [10, 5],
propagating user-specified constraints [7], leveraging reconstructed scene geometry [19, 1], or inferring constraints
from multiple images with varying lighting [34, 12]. Like
these latter approaches, we leverage multiple observations
of the scene to constrain the decomposition.
In this paper, we describe a new method for intrinsic im-

• we infer pairwise constraints on the reflectance of distant pixels that are oriented consistently and have similar shading over time. We propose a robust approach
for establishing reliable pairwise constraints without
prior knowledge of the lighting or geometry (Sec. 5);
• we extend a synthetic benchmark for intrinsic image
decomposition and conduct an extensive comparison
with several recent methods (Sec. 6.2).

2. Related work
Intrinsic image decomposition is an ill-posed problem,
and can only be solved by imposing constraints on the decomposition.
Constraints on the decomposition. Several assumptions
on the shading or reflectance have been proposed. This paper does not attempt to exhaustively describe all the published methods, and we refer the reader to the work by
Barron et al. [2] for a comprehensive review. Many methods share some common assumptions, e.g., smooth shad1433

