Pedestrian Travel Time Estimation in Crowded Scenes
Shuai Yi 1
Hongsheng Li 1
Xiaogang Wang 1,2
Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

1

{syi,hsli,xgwang}@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

60

In this paper, we target on the problem of estimating the
statistic of pedestrian travel time within a period from an
entrance to a destination in a crowded scene. Such estimation is based on the global distributions of crowd densities
and velocities instead of complete trajectories of pedestrians, which cannot be obtained in crowded scenes. The proposed method is motivated by our statistical investigation
into the correlations between travel time and global properties of crowded scenes. Active regions are created for each
source-destination pair to model the probable walking regions over the corresponding source-destination trafﬁc flow.
Two sets of scene features are specially designed for modeling moving and stationary persons inside the active regions
and their influences on pedestrian travel time. The estimation of pedestrian travel time provides valuable information
for both crowd scene understanding and pedestrian behavior analysis, but was not sufﬁciently studied in literature.
The effectiveness of the proposed pedestrian travel time
estimation model is demonstrated through several surveillance applications, including dynamic scene monitoring, localization of regions blocking trafﬁcs, and detection of abnormal pedestrian behaviors. Many more valuable applications based on our method are to be explored in the future.1

1. Introduction
Crowd scene understanding [19, 20, 22, 29] and pedestrian behavior analysis [1, 3, 10, 17] are important for video
surveillance. People would like to study scene properties
and understand what is happening in the scene. In the meanwhile, they are also interested in revealing the rules governing individual behaviors. Scene information and pedestrian
behaviors are correlated. Pedestrian travel time from an entrance to an exit is such a measurement that reﬂects information from both sides.
In crowd surveillance and trafﬁc management systems,
1 Project webpage can be found at http://www.ee.cuhk.edu.hk/∼syi/.

No. of pedestrians

Abstract

40
20
0
0

(a)

20

40
60
80
100
Pedestrian travel time (s)

120

(b)

(c)
(d)
Figure 1. (a) Four examples of pedestrian walking routes from
source 9 to destination 3. (b) Travel time distribution of all the
297 pedestrians from source 9 to destination 3 in a one-hour
video. (c) The trafﬁc ﬂow from source 9 to destination 3 (shown
in green) is intersected by the moving trafﬁc (shown in red). (d)
The trafﬁc ﬂow from source 9 to destination 3 (shown in green)
is blocked by stationary persons (shown in red). The frames are
extracted from the New York Grand Central Station dataset [30].
Ten source/destination regions are marked and numbered.

people care more about statistics of crowd population than
individuals. Thus we estimate the average travel time of
multiple pedestrians within a temporal window, such as one
minute, instead of each individual. Such statistic reﬂects
scene properties, and depends on scene structures, distributions of crowd densities and velocities. In crowded scenes,
it is impossible to simply estimate the travel time based on
the starting and ending points of pedestrian trajectories, because tracking fails frequently due to heavy occlusions. Instead, we will show that the travel time can be estimated
from scene features that encode global scene properties,
such as the spatial distributions of crowd densities and velocities. Features used by us can be computed from highly
fragmented tracks and individual subjects are not required
to be tracked over periods.
Pedestrian travel time between entrances and exits indicates trafﬁc efﬁciency and travel cost of a scene, and thus attracts great attention in surveillance applications. When the
travel time increases due to scene congestion, security ad-

3137

