Active Transfer Learning with Zero-Shot Priors:
Reusing Past Datasets for Future Tasks
E. Gavves∗
QUVA Lab, University of Amsterdam

T. Mensink
University of Amsterdam

C.G.M. Snoek
QUVA Lab, University of Amsterdam

T. Tommasi∗
UNC Chapel Hill

T. Tuytelaars
KU Leuven, ESAT-PSI, iMinds

Abstract
How can we reuse existing knowledge, in the form of
available datasets, when solving a new and apparently unrelated target task from a set of unlabeled data? In this
work we make a first contribution to answer this question
in the context of image classification. We frame this quest
as an active learning problem and use zero-shot classifiers
to guide the learning process by linking the new task to the
existing classifiers. By revisiting the dual formulation of
adaptive SVM, we reveal two basic conditions to choose
greedily only the most relevant samples to be annotated.
On this basis we propose an effective active learning algorithm which learns the best possible target classification
model with minimum human labeling effort. Extensive experiments on two challenging datasets show the value of our
approach compared to the state-of-the-art active learning
methodologies, as well as its potential to reuse past datasets
with minimal effort for future tasks.

1. Introduction
Modern visual learning algorithms are founded on data.
Given a set of images annotated with the desired object categories, the algorithm learns models able to recognize, detect
or describe unseen images. Despite their importance, image
datasets are assumed to be single-use only: whenever an object of interest is not previously annotated we urge for a new
collection containing the precious label. Isn’t this a wasteful approach? Take ImageNet [9] for example. With about
15M images this huge collection contains much more information than the officially listed 22K synsets. However,
most often such existing knowledge resources are ignored,
because of no label overlap with the future tasks at hand, be
it for classification [10, 13, 29] or localization [16, 31, 33].
We postulate that no past knowledge is useless for fu∗ This work has been done while working at ESAT-PSI, KU Leuven.

Figure 1: Imagine building a new classifier for “BMX” bicycles, a category absent from ImageNet. Rather than annotating the category from scratch, we propose to leverage
already available annotations for learning the “BMX” class.
Through a theoretical analysis of active learning within a
max-margin framework, we present the optimal conditions
for sampling new data to label using zero-shot priors.
ture learning, even if it appears to be so. The fundamental
question is how to reuse existing labels from given datasets,
without the need for new annotations. Previous transfer
learning methods proved to be helpful when at least few
annotated samples of the new target task are available [23].
However, they were never challenged with the more difficult
active learning setting, where no initial labeled data is available and the existing knowledge from the source datasets is
most probably irrelevant for the new task.
We are inspired by advances in zero-shot classification [1, 15, 20]. Zero-shot learning was originally proposed [15, 27] as a strategy to obtain classifiers for arbitrary, novel categories, when no annotated data is available.
Differently from [1,15] who depend on human-provided attribute annotations, recent works demonstrate that label cooccurrences from image datasets [20] and textual embeddings [11, 22] can be used for reliable zero-shot classification models. Here we re-purpose zero-shot learning as pri-

2731

