Face Flow
Patrick Snape

Anastasios Roussos
Yannis Panagakis
Stefanos Zafeiriou
Department of Computing, Imperial College London
180 Queens Gate, SW7 2AZ, London, U.K
{p.snape,troussos,i.panagakis,s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk
Abstract

In this paper, we propose a method for the robust and
efficient computation of multi-frame optical flow in an expressive sequence of facial images. We formulate a novel
energy minimisation problem for establishing dense correspondences between a neutral template and every frame
of a sequence. We exploit the highly correlated nature of
human expressions by representing dense facial motion using a deformation basis. Furthermore, we exploit the even
higher correlation between deformations in a given input
sequence by imposing a low-rank prior on the coefficients
of the deformation basis, yielding temporally consistent optical flow. Our proposed model-based formulation, in conjunction with the inverse compositional strategy and lowrank matrix optimisation that we adopt, leads to a highly
efficient algorithm for calculating facial flow. As experimental evaluation, we show quantitative experiments on a
challenging novel benchmark of face sequences, with dense
ground truth optical flow provided by motion capture data.
We also provide qualitative results on a real sequence displaying fast motion and occlusions. Extensive quantitative
and qualitative comparisons demonstrate that the proposed
method outperforms state-of-the-art optical flow and dense
non-rigid registration techniques, whilst running an order
of magnitude faster.

1. Introduction
Computing optical flow in the presence of non-rigid deformations is an important and challenging task. It plays a
significant role in a wide variety of problems such as medical imaging, dense non-rigid 3D reconstruction, dense 3D
mesh registration, motion segmentation, video re-texturing
and super-resolution. Broadly, optical flow methods describe procedures to relate pixels in one image to pixels in
another image of the same object. They establish a displacement field that can be thought of as a sampling, or warping,
of the input image back onto the reference image. Traditionally, optical flow is applied on a pair of consecutive frames

of a sequence, treating one of the frames as the template.
However, in terms of revealing the dynamics of a non-rigid
scene, it is much more useful to estimate the optical flow between every frame of a long sequence and a common template. In this scenario, long-term dense 2D tracks across the
sequence are established. We tackle the problem of multiframe optical flow by focusing on a specific deformable object, the human face.
The most straight-forward way to estimate a multi-frame
optical flow is to apply an algorithm that solves the traditional two-frame optical flow problem between every frame
and the template independently. However, the fact that we
have to deal with long sequences poses major difficulties.
For example, the point displacements between the template
and a frame can be substantially large and severe occlusions
of parts of the template can occur in some frames. Even
state-of-the-art two-frame optical flow methods that are especially designed to deal with large displacements or occlusions, e.g. [9, 27], are prone to fail. This is because they
lack any additional cues that could help them estimate an
appropriate initialisation or to disambiguate severe occlusions.
An alternative solution to the multi-frame optical flow
problem, also based on two-frame optical flow, is to estimate flow between consecutive frames and then combine
the various solutions. A simple integration of the solutions
to obtain long-term 2D tracks is prone to drift due to error
accumulation [11, 9]. This can be improved by the automatic detection of occlusions, gross errors, and other ambiguities [32, 34, 31, 29, 25], but any such solution is still
limited by the accuracy of the initial two-frame optical flow
estimations that are completely local in time and do not exploit any temporal cues.
Several recent methods solve the multi-frame optical
flow problem directly, by implicitly taking into account the
rich temporal information that is present in non-rigid scenes
[15, 36, 35, 28, 30, 14]. For example, the long-term 2D
trajectories of points on a surface undergoing non-rigid deformation are highly correlated and can be compactly described via a linear combination of a low-rank trajectory
12993

