Hierarchical Convolutional Features for Visual Tracking
Chao Ma
SJTU

Jia-Bin Huang
UIUC

Xiaokang Yang
SJTU

Ming-Hsuan Yang
UC Merced

chaoma@sjtu.edu.cn

jbhuang1@illinois.edu

xkyang@sjtu.edu.cn

mhyang@ucmerced.edu

Abstract
Visual object tracking is challenging as target objects often undergo significant appearance changes caused by deformation, abrupt motion, background clutter and occlusion. In this paper, we exploit features extracted from deep
convolutional neural networks trained on object recognition
datasets to improve tracking accuracy and robustness. The
outputs of the last convolutional layers encode the semantic
information of targets and such representations are robust
to significant appearance variations. However, their spatial
resolution is too coarse to precisely localize targets. In contrast, earlier convolutional layers provide more precise localization but are less invariant to appearance changes. We
interpret the hierarchies of convolutional layers as a nonlinear counterpart of an image pyramid representation and
exploit these multiple levels of abstraction for visual tracking. Specifically, we adaptively learn correlation filters on
each convolutional layer to encode the target appearance.
We hierarchically infer the maximum response of each layer
to locate targets. Extensive experimental results on a largescale benchmark dataset show that the proposed algorithm
performs favorably against state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking is one of the fundamental problems in computer vision with numerous applications [33,
26]. A typical scenario of visual tracking is to track an unknown target object, specified by a bounding box in the first
frame. Despite significant progress in the recent decades,
visual tracking is still a challenging problem, mainly due
to large appearance changes caused by occlusion, deformation, abrupt motion, illumination variation, and background
clutter. Recently, features based on convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) have demonstrated state-of-the-art results
on a wide range of visual recognition tasks [20, 11]. It is
thus of great interest to understand how to best exploit the
rich feature hierarchies in CNNs for robust visual tracking.
Existing deep learning based trackers [30, 21, 29,
18] typically draw positive and negative training samples

around the estimated target location to incrementally learn
a classifier over features extracted from a CNN. Two issues
ensue with such approaches. The first issue lies in the use
of neural networks as an online classifier following recent
object recognition algorithms, where only the outputs of the
last layer are used to represent targets. For high-level visual
recognition problems, it is effective to use features from the
last layer as they are most closely related to category-level
semantics and most invariant to nuisance variables such as
intra-class variations and precise location. However, the objective of visual tracking is to locate targets precisely rather
than to infer their semantic classes. Using only the features
from the last layer is thus not the optimal representation for
targets. The second issue is concerned with extracting training samples. Training a robust classifier requires a considerably large number of positive and negative samples, which
is not available in visual tracking. In addition, there lies ambiguity in determining a decision boundary since positive
and negative samples are highly correlated due to sampling
near a target.
In this work, we address these two issues by (i) using the
features from hierarchical layers of CNNs rather than only
the last layer to represent targets; (ii) learning adaptive correlation filters on each CNN layer without the need of sampling. Our approach builds on the observation that although
the last layers of CNNs are more effective to capture semantics, they are insufficient for capturing fine-grained spatial
details such as object positions. The earlier layers, on the
other hand, are precise in localization but do not capture
semantics as illustrated in Figure 1. This observation suggests that reasoning with multiple layers of CNN features
for visual tracking is of great importance as semantics are
robust to significant appearance variations and spatial details are effective for precise localization. We exploit both
the hierarchical features from the recent advances in CNNs
and the inference approach across multiple levels in classical computer vision problems. For example, computing
optical flow from the coarse levels of the image pyramid
are efficient, but finer levels are required for obtaining an
accurate and detailed flow field. A coarse-to-fine searching strategy is often adopted for best results [23]. In light

3074

