Optimizing the Viewing Graph for Structure-from-Motion
Chris Sweeney1
1

Torsten Sattler2

Tobias Höllerer1
2

University of California Santa Barbara

{cmsweeney, holl, mturk}@cs.ucsb.edu

Matthew Turk1

Marc Pollefeys2

Department of Computer Science
ETH Zürich, Switzerland

{sattlert, marc.pollefeys}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
The viewing graph represents a set of views that are related by pairwise relative geometries. In the context of
Structure-from-Motion (SfM), the viewing graph is the input to the incremental or global estimation pipeline. Much
effort has been put towards developing robust algorithms
to overcome potentially inaccurate relative geometries in
the viewing graph during SfM. In this paper, we take a fundamentally different approach to SfM and instead focus on
improving the quality of the viewing graph before applying SfM. Our main contribution is a novel optimization that
improves the quality of the relative geometries in the viewing graph by enforcing loop consistency constraints with
the epipolar point transfer. We show that this optimization
greatly improves the accuracy of relative poses in the viewing graph and removes the need for filtering steps or robust
algorithms typically used in global SfM methods. In addition, the optimized viewing graph can be used to efficiently
calibrate cameras at scale. We combine our viewing graph
optimization and focal length calibration into a global SfM
pipeline that is more efficient than existing approaches. To
our knowledge, ours is the first global SfM pipeline capable
of handling uncalibrated image sets.

1. Introduction
The viewing graph is a fundamental tool in the context of Structure-from-Motion (SfM) [20, 26, 29]. This
graph encapsulates the cameras that are to be estimated
as vertices and the relative geometries between cameras as
edges. SfM algorithms take the relative geometries from
the viewing graph as an input and output a reconstruction
consisting of camera poses and 3D points. The traditional
method for computing a SfM reconstruction is incremental
SfM [28, 32] which progressively grows a reconstruction by
adding one new view at a time. Incremental SfM requires
repeatedly performing nonlinear optimization (i.e., bundle
adjustment) as the reconstruction grows in size. As a re-

Figure 1. Reconstructions computed from global SfM methods on
the Pisa dataset [16]. Top: Standard global SfM pipelines [31]
struggle to handle image sets with poor calibration or inaccurate
relative geometries. Bottom: Our method optimizes the relative
geometries in the viewing graph to enforce global consistency, resulting in an efficient SfM pipeline that handles calibrated or uncalibrated images.

sult, incremental SfM is able to overcome noise in the viewing graph because errors and inaccuracies from the viewing
graph are consistently corrected through bundle adjustment.
Much recent work has focused on so-called “global
SfM” techniques that consider all relative poses (i.e., edges
in the viewing graph) to simultaneously estimate all camera
poses in a single step [3, 11, 12]. These methods operate on
calibrated image sets by first estimating the global orientation of all cameras simultaneously [6, 13, 14, 21], then solving for the camera positions simultaneously [3, 16, 22, 31].
Finally, structure is estimated and a global bundle adjustment is applied. Since bundle adjustment is generally the
most expensive part of SfM, global SfM methods are generally more efficient and scalable than incremental methods
as they only require a single bundle adjustment.
Since global SfM relies on averaging relative rotations
and translations, the quality of the input relative poses di-

801

