Relaxed Multiple-Instance SVM with Application to Object Discovery
Xinggang Wang† , Zhuotun Zhu† , Cong Yao, Xiang Bai∗
School of Electronic Information and Communications
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
xgwang@hust.edu.cn, zhuzhuotun@hust.edu.cn, yaocong2010@gmail.com, xbai@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Multiple-instance learning (MIL) has served as an important tool for a wide range of vision applications, for
instance, image classification, object detection, and visual tracking. In this paper, we propose a novel method to
solve the classical MIL problem, named relaxed multipleinstance SVM (RMI-SVM). We treat the positiveness of instance as a continuous variable, use Noisy-OR model to enforce the MIL constraints, and jointly optimize the bag label
and instance label in a unified framework. The optimization problem can be efficiently solved using stochastic gradient decent. The extensive experiments demonstrate that
RMI-SVM consistently achieves superior performance on
various benchmarks for MIL. Moreover, we simply applied
RMI-SVM to a challenging vision task, common object discovery. The state-of-the-art results of object discovery on
Pascal VOC datasets further confirm the advantages of the
proposed method.

1. Introduction
Exploring big visual data is a new trend in computer vision in recent years [29, 9, 5]. Especially, with the development of deep learning, the performances of many largescale visual recognition tasks have been significantly improved. However, the supervised deep learning methods,
e.g., deep convolutional neural networks (DCNN) [18], rely
heavily on the huge number of human-annotated data that
are non-trivial to get. Finely labeled images/videos, which
have pixel-level labels and bounding-box labels, are very
limited and expensive. However, there are hundreds times
of weakly labeled visual data that have image-level labels or
noisy labels. For example, we can extract image label from
its text caption on Flickr [15]. How to use the weakly labeled visual data for object recognition is a quite important
research problem.
† equal contribution; ∗ corresponding author.

Figure 1. Iteratively discover the locations of objects using the proposed RMI-SVM algorithm. 1st row: The top 100 object proposals
detected by Edgebox [38]. 2nd row: Randomly initialized object
locations in iteration 0. 3rd - 6th rows: The detected object locations in iteration 100, 500, 1000, and 2000, respectively. The blue
boxes show the object proposals, the red boxes show the detected objects that do not enough overlap with ground-truth, and the
green boxes show the detected objects that own enough overlap
with ground-truth. (Best viewed in color.)

The multiple-instance learning (MIL), proposed by Dietterich et al. [11] for the purpose of drug activity prediction, is a popular tool for exploring sematic information in
weakly labeled visual data. In MIL, instead of being given
the labels of each individual instance, the learner receives a
set of labeled bags, each containing plenty of instances. In
the binary-classification task, a bag may be labeled as positive if at least one instance is positive. On the other hand,
a bag will be labeled as negative if none of the instances
is positive. Typically, we can regard an image/video as a
11224

