Projection Bank: From High-dimensional Data to Medium-length Binary Codes
Li Liu
Mengyang Yu
Ling Shao
Department of Computer Science and Digital Technologies
Northumbria University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 8ST, UK
li2.liu@northumbria.ac.uk, m.y.yu@ieee.org, ling.shao@ieee.org

Abstract
Recently, very high-dimensional feature representations, e.g., Fisher Vector, have achieved excellent performance
for visual recognition and retrieval. However, these lengthy representations always cause extremely heavy computational and storage costs and even become unfeasible in
some large-scale applications. A few existing techniques
can transfer very high-dimensional data into binary codes,
but they still require the reduced code length to be relatively long to maintain acceptable accuracies. To target a better balance between computational efficiency and
accuracies, in this paper, we propose a novel embedding
method called Binary Projection Bank (BPB), which can
effectively reduce the very high-dimensional representations to medium-dimensional binary codes without sacrificing
accuracies. Instead of using conventional single linear or
bilinear projections, the proposed method learns a bank of
small projections via the max-margin constraint to optimally preserve the intrinsic data similarity. We have systematically evaluated the proposed method on three datasets:
Flickr 1M, ILSVR2010 and UCF101, showing competitive
retrieval and recognition accuracies compared with stateof-the-art approaches, but with a significantly smaller memory footprint and lower coding complexity.

1. Introduction
Recent research shows very high-dimensional feature
representations, e.g., Fisher Vector (FV) [23, 27, 22] and
VLAD [11], can achieve state-of-the-art performance in
many visual classiﬁcation, retrieval and recognition tasks.
Although these very high-dimensional representations lead
to better results, with the emergence of massive-scale
datasets, e.g., ImageNet [4] with around 15M images, the
computational and storage costs of these long data have become very expensive and even unfeasible. For instance, if
we represent 15M samples using 51200-dimensional FVs,
the storage requirement of these data is approximately
5.6TB and it will need about 7.7 × 1011 arithmetic oper-

(a)

(b)
Figure 1. Comparison of the proposed method (projection bank)
with state-of-the-art ITQ (linear projection) and BPBC (bilinear
projections). (a-1) The comparison results for retrieval on the UCF
101 [29] action dataset with around 10K videos. We use 1K videos
as the query set and report the average semantic precisions at the
top 50 retrieved points. Each video is represented via 170400-d
FV (Original). Our goal is mainly to compare the results calculated on binary codes with medium-dimensions (from 1000 bits to
10000 bits), where is shaded with red color in the ﬁgure. (a-2) The
comparison of storage requirements (double precision) for three
different projections. For ITQ, it is unfeasible to store the projections when code length exceeds 10000 bits. (a-3) The comparison
of coding complexities of different projections. (b) Illustration of
the three different coding methods.

ations measuring the Euclidean distance for image retrieval
on these data. Considering the trade-off between computational efﬁciency and performance, it is desirable to embed the high-dimensional data into a reduced feature space. However, traditional dimensionality reduction methods such as PCA [35] are not suitable for large-scale/highdimensional cases. The main reasons are: (1) Most dimensionality reduction methods are based on full-matrix linear
12821

