Multimodal Convolutional Neural Networks for Matching Image and Sentence
Lin Ma

Zhengdong Lu
Lifeng Shang
Hang Li
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies

forest.linma@gmail.com, {Lu.Zhengdong, Shang.Lifeng, HangLi.HL}@huawei.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose multimodal convolutional neural networks (m-CNNs) for matching image and sentence.
Our m-CNN provides an end-to-end framework with convolutional architectures to exploit image representation, word
composition, and the matching relations between the two
modalities. More specifically, it consists of one image CNN
encoding the image content and one matching CNN modeling the joint representation of image and sentence. The
matching CNN composes different semantic fragments from
words and learns the inter-modal relations between image
and the composed fragments at different levels, thus fully exploit the matching relations between image and sentence. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
m-CNNs can effectively capture the information necessary
for image and sentence matching. More specifically, our
proposed m-CNNs significantly outperform the state-ofthe-art approaches for bidirectional image and sentence retrieval on the Flickr8K and Flickr30K datasets.

1. Introduction
Associating image with natural language sentence plays
an essential role in many applications. Describing the image with natural sentences is useful for image annotation
and captioning [8, 21, 26], while retrieving image with a
natural language as query is more natural for image search
[13, 16]. The association between image and sentence can
be formalized as a multimodal matching problem, where
the semantically related image and sentence pairs should be
assigned higher matching scores than unrelated ones.
Multimodal matching between image and sentence
is complicated, and usually occurs at different levels as shown in Figure 1.
The words in the sentence, such as “grass”, “dog”, and “ball”, denote the objects in the image. The phrases describing the objects and their attributes or activities, such
as “black and brown dog”, and “small black and
brown dog play with a red ball”, correspond to
the image areas of their grounding meanings.
The

small black and brown dog play with a red ball in the grass

dog play with a red ball in
the grass
small black and brown dog
play with a red ball

black and
brown dog

a red ball

grass

ball

dog

Figure 1. Multimodal matching relations between image and
sentence. The words and phrases, such as “grass”, “a red
ball”,
and
“small black and brown dog play
with a red ball”, correspond to the image areas of their
grounding meanings.
The sentence “small black and
brown dog play with a red ball in the grass”
expresses the meaning of the whole image.

whole sentence “small black and brown dog play
with a red ball in the grass”, expressing a complete meaning, associates with the whole image. These
matching relations should be all taken into consideration for
an accurate multimodal matching between image and sentence. Recently, much research work focuses on modeling
the image and sentence matching relation at the specific level, namely the word level [31, 32, 6], phrase level [37, 27],
and sentence level [13, 16, 30]. However, to the best of our
knowledge, there are no models to fully exploit the matching relations between image and sentence by considering
the inter-modal correspondences at all the levels together.
The multimodal matching between image and sentence
requires good representations of image and sentence. Recently, deep neural networks have been employed to learn
better image and sentence representations. Specifically,
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have shown their
powerful abilities on learning of image representation [10,
29, 33, 11] and sentence representation [14, 15, 18]. However, the ability of CNN on multimodal matching, specifically the image and sentence matching problem, has not
been studied.
In this paper, we propose a novel multimodal convolutional neural network (m-CNN) framework for the image

2623

