Pairwise Conditional Random Forests for Facial Expression Recognition
Arnaud Dapogny1

Kevin Bailly1

arnaud.dapogny@isir.upmc.fr

kevin.bailly@isir.upmc.fr

Séverine Dubuisson1
severine.dubuisson@isir.upmc.fr
1

Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, CNRS, ISIR UMR 7222, 4 place Jussieu 75005 Paris

Abstract
Facial expression can be seen as the dynamic variation
of one’s appearance over time. Successful recognition thus
involves finding representations of high-dimensional spatiotemporal patterns that can be generalized to unseen facial
morphologies and variations of the expression dynamics. In
this paper, we propose to learn Random Forests from heterogeneous derivative features (e.g. facial fiducial point movements or texture variations) upon pairs of images. Those
forests are conditioned on the expression label of the first
frame to reduce the variability of the ongoing expression
transitions. When testing on a specific frame of a video,
pairs are created between this current frame and the previous ones. Predictions for each previous frame are used
to draw trees from Pairwise Conditional Random Forests
(PCRF) whose pairwise outputs are averaged over time to
produce robust estimates. As such, PCRF appears as a natural extension of Random Forests to learn spatio-temporal
patterns, that leads to significant improvements over standard Random Forests as well as state-of-the-art approaches
on several facial expression benchmarks.

Introduction
In the last decades, automatic facial expression recognition (FER) has attracted an increasing attention, as it is
a fundamental step of many applications such as humancomputer interaction, or assistive healthcare technologies.
A good survey covering FER can be found in [23]. There
exists many impediments to successful deciphering of facial
expressions, among which the large variability in morphological and contextual factors as well as the subtlety of lowintensity expressions. Because using dynamics of the expression helps disentangle those factors [4], most recent approaches aim at exploiting the temporal variations in videos
rather than trying to perform recognition on still images.

Figure 1. Flowchart of our PCRF FER method. When evaluating
a video frame indexed by n, dedicated pairwise trees are drawn
conditionally to expression probability distributions from previous
frames n − m1 , n − m2 , .... The subsequent predictions are averaged over time to output an expression probability distribution for
the current frame. This prediction can be used as a tree sampling
distribution for subsequent frame classification.

Nevertheless, as a matter of fact, the semantics of acted
facial events is composed of successive onset, apex and offset phases that may occur with various offsets and at different paces. Spontaneous behaviors can however be much
more difficult to analyse in terms of such explicit sequence.
Hence, there is no consensus on either how to effectively extract suitable representations from those high dimensional
video patterns, or on how to combine those representations
in a flexible way to generalize to unseen data and possibly unseen temporal variations. Common approaches employ spatio-temporal descriptors defined on fixed-size win4321
3783

