Interpolation on the manifold of K component GMMs
†

Nagesh Adluru Monami Banerjee§ Baba C. Vemuri§
†
University of Wisconsin–Madison § University of Florida

Hyunwoo J. Kim

†

Vikas Singh†

http://pages.cs.wisc.edu/˜hwkim/projects/k-gmm

Abstract
Probability density functions (PDFs) are fundamental
objects in mathematics with numerous applications in computer vision, machine learning and medical imaging. The
feasibility of basic operations such as computing the distance between two PDFs and estimating a mean of a set of
PDFs is a direct function of the representation we choose
to work with. In this paper, we study the Gaussian mixture model (GMM) representation of the PDFs motivated
by its numerous attractive features. (1) GMMs are arguably
more interpretable than, say, square root parameterizations
(2) the model complexity can be explicitly controlled by the
number of components and (3) they are already widely used
in many applications. The main contributions of this paper are numerical algorithms to enable basic operations on
such objects that strictly respect their underlying geometry.
For instance, when operating with a set of K component
GMMs, a first order expectation is that the result of simple
operations like interpolation and averaging should provide
an object that is also a K component GMM. The literature provides very little guidance on enforcing such requirements systematically. It turns out that these tasks are important internal modules for analysis and processing of a field
of ensemble average propagators (EAPs), common in diffusion weighted magnetic resonance imaging. We provide
proof of principle experiments showing how the proposed
algorithms for interpolation can facilitate statistical analysis of such data, essential to many neuroimaging studies.
Separately, we also derive interesting connections of our algorithm with functional spaces of Gaussians, that may be of
independent interest.

1. Introduction
Gaussian mixture models (GMM) are a fundamental statistical tool deployed in a broad spectrum of applications in
computer vision. These include modeling the foreground
scribbles for segmentation [22], tracking [12], discriminant
analysis [29], registration [15], action recognition [21], image indexing [26] and computing motion features [5]. Their

properties are well studied and efficient implementations
are available as part of popular software libraries in computer vision, machine learning and statistics.
A K component GMM (K-GMM for short) is a probability density function given as a weighted sum of K Gaussian densities,
p(x|Θ) =

K
X

π j N (x|µj , Σj )

(1)

j=1

where the mean and covariance of the mixing components
are given by µj and Σj respectively, π j gives the corresponding weight and Θ = {µj , Σj }K
j=1 . Let G =
K
} denote a set of N K-GMMs. This paper
{G1K , · · · , GN
K
studies the problem of interpolating between G1K , · · · , GN
to derive an interpolant, Ĝ. Our main requirement on Ĝ is
that it should correspond to a K-GMM for a given K. In addition to this constraint, based upon the needs of the specific
application, the interpolation task may correspond to an averaging operation over G or alternatively, when |G| = 2,
we may ask for a continuous interpolation Γ(GiK , t) such
that Γ(GiK , 0) = GiK and Γ(GiK , 1) = GjK for any i, j and
for any offset, t ∈ [0, 1]. The question of whether this problem permits efficient solution schemes is interesting enough
in its own right to merit careful investigation. It turns out
that such an algorithm, if available, will be immediately
applicable to (or facilitate) a variety of tasks in computer
vision, machine learning and medical imaging with minor
changes. Below, as motivation, we provide a sampling of
such applications.
Problem 1: Spatial transformations of diffusion PDFs
[10, 7, 8]. An important scientific frontier today is to establish a connectome of the human brain [23]. Diffusion
weighted magnetic resonance (MR) is one of the tools being used to help answer the underlying analysis questions.
It exploits the physical phenomenon of diffusion of water
to image the microstructure of the white matter pathways in
the brain [7]. An object estimated from such MR measurements is the so-called ensemble average propagator (EAP),
a PDF describing the diffusivity profiles of water molecules
on spheres of varying radii at the micrometer scale. The
12884

