Exploiting high level scene cues in stereo reconstruction
Simon Hadfield
University of Surrey
Guildford, UK, GU2 7XH

Richard Bowden
University of Surrey
Guildford, UK, GU2 7XH

s.hadfield@surrey.ac.uk

r.bowden@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
We present a novel approach to 3D reconstruction which
is inspired by the human visual system. This system unifies standard appearance matching and triangulation techniques with higher level reasoning and scene understanding, in order to resolve ambiguities between different interpretations of the scene. The types of reasoning integrated
in the approach includes recognising common configurations of surface normals and semantic edges (e.g. convex,
concave and occlusion boundaries). We also recognise the
coplanar, collinear and symmetric structures which are especially common in man made environments.

(a) Input data

(b) Appearance matching

(c) Scene reasoning

(d) Resulting reconstruction

1. Introduction
Understanding the 3D structure in an environment purely
from visual observations is one of the oldest and most
widely exploited problems in computer vision. It is also one
of the most challenging problems for general scenes; many
ambiguities result from different combinations of structure,
texture and illumination leading to the same observed images. We present a novel formulation for the problem,
which makes it possible to unify both bottom-up appearance matching and top-down scene reasoning, in a single
approach.
This formulation is inspired by the human visual system.
Recognising matches between the observations of both eyes
allows depth to be estimated via triangulation. This (along
with assumptions about the smoothness of the scenes structure) can be seen as the traditional approach to stereo reconstruction dating back as far as the 1960s [2, 22]. In
computer vision this is generally achieved by estimating the
epipolar geometry (equivalent to a humans innate knowledge of their eyes characteristics) followed by some form
of appearance based matching. In this paper we refer to this
as bottom-up reconstruction, as the reconstruction emerges
from the matching of small scene sub-units.
However, humans also use many strong high-level cues
to understand the structure of their environment. This can

Figure 1: Illustration of bottom-up matching (b) and topdown understanding (c) cues used in our unified approach.
be seen intuitively, by noticing that people can easily understand the layout of objects within a photo or video, even
though triangulation indicates that all objects lie on a single plane. Many of these cues have been explored in computer vision, particularly when working from a single image (e.g. single-image reconstruction and scene understanding). Some of the most commonly used cues are assumptions about the viewing orientation and gravity, assumptions
about the type of surfaces in manmade-environments (i.e.
the Manhattan world assumption) and assumptions about
commonly occurring object configurations. We collectively
refer to these as top-down reconstruction techniques, as the
structure of each scene sub-unit is defined using rules about
the overall configuration of multiple sub-units.
One particular advantage of our unified framework is it
reduces issues related to the baseline of standard stereo systems. Matching and triangulation based systems tend to
1783

