Beyond Covariance: Feature Representation with Nonlinear Kernel Matrices
Lei Wang1 , Jianjia Zhang1 , Luping Zhou1 , Chang Tang1,2 , Wanqing Li1
School of Computing and Information Technology, University of Wollongong, Australia1
School of Electronic Information Engineering, Tianjin University, China2

Abstract
Covariance matrix has recently received increasing attention in computer vision by leveraging Riemannian geometry of symmetric positive-definite (SPD) matrices. Originally proposed as a region descriptor, it has now been
used as a generic representation in various recognition
tasks. However, covariance matrix has shortcomings such
as being prone to be singular, limited capability in modeling complicated feature relationship, and having a fixed
form of representation. This paper argues that more appropriate SPD-matrix-based representations shall be explored to achieve better recognition. It proposes an open
framework to use the kernel matrix over feature dimensions as a generic representation and discusses its properties and advantages. The proposed framework significantly
elevates covariance representation to the unlimited opportunities provided by this new representation. Experimental study shows that this representation consistently outperforms its covariance counterpart on various visual recognition tasks. In particular, it achieves significant improvement
on skeleton-based human action recognition, demonstrating
the state-of-the-art performance over both the covariance
and the existing non-covariance representations.

1. Introduction
Covariance matrix was proposed as a region descriptor
around ten years ago1 [22]. It can effectively fuse multiple
features and be efficiently calculated via integral images.
Also, it is partially invariant to rotation and scale changes
and robust against outliers. Due to these properties, region
covariance descriptor has shown promising performance in
object detection, recognition and tracking [22, 18, 23].
The past several years have seen an expansion of covariance matrix in vision applications. In addition to a region
descriptor, it has now been used as a generic feature representation and applied to various tasks including pedestrian detection [23], face recognition [15], action recog1 As a basic statistical concept, covariance matrix has long been used in
all sorts of areas of computer vision, which is not the focus of this paper.

nition [30, 5, 10], image set classification [27], shape retrieval [20], etc. A driving force to this trend is the powerful
mathematical theory of Riemannian manifold of symmetric
positive-definite (SPD) matrices.
The transition from region descriptor to generic feature
representation brings forth new issues. Firstly, the dimensions of covariance matrix become higher, while the number of samples available for covariance estimation becomes
smaller, as observed in human action recognition and image
set classification. This results in unreliable or even singular
covariance estimate, and the Riemannian metrics for SPD
matrix cannot be directly applied. Secondly, covariance matrix only evaluates linear correlation of features. This might
bring the advantages of simplicity and efficiency, when it is
used as a region descriptor. Nevertheless, as a generic representation, the capability of modeling nonlinear feature relationship becomes essential. Last but not least, covariance
matrix has a single, fixed form. It cannot be conveniently
altered to model different feature relationships.
To address these issues, we propose to use kernel matrix
as a generic feature representation. Each of its entries evaluates a kernel function between a pair of feature dimensions
(rather than between a pair of samples, as we usually do in
kernel methods). As will be shown, for a large set of kernel
functions, the kernel matrix is guaranteed to be nonsingular,
even if samples are scarce, which ensures Riemannian metrics to be readily applicable. More importantly, kernel matrix gives us unlimited opportunities to model nonlinear feature relationship in an efficient manner. Extracting different
relationship is just a matter of changing the kernel function.
In addition, this new representation can work well with covariance representation by providing complementary information. Combining them together can effectively improve
recognition performance.
This paper first describes the background on covariance
matrix and then discusses its newly encountered issues. After that, we propose kernel matrix as a generic feature representation and elaborate its properties and advantages. Following that, a framework of combining different representations is presented. At last, we discuss computational issues
and the differences of our work from the existing ones. Ex-

4570

