Single-shot Specular Surface Reconstruction with Gonio-plenoptic Imaging
Lingfei Meng
Ricoh Innovations, Corp.

Liyang Lu∗
Rice University

Noah Bedard, Kathrin Berkner
Ricoh Innovations, Corp.

meng@ric.ricoh.com

liyang.lu@rice.edu

{noah,berkner}@ric.ricoh.com

Abstract
We present a gonio-plenoptic imaging system that realizes a single-shot shape measurement for specular surfaces.
The system is comprised of a collimated illumination source
and a plenoptic camera. Unlike a conventional plenoptic
camera, our system captures the BRDF variation of the object surface in a single image in addition to the light field
information from the scene, which allows us to recover very
fine 3D structures of the surface. The shape of the surface is
reconstructed based on the reflectance property of the material rather than the parallax between different views. Since
only a single-shot is required to reconstruct the whole surface, our system is able to capture dynamic surface deformation in a video mode. We also describe a novel calibration technique that maps the light field viewing directions
from the object space to subpixels on the sensor plane. The
proposed system is evaluated using a concave mirror with
known curvature, and is compared to a parabolic mirror
scanning system as well as a multi-illumination photometric stereo approach based on simulations and experiments.

1. Introduction
Measuring the geometry of surfaces is an active research
topic, and has many applications, such as realistic image
rendering [6] and surface inspection [19]. Estimating the
geometry for a specular surface is still a challenging problem in the field of computer vision [23], and most dense
shape reconstruction techniques assume the scene to be
Lambertian [7]. Recently new techniques have been proposed to address measurement of specular surfaces. In
general, a large number of image acquisitions are required
[6, 7, 23], or the surface needs to be pressed into an elastomeric sensor with known reflectivity [10, 11]. Estimating
surface normals from a single image is still a challenging
and open research problem.
Whereas disparity-estimation based methods from data
⇤ Liyang Lu performed the work while at Ricoh Innovations, Corp..

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Raw sensor images captured by our plenoptic camera on
a flat plastic ruler card (a) in ambient room light condition, and (b)
with collimated illumination.

obtained with a stereo imaging system uses only two views,
plenoptic cameras, in comparison, enable capture of a 4D
light field in a single-shot for depth estimation [1, 20, 22].
Depth estimation of objects using a plenoptic camera typically relies on the parallax between different views captured
by the camera, similarly to conventional stereo imaging. In
a plenoptic imaging system, images are commonly captured
with flat field illumination or any regular illumination, such
as ambient illumination without specifically controlled directionality. Using such a illumination scheme, a plenoptic
camera cannot resolve very fine 3D structures of a surface
due to limited depth resolution of the system, or estimate
the geometry of a textureless surface due to the absence of
features necessary for disparity estimation.
In this paper we present a gonio-plenoptic imaging system that realizes a single-shot shape measurement for specular surfaces that contain very fine or textureless 3D structures in a micron-scale. Besides, our system is able to capture dynamic surface deformation in a video mode. Similar
to a goniophotometer our system measures the light at different angles, but only one image acquisition is required.
Our system is comprised of a collimated illumination and
a plenoptic camera. In contrast to a conventional plenoptic
camera, our system does not rely on the parallax between
multiviews; instead the shape of a surface is reconstructed
based on the reflectivity of the surface. The use of a collimated illumination source allows us to capture the bidirectional reflectance distribution function (BRDF) variation
of the surface, which is used as a cue for surface geometry

3433

