Visual Tracking with Fully Convolutional Networks
Lijun Wang1,2 , Wanli Ouyang2 , Xiaogang Wang2 , and Huchuan Lu1
1
Dalian University of Technology, China
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China

Abstract
We propose a new approach for general object tracking
with fully convolutional neural network. Instead of treating
convolutional neural network (CNN) as a black-box feature
extractor, we conduct in-depth study on the properties of CNN features offline pre-trained on massive image data and
classification task on ImageNet. The discoveries motivate
the design of our tracking system. It is found that convolutional layers in different levels characterize the target from
different perspectives. A top layer encodes more semantic
features and serves as a category detector, while a lower
layer carries more discriminative information and can better separate the target from distracters with similar appearance. Both layers are jointly used with a switch mechanism
during tracking. It is also found that for a tracking target,
only a subset of neurons are relevant. A feature map selection method is developed to remove noisy and irrelevant feature maps, which can reduce computation redundancy
and improve tracking accuracy. Extensive evaluation on the
widely used tracking benchmark [36] shows that the proposed tacker outperforms the state-of-the-art significantly.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking, as a fundamental problem in computer vision, has found wide applications. Although much
progress [7, 29, 38] has been made in the past decade,
tremendous challenges still exist in designing a robust tracker that can well handle significant appearance changes, pose
variations, severe occlusions, and background clutters.
Existing appearance-based tracking methods adopt either generative or discriminative models to separate the
foreground from background and distinct co-occurring objects. One major drawback is that they rely on low-level
hand-crafted features which are incapable to capture semantic information of targets, not robust to significant appearance changes, and only have limited discriminative power.
Driven by the emergence of large-scale visual data
sets and fast development of computation power, Deep

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Feature maps for target localization. (a)(b) From left to
right: input image, the ground truth target heat map, the predicted heat maps using feature maps of conv5-3 and conv4-3 layers of
VGG network [27] (See Section 4.2 for the regression method). (c)
From left to right: input image, ground truth foreground mask, average feature maps of conv5-3 (top) and conv4-3 (bottom) layers,
average selected feature maps conv5-3 (top) and conv4-3 (bottom)
layers (See Section 4.1 for the feature map selection method).

Neural Networks (DNNs), especially convolutional neural networks [17] (CNNs), with their strong capabilities of
learning feature representations, have demonstrated record
breaking performance in computer vision tasks, e.g., image classification [16, 27], object detection [8, 23, 22], and
saliency detection [33, 39]. Different from hand-crafted
features, those learned by CNNs from massive annotated
visual data and a large number of object classes (such as ImageNet [4]) carry rich high-level semantic information and
are strong at distinguishing objects of different categories.
These features have good generalization capability across
data sets. Recent studies [28, 1] have also shown that such
features are robust to data corruption. Their neuron respons-

3119

