Joint Fine-Tuning in Deep Neural Networks
for Facial Expression Recognition
Heechul Jung

Sihaeng Lee Junho Yim Sunjeong Park Junmo Kim
School of Electrical Engineering
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology

{heechul, haeng, junho.yim, sunny0414, junmo.kim}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Temporal information has useful features for recognizing facial expressions. However, to manually design useful
features requires a lot of effort. In this paper, to reduce this
effort, a deep learning technique, which is regarded as a
tool to automatically extract useful features from raw data,
is adopted. Our deep network is based on two different
models. The first deep network extracts temporal appearance features from image sequences, while the other deep
network extracts temporal geometry features from temporal facial landmark points. These two models are combined
using a new integration method in order to boost the performance of the facial expression recognition. Through several
experiments, we show that the two models cooperate with
each other. As a result, we achieve superior performance to
other state-of-the-art methods in the CK+ and Oulu-CASIA
databases. Furthermore, we show that our new integration
method gives more accurate results than traditional methods, such as a weighted summation and a feature concatenation method.

1. Introduction
Recognizing an emotion from a facial image is a classic problem in the field of computer vision, and many studies have been conducted. It can be classified into two categories: image sequence-based and still image-based approaches. Image sequence-based approach has been used to
increase the recognition performance by extracting useful
temporal features from the image sequences, and the performance is usually better than a still image-based approach
[15, 20, 12, 17, 8]. Both appearance and geometric features
can be used for the spatio-temporal feature [1, 22].
Well-known deep learning algorithms, such as the deep
neural networks (DNNs) and the convolutional neural networks (CNNs), have an ability to automatically extract useful representations from raw data (e.g., image data). However, there is a limit when applying them directly to facial

Figure 1. Overall structure of our approach. The blue and red
boxes with dotted lines correspond to the two architectures of the
deep networks. Our two deep networks receive an image sequence
and facial landmark points as input, respectively. Conv and FC
refer to the convolutional and fully connected layers. Finally, the
outputs of these networks are integrated using a proposed joint
fine-tuning method, which is represented in the purple box.

expression recognition databases, such as CK+ [13], MMI
[18], and Oulu-CASIA [23]. The major reason is that the
amount of data is too small, so a deep network that has many
parameters can easily fall into overfitting when training. (In
general, data collection is expensive.) Furthermore, if the
training data is high dimensional, the overfitting problem
becomes more crucial.
In this paper, we are interested in recognizing facial expressions using a limited amount of (typically a few hundreds of) image sequence data with a deep network. In order
to overcome the problem of having a small amount of data,
we construct two small deep networks that complement
each other. One of the deep networks is trained using image
sequences, while the other deep network learns the temporal trajectories of facial landmark points. In other words,
the first network focuses more on appearance changes of
facial expressions over time, while the second network is directly related to the motion of facial parts. Furthermore, we
present a new integration method called joint fine-tuning,
which performs better than simple weighted summation
12983

