Box Aggregation for Proposal Decimation: Last Mile of Object Detection
Shu Liu†
†
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Cewu Lu♯,‡ Jiaya Jia†
♯
Stanford University ‡ Shanghai Jiao Tong University

{sliu,leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

lu-cw@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Regions-with-convolutional-neural-network (RCNN) is
now a commonly employed object detection pipeline. Its main steps, i.e., proposal generation and convolutional
neural network (CNN) feature extraction, have been intensively investigated. We focus on the last step of the system
to aggregate thousands of scored box proposals into final
object prediction, which we call proposal decimation. We
show this step can be enhanced with a very simple box aggregation function by considering statistical properties of
proposals with respect to ground truth objects. Our method
is with extremely light-weight computation, while it yields an improvement of 3.7% in mAP on PASCAL VOC 2007
test. We explain why it works using some statistics in this
paper.

1. Introduction
Object detection has made notable progress in recent
years. The regions-with-convolutional-neural-network (RCNN) framework [10] achieved very good performance and
becomes a standard pipeline for object detection. This
framework consists of three steps: (1) object proposal generation, (2) CNN feature extraction and class-specific scoring, (3) and object box finding from thousands of scored
box proposals. Most previous work focused on improving
the first two steps in this pipeline because they directly and
importantly influence results. The representative work includes proposal generation with high recall [25, 1] and developing deeper CNN models [20, 21] or new structure [15]
to boost the performance.
Compared to above intensive research to modify RCNN, the final step to obtain the optimal object bounding box
from thousands of box proposals, which we call proposal decimation, finds a rather limited number of solutions. The commonly employed strategy for proposal decimation is only the simple non-maximum suppression (NMS),
which chooses box proposals with the highest scores.
Is proposal decimation a problem that has already been

Figure 1. Many high-score box proposals surrounding an object.
There are a lot of box proposals after the second stage of RCNN.
It is actually not easy to find the correct ones.

solved? Our answer is negative based on the fact that nearly
99% of the box proposals have to be removed to keep the
true object ones in an image, which is obviously not easy.
One example is shown in Fig. 1. We also find empirically,
which will be elaborated on later in this paper, false positive
bounding boxes indeed adversely influence the performance
of object detection.
Brief Analysis We present in this paper a few intriguing
findings regarding proposal decimation. First, when the detection scores of proposals are sufficiently high, localization
accuracy is not strongly related to these scores anymore. In
other words, the highest-score proposal may not correspond
to the highest localization accuracy. Thus only choosing the
highest-score box proposal is not optimal.
Second, box proposals in a box group are statistically stable. After normalizing box proposals based on the
ground truth, high-score box proposals follow similar distributions even on different-object images. The explanation of
this type of stable distributions is twofold. On the one hand,
box proposals based on segments already densely locate at
object regions. On the other hand, many box proposals, including those only containing part of the objects and those
containing some background, can be assigned with high scores in RCNN.
12569

