Just Noticeable Differences in Visual Attributes
Aron Yu
University of Texas at Austin

Kristen Grauman
University of Texas at Austin

aron.yu@utexas.edu

grauman@cs.utexas.edu

indistinguishable?

Abstract
We explore the problem of predicting “just noticeable
differences” in a visual attribute. While some pairs of
images have a clear ordering for an attribute (e.g., A is
more sporty than B), for others the difference may be indistinguishable to human observers. However, existing relative attribute models are unequipped to infer partial orders on novel data. Attempting to map relative attribute
ranks to equality predictions is non-trivial, particularly
since the span of indistinguishable pairs in attribute space
may vary in different parts of the feature space. We develop
a Bayesian local learning strategy to infer when images are
indistinguishable for a given attribute. On the UT-Zap50K
shoes and LFW-10 faces datasets, we outperform a variety
of alternative methods. In addition, we show the practical
impact on fine-grained visual search.

1. Introduction
Imagine you are given a pile of images of Barack Obama,
and you must sort them according to where he looks most to
least serious. Can you do it? Surely there will be some obvious ones where he is more serious or less serious. There will
even be image pairs where the distinction is quite subtle, yet
still perceptible. However, you are likely to conclude that
forcing a total order is meaningless: while the images exhibit different degrees of the attribute seriousness, at some
point the differences become indistinguishable. It’s not that
the pixel patterns in indistinguishable image pairs are literally the same—they just can’t be characterized consistently
as anything other than “equally serious”.
Attributes are visual properties describable in words,
capturing anything from material properties (metallic,
furry), shapes (flat, boxy), expressions (smiling, surprised),
to functions (sittable, drinkable). Since their introduction to the recognition community [7, 15, 16], attributes
have inspired a number of useful applications in image
search [13, 14, 15, 26], biometrics [4, 21], and languagebased supervision for recognition [2, 16, 19, 25].
Existing attribute models come in one of two forms:
categorical or relative. Whereas categorical attributes are

least open

least serious

indistinguishable?

most open

most serious

Figure 1: At what point is the strength of an attribute indistinguishable between two images? While existing relative attribute methods are restricted
to inferring a total order, in reality there are images that look different but
where the attribute is nonetheless perceived as “equally strong”. For example, in the fourth and fifth images of Obama, is the difference in seriousness
noticeable enough to warrant a relative comparison?

suited only for clear-cut predicates, such as male or wooden,
relative attributes can represent “real-valued” properties
that inherently exhibit a spectrum of strengths, such as serious or sporty. Typically one learns a relative attribute in
the learning-to-rank setting; training data is ordered (e.g.,
we are told image A has it less than B), and a ranking function is optimized to preserve those orderings. Given a new
image, the function returns a score conveying how strongly
the attribute is present [1, 3, 5, 6, 14, 17, 18, 19, 22, 23, 27].
The problem is that existing models for relative attributes
assume that all images are orderable. In particular, they assume that at test time, the system can and should always distinguish which image in a pair exhibits the attribute more.
Yet, as our Obama example above illustrates, this assumption is incompatible with how humans actually perceive attributes. In fact, recent work reports that in a fine-grained
domain like fashion, 40% of the time human judges asked to
compare images for a relative attribute declare that no difference is perceptible [27]. Within a given attribute, sometimes we can perceive a comparison, sometimes we can’t.
See Figure 1.
We argue that this situation calls for a model of just noticeable difference among attributes. Just noticeable difference (JND) is a concept from psychophysics. It refers to
the amount a stimulus has to be changed in order for it to
be detectable by human observers at least half the time. For
example, JND is of interest in color perception (which light
sources are perceived as the same color?) and image quality
12416

