You Are Here: Mimicking the Human Thinking Process in Reading Floor-Plans
Hang Chu, Dong Ki Kim, Tsuhan Chen
Cornell University
{hc772, dk683}@cornell.edu, tsuhan@ece.cornell.edu
Abstract
A human can easily find his or her way in an unfamiliar building, by walking around and reading the floor-plan.
We try to mimic and automate this human thinking process.
More precisely, we introduce a new and useful task of locating an user in the floor-plan, by using only a camera and a
floor-plan without any other prior information. We address
the problem with a novel matching-localization algorithm
that is inspired by human logic. We demonstrate through
experiments that our method outperforms state-of-the-art
floor-plan-based localization methods by a large margin,
while also being highly efficient for real-time applications.

1. Introduction
Floor-plans contain useful structure information about
building interiors, and they are easy to acquire [38] as
all buildings have the plans. Floor-plan related problems,
therefore, have received a lot of attention from the computer
vision research community [2, 4, 12, 29, 11, 24].
Floor-plan is also widely used in daily life. It is commonly used as a guide in large buildings, such as museums,
malls, and laboratories. There are two common scenarios
in using the floor-plan. In the first scenario, the floor-plan
is found at a fixed location. There is often a ”You are here”
arrow in the plan to help a viewer quickly find out where
he or she is located. In the second scenario, a tourist has
the floor-plan in hand. In this case, there is no the ”You are
here” arrow in the plan. Instead, the tourist needs to find
out where he or she is by walking around, comparing the
observed scenery with the floor-plan, and eventually figuring out the correct location.
Our goal is to help human users by solving the localization problem fully automatically. More specifically, our
system stores a floor-plan as prior, takes a video stream of
what a tourist sees, and estimates the tourist’s current position and orientation in the floor-plan. Figure 1 shows an
example of the input and output of our system.
Several reasons make our goal challenging to accom-

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Our system takes a video stream and a floor-plan,
and outputs the position and orientation of the current frame
in the floor-plan.

plish. Firstly, the floor-plan does not provide any information about color or texture. Thus, it is hard to use methods
based on image feature matching, which rely on previously
stored features. Secondly, buildings are composed of repetitive structures. Those repetitive structures, such as corner
and corridor, can be observed at multiple locations. Thirdly,
the floor-plan can be inconsistent with the real-world. It
outlines the building structure, but does not include the furniture. Thus, it is difficult to apply existing conventional
techniques in our task:
SLAM Vision-based methods for Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) [9, 36, 20, 8, 31, 6, 1] are able
to create representational feature maps, and estimate the observer’s motion. Although in some applications floor-plans
are used, an annotated feature map is still needed to perform localization. Thus, it is difficult to use those methods
to localize in a building that has not been mapped beforehand by similar algorithms. SLAM methods are specialized
in effective camera tracking and map creation, rather than
finding associations between the observed structure and the
floor-plan.
Image Retrieval Image retrieval methods localize the
camera by matching image features with a database of images with known positions [26, 43, 16], or a prior 3D reconstruction of the environment [22, 15], which further can
be made memory efficient by state-of-the-art compression
processing methods [28, 5]. However, in our case we do
12210

