Fine-Grained Change Detection of Misaligned Scenes with Varied Illuminations
Wei Feng1∗, Fei-Peng Tian1,2 , Qian Zhang1 , Nan Zhang1 , Liang Wan2 , Jizhou Sun1
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2
School of Computer Software, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
{wfeng,tianfeipeng,qianz,nzh cs,lwan,jzsun}@tju.edu.cn

5

Abstract

3
1

Detecting fine-grained subtle changes among a scene is
critically important in practice. Previous change detection methods, focusing on detecting large-scale significant
changes, cannot do this well. This paper proposes a feasible
end-to-end approach to this challenging problem. We start
from active camera relocation that quickly relocates camera to nearly the same pose and position of the last time observation. To guarantee detection sensitivity and accuracy
of minute changes, in an observation, we capture a group
of images under multiple illuminations, which need only
to be roughly aligned to the last time lighting conditions.
Given two times observations, we formulate fine-grained
change detection as a joint optimization problem of three
related factors, i.e., normal-aware lighting difference, camera geometry correction flow, and real scene change mask.
We solve the three factors in a coarse-to-fine manner and
achieve reliable change decision by rank minimization. We
build three real-world datasets to benchmark fine-grained
change detection of misaligned scenes under varied multiple lighting conditions. Extensive experiments show the
superior performance of our approach over state-of-the-art
change detection methods and its ability to distinguish real
scene changes from false ones caused by lighting variations.

1. Introduction
Change detection is a fundamental low-level vision problem and is broadly useful in many real-world vision applications, like video surveillance, tracking, segmentation, and
remote sensing, as a critical preprocessing step [20, 22, 5, 6,
7, 12]. The major challenge of change detection is to separate real scene changes from false changes caused by different imaging conditions, e.g., suddenly varied lightings and
camera movements. To tackle this problem, most state-ofthe-art change detection methods assume real scene changes
∗ is the corresponding author. Tel: (+86)-22-27406538.

6
4

(a) Last time observation X

2

5
3
1

6
4

(b) Current observation Y
F1=0.1050

2

F1=0.0000

F1=0.0158
(c) SC_SOBS
F1=0.0357

(d) SC_SOBS LF
F1=0.5773

(e) SubSENSE

F1=0.0771
(f) SubSENSE LF

(g) Our result

(h) Ground truth

Figure 1. A real case of fine-grained change detection of a small
Buddha sculpture in the Summer Palace. See text for details.

occur in a relatively large-scale and are salient enough to
transcend detailed changes caused by illumination or camera variations [10, 16, 17, 25, 26, 21].
However, some recent applications, such as high-value
object monitoring, need to accurately discover and locate
fine-grained subtle changes within a scene. For instance,
an essential problem in preventive conservation of cultural
heritage is to detect and measure the tiny changes of cultural relics from two sets of observations within long time
intervals [23, 27].1 Other examples include biomedical di1 As most important relics are properly protected, their states are usually
very stable, thus their monitoring interval can be as long as a year.

11260

