Structure from Motion Using Structure-less Resection
Enliang Zheng
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

Changchang Wu
Google

ezheng@cs.unc.edu

ccwu@google.com

Abstract
This paper proposes a new incremental structure from
motion (SfM) algorithm based on a novel structure-less
camera resection technique. Traditional methods rely on
2D-3D correspondences to compute the pose of candidate
cameras using PnP. In this work, we take the collection
of already reconstructed cameras as a generalized camera, and determine the absolute pose of a candidate pinhole camera from pure 2D correspondences, which we call
it semi-generalized camera pose problem. We present the
minimal solvers of the new problem for both calibrated and
partially calibrated (unknown focal length) pinhole cameras. By integrating these new algorithms in an incremental
SfM system, we go beyond the state-of-art methods with the
capability of reconstructing cameras without 2D-3D correspondences. Large-scale real image experiments show that
our new SfM system significantly improves the completeness
of 3D reconstruction over the standard approach.

O2

O1
O2

O1

O3

O3

1. Introduction

Figure 1. There are 3 objects in the scene: sugar (O1 ), blueberries
(O2 ) and vitamin (O3 ). Each of the three images on the left can
see only two out of the three objects, where the lack of three-view
overlap prohibits standard resection. Note there are not reliable
feature matches on the table due to the repeating patterns. The
right image shows the dense reconstruction [3] from our reconstructed cameras using structure-less resection.

The standard incremental structure from motion (SfM)
is a widely used technique [16, 18, 15, 5]. During the
incremental reconstruction, cameras with estimated poses
are added to the 3D model repeatedly, which is a process
called camera resection. Traditionally, the pose estimation
step uses PnP algorithms, leveraging the correspondences
between the 3D points and 2D features [9, 20, 19]. However, such structure-based resection method requires sufficient 3D points to be visible in the new cameras, which cannot be always satisfied even when there are enough feature
matches. Figure 1 shows an extreme case of such a problem.
Each of the three images captures two out of three objects
in the scene, and no two-view reconstruction can be used
to resect a third camera, because there are no three-view
overlaps. In general, feature tracks are not always triangulated to 3D points due to pose inaccuracy, outlier feature
matches, and threshold settings. This can easily lead to incomplete reconstructions with the standard SfM approach,
even when there are sufficient feature matches.

In this paper, we introduce a novel structure-less resection technique that exploits solely 2D matches for exact
camera pose estimation that maximizes the number of potential 3D points. By taking the set of already reconstructed
pinhole cameras as a single generalized camera [14], we
register a new pinhole camera to the generalized camera
using the 2D image correspondences (see Figure 2a) between the multiple cameras. Given the example in Figure
1, we may first compute the two-view reconstruction of the
first two images (which reconstructs O2 only), use the two
cameras together as a generalized camera to resect the third
camera from the 2D matches on object O1 and O3 , and then
reconstruct O1 and O3 .
We name this new problem semi-generalized camera
pose estimation since it involves one generalized camera
and one pinhole camera. This paper presents the minimal solvers for the semi-generalized camera pose estimation problem, with the pinhole camera either calibrated or
12075

