High-for-Low and Low-for-High:
Efficient Boundary Detection from Deep Object Features
and its Applications to High-Level Vision
Gedas Bertasius
University of Pennsylvania

Jianbo Shi
University of Pennsylvania

Lorenzo Torresani
Dartmouth College

gberta@seas.upenn.edu

jshi@seas.upenn.edu

lt@dartmouth.edu

Abstract
Most of the current boundary detection systems rely exclusively on low-level features, such as color and texture.
However, perception studies suggest that humans employ
object-level reasoning when judging if a particular pixel
is a boundary. Inspired by this observation, in this work
we show how to predict boundaries by exploiting objectlevel features from a pretrained object-classification network. Our method can be viewed as a High-for-Low approach where high-level object features inform the low-level
boundary detection process. Our model achieves state-ofthe-art performance on an established boundary detection
benchmark and it is efficient to run.
Additionally, we show that due to the semantic nature of
our boundaries we can use them to aid a number of highlevel vision tasks. We demonstrate that by using our boundaries we improve the performance of state-of-the-art methods on the problems of semantic boundary labeling, semantic segmentation and object proposal generation. We can
view this process as a Low-for-High scheme, where lowlevel boundaries aid high-level vision tasks.
Thus, our contributions include a boundary detection
system that is accurate, efficient, generalizes well to multiple datasets, and is also shown to improve existing stateof-the-art high-level vision methods on three distinct tasks.

1. Introduction
In the vision community, boundary detection has always
been considered a low-level problem. However, psychological studies suggest that when a human observer perceives
boundaries, object level reasoning is used [13, 25, 17]. Despite these findings, most of the boundary detection methods rely exclusively on low-level color and gradient features. In this work, we present a method that uses objectlevel features to detect boundaries. We argue that using
object-level information to predict boundaries is more sim-

SotA
HFL

Low-Level Task
BD
ODS
0.76 [27]
0.77

High-Level Tasks
SS
AP
PI-IOU
19.9 [11]
45.8 [5]
54.6
48.8

SBL
MF
28.0 [11]
62.5

OP
MR
0.88 [31]
0.90

Table 1: Summary of results achieved by our proposed
method (H F L) and state-of-the-art methods (SotA). We provide results on four vision tasks: Boundary Detection (BD),
Semantic Boundary Labeling (SBL), Semantic Segmentation (SS), and Object Proposal (OP). The evaluation metrics
include ODS F-score for BD task, max F-score (MF) and
average precision (AP) for SBL task, per image intersection over union (PI-IOU) for SS task, and max recall (MR)
for OP task. Our method produces better results in each of
these tasks according to these metrics.
ilar to how humans reason. Our boundary detection scheme
can be viewed as a High-for-Low approach where we use
high-level object features as cues for a low-level boundary
detection process. Throughout the rest of the paper, we refer to our proposed boundaries as High-for-Low boundaries
(H F L).
We present an efficient deep network that uses objectlevel information to predict the boundaries. Our proposed
architecture reuses features from the sixteen convolutional
layers of the network of Simonyan et al. [29], which we
refer to as VGG net. The VGG net has been trained for
object classification, and therefore, reusing its features allows our method to utilize high-level object information to
predict H F L boundaries. In the experimental section, we
demonstrate that using object-level features produces semantically meaningful boundaries and also achieves above
state-of-the-art boundary detection accuracy.
Additionally, we demonstrate that we can successfully
apply our H F L boundaries to a number of high-level vision
tasks. We show that by using H F L boundaries we improve
the results of three existing state-of-the-art methods on the
tasks of semantic boundary labeling, semantic segmenta1504

