Improving Image Classification with Location Context
Kevin Tang1 , Manohar Paluri2 , Li Fei-Fei1 , Rob Fergus2 , Lubomir Bourdev2
1
2
Computer Science Department, Stanford University
Facebook AI Research
{kdtang,feifeili}@cs.stanford.edu

{mano,robfergus,lubomir}@fb.com

Abstract
With the widespread availability of cellphones and cameras that have GPS capabilities, it is common for images
being uploaded to the Internet today to have GPS coordinates associated with them. In addition to research that
tries to predict GPS coordinates from visual features, this
also opens up the door to problems that are conditioned on
the availability of GPS coordinates. In this work, we tackle
the problem of performing image classification with location context, in which we are given the GPS coordinates for
images in both the train and test phases. We explore different ways of encoding and extracting features from the GPS
coordinates, and show how to naturally incorporate these
features into a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), the
current state-of-the-art for most image classification and
recognition problems. We also show how it is possible to
simultaneously learn the optimal pooling radii for a subset
of our features within the CNN framework. To evaluate our
model and to help promote research in this area, we identify
a set of location-sensitive concepts and annotate a subset of
the Yahoo Flickr Creative Commons 100M dataset that has
GPS coordinates with these concepts, which we make publicly available. By leveraging location context, we are able
to achieve almost a 7% gain in mean average precision.

1. Introduction
As Figure 1 shows, it is sometimes hard even for humans
to recognize the content of photos without context. Just by
looking at the photos we can conclude that all these examples can reasonably be of snow. Consider, however, that (a)
was taken at the Bonneville Salt Flats in Utah, (c) and (d)
were taken in Death Valley and Palo Alto, respectively, both
of which are areas in California that never see snow, and
(b) was taken in New Hampshire, where snow storms are
common. With this information in hand, it is much easier
to correctly deduce that (b) is the only image that actually
contains snow.
Motivated by this observation, we tackle the problem of
image classification with location context. In particular, we

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Which of these are images of snow? Just by looking at
the images, it may be difficult to tell. However, what if we knew
that (a) was taken at the Bonneville Salt Flats in Utah, (b) was
taken in New Hamsphire, (c) was taken in Death Valley, California
and (d) was taken near Palo Alto, California? Image credits given
in supplementary material.

are interested in classifying consumer images with concepts
that commonly occur on the Internet, ranging from objects
to scenes to specific landmarks, as these are the things that
people often take pictures of, and the Internet is the largest
source of geotagged images. Building on the CNN architecture introduced in [26], the basis for most state-of-theart image classification and recognition results, we address
how to represent and incorporate location features into the
network architecture. This is not an easy problem, as we
have found that naive approaches such as concatenating the
GPS coordinates into the classifier, or leveraging nearby images as a Bayesian prior result in almost no gain in performance. However, knowing the GPS coordinates allows us
to utilize geographic datasets and surveys that have been
collected by various institutions and agencies. We can also
leverage the large amount of data on the Internet tagged
with GPS coordinates in a data-driven fashion.
In summary, the contributions in this paper can be orga11008

