Complementary Sets of Shutter Sequences for Motion Deblurring
Hae-Gon Jeon1
1

Joon-Young Lee1

Robotics and Computer Vision Lab., KAIST

hgjeon@rcv.kaist.ac.kr

jylee@rcv.kaist.ac.kr

Yudeog Han2
2

Seon Joo Kim3

Agency for Defense Development

ydhan@add.re.kr

Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel multi-image motion
deblurring method utilizing the coded exposure technique.
The key idea of our work is to capture video frames with
a set of complementary fluttering patterns to preserve spatial frequency details. We introduce an algorithm for generating a complementary set of binary sequences based on
the modern communication theory and implement the coded
exposure video system with an off-the-shelf machine vision
camera. The effectiveness of our method is demonstrated on
various challenging examples with quantitative and qualitative comparisons to other computational image capturing
methods used for image deblurring.

1. Introduction
Image deblurring is a challenging task that is inherently
an ill-posed problem due to the loss of high frequency information during the imaging process. In the past decade, there
have been significant developments in the image deblurring
research that improve the performance over the traditional
deblurring solutions such as Richardson-Lucy [29, 23] and
Wiener filter [42].
One research direction that has gained interest is to use
multiple blurred images for deblurring, which shows better performance over the single image deblurring methods
in general due to the complementary information provided.
Yuan et al. used a blurred/noise image pairs to estimate the
blur kernel [43], Cai et al. proposed to use multiple severly motion blurred images [4], and Chen et al. performed
an iterative blur kernel estimation and a dual image deblurring [6]. Cho et al. [7] presented a video deblurring approach that uses sharp regions in a frame to restore blurry
regions of the same content in nearby frames. In [32, 33],
motion blur in a video is reduced by increasing the framerate for temporal super-resolution.
Another development in the image deblurring research
is to modify the way images are captured to make the deblurring problem more feasible. In [21, 20, 28], videos are
captured by modulating each pixel independently by binary
patterns, which enables the recovery of high temporal reso-

3

seonjookim@yonsei.ac.kr

In So Kweon1
Yonsei Univerisity
iskweon@kaist.ac.kr

lution. On the other hand, this paper is particularly related
to the works that employ imaging systems that control the
exposures for the whole image, not on the pixel level, during
image captures. In [27], Raskar et al. presented the coded
exposure photography that flutters the camera’s shutter open
and closed in a special manner within the exposure time
in order to preserve the spatial frequency details, thereby
enabling the deconvolution problem to become well-posed
(Fig. 1(a)). Jeon et al. [14] improved deconvolution performance by computing optimized fluttering patterns.
Instead of the fluttering shutter within a single exposure, Agrawal et al. [2] proposed a varying exposure video
framework which varies the exposure time of successive
frames (Fig. 1(b)). The main idea is to image the same object with varying PSFs (Point Spread Functions) by varying
the exposures so that the nulls in the frequency component
of one frame can be filled by other frames, making the deblurring problem well-posed. Holloway et al. [12] applied
the concept of coded exposure into a video camera. This
approach captures a series of coded exposure images with
different fluttering patterns in successive frames and perform temporal resolution upsampling via compressed sensing. As mentioned in [12], this approach cannot handle
scenes without the spatio-temporal continuity and requires
many observations for estimating an object motion.
In this paper, we propose a coded exposure video scheme
which combines the benefits of the coded exposure imaging [27, 14] and the varying exposure video [2]. Rather
than varying the exposures between the frames, we capture
a video under a fixed exposure time and apply the coded
exposure on each frame (Fig. 1(c)). To minimize the frequency information loss during the image capture, we introduce a method for generating a complementary set of
fluttering patterns that compensate for the losses in successive frames. By using the complementary sets of fluttering
patterns, we can generate various exposure time sequences
for a flexible frame rate capture and achieve higher quality
deblurring results with improved SNR compared to the previous methods. In addition, we show our framework can be
applied to other application such as the privacy protection
for video surveillance by adding intentional blur [19].
13541

