HARF: Hierarchy-associated Rich Features for Salient Object Detection
Wenbin Zou
Shenzhen Key Lab of Advanced Telecommunication and Information Processing
College of Information Engineering, Shenzhen University
zouszu@sina.com

Nikos Komodakis
Universite Paris-Est, Ecole des Ponts ParisTech
nikos.komodakis@enpc.fr

Abstract
The state-of-the-art salient object detection models are
able to perform well for relatively simple scenes, yet for
more complex ones, they still have difficulties in highlighting salient objects completely from background, largely due
to the lack of sufficiently robust features for saliency prediction. To address such an issue, this paper proposes a
novel hierarchy-associated feature construction framework
for salient object detection, which is based on integrating
elementary features from multi-level regions in a hierarchy.
Furthermore, multi-layered deep learning features are introduced and incorporated as elementary features into this
framework through a compact integration scheme. This
leads to a rich feature representation, which is able to represent the context of the whole object/background and is much
more discriminative as well as robust for salient object detection. Extensive experiments on the most widely used and
challenging benchmark datasets demonstrate that the proposed approach substantially outperforms the state-of-theart on salient object detection.

1. Introduction
Saliency detection is important to many applications,
such as object segmentation, object recognition, contentbased image retrieval, and adaptive image/video coding.
The original task of saliency detection aims to predict fixation points in an image, where the earliest study on this
topic is motivated by the observation from cognitive scientists that the inherent visual attention mechanism enables
humans to identify rapidly and effortlessly the visually outstanding (salient) regions/objects in complex scenes.
Following the fixation prediction, saliency detection has
This work was supported by the NSFC projects (No. 61401287 and
No. 61472257), the EC project FP7-ICT-611145 ROBOSPECT and the
Shenzhen Key Project for Foundation Research (No. JC201105170613A).

been recently extended to mean highlighting the whole
salient object in an image. The focus of the present paper is
exactly on this task (usually also referred to as salient object
detection in the computer vision literature), which is essentially equivalent to solving a binary foreground/background
segmentation problem.
A common characteristic of most existing methods for
salient object detection is that they generally simplify the
original images by partitioning them into blocks or segmenting them into regions through image segmentation algorithms or pixel clustering methods. This is done for efficiency but, most importantly, for computing visual features
of wider image support with the hope that these features will
thus be more robust. The fixed block partition inevitably
merges object pixels into background for those blocks surrounding the object boundaries, while image segmentation
methods are typically boundary-preserved and ensure that
the pixels within the same region share certain visual characteristics. Thus the state-of-the-art salient object detection
models typically compute visual features based on regions
for saliency evaluation, where it is important to note that the
robustness and richness of these features also determine to
a large extent performance of saliency detection.
However, one problem from this is that the features extracted from small regions might be not sufficiently discriminative for detecting salient objects in complex scenes. A
suggestion might be to adjust the segmentation parameters
so that an object is composed of very few regions to facilitate the salient object detection task. Unfortunately, natural images may contain a variety of complex scenes, and
the state-of-the-art image segmentation methods are still
far from separating the whole objects with the well-defined
boundaries from background regions. For some images, adjusting the segmentation parameters to decrease the number
of regions may result in under-segmentation, where salient
object regions are merged into background, and lead to in1406

