The joint image handbook
Matthew Trager∗

Martial Hebert

Jean Ponce∗

Inria

Carnegie Mellon University

École Normale Supérieure / PSL Research University

Abstract
Given multiple perspective photographs, point correspondences form the “joint image”, effectively a
replica of three-dimensional space distributed across its
two-dimensional projections. This set can be characterized
by multilinear equations over image coordinates, such as
epipolar and trifocal constraints. We revisit in this paper
the geometric and algebraic properties of the joint image,
and address fundamental questions such as how many and
which multilinearities are necessary and/or sufficient to determine camera geometry and/or image correspondences.
The new theoretical results in this paper answer these questions in a very general setting and, in turn, are intended to
serve as a “handbook” reference about multilinearities for
practitioners.

1. Introduction
Point correspondences in multiple images can be characterized using conditions that are “multilinear” in homogeneous image coordinates (e.g., epipolar and trifocal constraints [5, 13, 16, 17, 21]). These constraints are at the core
of any structure-from-motion (SfM) system, where they are
mainly used in two tasks: selecting matching points in different pictures, and estimating the camera parameters from
these correspondences. Yet, after 35 years of study, dating back to Longuet-Higgins’ seminal work on the essential matrix [13] (and at least to the sixties in photogrammetry [19]), practicioners and specialists alike would still be
hard pressed today to answer many simple questions such
as how many multilinear relations (and which ones) are necessary and/or sufficient to characterize correspondences, or
to determine the corresponding camera parameters.
Partial results are available, but scattered in the literature, and they sometimes contradict each other [4, 6, 14].
The aim of this presentation is to give new and definite answers to this type of elementary but fundamental questions
in a very general setting: our hope is to provide a practical “handbook” reference for useful results and facts on
multilinearities. Our results are obtained by using elementary tools from algebraic geometry to characterize the joint
image, introduced by Triggs in [20]: this set is formed by
the n-tuples of matching points, and is in fact in a formal
∗ Willow project team. DI/ENS, ENS/CNRS/Inria UMR 8548.

sense an (almost) exact replica of 3D-space “distributed”
across multiple images. An advantage of this geometric
viewpoint is that it does not require the analytic tools that
have been exploited in the past for deriving multi-view constraints (such as Grassman-Cayley algebras [4], tensor calculus [20], Plücker coordinates and line geometry [14]).
Moreover, the joint image simultaneously describes point
correspondences and camera geometry independently of the
choice of coordinates in space, and this natural setting may
be useful for revisiting many existing algorithms (cf. the
discussion in Section 4). All of our results apply to ordinary
(affine or Euclidean) pinhole cameras with known intrinsic
parameters as well as projective, uncalibrated ones. We thus
believe that they are highly relevant in practice.
Closely related to our work is that of Heyden and Åström
in [11], who also study the algebraic properties of multiview constraints. For example, these authors show that
for cameras in general position, the epipolar (bilinear) constraints are sufficient for characterizing correspondences for
n ≥ 4 views; they also observe that for n ≥ 5, “some”
conditions can be dropped. We extend these results, characterizing the extent to which trilinear relations are required
in the case of degenerate camera configurations (Proposition 5), and giving useful bounds on the number of necessary conditions for generic configurations (Proposition 6).
Heyden and Åström also discuss in [11] an interesting property of the epipolar constraints for three cameras in general
position: these conditions uniquely determine (up to projective ambiguity) the associated camera matrices; however,
the trilinear conditions do not follow algebraically from the
bilinear ones and, in fact, bilinear constraints are not sufficient for characterizing point correspondences in general.
We discuss in Section 3 this somewhat paradoxical behavior
in a more general setting, defining the notions of weak and
strong characterizations of the joint image, that respectively
determine camera parameters and point correspondences.
For example, we will show that (perhaps suprisingly) the
nine trilinearities encoded in the trifocal tensor are not sufficient to completely ensure correspondence among three
views (Proposition 9), although they can be used to recover
the corresponding projection matrices. On the other hand,
for n views in general position, camera matrices can always
be determined using 2n − 3 epipolar relations, assuming
these relate appropriate pairs of cameras (Proposition 7).
1909

