Single Image 3D Without a Single 3D Image
David F. Fouhey1 , Wajahat Hussain2 , Abhinav Gupta1 , Martial Hebert1
1
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
2
Aragón Institute of Engineering Research (I3A), Universidad de Zaragoza, Spain

Abstract

Image

Do we really need 3D labels in order to learn how to
predict 3D? In this paper, we show that one can learn a
mapping from appearance to 3D properties without ever
seeing a single explicit 3D label. Rather than use explicit
supervision, we use the regularity of indoor scenes to learn
the mapping in a completely unsupervised manner. We
demonstrate this on both a standard 3D scene understanding dataset as well as Internet images for which 3D is unavailable, precluding supervised learning. Despite never
seeing a 3D label, our method produces competitive results.

3D Structure

Style

1. Introduction
Consider the image in Fig. 1. When we see this image,
we can easily recognize and compensate for the underlying
3D structure: for example, we have no trouble recognizing the orientation of the bookshelves and the floor. But
how can computers do this? Traditionally, the answer is to
use a supervised approach: simply collect large amounts of
labeled data to learn a mapping from RGB to 3D. In theory, this is mathematically impossible, but the argument is
that there is sufficient regularity to learn the mapping from
data. In this paper, we take this argument one step further:
we claim that there is enough regularity in indoor scenes
to learn a model for 3D scene understanding without ever
seeing an explicit 3D label.
At the heart of our approach is the observation that images are a product of two separate phenomena. From a
graphics point of view, the image we see is a combination of
(1) the coarse scene geometry or meshes in our coordinate
frame and (2) the texture in some canonical representation
that is put on top of these meshes. For instance, the scene in
Fig. 1 is the combination of planes at particular orientations
for the bookshelf and the floor, as well as the fronto-parallel
rectified texture maps representing the books and the alphabet tiles. We call the coarse geometry the 3D structure and
the texture maps the style1 . In the 3D world these are dis1 Of course, the books in Fig. 1 themselves could be further represented
by 3D models. However, in this paper, we ignore this fine change in far
structure, and represent the books in terms of their contribution to texture.

Figure 1. How can we learn to understand images in a 3D way?
In this paper, we show a way to do this without using a single
3D label. Our approach treats images as a combination of a 3D
model (3D structure) with canonical textures (style) applied on
top. In this paper, we learn style elements that recognize texture (e.g., bookshelves, tile floors) rectified to a canonical view.
Rather than use explicit supervision, we use the regularity of indoor scenes and a hypothesize-and-verify approach to learn these
elements. We thus learn models for single image 3D without seeing a single explicit 3D label. 3D model from [18].

tinct, but when viewed as a single image, the signals for
both get mixed together with no way to separate them.
Based on this observation, we propose style elements
as a basic unit of 3D inference. Style elements detect the
presence of style, or texture that is correctly rectified to
a canonical fronto-parallel view. They include things like
cabinets, window-blinds, and tile floors. We use these style
elements to recognize when a texture has been rectified to
fronto-parallel correctly. This lets us recognize the orientation of the scene in a hypothesize-and-verify framework:
for instance, if we warp the bookshelf in Fig. 2 to look as
if it is facing right, our rectified bookshelf detector will respond strongly; if we warp it to look as if it is facing left,
our rectified bookshelf detector will respond poorly.
In this paper, we show that we can learn these style elements in an unsupervised manner by leveraging the regular11053

