Contour Detection and Characterization for Asynchronous Event Sensors
Francisco Barranco∗ 1,2 , Ching L. Teo∗ 1 , Cornelia Fermüller1 , Yiannis Aloimonos1
1
Computer Vision Lab, University of Maryland (USA) 2 CITIC, University of Granada (Spain)
{barranco, cteo, fer, yiannis}@umiacs.umd.edu

Abstract
The bio-inspired, asynchronous event-based dynamic vision sensor records temporal changes in the luminance of
the scene at high temporal resolution. Since events are only
triggered at significant luminance changes, most events occur at the boundary of objects and their parts. The detection
of these contours is an essential step for further interpretation of the scene. This paper presents an approach to learn
the location of contours and their border ownership using
Structured Random Forests on event-based features that encode motion, timing, texture, and spatial orientations. The
classifier integrates elegantly information over time by utilizing the classification results previously computed. Finally, the contour detection and boundary assignment are
demonstrated in a layer-segmentation of the scene. Experimental results demonstrate good performance in boundary
detection and segmentation.

1. Introduction
Event-based computation has been gaining increasing attention in Machine Vision. The Dynamic Vision Sensor
(DVS) provides asynchronous responses at pixels where luminance changes, along with very precise timing information in the order of a few microseconds. In other words,
it records at high temporal resolution where and when
changes in the image occur. This sensor can become a new
tool for processing dynamic scenes, especially when there
is demand for real-time performance, low computational
resources or low latency. Such capabilities currently cannot be exploited by Computer Vision methods using framebased sensors.
Unlike conventional cameras, the great advantage of the
DVS is that it provides very high temporal resolution data at
object boundaries. These are the most challenging locations
for frame-based image motion estimation, and most of the
computations in image motion algorithms are spent there.
In conventional Computer Vision, estimation of image mo∗ – indicates equal contribution

Figure 1. Our approach improves over the simple baseline contours
(A), obtained by accumulating DVS events over short time intervals, to produce contours that are not only more accurate but also
includes border ownership information (B-I) useful for generating
a segmentation of the scene (B-II).

tion and the detection of object boundaries are considered
two problems coupled in a chicken-and-egg situation. Finding object contours in early processing stages, will greatly
facilitate further processes, such as accurate and dense image motion estimation, segmentation, or recognition.
Recent studies have shown the advantages of eventbased data for the estimation of local features such as sparse
image motion [2, 3, 4], moving corners [8], and tracking [9].
However, the problem of detecting extended contours has
not yet been addressed. The asynchronous frame-free representation of the DVS consists of sparse event responses
with accurate timing, but they are not grouped into meaningful entities: e.g. object boundaries or segments. It may
appear at first sight that this data, because of its sparseness
and the fact that there is no image intensity, is not suited
well for conventional vision techniques. In this work we introduce an approach, using methods from Computer Vision,
but adapted to the event based data, to obtain contours and
ordinal depth as shown in Fig. 1.
Neurophysiological experiments suggest that human vision has processes dedicated to linking contours in early visual areas V1 and V2 (see [11]). Further evidence shows
that biological vision also has mechanisms for assigning ordinal depth information to contours, via the so-called border
ownership assignment [31, 33]. Such processes determine
which of the two sides next to the boundary belongs to the

486

