Multi-conditional Latent Variable Model for Joint Facial Action Unit Detection
Stefanos Eleftheriadis∗
Ognjen Rudovic∗
Maja Pantic∗†
∗
Department of Computing, Imperial College London, UK
†
EEMCS, University of Twente, The Netherlands
{s.eleftheriadis, orudovic, m.pantic}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose a novel multi-conditional latent variable
model for simultaneous facial feature fusion and detection of facial action units. In our approach we exploit the
structure-discovery capabilities of generative models such
as Gaussian processes, and the discriminative power of
classifiers such as logistic function. This leads to superior performance compared to existing classifiers for the
target task that exploit either the discriminative or generative property, but not both. The model learning is performed via an efficient, newly proposed Bayesian learning
strategy based on Monte Carlo sampling. Consequently,
the learned model is robust to data overfitting, regardless
of the number of both input features and jointly estimated
facial action units. Extensive qualitative and quantitative
experimental evaluations are performed on three publicly
available datasets (CK+, Shoulder-pain and DISFA). We
show that the proposed model outperforms the state-of-theart methods for the target task on (i) feature fusion, and (ii)
multiple facial action unit detection.

1. Introduction
Facial expression is one of the most powerful channels of
non-verbal communication [1]. It conveys emotions, provides clues about people’s personality and intentions, reveals the state of pain, weakness or hesitation, among others. Automatic analysis of facial expressions has attracted
significant research attention over the past decade, due to its
wide importance in various domains such as medicine, security and psychology [14]. The facial action coding system
(FACS) [7] is the most comprehensive anatomically-based
system for describing facial expressions in terms of nonoverlapping, visually detectable facial muscle activations,
named action units (AUs). FACS defines 33 unique AUs,
several categories of head/eye positions and other movements, which can describe every possible facial expression.
Automatic detection of AUs is a challenging task mainly
due to the complexity and subtlety of human facial behav-

ior, and individual differences and artifacts caused by variation in head-pose, illumination, occlusions, etc. [4]. These
and other sources of variation in facial expression data are
typically accounted for at the (i) feature level, by finding
facial features that are robust to the aforementioned artifacts, and/or (ii) model level, by capturing semantics of
AUs, i.e., their co-occurrences as commonly encountered
in naturalistic data. At the feature level, detection of AUs
can be performed using either geometric or appearance descriptors, or both. While the geometric features (e.g., the
displacement of the facial points between expressive and
neutral faces [13]) are more robust to illumination and pose
changes, not all AUs can be detected solely from them. For
example, activation of AU6 wrinkles the skin around the
outer corners of the eyes and raises the cheeks, which makes
it difficult to detect this AU (independently from other AUs)
using the geometric features explicitly. On the other hand,
appearance-based features overcome this by being able to
capture transient differences in the facial texture, such as
wrinkles, bulges and furrows, however, they are usually
prone to overfitting. Hence, modeling both geometric and
appearance features exploits the complementary properties
of these two features, leading to improved AU detection.
At the model level, the goal is to improve the AU detection by modeling ‘semantics’ of facial behavior (e.g., in
terms of AU co-occurrences). This is important because
AUs rarely appear in isolation (more than 7,000 AU combinations have been observed in everyday life [23]). The type
of the AU co-occurrences depends largely on the context
in which the facial expression is displayed, e.g., due to latent variables such as emotions (e.g., AU12 and AU6 in the
case of happiness, and AU4 and AU7 in the case of fear).
Furthermore, co-occurring AUs can be non-additive, in the
case of one AU masks another, or a new and distinct set
of appearances can be created [7]. For instance, AU4 (brow
lowerer) has a different appearance when occurring together
with AU1 (inner brow raise) than alone. When AU1,4 cooccur, the brows are drawn together and are raised due to the
action of AU1; the brows are lowered otherwise. This, in
turn, significantly affects the appearance of the target AUs.

3792

