Opening the Black Box:
Hierarchical Sampling Optimization for Estimating Human Hand Pose

Microsoft Research

‡

Imperial College London

Abstract
We address the problem of hand pose estimation, formulated as an inverse problem. Typical approaches optimize
an energy function over pose parameters using a ‘black
box’ image generation procedure. This procedure knows little about either the relationships between the parameters or
the form of the energy function. In this paper, we show that
we can significantly improve upon black box optimization
by exploiting high-level knowledge of the parameter structure and using a local surrogate energy function. Our new
framework, hierarchical sampling optimization, consists of
a sequence of predictors organized into a kinematic hierarchy. Each predictor is conditioned on its ancestors, and
generates a set of samples over a subset of the pose parameters. The highly-efficient surrogate energy is used to
select among samples. Having evaluated the full hierarchy, the partial pose samples are concatenated to generate a
full-pose hypothesis. Several hypotheses are generated using the same procedure, and finally the original full energy
function selects the best result. Experimental evaluation on
three publically available datasets show that our method is
particularly impressive in low-compute scenarios where it
significantly outperforms all other state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Estimating the articulated pose of the human hand
presents unique challenges for computer vision algorithms.
The search space is high-dimensional, the hand can appear
in essentially any 3D global orientation, there are frequent
self-occlusions, and fingers have (locally) similar appearance. Early success [1, 20, 4] has been accelerated by the
arrival of consumer depth cameras [13, 7, 12, 16, 25, 17, 21,
19], but the problem is far from solved.
Modern pose estimation algorithms attack the problem
with a ‘hybrid’ discriminative/generative approach. First,
a learned discriminative component makes a prediction di-

Pushmeet Kohli†
Jamie Shotton†

input
image

Full Pose
Regression
Energy
Function
Parameter
Updates
final
result

Black Box
Optimization

input
image
Partial Pose Regression
Surrogate Energy Selection

…

Partial Pose Regression
Surrogate Energy Selection

layer 1

†

Jonathan Taylor†
Tae-Kyun Kim‡

…
layer K

Danhang Tang†‡
Cem Keskin†

Energy Function
final
result

Hierarchical Sampling
Optimization

Figure 1: Opening the black box. A typical black box optimization approach (left) will regress candidate full poses
and then iteratively update them based on the evaluation of
the energy function. Our approach (right) instead regresses
partial poses in a layered kinematic hierarchy, using a surrogate energy function to keep only the best partial poses.
Our approach can achieve higher accuracy than black box
optimization, even without iteration.
rectly from the input image about either the pose parameters
themselves [17, 9] or some intermediates such as fingertip positions [16], hand joint positions [25], or hand parts
[7, 19]. Second, a generative component combines discriminative and motion-based predictions in an optimization over the pose parameters.
Also known as ‘analysis by synthesis’ or ‘inverse graphics’, generative approaches aim to infer the hand pose parameters that allow one to generate or synthesize the input
image. Given a model of the hand, its pose (and sometimes shape [8]) parameters are optimized to minimize an
energy function. An ideal energy function is the reconstruction error: the distance between the observed image and a
synthetic rendering of the model. Unfortunately, the recon13325

