PQTable: Fast Exact Asymmetric Distance Neighbor Search
for Product Quantization using Hash Tables
Yusuke Matsui Toshihiko Yamasaki Kiyoharu Aizawa
The University of Tokyo, Japan
{matsui, yamasaki, aizawa}@hal.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
We propose the product quantization table (PQTable), a
product quantization-based hash table that is fast and requires neither parameter tuning nor training steps. The
PQTable produces exactly the same results as a linear PQ
search, and is 102 to 105 times faster when tested on the
SIFT1B data. In addition, although state-of-the-art performance can be achieved by previous inverted-indexing-based
approaches, such methods do require manually designed
parameter setting and much training, whereas our method
is free from them. Therefore, PQTable offers a practical and
useful solution for real-world problems.

1. Introduction
With the explosive growth of multimedia data, compressing high-dimensional vectors and performing approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) searches in the compressed
domain is becoming a fundamental problem in handling
large databases. Product quantization (PQ) [13], and its
extensions [17, 7, 2, 24, 21, 11, 5, 25], are popular and successful methods for quantizing a vector into a short code.
PQ has three attractive properties: (1) PQ can compress
an input vector into an extremely short code (e.g., 32 bit)
that enables it to handle typically one billion data points
in memory at once; (2) the approximate distance between
a raw vector and a compressed PQ code can be computed
efficiently (the so-called asymmetric distance computation
(ADC) [13]), which is a good estimate of the original Euclidean distance; and (3) the data structure and coding algorithms are surprisingly simple. By quantizing database vectors into short codes in advance, vectors similar to a given
query can be found from the database codes by a linear comparison of the query with each code using ADC (see the
linear ADC scan in Fig. 1a).
Although a linear ADC scan is simple and easy to use,
ANN search by linear ADC scanning is efficient only for
small datasets because the search is exhaustive, i.e., the
computational cost is at least O(N ) for N PQ codes. To

handle large (e.g., N = 109 ) databases, short-code-based
inverted indexing systems [1, 23, 7, 15, 3, 4] have been proposed, which are currently state-of-the-art ANN methods
(see Fig. 1b). Such systems operate in two stages: (1) coarse
quantization and (2) reranking via short codes. A database
vector is first assigned to a bucket using a coarse quantizer
(e.g., k-means [13], multiple k-means [23], or Cartesian
products [1, 12]), then compressed to a short code using
PQ [13] or its extensions [17, 7] and finally stored as a posting list 1 . In the retrieval phase, a query vector is assigned
to the nearest buckets by the coarse quantizer, then associated items in corresponding posting lists are traversed, with
the nearest one being reranked via ADC 2 . These systems
have been reported as being fast, accurate, and memory efficient, by being capable of holding one billion data points
in memory and conducting a retrieval in milliseconds.
However, such inverted indexing systems are built by
a process of carefully designed manual parameter tuning.
The processing time and recall rates strongly depend on
the number of space partitions in the coarse quantizer, and
its optimal size needs to be decided manually, as shown
in Fig. 2. For example, this simple example shows that
k = 1024 is the fastest setting for N = 107 , but the slowest
for N = 108 . These relationships do not become clear until several parameter combinations for the coarse quantizers
are examined. However, training and testing coarse quantizers is computationally expensive. For example, we found
that, to plot a single dot of Fig. 2 for N = 109 , the training
took around a day and building the inverted index structure
took around three days, using 16-core machines. This is
particularly critical for a recent per-cell training ANN system [3, 15], which requires even more computation to build
the system. It should be pointed out that achieving stateof-the-art performances by ANN systems depends largely
on special tuning for the testbed dataset, e.g., SIFT1B [14].
There is no guarantee that we can always achieve the best
performance by such systems. In real-world applications,
1 In practice, the residual difference between the query vector and the
codeword is encoded.
2 There are smarter versions of this computation [3].

11940

