Learning Common Sense Through Visual Abstraction
Ramakrishna Vedantam1∗ Xiao Lin1∗ Tanmay Batra2† C. Lawrence Zitnick3 Devi Parikh1
1
Virginia Tech 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 Microsoft Research
1

{vrama91,linxiao,parikh}@vt.edu

2

tbatra@andrew.cmu.edu

1. Introduction
Teaching machines common sense has been a longstanding challenge at the core of Artificial Intelligence (AI) [8].
Consider the task of assessing how plausible it is for a dog
to jump over a tree. One approach is to mine text sources
to estimate how frequently the concept of dogs jumping
over trees is mentioned. A long history of works address
the problem is this manner by mining knowledge from the
web [5, 21, 24] or by having humans manually specify
facts [4, 28, 33, 34] in text. Unfortunately, text is known
to suffer from a reporting bias. If the frequency of mention was an indication of occurrence in the real world, peo∗ Equal contribution
† This work was done as an intern at Virginia Tech

larryz@microsoft.com

new$asser(on:$$
squirrels$look$at$nuts$

Abstract
Common sense is essential for building intelligent machines. While some commonsense knowledge is explicitly
stated in human-generated text and can be learnt by mining
the web, much of it is unwritten. It is often unnecessary and
even unnatural to write about commonsense facts. While
unwritten, this commonsense knowledge is not unseen! The
visual world around us is full of structure modeled by commonsense knowledge. Can machines learn common sense
simply by observing our visual world? Unfortunately, this
requires automatic and accurate detection of objects, their
attributes, poses, and interactions between objects, which
remain challenging problems. Our key insight is that while
visual common sense is depicted in visual content, it is the
semantic features that are relevant and not low-level pixel
information. In other words, photorealism is not necessary to learn common sense. We explore the use of humangenerated abstract scenes made from clipart for learning
common sense. In particular, we reason about the plausibility of an interaction or relation between a pair of nouns
by measuring the similarity of the relation and nouns with
other relations and nouns we have seen in abstract scenes.
We show that the commonsense knowledge we learn is complementary to what can be learnt from sources of text.

3

similar$to?$
known$plausible$asser(on:$$
squirrels$want$nuts$
look$at$

want$

Figure 1: We consider the task of assessing how plausible
a commonsense assertion is based on how similar it is to
known plausible assertions. We argue that this similarity
should be computed not just based on the text in the assertion, but also based on the visual grounding of the assertion.
While “wants” and “looks at” are semantically different,
their visual groundings tend to be similar. We use abstract
scenes made from clipart to provide the visual grounding.
ple are ∼3 times more likely to be murdered than they are
to inhale, and people inhale ∼6 times as often as they exhale [16]. This bias is not surprising. After all, people talk
about things that are interesting to talk about, and unusual
circumstances tend to be more interesting.
While unwritten, commonsense knowledge is not unseen! The visual world around us is full of structure modeled by our commonsense knowledge. By reasoning visually about a concept we may be able to estimate its plausibility more accurately. For instance, while “squirrels wanting nuts” is frequently mentioned in text, “squirrels looking at nuts” is rarely mentioned even though it is equally
plausible. However, if we visually imagine a squirrel wanting a nut, we typically imagine a squirrel looking at a nut
(Figure 1). This is because wanting something and looking at something tend to be visually correlated, even though
12542

