Non-Parametric Structure-Based Calibration of Radially Symmetric Cameras
Federico Camposeco, Torsten Sattler, Marc Pollefeys
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, Switzerland
{federico.camposeco, torsten.sattler, marc.pollefeys}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
We propose a novel two-step method for estimating the
intrinsic and extrinsic calibration of any radially symmetric
camera, including non-central systems. The first step consists of estimating the camera pose, given a Structure from
Motion (SfM) model, up to the translation along the optical
axis. As a second step, we obtain the calibration by finding the translation of the camera center using an ordering
constraint. The method makes use of the 1D radial camera model, which allows us to effectively handle any radially symmetric camera, including non-central ones. Using
this ordering constraint, we show that the we are able to
calibrate several different (central and non-central) Wide
Field of View (WFOV) cameras, including fisheye, hypercatadioptric and spherical catadioptric cameras, as well as
pinhole cameras, using a single image or jointly solving for
several views.

1. Introduction
Recently, cameras with a wide field of view (WFOV)
such as fisheye and omnidirectional cameras are starting to
become more and more popular. Due to their ability to observe a large portion of the scene, using WFOV cameras
is advantageous for 3D computer vision tasks such as the
precise camera tracking that is done as part of visual navigation for robots and autonomous vehicles. At the same
time, action cameras with WFOV such as the GoPro Hero
are widely used. Similarly, camera mounts for mobile devices that enable them to take panoramic images, e.g., using
a catadioptric lens, are becoming more frequent. As a result, more and more WFOV images are becoming available
on photo sharing websites such as Flickr and Picasa. In the
case of Structure-from-Motion (SfM) from photo community collections, these photos could be particularly helpful
to strengthen the overall reconstruction as they provide constraints to many other cameras. However, they are typically
discarded in practice due to the challenge of automatically
calibrating these cameras.
In this paper, we present a novel method to automatically
calibrate WFOV cameras from 2D-3D matches established

between features extracted in their images and 3D points in
a SfM reconstruction using image-based localization methods. Given a partial reconstruction obtained from regular
images, our method can thus be used to calibrate and then
insert WFOV into a SfM model to strongly link together different parts of the scene which are all visible in these photos
and thus improve the quality of the reconstruction.
Our method is based on the 1D radial camera model [15–
17], which can be used to describe any type of camera with
radial distortion, including pinhole, fisheye, and non-central
cameras such as catadioptric lenses, as long as the center of
distortion is known. We combine this model with a nonparametric intrinsic calibration to obtain an extremely powerful calibration method that is capable of calibrating a wide
range of camera types. Our method consists of two steps.
In the first step, the extrinsic calibration is computed from
the 2D-3D matches up to the position of the camera center
(or camera centers in the case of non-central cameras) along
the optical axis. This can be done efficiently using a linear
7-point solver inside a RANSAC loop [5]. Given the partial
extrinsic calibration, we employ a novel ordering constraint
on the opening angle of the viewing rays corresponding to
the 2D features to estimate the remaining extrinsic parameter in the case of a central camera. Since we are considering radially symmetric cameras, fixing the camera center
directly provides the intrinsic calibration as it provides a
mapping from image positions to viewing rays. A slightly
generalized version of this constraint enables us to obtain a
more accurate calibration from multiple photos taken with
the same camera. The constraint can be further generalized
to also handle non-central cameras, both when only a single
or multiple photos are available. In addition to its generality, our novel ordering constraint enables us to formulate the
second part of the calibration process as a convex optimization program. We experimentally demonstrate the accuracy
of our calibration pipeline for a wide range of cameras. Additionally, we make the source code of our method available [1].
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows.
Sec. 2 discusses related work. Sec. 3 reviews the 1D radial camera model. Sec. 4 introduces our novel ordering
constraint and derives our calibration method for the case
of central cameras. The extension to non-central cameras

2192

