Tracking-by-Segmentation with Online Gradient Boosting Decision Tree
Jeany Son1,2
Ilchae Jung1,2
Kayoung Park2
Bohyung Han1,2
1
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering and 2 Computer Vision Lab., POSTECH, Korea
{jeany,chey0313,kayoungpark,bhhan}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
We propose an online tracking algorithm that adaptively
models target appearances based on an online gradient
boosting decision tree. Our algorithm is particularly useful for non-rigid and/or articulated objects since it handles
various deformations of the target effectively by integrating
a classifier operating on individual patches and provides
segmentation masks of the target as final results. The posterior of the target state is propagated over time by particle
filtering, where the likelihood is computed based mainly on
a patch-level confidence map associated with a latent target
state corresponding to each sample. Once tracking is completed in each frame, our gradient boosting decision tree
is updated to adapt new data in a recursive manner. For
effective evaluation of segmentation-based tracking algorithms, we construct a new ground-truth that contains pixellevel annotation of segmentation mask. We evaluate the
performance of our tracking algorithm based on the measures for segmentation masks, where our algorithm illustrates outstanding accuracy compared to the state-of-theart segmentation-based tracking methods.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking problem has been studied extensively
and significant progress has been made recently in terms of
tracker performance and evaluation methodology. Tracking
algorithms typically deal with various challenges by adapting target appearances over time [13, 23, 26], reasoning occlusion [20], handling abrupt motion [21, 24], and/or managing background clutter [6]. However, most of existing
algorithms are limited to producing bounding boxes as their
outputs, and they often suffer from drifting problems when
substantial non-rigid and articulated motions are involved in
a target. To overcome such limitations, part- or patch-based
tracking algorithms [2, 14, 22] have been proposed, but they
still employ bounding boxes for target localization.
We believe that segmentation-based tracking is a natural
solution to handle non-rigid and deformable objects effectively. Hence, we propose a novel tracking-by-segmentation

framework, which maintains target appearances based on
small local patches and performs tracking by classifying the
patches into the target or the background. A new online gradient boosting decision tree is integrated for classification,
where the loss function is minimized incrementally without
offline samples. We employ the distance to the object center
as a feature in addition to ordinary visual features for classification, which turns out to improve performance substantially. Particle filter is adopted to propagate the posterior,
where a segmentation mask is constructed for each latent
target state corresponding to a sample. The final tracking result is given by the mask of the best sample. To evaluate our
tracking algorithm, we construct new ground-truths of existing datasets, which contain pixel-level label annotations
and facilitate accurate tracking performance evaluation of
segmentation-based tracking algorithms.
There are several prior studies about segmentation-based
tracking. Aeschliman et al. [1] propose pixel-level probabilistic models for joint target tracking and segmentation,
but this algorithm assumes a static camera environment similar to a background subtraction. Another segmentationbased tracking algorithm is proposed in a particle filter
framework by applying GrabCut [27] to each sample for
robust observation [4], but the likelihood computation is
based on simple features such as color and gradient distributions. A mid-level appearance structure, superpixel, is
employed to distinguish the target from background, where
target state is obtained by computing Maximum a Posteriori (MAP) based on a confidence map of superpixels [28].
HoughTrack [10] relies on an online Hough forest, where
patch-based classification and voting is performed to identify the target area. PixelTrack [7] provides soft segmentations of the target based on pixel-wise classification. Recently, Hong et al. [17] propose a multiple quantization
technique, which tracks the target by identifying the best
configuration across pixel, superpixel and bounding box
levels. These methods may have trouble to handle scale
variations effectively since the size of voting vector does
not adapt a target size [10, 7] and the algorithm is designed
for fixed-size bounding boxes [17]. In addition, although
all the above tracking algorithms can generate segmentation
13056

