Learning to Boost Filamentary Structure Segmentation
Lin Gu, Li Cheng
Bioinformatics Institute, A*STAR, Singapore
gulin,chengli@bii.a-star.edu.sg

Abstract
The challenging problem of filamentary structure segmentation has a broad range of applications in biological
and medical fields. A critical yet challenging issue remains
on how to detect and restore the small filamentary fragments from backgrounds: The small fragments are of diverse shapes and appearances, meanwhile the backgrounds
could be cluttered and ambiguous. Focusing on this issue,
this paper proposes an iterative two-step learning-based
approach to boost the performance based on a base segmenter arbitrarily chosen from a number of existing segmenters: We start with an initial partial segmentation where
the filamentary structure obtained is of high confidence
based on this existing segmenter. We also define a scanning horizon as epsilon balls centred around the partial
segmentation result. Step one of our approach centers on
a data-driven latent classification tree model to detect the
filamentary fragments. This model is learned via a training process, where a large number of distinct local figure/background separation scenarios are established and
geometrically organized into a tree structure. Step two spatially restores the isolated fragments back to the current
partial segmentation, which is accomplished by means of
completion fields and matting. Both steps are then alternated with the growth of partial segmentation result, until
the input image space is entirely explored. Our approach is
rather generic and can be easily augmented to a wide range
of existing supervised/unsupervised segmenters to produce
an improved result. This has been empirically verified on
specific filamentary structure segmentation tasks: retinal
blood vessel segmentation as well as neuronal segmentations, where noticeable improvement has been shown over
the original state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
This work aims to address the problem of image-based
filamentary structure segmentation. In particular, we focus
on the challenging issue of preserving weak foreground signals, i.e., small and thin filaments from ambiguous back-

grounds. This problem is fundamental in a rather broad
range of applications such as neuronal tracing from microscopic images [17], retinal blood vessel tracing in retinal
scans [9], as well as reconstruction of human vasculature
such as 2D digital subtraction angiography and 3D magnetic resonance angiography [10]. Difficulties of this problem lie in the high variability of filament shape, texture and
thickness, which is further complicated by the often noisy
and cluttered background that at times could even confuse a
trained eye [1].
Existing methods can be roughly categorized into three
types: Hessian-based, model-based and learning-based.
Hessian-based models make use of the second order derivatives either to guide the development of snake [27], to detect
filament edges [2], or to combine with the eigenvalues [10]
for segmenting filamentary structures. They however often lack the flexibility to tackle irregular filamentary structures. Model-based methods instead emphasize on fitting
filaments with known geometric shapes. Zhao et al. [29]
regard individual fibres of neurons as connected tubular
shapes which are assembled to form neuronal tree structures. One widely used unsupervised method, optimally
oriented flux (OOF) [13], is based on the assumption of
circular filament cross-sections, which is further extended
in Turetken et al. [26] to segment filamentary structures
through a set of regularly spaced anchor points. Learningbased methods [22, 21, 25, 6], on the other hand, advocate
the automation of the feature learning process. For example,
the method of [6] employs a gradient boosting framework
to optimize filters and often produces the state-of-the-art
performance. Existing filamentary structure segmentation
methods usually work very well when the filamentary structured foregrounds are of high contrast or with clear boundary from the backgrounds. Their performance nevertheless
deteriorates dramatically when dealing with small and thin
filaments. This is often further complicated with cluttered
and ambiguous backgrounds, which are not uncommon in
real-world images.
In addition to the basic segmentation result, many of
the aforementioned methods also produce a pixelwise confidence map, despite the heterogeneous nature of these meth-

639

