Learning Informative Edge Maps for Indoor Scene Layout Prediction
Arun Mallya and Svetlana Lazebnik
Dept. of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{amallya2,slazebni}@illinois.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce new edge-based features for
the task of recovering the 3D layout of an indoor scene
from a single image. Indoor scenes have certain edges that
are very informative about the spatial layout of the room,
namely, the edges formed by the pairwise intersections of
room faces (two walls, wall and ceiling, wall and floor). In
contrast with previous approaches that rely on area-based
features like geometric context and orientation maps, our
method attempts to directly detect these informative edges.
We learn to predict ‘informative edge’ probability maps using two recent methods that exploit local and global context,
respectively: structured edge detection forests, and a fully
convolutional network for pixelwise labeling. We show that
the fully convolutional network is quite successful at predicting the informative edges even when they lack contrast
or are occluded, and that the accuracy can be further improved by training the network to jointly predict the edges
and the geometric context. Using features derived from
the ‘informative edge’ maps, we learn a maximum margin structured classifier that achieves state-of-the-art performance on layout prediction.

1. Introduction
Consider the task of finding the spatial layout of the indoor scene depicted in Fig. 1. In the widely accepted framework of Hedau et al. [10], this task is formulated as finding a
3D box, such as the one outlined with green lines, that best
fits the room. Existing approaches to this problem focus
on complex mid-level image features [10, 16, 20] or powerful inference procedures [21, 22, 26, 28]. The problem
of layout estimation would be greatly simplified – indeed,
made almost trivial – if we could directly find edges that are
very informative about the 3D structure of the room, namely
those between two walls, the walls and the ceiling, and the
walls and the floor. Unfortunately, these edges are neither
very prominent nor always visible. We can see these issues
in Fig. 1: high-contrast “clutter” edges exist between the
arm chair and the wall, and the TV and the shelf, while the

Image with groundtruth!
box!

Inferred edge map with best
box estimate!

Figure 1. An indoor scene (left) and a map of the edges that determine its 3D layout (right). We present novel techniques to obtain
this informative edge map from an image and demonstrate its effectiveness for determining the spatial layout of a room.

wall and the ceiling are nearly of the same color. Moreover,
the arm chair and the cupboard heavily occlude the edges
between the walls and the floor. Thus, inferring 3D box
edges directly from low-level pixel information seems very
challenging. For this reason, most existing approaches rely
on mid-level area-based features, such as Geometric Context [10] and Orientation Maps [16], as an intermediate step
for layout estimation. At the same time, in the literature
on image segmentation and perceptual organization, there
has been successful work on learning to predict object contours from low-level pixel information [2, 6, 17, 31] and this
work motivates us to directly predict informative edges for
room layout estimation. Given an image, we determine its
informative edge map and subsequently use it to predict the
best-fit 3D box for the image, as depicted in the right half
of Fig. 1. Our contributions are as follows:
1. We adapt two recently developed pixel labeling methods for learning to predict informative edge maps
for room layout: Structured Forests for Edge Detection [7] and Fully Convolutional Networks (FCNs)
[18]. We find that FCNs show an impressive level of
performance on this task, especially when trained to
jointly predict informative edges and geometric context (Sec. 3).
2. We propose a structured layout inference method that
1936

