Photometric Stereo with Small Angular Variations
Jian Wang† , Yasuyuki Matsushita‡ , Boxin Shi§ , and Aswin C. Sankaranarayanan†
†
ECE Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
‡
Osaka University, Osaka, Japan
§
Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore

Abstract
Most existing successful photometric stereo setups require large angular variations in illumination directions,
which results in acquisition rigs that have large spatial extent. For many applications, especially involving mobile devices, it is important that the device be spatially compact.
This naturally implies smaller angular variations in the illumination directions. This paper studies the effect of small
angular variations in illumination directions to photometric
stereo. We explore both theoretical justification and practical issues in the design of a compact and portable photometric stereo device on which a camera is surrounded by
a ring of point light sources. We first derive the relationship between the estimation error of surface normal and the
baseline of the point light sources. Armed with this theoretical insight, we develop a small baseline photometric
stereo prototype to experimentally examine the theory and
its practicality.

1. Introduction
Size, weight, and power (SWaP) are key factors in designing a practical 3D acquisition system. The popularity of
commercial depth cameras such as the Kinect [14], which
is based on time-of-flight technology, and RealSense [10],
which is based on stereo and active illumination, can be attributed to their careful SWaP consideration. In contrast to
this, 3D acquisition based on photometric stereo is yet to
gain widespread commercial adoption. There are many advantages to use photometric stereo — all arising from its
ability to compute surface orientation at the same resolution as the input images [20, 18], which is achieved by determining surface normal per pixel from shading variations
observed under varying lightings. Reliable surface normal
estimates are obtained when the light sources have a large
angular spread [4]; however, lighting with a large angular
spread necessarily requires a large space especially when
imaging macroscopic objects, and hence, does not satisfy
small SWaP.

y

x
z

Figure 1. A compact photometric stereo system with a light ring of
radius r and a camera placed at the center of the ring. We seek to
image a scene whose depth d is significantly larger than the radius
of the light ring, i.e., d ≫ r.

This paper deals with photometric stereo under small angular variations. Our envisioned acquisition setup is as follows. A camera is surrounded by a small light ring. It is
used to capture the surface normal of a scene whose spatial
extent is significantly larger than the system itself. We define the baseline as the greatest distance between every two
lights, which is the diameter of the light ring here. To fulfill
the small SWaP requirement, we want the baseline to be as
small as possible.

1.1. Problem setup
In this paper, we analyze the estimation error with regard
to baseline and other system parameters like the number of
lights, camera noise level and scene location. Our problem
formulation is as follows.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, our setup consists of n identical
point light sources distributed uniformly on a circle of radius r, centered at the camera. We obtain n images, one
for illumination under each light source. The camera is assumed to make intensity measurements corrupted by additive noise with mean 0, variance σ 2 , and i.i.d both across
pixels and across images. Finally, the baseline of the system is small, which translates to the condition r ≪ d.
We consider a Lambertian scene point P at the
location p = [0, h, d]⊤ ∈ R3 with a surface normal
n ∈ R3 , knk2 = 1 and diffuse albedo ρ. When P is illuminated by a point light source at the location s ∈ R3 , its

3478

