Depth Map Estimation and Colorization of Anaglyph Images Using Local Color
Prior and Reverse Intensity Distribution
Williem
Inha University
Incheon 402-751, Korea

Ramesh Raskar
MIT Media Lab
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

In Kyu Park
Inha University
Incheon 402-751, Korea

williem.pao@gmail.com

raskar@media.mit.edu

pik@inha.ac.kr

Abstract
In this paper, we present a joint iterative anaglyph stereo
matching and colorization framework for obtaining a set of
disparity maps and colorized images. Conventional stereo
matching algorithms fail when addressing anaglyph images
that do not have similar intensities on their two respective
view images. To resolve this problem, we propose two novel
data costs using local color prior and reverse intensity distribution factor for obtaining accurate depth maps. To colorize an anaglyph image, each pixel in one view is warped
to another view using the obtained disparity values of nonoccluded regions. A colorization algorithm using optimization is then employed with additional constraint to colorize
the remaining occluded regions. Experimental results confirm that the proposed unified framework is robust and produces accurate depth maps and colorized stereo images.

1. Introduction
During the last couple of decades, 3D technology has become popular in both research activities and consumer applications. In consumer electronics, polarized filter glass
and shutter glass have been widely used to deliver the
stereoscopic experience to 3D TV users. A more primitive
method involves anaglyph imagery, which has been used
to implement stereoscopic visualization in a cost effective
way using color filtered glasses. Anaglyph is often used to
distribute 3D videos or images in the online video/image
database. Besides for image size compression, it is a useful method for general consumers who want to enjoy 3D
experience without expensive devices.
An anaglyph image packs partial information of stereo
images in a single color image, which typically consists of
red (only the red channel) from the left image and cyan
(blue and green channels) from the right image. Consequently, it suffers from missing color information and it is
difficult to process the anaglyph image using conventional
computer vision algorithms. In early research, several stud-

Figure 1: Pipeline of the proposed algorithm
ies have aimed to colorize the pixels in the missing channels [10, 13]. However, the state-of-the-art technique in
anaglyph colorization [10] is still inaccurate due to the high
dependency on the initial correspondence map. Note that
the dense matching algorithm [14] is erroneous because of
the nature of anaglyph image. Thus, it is necessary to develop a reliable anaglyph matching method to restore the
original color of stereo images accurately.
Typical stereo matching approaches have been built on
the photometric consistency assumption that requires the
corresponding points of a stereo pair to have similar intensity values [18]. For that reason, anaglyph stereo matching
becomes a difficult problem because half of the color channels are completely missing. To our best knowledge, there
has been no previous anaglyph stereo matching algorithm
that can obtain accurate disparity map.
In this paper, we propose an iterative joint method to not
only compute the disparity map but also simultaneously colorize the missing color information of the anaglyph image.
The overview of the proposed framework is shown in Figure 1. An accurate disparity map is estimated by employing two novel anaglyph data costs which are based on local
color prior (LC) and reverse intensity distribution (RID).
To restore the missing color, we first transfer the known
color information from one image to another using the obtained disparity. We then colorize the remaining pixels in
occluded regions using the diffusion-based colorization. A
novel weight kernel function based on the color similarity
is introduced to achieve accurate colorization. In summary,
this paper makes the following contributions.
13460

