Fully Connected Object Proposals for Video Segmentation
Federico Perazzi1,2

Oliver Wang2
1
ETH Zurich

Markus Gross1,2 Alexander Sorkine-Hornung2
2
Disney Research Zurich

Abstract
We present a novel approach to video segmentation using
multiple object proposals. The problem is formulated as a
minimization of a novel energy function defined over a fully
connected graph of object proposals. Our model combines
appearance with long-range point tracks, which is key to ensure robustness with respect to fast motion and occlusions
over longer video sequences. As opposed to previous approaches based on object proposals, we do not seek the best
per-frame object hypotheses to perform the segmentation.
Instead, we combine multiple, potentially imperfect proposals to improve overall segmentation accuracy and ensure
robustness to outliers. Overall, the basic algorithm consists
of three steps. First, we generate a very large number of
object proposals for each video frame using existing techniques. Next, we perform an SVM-based pruning step to retain only high quality proposals with sufficiently discriminative power. Finally, we determine the fore- and background
classification by solving for the maximum a posteriori of
a fully connected conditional random field, defined using
our novel energy function. Experimental results on a well
established dataset demonstrate that our method compares
favorably to several recent state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation refers to the partitioning of
a video into two disjoint sets of pixels representing a foreground object and background regions. The abundance of
available literature on video segmentation reflects the importance of the topic, which is an essential building block
for numerous applications including video editing and postprocessing, video retrieval, analysis of large video collections, activity recognition, and many more. Many existing
approaches are based on background subtraction, tracking
of feature points and homogeneous regions, spatiotemporal graph-cuts, or hierarchical clustering. Recently, methods leveraging advances in object recognition have gained
popularity. These methods make use of per-frame object
proposals and employ different techniques to select a set of
temporally coherent segments, one per frame, typically by

Figure 1. Example segmentations using our approach on
three sequences of the Freiburg-Berkeley Motion Segmentation
Dataset [5]. Top to bottom: we demonstrate robustness to challenging situations typical of unconstrained videos such as fastmotion and motion blur, color ambiguities between fore- and background, and partial occlusions.

minimizing an energy function defined over a locally connected spatiotemporal graph. While these methods have
achieved state-of-art performance [27, 30, 44], the sparse
graph structure limits their ability to segment videos with
fast motion and occlusions.
We propose an efficient alternative approach which exploits a fully connected spatiotemporal graph built over object proposals. We map our similarity term into a Euclidian
space, which is computationally efficient to optimize and
well suited for modeling long-range connections. The fully
connected nature of the graph implies information exchange
between both spatially and temporally distant object proposals, which in turn enables our method to be robust to
the difficult cases of fast frame-to-frame motion and object
occlusions. We additionally propose an energy term that incorporates sparse but confident long range feature tracks, in
order to ensure similar temporal labeling of objects. While
previous approaches are constrained to the selection of one
proposal per frame, our formulation enables the grouping of
multiple overlapping proposals in the same frame, yielding
robustness to outliers and incorrect proposal boundaries.
Given as input a set of object proposals and a few annotated foreground proposals, our algorithm consists of three
steps. Initially, a rough classification and subsampling of
13227

