kNN Hashing with Factorized Neighborhood Representation
Kun Ding, Chunlei Huo, Bin Fan, Chunhong Pan
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, P.R. China
Email:{kding,clhuo,bfan,chpan}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Hashing is very effective for many tasks in reducing the
processing time and in compressing massive databases. Although lots of approaches have been developed to learn
data-dependent hash functions in recent years, how to learn
hash functions to yield good performance with acceptable
computational and memory cost is still a challenging problem. Based on the observation that retrieval precision is
highly related to the kNN classification accuracy, this paper
proposes a novel kNN-based supervised hashing method,
which learns hash functions by directly maximizing the kNN
accuracy of the Hamming-embedded training data. To make
it scalable well to large problem, we propose a factorized
neighborhood representation to parsimoniously model the
neighborhood relationships inherent in training data. Considering that real-world data are often linearly inseparable,
we further kernelize this basic model to improve its performance. As a result, the proposed method is able to learn
accurate hashing functions with tolerable computation and
storage cost. Experiments on four benchmarks demonstrate
that our method outperforms the state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
With the rapidly increasing amount of available data,
such as image, text and video, fast similarity search and efficient data storage/indexing techniques become increasingly
important in many tasks, e.g., matching [28], retrieval [29],
video segmentation [23] and graph construction [35]. Traditional methods, for example kd-tree [2], are inefficient in dealing with tens of thousands high-dimensional data. Hashing [1, 6, 22, 26, 32], as an emerging and popular
technique, enables both fast search and efficient storage by
mapping high-dimensional data to low-dimensional binary
codes while maintaining some similarity and structural information of the original data.
Many hashing methods are proposed in the literature.
Early ones are data-independent [1, 3, 13]. For example, locality-sensitive hashing (LSH) [1] uses random pro-

jections as the hash functions. To preserve the geometry of high-dimensional data, lots of hash bits are needed
as it does not explore the data distribution when choosing the hashing functions. Recent researches are mainly focused on developing data-dependent or learning-based
hashing to automatically learn compact binary codes from
data. In general, according to the level of supervision, the
learning-based hashing can be categorized into unsupervised [6, 7, 10, 21, 27, 32], semi-supervised [31] and supervised [6, 12, 16, 17, 18, 22, 26] methods. Among them,
supervised hashing has attracted extensive attention due to
its superiority on preserving the semantic similarity.
Perhaps the most intuitive idea to learn hash functions is to preserve the (dis-)similarity defined in input space [6, 12, 22, 32]. Inspired by this, binary reconstruction
embedding (BRE) [12] explicitly preserves the pairwise distances between data, while kernel-based supervised hashing
(KSH) [22] learns binary codes to preserve semantic similarity. An alternative objective for hashing is maximizing
the precision of a certain classifier applied in Hamming space. Lin et al. proposed FastHash [18] to learn hash functions for high-dimensional data with a two-step strategy,
where the second step comes down to training binary classifiers, e.g., decision trees. Although this framework is simple and flexible, the decomposition may lead to suboptimal
performance. More recently, Shen et al. improved FastHash
by proposing the supervised discrete hashing (SDH) [26] to
generate binary codes with the minimal classification loss
of a linear classifier. It shows great advantages over the
similarity-preserving based hashing paradigm. However, as
retrieval is essentially a neighbor search problem, optimizing the accuracy of a kNN classifier might be more reasonable. Therefore, in this paper, we formulate the problem
of learning hash functions by directly maximizing the kNN
classification accuracy on the binary embeddings of training
data. To tackle the problem of discreteness of kNN accuracy, the stochastic neighborhood representation [5, 8, 24] is
resorted to define a surrogate objective function. By approximating the involved sign function with a smooth function,
we finally obtain a tractable unconstrained problem.

1098

