Ask Your Neurons: A Neural-based Approach to
Answering Questions about Images
Mateusz Malinowski1
Marcus Rohrbach2
Mario Fritz1
1
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany
2
UC Berkeley EECS and ICSI, Berkeley, CA, United States

Abstract
We address a question answering task on real-world images that is set up as a Visual Turing Test. By combining
latest advances in image representation and natural language processing, we propose Neural-Image-QA, an endto-end formulation to this problem for which all parts are
trained jointly. In contrast to previous efforts, we are facing
a multi-modal problem where the language output (answer)
is conditioned on visual and natural language input (image
and question). Our approach Neural-Image-QA doubles the
performance of the previous best approach on this problem.
We provide additional insights into the problem by analyzing how much information is contained only in the language
part for which we provide a new human baseline. To study
human consensus, which is related to the ambiguities inherent in this challenging task, we propose two novel metrics
and collect additional answers which extends the original
DAQUAR dataset to DAQUAR-Consensus.

CNN
What

is

behind

the

table

?

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

LSTM

chairs

window

<END>

Figure 1. Our approach Neural-Image-QA to question answering
with a Recurrent Neural Network using Long Short Term Memory
(LSTM). To answer a question about an image, we feed in both,
the image (CNN features) and the question (green boxes) into the
LSTM. After the (variable length) question is encoded, we generate the answers (multiple words, orange boxes). During the answer
generation phase the previously predicted answers are fed into the
LSTM until the hENDi symbol is predicted.

can generate image [12] and video descriptions [30]. Both
are conditioning on the visual features that stem from deep
learning architectures and employ recurrent neural network
approaches to produce descriptions.
To further push the boundaries and explore the limits
of deep learning architectures, we propose an architecture
for answering questions about images. In contrast to prior
work, this task needs conditioning on language as well
visual input. Both modalities have to be interpreted and
jointly represented as an answer depends on inferred meaning of the question and image content.
While there is a rich body of work on natural language
understanding that has addressed textual question answering tasks based on semantic parsing, symbolic representation and deduction systems, which also has seen applications to question answering on images [20], there is initial
evidence that deep architectures can indeed achieve a similar goal [33]. This motivates our work to seek end-to-end
architectures that learn to answer questions in a single holistic and monolithic model.
We propose Neural-Image-QA, an approach to question

1. Introduction
With the advances of natural language processing and
image understanding, more complex and demanding tasks
have become within reach. Our aim is to take advantage
of the most recent developments to push the state-of-theart for answering natural language questions on real-world
images. This task unites inference of question intends and
visual scene understanding with a word sequence prediction
task.
Most recently, architectures based on the idea of layered, end-to-end trainable artificial neural networks have
improved the state of the art across a wide range of diverse
tasks. Most prominently Convolutional Neural Networks
have raised the bar on image classification tasks [16] and
Long Short Term Memory Networks are dominating performance on a range of sequence prediction tasks such as
machine translation [28].
Very recently these two trends of employing neural architectures have been combined fruitfully with methods that

1

