Weakly-supervised Structured Output Learning with Flexible and Latent
Graphs using High-order Loss Functions
Gustavo Carneiro1 Tingying Peng2 Christine Bayer3 Nassir Navab2,4
1
Australian Centre for Visual Technologies, University of Adelaide
2
Computer Aided Medical Procedures, Technische Universität München
3
Department of Radiation Oncology, Technische Universität München
4
Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
We introduce two new structured output models that use
a latent graph, which is flexible in terms of the number of
nodes and structure, where the training process minimises
a high-order loss function using a weakly annotated training set. These models are developed in the context of microscopy imaging of malignant tumours, where the estimation of the number and proportion of classes of microcirculatory supply units (MCSU) is important in the assessment
of the efficacy of common cancer treatments (an MCSU is
a region of the tumour tissue supplied by a microvessel).
The proposed methodologies take as input multimodal microscopy images of a tumour, and estimate the number and
proportion of MCSU classes. This estimation is facilitated
by the use of an underlying latent graph (not present in the
manual annotations), where each MCSU is represented by a
node in this graph, labelled with the MCSU class and image
location. The training process uses the manual weak annotations available, consisting of the number of MCSU classes
per training image, where the training objective is the minimisation of a high-order loss function based on the norm
of the error between the manual and estimated annotations.
One of the models proposed is based on a new flexible latent
structure support vector machine (FLSSVM) and the other
is based on a deep convolutional neural network (DCNN)
model. Using a dataset of 89 weakly annotated pairs of
multimodal images from eight tumours, we show that the
quantitative results from DCNN are superior, but the qualitative results from FLSSVM are better and both display high
correlation values regarding the number and proportion of
MCSU classes compared to the manual annotations.

1. Introduction
Structured output models have become one of the most
studied topics in computer vision given their wide applicability in semantic segmentation [18, 32], instance segmentation [25], human pose estimation [28, 3], depth and normal

Figure 1. From a pair of multimodal microscopy images (pink
left box) acquired from a tumour tissue, the methodology must
produce a high-level annotation (blue right box) consisting of
the number of MCSU classes found, where the classes are normoxia (N), chronic hypoxia (CH), acute hypoxia (AH), and necrosis (Ne). This annotation is facilitated by a latent graph (green
centre box) with nodes representing the MCSUs, which is flexible
because the number of nodes and the structure of the graph are not
fixed. This figure is better visualised with a pdf reader - please
zoom in the IF/HE images to notice the MCSU annotations.

estimation [7], multiple organ detection and segmentation
from medical images [19, 30, 20, 36], among other problems. The use of latent variables in structured output learning models [34] is also important in several problems, where
an underlying graph helps the design of a more effective
approach. Examples of such models are present in 3D human pose estimation [11, 33] and weakly supervised semantic segmentation [16, 23, 33, 9]. High-order loss functions
have also become relevant in structured output problems,
with, for instance, the use of overlap loss in segmentation
problems [27, 24]. Flexible underlying graphs have also
been applied in structured output learning problems [26],
where the number of nodes and graph structure can vary
with the input data. Finally, there are a few problems formulated as weakly supervised latent structured output learning [9, 16, 23], but these approaches rely on low-order loss
functions. In summary, current structured output learning
1648

