Learning Social Relation Traits from Face Images
Zhanpeng Zhang, Ping Luo, Chen Change Loy, and Xiaoou Tang
Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
zz013@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, pluo@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, ccloy@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, xtang@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Social relation deﬁnes the association, e.g., warm,
friendliness, and dominance, between two or more people.
Motivated by psychological studies, we investigate if
such ﬁne-grained and high-level relation traits can be
characterised and quantiﬁed from face images in the wild.
To address this challenging problem we propose a deep
model that learns a rich face representation to capture
gender, expression, head pose, and age-related attributes,
and then performs pairwise-face reasoning for relation
prediction. To learn from heterogeneous attribute sources,
we formulate a new network architecture with a bridging
layer to leverage the inherent correspondences among these
datasets. It can also cope with missing target attribute
labels. Extensive experiments show that our approach is
effective for ﬁne-grained social relation learning in images
and videos.

1. Introduction
Social relation manifests when we establish, reciprocate,
or deepen relationships with one another in either physical
or virtual world. Studies have shown that implicit social
relations can be discovered from texts and microblogs [7].
Images and videos are becoming the mainstream medium to
share information, which capture individuals with different
social connections. Effectively exploiting such socially-rich
sources can provide social facts other than the conventional
medium like text (Fig. 1).
The aim of this study is to characterise and quantify
social relation traits from computer vision point of view.
Inspired by extensive psychological studies [9, 11, 13, 18],
which show that face emotional expressions can serve
as social predictive functions, we wish to automatically
recognise ﬁne-grained and high-level social relation traits
(e.g., friendliness, warm, and dominance) from face images.
Such a capability promises a wide spectrum of applications.
For instance, automatic social relation inference allows for
relation mining from image collection in social network,
personal album, and ﬁlms.

Figure 1. The image is given a caption ‘German Chancellor
Angela Merkel and U.S. President Barack Obama inspect a
military honor guard in Baden-Baden on April 3.’ (source:
www.rferl.org). Nevertheless, when we examine the face images
jointly, we could observe far more rich social facts that are
different from that expressed in the text.

Proﬁling unscripted social relation from face images is
non-trivial. Among the most signiﬁcant challenges are: (1)
as suggested by psychological studies [9, 11, 13], relations
of face images are related to high-level facial factors. Thus
we need a rich face representation that captures various
attributes such as expression and head pose; (2) no single
dataset is presently available, which encompasses all the
required facial attribute annotations to learn such a rich
representation. In particular, some datasets only contain
face expression labels, whilst other datasets may only
contain the gender label. Moreover, these datasets are
collected from different environments and exhibit different
statistical distributions. How to effectively train a model on
such heterogeneous data remains an open problem.
To this end, we carefully formulate a deep model to learn
a face representation for social relation prediction, driven
by rich facial attributes such as expression, head pose,
gender, and age. We devise a new deep architecture that
is capable of (1) dealing with missing attribute labels from
different datasets, and (2) bridging the gap of heterogeneous
datasets by weak constraints derived from the association
of face part appearances. This allows the model to learn
more effectively from heterogeneous datasets with different
annotations and statistical distributions. Unlike existing
face analyses that mostly consider single subject, our
network is formulated with a Siamese-like architecture [2],
it is thus capable of jointly considering pairwise faces for
relation reasoning, where each face serves as the mutual

3631

