Low-Rank Tensor Approximation with Laplacian Scale Mixture Modeling for
Multiframe Image Denoising
Weisheng Dong
Xidian University, China

Guangyu Li
Xidian University, China

wsdong@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Guangming Shi
Xidian University, China
gmshi@xidian.edu.cn

Xin Li
West Virginia University

Yi Ma
ShanghaiTech University, China

xin.li@ieee.org

mayi@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Patch-based low-rank models have shown effective in
exploiting spatial redundancy of natural images especially for the application of image denoising. However, twodimensional low-rank model can not fully exploit the spatiotemporal correlation in larger data sets such as multispectral images and 3D MRIs. In this work, we propose a novel
low-rank tensor approximation framework with Laplacian
Scale Mixture (LSM) modeling for multi-frame image denoising. First, similar 3D patches are grouped to form a
tensor of d-order and high-order Singular Value Decomposition (HOSVD) is applied to the grouped tensor. Then the
task of multiframe image denoising is formulated as a Maximum A Posterior (MAP) estimation problem with the LSM
prior for tensor coefficients. Both unknown sparse coefficients and hidden LSM parameters can be efficiently estimated by the method of alternating optimization. Specifically, we have derived closed-form solutions for both subproblems. Experimental results on spectral and dynamic
MRI images show that the proposed algorithm can better
preserve the sharpness of important image structures and
outperform several existing state-of-the-art multiframe denoising methods (e.g., BM4D and tensor dictionary learning).

1. Introduction
The field of image denoising has advanced rapidly in
the past decades. Early attacks on denoising are based on
sparse representations of images (e.g., [17, 1]); later this
line of research has evolved into image denoising methods
via dictionary learning [8, 13]. The combination of dictionary learning and nonlocal means [3] has led to many
state-of-the-art natural image denoising methods [5, 12, 6].

Recent advances include the low-rank matrix approximation (e.g., [7]) and high-order singular value decomposition
(e.g., [18]).
By contrast, the field of multi-frame image denoising has
been under-researched as of today despite the abundance of
volumetric data in the real world (e.g., volume rendering,
remote sensing and dynamic MRI). In ANLM3D [15], the
method of nonlocal-mean filtering was made spatially adaptive for the application of MRI. The well-known BM3D
method was also extended into BM4D [11] for volumetric
data restoration. To fully exploit the correlations among the
multi-frames, the low-rank tensor approximation methods have been proposed for multi-frame image denoising. In
[19], based on the Tucker decomposition, the multirank is
first estimated using the alternating least square (ALS) algorithm and the hyperspectral image (HSI) is denoised by
multirank truncation of the core tensor. The parallel factor
analysis (PARAFAC) decomposition has also been exploited for HSI denoising [10]. However, both the two methods
didn’t consider the rich nonlocal self-similarity of HSI and
the ALS algorithm didn’t exploit the sparse nature of the
core tensor. In [16], the tensor dictionary learning method
combing similar patches grouping has been proposed for
HSI denoising, where the Akaike information criterion (AIC)/minimum description length (MDL) technique is use to
estimate the multirank. The multirank truncation is then
applied to denoise the core tensor. As the AIC/MDL technique cannot exploit the sparse nature of the core tensor,
the denoising results are still often unsatisfied. In [18], the
high-order singular value decomposition (HOSVD) is used
to decompose the grouped similar 3D patches. The resulted
core tensor is then denoised by hard-thresholding followed
by Wiener filtering. Though effective, the two-stage denoising method is heuristic in nature.
In this paper, we present a novel low-rank tensor approximation framework with Laplacian Scale Mixture (LSM)

442

