Per-Sample Kernel Adaptation for Visual Recognition and Grouping
Borislav Antic and Björn Ommer
Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing
IWR, Heidelberg University, Germany
borislav.antic@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de, ommer@uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract
Object, action, or scene representations that are corrupted by noise significantly impair the performance of visual recognition. Typically, partial occlusion, clutter, or excessive articulation affects only a subset of all feature dimensions and, most importantly, different dimensions are
corrupted in different samples. Nevertheless, the common
approach to this problem in feature selection and kernel
methods is to down-weight or eliminate entire training samples or the same dimensions of all samples. Thus, valuable
signal is lost, resulting in suboptimal classification.
Our goal is, therefore, to adjust the contribution of individual feature dimensions when comparing any two samples and computing their similarity. Consequently, persample selection of informative dimensions is directly integrated into kernel computation. The interrelated problems
of learning the parameters of a kernel classifier and determining the informative components of each sample are then
addressed in a joint objective function. The approach can
be integrated into the learning stage of any kernel-based
visual recognition problem and it does not affect the computational performance in the retrieval phase. Experiments
on diverse challenges of action recognition in videos and
indoor scene classification show the general applicability
of the approach and its ability to improve learning of visual
representations.

1. Introduction
Visual recognition is one of the central problems of computer vision. It involves detection of objects and their localization in images [9], classification of actions and complex activities [22, 1], scene recognition [25], and related
problems. Over the last decade the field has seen a tremendous increase in performance. Among the many advancements, two broad directions, which have boosted performance significantly, are standing out. First, there has been a
lot of work on improving feature descriptors, interest points,
and the like. As a result, models of image and video con-

Figure 1: Computing a kernel for a given data matrix. Red are
components affected by feature selection, blue are samples selected by SVM, and green are individual noisy components suppressed by our approach. Note that per-sample kernel adaptation
only affects individual noisy comparisons, whereas red and blue
manipulate entire feature or sample planes.

tent have become significantly richer over the years, while
constantly increasing their dimensionality. Influential work
such as SIFT [20], HoG [7], video descriptors like HoF [16]
and dense trajectories [28], or most recently the filters created by deep convolutional neural networks [15] have laid
the basis for many other approaches. A second broad theme
have been part-based models that integrate the content of
many local features and the spatial layout (e.g., geometry,
shape) of the class of interest. Popular models range all the
way from simple bag-of-features to object representations
with rich spatial structure such as deformable part models
(DPM) [9].
Although features and the object category models that
integrate them have been significantly improved over the
years, the currently popular theme of utilizing semi-local,
high-dimensional parts creates issues of its own. Due to
their spatial extent and high dimensionality these descriptors are likely to contain noisy feature dimensions caused
by partial occlusion or clutter. Moreover, the dimensions
that are affected typically vary between instances of a visual category, e.g., since different areas of an object may
be corrupted. Nevertheless, typical solutions to this prob11251

