Attribute-Graph: A Graph based approach to Image Ranking
Nikita Prabhu and R. Venkatesh Babu
Video Analytics Lab, SERC
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India.
nikita@ssl.serc.iisc.in, venky@serc.iisc.in

Abstract
We propose a novel image representation, termed
Attribute-Graph, to rank images by their semantic similarity
to a given query image. An Attribute-Graph is an undirected
fully connected graph, incorporating both local and global
image characteristics. The graph nodes characterise objects as well as the overall scene context using mid-level semantic attributes, while the edges capture the object topology. We demonstrate the effectiveness of Attribute-Graphs
by applying them to the problem of image ranking. We
benchmark the performance of our algorithm on the ‘rPascal’ and ‘rImageNet’ datasets, which we have created in order to evaluate the ranking performance on complex queries
containing multiple objects. Our experimental evaluation
shows that modelling images as Attribute-Graphs results in
improved ranking performance over existing techniques.

1. Introduction
In a digital world of Flickr, Picasa and Google Image
Search, ranking retrieved images based on their semantic
similarity to a query has become a vital problem. Most content based image retrieval algorithms treat images as a set
of low level features or try to define them in terms of the associated text [15, 38]. Such a representation fails to capture
the semantics of the image. This, more often than not, results in retrieved images which are semantically dissimilar
to the query.
Image processing and computer vision researchers to
date, have used several different representations for images.
They vary from low level features such as SIFT [21], HOG
[3], GIST [23] etc. to high level concepts such as objects
and people [20]. Since we want our image retrieval system
to rank images in a way which is compatible with visual
similarity as perceived by humans, it is intuitive to work
in a human understandable feature space. When asked to
describe an object or a scene, people usually resort to midlevel features such as size, appearance, feel, use, behaviour
etc. Such descriptions are commonly referred to as the at-

(a)

(c)

(b)

Figure 1. Same objects, yet different semantics: (a) A dog next to
a person lying on a sofa (b) A person and a dog near a forest (c) A
dog watching a person from a distance

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 2. (a) An example query image (b) & (c) Expected Retrieved images: Ones with same semantics

tributes of the object or scene. These human understandable, machine detectable attributes have recently become a
popular feature category for image representation for various vision tasks [31, 43, 45]. In addition to image and object
characteristics, object interactions and background/context
information form an important part of an image description.
It is therefore, essential, to develop an image representation
which can effectively describe various image components
and their interactions.
Graphs, which have long been used by the vision community to represent structured groups of objects, are an
ideal tool for this purpose [9, 12, 22, 34]. We represent
images as Attribute-Graphs, using graph nodes to represent objects in the image and the global context of the
scene. Each object is described using object-specific local attributes, and the overall scene with global attributes,
thereby capturing both local and global descriptions of the
image. Apart from the objects of importance in the scene,
our model also incorporates the geometrical layout of the
objects in the image. The edges of the graph capture the
location, structure and orientation of the nodes with respect
to other nodes. The proposed Attribute-Graphs thus characterise an image from three different perspectives, namely,

1071

