Multiple-hypothesis affine region estimation with anisotropic LoG filters
Takahiro Hasegawa
Chubu University

Mitsuru Ambai, Kohta Ishikawa
Denso IT Laboratory, Inc.

tkhr@vision.cs.chubu.ac.jp

{manbai, kishikawa}@d-itlab.co.jp

Gou Koutaki
Kumamoto University

Yuji Yamauchi, Takayoshi Yamashita, Hironobu Fujiyoshi
Chubu University

koutaki@cs.kumamoto-u.ac.jp

yuu@vision.chubu.ac.jp, {yamashita, hf}@cs.chubu.ac.jp

Abstract
We propose a method for estimating multiple-hypothesis
affine regions from a keypoint by using an anisotropic
Laplacian-of-Gaussian (LoG) filter. Although conventional
affine region detectors, such as Hessian/Harris-Affine, iterate to find an affine region that fits a given image patch,
such iterative searching is adversely affected by an initial
point. To avoid this problem, we allow multiple detections
from a single keypoint. We demonstrate that the responses
of all possible anisotropic LoG filters can be efficiently computed by factorizing them in a similar manner to spectral
SIFT. A large number of LoG filters that are densely sampled in a parameter space are reconstructed by a weighted
combination of a limited number of representative filters,
called “eigenfilters”, by using singular value decomposition. Also, the reconstructed filter responses of the sampled
parameters can be interpolated to a continuous representation by using a series of proper functions. This results in
efficient multiple extrema searching in a continuous space.
Experiments revealed that our method has higher repeatability than the conventional methods.

Figure 1. Comparison of multiple affine region estimation results.
Left column: detection from binary image. Central column: keypoint localization offsets. Right column: detection from grayscale
image.

space constructed by Gaussian kernels of different sizes.
The Hessian-Laplace and Harris-Laplace keypoint detectors
[14] also estimate scale using the same Gaussian scale space
as LoG and DoG. In addition, the Speeded-Up Robust Features (SURF) [2] keypoint detector approximates secondorder derivative filters by using box filters. The drawback
of these scale-invariant methods, however, is that they lose
their invariance once anisotropic transformations occur. To
overcome this limitation, detecting keypoints that are invariant under projective transformations are needed.
Affine region estimation, which detects a region invariant to projective transformations, determines affine parameters (σx , σy , θ) by convolving anisotropic Gaussian or LoG
filters. The Hessian-Affine and Harris-Affine methods [15]
estimate an affine region by using the iterative convolution
processing of an anisotropic Gaussian filter. This processing often fails, however, to detect corresponding affine regions between a pair of images when one of them suffers
from image deformation or keypoint offset. Furthermore, in
many cases, image textures can give multiple affine regions
for a single keypoint. Conventional affine region detectors

1. Introduction
Keypoint matching is a fundamental task in applications
such as object recognition, image mosaicking, large-scale
image searching and 3D reconstruction. It involves finding the correspondence between keypoints in a set of images, each having a different viewing angle, and other imaging conditions. A common matching technique that is robust across conditions is scale-invariant keypoint detection
and matching [10, 11, 12, 14, 2]. Scale-invariant keypoint
detectors, such as Laplacian-of-Gaussian (LoG) [10, 11]
and Difference-of-Gaussian (DoG) [12], estimate scale by
determining the parameters at which the response value
of the LoG or DoG becomes an extremum from a scale
1
585

