Sequence to Sequence – Video to Text
Subhashini Venugopalan1

Marcus Rohrbach2,4
Trevor Darrell2

1

3

University of Texas at Austin
University of Massachusetts, Lowell

Jeff Donahue2
Kate Saenko3

Raymond Mooney1

2

4

University of California, Berkeley
International Computer Science Institute, Berkeley

Abstract
Raw Frames

Real-world videos often have complex dynamics; and
methods for generating open-domain video descriptions
should be sensitive to temporal structure and allow both input (sequence of frames) and output (sequence of words) of
variable length. To approach this problem, we propose a
novel end-to-end sequence-to-sequence model to generate
captions for videos. For this we exploit recurrent neural networks, specifically LSTMs, which have demonstrated stateof-the-art performance in image caption generation. Our
LSTM model is trained on video-sentence pairs and learns
to associate a sequence of video frames to a sequence of
words in order to generate a description of the event in the
video clip. Our model naturally is able to learn the temporal structure of the sequence of frames as well as the sequence model of the generated sentences, i.e. a language
model. We evaluate several variants of our model that exploit different visual features on a standard set of YouTube
videos and two movie description datasets (M-VAD and
MPII-MD).

1. Introduction
Describing visual content with natural language text has
recently received increased interest, especially describing
images with a single sentence [8, 5, 16, 18, 20, 23, 29, 40].
Video description has so far seen less attention despite its
important applications in human-robot interaction, video indexing, and describing movies for the blind. While image
description handles a variable length output sequence of
words, video description also has to handle a variable length
input sequence of frames. Related approaches to video
description have resolved variable length input by holistic
video representations [29, 28, 11], pooling over frames [39],
or sub-sampling on a fixed number of input frames [43]. In
contrast, in this work we propose a sequence to sequence
model which is trained end-to-end and is able to learn arbitrary temporal structure in the input sequence. Our model
is sequence to sequence in a sense that it reads in frames

CNN - Object
pretrained

CNN
Outputs

LSTMs

Our LSTM network is connected to a
CNN for RGB frames or a
CNN for optical flow images.

A
man
is

Flow images

cutting
a
CNN - Action
pretrained

bottle
<eos>

Figure 1. Our S2VT approach performs video description using
a sequence to sequence model. It incorporates a stacked LSTM
which first reads the sequence of frames and then generates a sequence of words. The input visual sequence to the model is comprised of RGB and/or optical flow CNN outputs.

sequentially and outputs words sequentially.
The problem of generating descriptions in open domain
videos is difficult not just due to the diverse set of objects,
scenes, actions, and their attributes, but also because it is
hard to determine the salient content and describe the event
appropriately in context. To learn what is worth describing, our model learns from video clips and paired sentences
that describe the depicted events in natural language. We
use Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) networks [12], a
type of recurrent neural network (RNN) that has achieved
great success on similar sequence-to-sequence tasks such as
speech recognition [10] and machine translation [34]. Due
to the inherent sequential nature of videos and language,
LSTMs are well-suited for generating descriptions of events
in videos.
The main contribution of this work is to propose a novel
model, S2VT, which learns to directly map a sequence of
14534

