Adaptive Hashing for Fast Similarity Search
Fatih Cakir
Stan Sclaroff
Department of Computer Science
Boston University, Boston, MA
{fcakir,sclaroff}@cs.bu.edu

Abstract
With the staggering growth in image and video datasets,
algorithms that provide fast similarity search and compact storage are crucial. Hashing methods that map the
data into Hamming space have shown promise; however,
many of these methods employ a batch-learning strategy
in which the computational cost and memory requirements
may become intractable and infeasible with larger and
larger datasets. To overcome these challenges, we propose
an online learning algorithm based on stochastic gradient
descent in which the hash functions are updated iteratively
with streaming data. In experiments with three image retrieval benchmarks, our online algorithm attains retrieval
accuracy that is comparable to competing state-of-the-art
batch-learning solutions, while our formulation is orders
of magnitude faster and being online it is adaptable to the
variations of the data. Moreover, our formulation yields improved retrieval performance over a recently reported online hashing technique, Online Kernel Hashing.

1. Introduction
While the current ease of collecting images and videos
has made huge repositories available for the computer vision community, it has also challenged researchers to address the problems associated with such large-scale data. At
the core of these problems lies the challenge of fast similarity search and the issue of storing these massive collections.
One promising strategy for expediting similarity search involves mapping the data items into Hamming space via a set
of hash functions where linear search is fast and often sublinear solutions perform well. Furthermore, the resulting binary representations allow compact indexing structures with
a very low memory footprint.
Relatively early work in this domain include the dataindependent Locality Sensitive Hashing and its variants
[3, 5, 13] in which the retrieved nearest neighbors of a query
are ensured to be within a scale of the true neighbors. Many
subsequent studies have utilized training data to learn the

hash functions. These data-dependent methods can be categorized as unsupervised, semi-supervised and supervised
techniques. Ignoring any label information, unsupervised
studies [23, 24, 7] are often used to preserve a metricinduced distance in the Hamming space. When the goal is
the retrieval of semantically similar neighbors, supervised
methods [12, 19, 18, 17] have shown to outperform these
unsupervised techniques. Finally, semi-supervised methods
like [22] leverage label information while constraining the
solution space with the use of unlabeled data.
Although data-dependent solutions tend to yield higher
accuracy in retrieval tasks than their data-independent counterparts, the computational cost of the learning phase is a
critical issue when large datasets are considered. Large
scale data are the norm for hashing applications, and as
datasets continue to grow and include variations that were
not originally present, hash functions must also accommodate this deviation. However, this may necessitate retraining from scratch for many data-dependent solutions
employing a batch learning strategy. To overcome these
challenges, we propose an online learning algorithm in
which the hash functions are updated swiftly in an iterative manner with streaming data. The proposed formulation employs stochastic gradient descent (SGD). SGD algorithms provide huge memory savings and can provide substantial performance improvements in large-scale learning.
The properties of SGD have been extensively studied [1, 14]
and SGD has been successfully applied to a wide variety
of applications including but not limited to; tracking [10],
recognition [15], learning [21] etc.
Despite its feasibility and practicality, it is not straightforward to apply SGD for hashing. Please observe the setup
in Fig. 1. Considering semantic based retrieval, an appropriate goal would be to assign the same binary vector to
instances sharing the same label. The two hash functions of
form f = sgn(wT x) are ample to yield perfect empirical
Mean Average Precision (mAP) scores based on Hamming
rankings for the synthetic dataset in Fig. 1. However, in an
online learning framework where pairs of points are available at each iteration, f2 will produce identical mappings
11044

