Multi-View Complementary Hash Tables for Nearest Neighbor Search
Xianglong Liu†
Lei Huang†
Cheng Deng‡
Jiwen Lu ♮
Bo Lang†
†
State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
‡
Xidian University, Xi’an, China
♮
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{xlliu, huanglei, langbo}@nlsde.buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed the success of hashing techniques in fast nearest neighbor search. In practice many
applications (e.g., visual search, object detection, image
matching, etc.) have enjoyed the benefits of complementary hash tables and information fusion over multiple views.
However, most of prior research mainly focused on compact hash code cleaning, and rare work studies how to build
multiple complementary hash tables, much less to adaptively integrate information stemming from multiple views. In
this paper we first present a novel multi-view complementary hash table method that learns complementary hash tables from the data with multiple views. For single multiview table, using exemplar based feature fusion, we approximate the inherent data similarities with a low-rank matrix,
and learn discriminative hash functions in an efficient way.
To build complementary tables and meanwhile maintain scalable training and fast out-of-sample extension, an exemplar reweighting scheme is introduced to update the induced low-rank similarity in the sequential table construction framework, which indeed brings mutual benefits between tables by placing greater importance on exemplars
shared by mis-separated neighbors. Extensive experiments
on three large-scale image datasets demonstrate that the
proposed method significantly outperforms various naive
solutions and state-of-the-art multi-table methods.

1. Introduction
The explosive growth of the big data in recent years has
brought great challenges to the scalable similarity search.
Among the vast solutions, hash-based approximate nearest
neighbor (ANN) search has achieved attractive performance
in many applications like visual search [11, 15, 33, 38], object detection [4], visual classiﬁcation [25], recommendation [20] and image matching [1]. Locality-Sensitive Hashing (LSH) [3, 14] pioneered the hashing research by indexing similar data using similar hash codes, and achieves

chdeng.xd@gmail.com

elujiwen@gmail.com

large-scale search in a constant or sub-linear time. However, since the hash functions are randomly generated in
LSH, it usually needs long hash codes to reach a satisfactory performance. As indicated by the literature, the capability of capturing the data structure has signiﬁcant affects on
the performance of many tasks like retrieval and classiﬁcation [8, 12, 19, 23, 28, 35]. Therefore, many traditional hashing methods attempt to learn data-dependent hash functions
that preserve data neighbor structures, and pursue compact,
yet informative binary codes by utilizing the complementarity among hash functions [9, 13, 17, 26, 29, 30, 34, 36, 40].
Though the compact codes can achieve compressed storage and efﬁcient computation, they usually fail to satisfy the practical requirement for a desired number of retrieved nearest neighbors. To address this problem, multitable methods have been studied to build several tables that
maximally cover the nearest neighbors by leveraging the table complementarity [1, 4, 7, 11, 21, 24, 27, 37]. As the most
widely-used strategy, LSH-based multi-table can faithfully
balance recall and precision performance [1, 24, 31], working like multi-index hashing [27]. However, it often requires a huge number of tables without eliminating the table
redundance. [37] proposed a sequential learning method to
build complementary hash tables, and obtained promising
performance with much less tables. [21] further studied the
general multi-table construction strategy using bit selection
over existing hashing algorithms.
Despite the aforementioned progress, most of these related works still suffer from the lack of table complementarity
for the maximum coverage of nearest neighbors when using multiple tables. Moreover, their hash tables are usually
learned only from single type of data source. In real-life
applications many objects have a set of diverse and complementary descriptors in the form of multiple views (e.g.,
images can be described by different visual descriptors like
SIFT and GIST) [5], and existing hashing research have
proved that adaptively combining them can help learn more
informative hash functions [16, 22, 32].
In this paper, we aim to learn complementary hash ta11107

