What makes an object memorable?
Rachit Dubey*1 , Joshua Peterson*2 , Aditya Khosla3 , Ming-Hsuan Yang4 , and Bernard Ghanem1
1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology 2 University of California, Berkeley
4
University of California, Merced

3

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Abstract
Recent studies on image memorability have shed light
on what distinguishes the memorability of different images
and the intrinsic and extrinsic properties that make those
images memorable. However, a clear understanding of the
memorability of specific objects inside an image remains
elusive. In this paper, we provide the first attempt to answer the question: what exactly is remembered about an
image? We augment both the images and object segmentations from the PASCAL-S dataset with ground truth memorability scores and shed light on the various factors and
properties that make an object memorable (or forgettable)
to humans. We analyze various visual factors that may influence object memorability (e.g. color, visual saliency, and
object categories). We also study the correlation between
object and image memorability and find that image memorability is greatly affected by the memorability of its most
memorable object. Lastly, we explore the effectiveness of
deep learning and other computational approaches in predicting object memorability in images. Our efforts offer a
deeper understanding of memorability in general thereby
opening up avenues for a wide variety of applications.

1. Introduction
Consider the left image in Figure 1. Even though the
person on the right is comparable in size to the person on the
left, he is remembered far less by human subjects, indicated
by their respective memorability scores of 0.18 and 0.64.
Moreover, people tend to remember the person on the left
and the fish in the center, even after 3 minutes and more
than 70 additional visual stimuli have passed. Interestingly,
despite vibrant colors and considerable size, the boat is far
less memorable with a memorability score of 0.18.
One of the primary goals of computer vision is to aid
human-relevant tasks, such as object recognition, object detection, and scene understanding. Much of the algorithms

Figure 1: Not all objects are equally remembered. Image showing
objects and their respective memorability scores (left) obtained from our
experiment. We note that certain objects (the fish and left person) are more
memorable than other objects. Right panel shows the ground truth map
generated from the object segments and memorability scores.
in service of this goal have to make inferences about all
objects in a scene. In comparison, humans are incredibly
selective in the information they consider from the possible visual candidates they encounter, and as a result, many
human tasks are dependent on this filtering mechanism to
be performed effectively. For this reason, it is important
for vision systems to have information on hand concerning what objects humans deem important in the world, or
in our specific case, which of them are worth remembering.
Such information holds exciting promise. For example, it
can help in building assistive devices (goggles) so that the
elderly can easily memorize objects that they tend to forget, or help design better instructional diagrams involving
memorable graphic objects.
Going back to Figure 1, why are the fish and left person more memorable and how do these objects influence
the overall memorability of the photo? The community
has made great strides in understanding comparable visual
properties of the world such as saliency [19, 15, 16, 7,
4, 11, 12] and importance [3], but we still do not have a
clear understanding of what objects are worth remembering in the world. Although recent studies related to image memorability [17, 22, 24, 18, 8] have explored this at
the image-level, no work has explored what exactly in an
image is remembered. Using object annotations and predictive models, such knowledge can be potentially inferred
from the memorability score of an image alone [25], but

* denotes equal contribution

11089

