Learning to Track: Online Multi-Object Tracking by Decision Making
Yu Xiang1,2 , Alexandre Alahi1 , and Silvio Savarese1
1
Stanford University, 2 University of Michigan at Ann Arbor
yuxiang@umich.edu, {alahi, ssilvio}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Online Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) has wide applications in time-critical video analysis scenarios, such as
robot navigation and autonomous driving. In trackingby-detection, a major challenge of online MOT is how to
robustly associate noisy object detections on a new video
frame with previously tracked objects. In this work, we
formulate the online MOT problem as decision making in
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), where the lifetime of
an object is modeled with a MDP. Learning a similarity
function for data association is equivalent to learning a policy for the MDP, and the policy learning is approached in
a reinforcement learning fashion which benefits from both
advantages of offline-learning and online-learning for data
association. Moreover, our framework can naturally handle
the birth/death and appearance/disappearance of targets by
treating them as state transitions in the MDP while leveraging existing online single object tracking methods. We conduct experiments on the MOT Benchmark [24] to verify the
effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
Tracking multiple objects in videos is an important problem in computer vision which has wide applications in various video analysis scenarios, such as visual surveillance,
sports analysis, robot navigation and autonomous driving.
In cases where objects in a specific category are to be
tracked, such as people or cars, a category detector can be
utilized to facilitate tracking. Recent progress on MultiObject Tracking (MOT) has focused on the tracking-bydetection strategy, where object detections from a category
detector are linked to form trajectories of the targets. In order to resolve ambiguities in associating object detections
and to overcome detection failures, most of these recent
works [7, 11, 27, 23] process video sequences in a batch
mode in which video frames from future time steps are also
utilized to solve the data association problem. However,
such non-causal systems are not suitable for online tracking
applications like robot navigation and autonomous driving.

MDP1

Tracked

Lost

Tracked

MDP2

Tracked

Lost

Tracked

MDP3

Tracked

Tracked

Tracked

Figure 1. We formulate the online multi-object tracking problem as
decision making in a Markov Decision Process (MDP) framework.

For tracking-by-detection in the online mode, the major challenge is how to associate noisy object detections
in the current video frame with previously tracked objects.
The basis for any data association algorithm is a similarity
function between object detections and targets. To handle
ambiguities in association, it is useful to combine different
cues in computing the similarity, such as appearance, motion, and location. Most previous works rely on heuristically selected parametric models for the similarity function
and tune these parameters by cross-validation, which is not
scalable to the number of features and does not necessarily
guarantee generalization power of the model.
Recently, there is a trend on learning to track that advocates the concept of injecting learning capabilities to MOT
[38, 25, 22, 20, 4]. Based on their learning schemes, we
can categorize these methods into offline-learning methods
and online-learning methods. In offline-learning, learning
is performed before the actual tracking takes place. For instance, [25, 20] use supervision from ground truth trajectories offline to learn a similarity function between detections and tracklets for data association. As a result, offlinelearning is static: it cannot take into account the dynamic
status and the history of the target in data association, which
is important to resolve ambiguities, especially when it needs
to re-assign missed or occluded objects when they appear
again. In contrast, online-learning conducts learning during
tracking. A common strategy is to construct positive and
negative training examples according to the tracking results,
and then to train a similarity function for data association
14705

