Regressing a 3D Face Shape from a Single Image
Sergey Tulyakov and Nicu Sebe
University of Trento, Italy
sergey.tulyakov@unitn.it, sebe@disi.unitn.it

Abstract
In this work we present a method to estimate a 3D face
shape from a single image. Our method is based on a cascade regression framework that directly estimates face landmarks locations in 3D. We include the knowledge that a face
is a 3D object into the learning pipeline and show how this
information decreases localization errors while keeping the
computational time low. We predict the actual positions of
the landmarks even if they are occluded due to face rotation.
To support the ability of our method to reliably reconstruct
3D shapes, we introduce a simple method for head pose estimation using a single image that reaches higher accuracy
than the state of the art. Comparison of 3D face landmarks
localization with the available state of the art further supports the feasibility of a single-step face shape estimation.
The code, trained models and our 3D annotations will be
made available to the research community.

1. Introduction
Over the last several years 2D face alignment has
reached maturity making it possible to detect landmarks in
the wild at very high frame rates [12, 20, 13, 5, 21]. The
mainstream direction is based on learning a sequence of regressors in a cascade fashion starting from the mean shape,
and consequently reﬁning the shape prediction at the later
stages of the cascade [8, 2]. Previous works for face alignment used Active Appearance Models (AAM) [6, 18, 9] and
Constrained Local Models (CLM) [7, 25, 22]. Cascaded regressor methods are advantageous over the AAM and CLM
based approaches in several respects: (i) running a sequence
of regressors is faster than solving an optimization problem
for every image, (ii) the ofﬂine training stage allows cascaded approaches to take advantage of the large available
sets of training images, (iii) shape-invariant feature sampling makes these methods robust to rotations.
As a natural extension of 2D face alignment methods, 3D
face analysis from a 2D image also experiences signiﬁcant
breakthrough [12, 5] reaching comparable results to depthbased methods [27, 26, 16, 24]. These methods ﬁrst detect

Figure 1: Selected examples of images from the HELEN
database [15] processed by our method. Top: the projections of the landmarks to the image plane. Arrows represent
the face bases used to ﬁnd the head pose. Bottom: estimated
faces shapes in the world coordinate system.
2D landmarks and as a second step ﬁt a previously learned
high resolution 3-dimensional face model to estimate a face
shape. However, in many applications this high precision
face shape estimation is not always required, while frame
rates and low hardware requirements often become more
critical [11, 30].
In this work, we present a novel cascaded regressorbased method to estimate a 3D shape of a face from a single
2D image. Motivated by the recent success of sequential approaches for 2D face alignment, we extend the framework
to naturally detect 3D landmarks positions from a single image at state-of-the-art accuracy and processing speed. In
contrast to existing two-step systems that ﬁrst detect landmarks and only then recover a 3D shape, our method provides a reliable estimate of a face shape in one step. To
support the applicability of our method to real-world problems we report the results on a large set of face images.
Moreover, since our method outputs a 3D shape, we show
how this shape can be used to accurately estimate the head
pose of a face improving state-of-the-art accuracy. Selected
examples of face landmarks estimated by our method are
13748

