Hyperpoints and Fine Vocabularies for Large-Scale Location Recognition
Torsten Sattler1 , Michal Havlena2 , Filip Radenović3 , Konrad Schindler2 , Marc Pollefeys1
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, Switzerland
2
Institute of Geodesy and Photogrammetry, ETH Zürich, Switzerland
3
CMP, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
{sattlert,pomarc}@inf.ethz.ch,{havlena,schindler}@geod.baug.ethz.ch,radenfil@cmp.felk.cvut.cz

Abstract
Structure-based localization is the task of finding the absolute pose of a given query image w.r.t. a pre-computed
3D model. While this is almost trivial at small scale, special care must be taken as the size of the 3D model grows,
because straight-forward descriptor matching becomes ineffective due to the large memory footprint of the model,
as well as the strictness of the ratio test in 3D. Recently,
several authors have tried to overcome these problems, either by a smart compression of the 3D model or by clever
sampling strategies for geometric verification. Here we explore an orthogonal strategy, which uses all the 3D points
and standard sampling, but performs feature matching implicitly, by quantization into a fine vocabulary. We show
that although this matching is ambiguous and gives rise to
3D hyperpoints when matching each 2D query feature in
isolation, a simple voting strategy, which enforces the fact
that the selected 3D points shall be co-visible, can reliably
find a locally unique 2D-3D point assignment. Experiments
on two large-scale datasets demonstrate that our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance, while the memory
footprint is greatly reduced, since only visual word labels
but no 3D point descriptors need to be stored.

1. Introduction
The continuously increasing amount of available imagery enables Structure-from-Motion (SfM) systems to produce larger and larger 3D scene models. In turn, these reconstructions can be used in visual navigation tasks to enable humans or autonomous vehicles to stay localized in
their surrounding, by estimating camera poses w.r.t. to the
model. Naturally, scalable localization becomes an issue as
the size of the reconstructions increases.
Many state-of-the-art approaches for structure-based localization associate image descriptors [5, 21] with the scene
points during SfM reconstruction, and use these to establish
the 2D-3D matches required for pose estimation [9, 15, 20,
29, 34]. The most obvious issue w.r.t. scalability is memory

Figure 1: Correct camera pose estimation despite the presence of a repetitive pattern, as achieved by the proposed
method for one of the query images of San Francisco.
consumption: large models easily contain hundreds of millions of descriptors, which require tens of gigabytes of storage space (actually often more than the underlying image
database). Model compression schemes try to mitigate this
problem by reducing the 3D model to a small fraction of all
available scene points [6, 19, 26]. These schemes achieve
impressive compression rates, but the smaller number of
points also translates into fewer matches and thus a larger
number of images that cannot be localized.
A second, more subtle problem with growing model
size is that the discriminative power of the descriptors decreases. As the descriptor space becomes more densely
populated, matching features by nearest-neighbor search in
that space becomes more ambiguous; and the widely used
ratio test [21], which defines a match as a point whose distance to the nearest neighbor in descriptor space is a lot
lower than to the 2nd -nearest neighbor, becomes too strict.
One can use location recognition [3, 8, 31, 35] and image
retrieval techniques [10, 27, 32] to first narrow down the
search to smaller sub-regions of the model [7, 15, 30] with
fewer scene points to match to. Empirically, though, pure
descriptor matching mostly outperforms retrieval-based approaches on large datasets, since the latter are prone to false
positives (wrong localizations).

2102

