Mining And-Or Graphs for Graph Matching and Object Discovery
Quanshi Zhang, Ying Nian Wu, and Song-Chun Zhu
University of California, Los Angeles
{zhangqs,ywu,sczhu}@ucla.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
In this paper, we redefine the concept of graph mining,
which was originally developed for discovering frequent entity relations from tabular data, and reformulate its theory
in order to solve problems in computer vision. Our theory
aims to discover a hierarchical pattern to represent common
subgraphs embedded in a number of unannotated Attributed Relational Graphs (ARGs). A theoretical solution to this
graph-mining problem can have broad applications in different vision tasks, such as object discovery and recognition, scene understanding, etc.
A variety of visual data (e.g. RGB/RGB-D images and
videos) can be represented as ARGs. Each ARG node may
contain different unary attributes to represent different highdimensional local features. Pairwise attributes on edges
measure spatial relationships between object parts.
We define a hierarchical And-Or Graph (AoG) model to
represent the common subgraphs in a set of ARGs, as shown
in Fig. 1. The top AND node is a composition of a set of OR
nodes. Each OR node describes a local part and has several
alternative terminal nodes as local pattern candidates.
Task: In this study, we aim to mine (learn) the AoG
(the model) from a number of ARGs (unlabeled data). Giv-

Learning:
Graph mining

Model:
And‐Or
Graph

Subgraph pattern
AND node

Pairwise attributes:
deformable spatial
relationships

Application:
Graph matching

This paper reformulates the theory of graph mining on
the technical basis of graph matching, and extends its scope of applications to computer vision. Given a set of
attributed relational graphs (ARGs), we propose to use
a hierarchical And-Or Graph (AoG) to model the pattern of maximal-size common subgraphs embedded in the
ARGs, and we develop a general method to mine the
AoG model from the unlabeled ARGs. This method provides a general solution to the problem of mining hierarchical models from unannotated visual data without
exhaustive search of objects. We apply our method to
RGB/RGB-D images and videos to demonstrate its generality and the wide range of applicability. The code will be
available at https://sites.google.com/site/
quanshizhang/mining-and-or-graphs.

Data:
ARGs

OR node

Unary attributes:
local patterns

OR node
Terminal
node

Terminal nodes

Terminal
nodes

Inference
Figure 1. And-Or graph (AoG). The AoG models the regularities and variabilities of the common subgraphs embedded in the
ARGs. The top AND node has several OR nodes as different object parts. Each OR node has several terminals to represent alternative local patterns. The AoG model can represent a variety of visual data, and we present an example for RGB images. Node/edge
colors denote high-dimensional unary/pairwise attributes.

en the ARGs and an initial graph template, our method
gradually modifies this template into the target AoG with
the maximal number of OR nodes. During the graph-mining
process, we discover new OR nodes and terminal nodes,
delete redundant nodes, update attributes, and train matching parameters for the AoG. The mined AoG has stable
graph-matching performance, and can be used for object inference in previously unseen ARGs (images or videos).
This study extends the concepts from both the fields of
graph matching/mining and unsupervised learning, which
are outlined below.
Graph matching & mining: As shown in Fig. 1, graph
matching can be regarded as object inference. It maps nodes
in a small graph template (a model) to a target ARG (e.g. an
image) via a global optimization.
In contrast, graph mining is presented from the opposite
perspective: When we use ARGs to represent images, com1 55

