Look and Think Twice: Capturing Top-Down Visual Attention with Feedback
Convolutional Neural Networks∗
Chunshui Cao† Xianming Liu‡ Yi Yang§ Yinan Yu§ Jiang Wang§ Zilei Wang†
Yongzhen Huang♮ Liang Wang ♮ Chang Huang§ Wei Xu§ Deva Ramanan♯ Thomas S. Huang‡
†
University of Science and Technology of China ‡ University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
§
Baidu Research ♮ Institution of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences ♯ Carnegie Mellon University
Abstract
While feedforward deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have been a great success in computer vision, it
is important to note that the human visual cortex generally
contains more feedback than feedforward connections. In
this paper, we will briefly introduce the background of feedbacks in the human visual cortex, which motivates us to develop a computational feedback mechanism in deep neural
networks. In addition to the feedforward inference in traditional neural networks, a feedback loop is introduced to
infer the activation status of hidden layer neurons according to the “goal” of the network, e.g., high-level semantic
labels. We analogize this mechanism as “Look and Think
Twice.” The feedback networks help better visualize and
understand how deep neural networks work, and capture
visual attention on expected objects, even in images with
cluttered background and multiple objects. Experiments on
ImageNet dataset demonstrate its effectiveness in solving
tasks such as image classification and object localization.

1. Introduction
“What did you see in this image?”
“Panda, Tiger, Elephant, Lions.”
“Have you seen the Gorilla?”
“Oh! I even didn’t notice there is a Gorilla !”
Visual attention typically is dominated by “goals” from
our mind easily in a top-down manner, especially in the
case of object detection. Cognitive science explains this
in the “Biased Competition Theory” [1, 5, 6], that human visual cortex is enhanced by top-down stimuli and
non-relevant neurons will be suppressed in feedback loops
when searching for objects. By “looking and thinking
twice”, both human recognition and detection performances
increase significantly, especially in images with cluttered
∗ This work is conducted during Chunshui Cao’s and Xianming Liu’s
internship at Institute of Deep Learning, Baidu Research

Figure 1. Feedback Convolutional Net model for capturing visual
attention by inferring the status of hidden neuron activations. It is
designed to utilize both bottom-up image inputs and top-down semantic labels to infer the hidden neuron activations. Salient areas
captured by feedback often correspond to related “target” objects,
even in images with cluttered background and multiple objects.

background [3]. This leads to the selectivity in neuron activations [16], which reduces the chance of recognition being
interfered with either noises or distractive patterns.
Inspired by above evidences, we present a novel Feedback Convolutional Neural Network architecture in this paper. It achieves this selectivity by jointly reasoning outputs
of class nodes and activations of hidden layer neurons during the feedback loop. As shown in Figure 1, during the
feedforward stage, the proposed networks perform inference from input images in a bottom-up manner as traditional
Convolutional Networks; while in feedback loops, it sets up
high-level semantic labels, (e.g., outputs of class nodes) as
the “goal” in visual search to infer the activation status of
hidden layer neurons. We show that the network is powerful enough to apply for class model visualization [24, 33],
object localization [24] and image classification [15].
Optimization in a Feedback Loop: From a machine
learning perspective, the proposed feedback networks add
extra flexibility to Convolutional Networks, to help in capturing visual attention and improving feature detection.
12956

