Multiple Feature Fusion via Weighted Entropy for Visual Tracking
Lin Ma, Jiwen Lu, Jianjiang Feng and Jie Zhou
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China

Abstract
It is desirable to combine multiple feature descriptors
to improve the visual tracking performance because different features can provide complementary information to describe objects of interest. However, how to effectively fuse
multiple features remains a challenging problem in visual
tracking, especially in a data-driven manner. In this paper,
we propose a new data-adaptive visual tracking approach
by using multiple feature fusion via weighted entropy. Unlike existing visual trackers which simply concatenate multiple feature vectors together for object representation, we
employ the weighted entropy to evaluate the dissimilarity
between the object state and the background state, and seek
the optimal feature combination by minimizing the weighted
entropy, so that more complementary information can be
exploited for object representation. Experimental results
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach in tackling
various challenges for visual object tracking.

1. Introduction
Object tracking is a fundamental researching topic in
computer vision, and robust object tracking provides a further step to high-level visual analysis and understanding. In
object tracking, the appearance model is an important factor
for object representation, and a variety of feature descriptors
with effective appearance models have been proposed in the
literature [33]. Due to the computational convenience, single feature descriptor has been widely used in appearance
based visual tracking models [4, 16, 28, 37]. However, single feature is usually not powerful enough to describe objects of interests and it is desirable to combine multiple feature descriptors to improve the visual tracking performance
because different features can provide complementary information [24, 41].
Over the past few years, some researchers have proposed
several multiple feature fusion based visual tracking methods, where different features were concatenated directly for
object representation [22]. Kwon et al. [19] decomposed
the observation model into multiple basic observation models, where each model was associated one feature. Then,

Figure 1. Flowchart of our proposed approach. Our approach
contains two main parts: 1) tracking with complementary feature evaluation and 2) system updating. We first perform corner
tracking and obtain an initial state, and then sample a set of candidate states around the initial state. Each state is first evaluated
with three different features (intensity image, color histogram and
Haar feature), and then they are evaluated and fused based on the
weighted entropy. In the state updating procedure, we update the
fusion configure by using saved samples with the weighted entropy, and also update the subspaces for different features separately.

they selected the optimal features to capture the appearance
variations by using sparse principal component analysis.
Grabner et al. [9] adopted multiple features and selected the
best one according to the background information. However, both of them are not not effective to discriminate the
object from background, especially when the background
varies drastically.
To make the tracking model discriminative and robust to
the drastic background variation, we propose a new dataadaptive visual tracking approach by using multiple feature fusion via weighted entropy, where both the generative and discriminative information are exploited in our
approach. Figure 1 shows the flowchart of our approach.
Since entropy can represent the disorderness of signals, it
is much easier to separate signals by minimizing their entropy [10, 36]. To better highlight different contributions
of different features in object representation, we employ the
weighted entropy [11, 12, 18] to represent the difference
or disorderness of the candidate states, and the most dis13128

