Unsupervised Domain Adaptation with Imbalanced Cross-Domain Data
Tzu-Ming Harry Hsu1 , Wei-Yu Chen1 , Cheng-An Hou2 , Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai3 ,
Yi-Ren Yeh4 , and Yu-Chiang Frank Wang3
1
Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
2
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
3
Research Center for IT Innovation, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
4
Department of Mathematics, National Kaohsiung Normal University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan
{harry19930924, wyharveychen, c.a.andyhou, y.h.huberttsai}@gmail.com, yryeh@nknu.edu.tw, ycwang@citi.sinica.edu.tw

Abstract
We address a challenging unsupervised domain adaptation problem with imbalanced cross-domain data. For standard unsupervised domain adaptation, one typically obtains
labeled data in the source domain and only observes unlabeled data in the target domain. However, most existing
works do not consider the scenarios in which either the label numbers across domains are different, or the data in the
source and/or target domains might be collected from multiple datasets. To address the aforementioned settings of imbalanced cross-domain data, we propose Closest Common
Space Learning (CCSL) for associating such data with the
capability of preserving label and structural information
within and across domains. Experiments on multiple crossdomain visual classification tasks confirm that our method
performs favorably against state-of-the-art approaches, especially when imbalanced cross-domain data are presented.

1. Introduction
For pattern recognition problems, one typically trains the
classifiers using pre-collected training data, aiming at recognizing test instances which are not seen during training.
This implies that training and test data exhibit similar data
or feature distributions. However, in real-world applications, training and test data might be collected by different users, using distinct sensors, at dissimilar scenarios, or
during separate time periods. Such data are considered to
be present in different domains, and the difference between
them (or the mismatch between their data distributions) is
thus not negligible.
Domain adaptation addresses the tasks in which training
and test data are collected from source and target domains,
respectively. Its goal is to eliminate domain differences for

relating cross-domain data. Depending on the availability
of labeled data in the target domain during training, one
can generally divide existing techniques into two categories:
semi-supervised and unsupervised domain adaptation.
For semi-supervised domain adaptation, either a small
number of target-domain labeled data or cross-domain data
pairs can be observed during training [21]. For example, Jiang and Zhai [15] apply instance reweighting techniques for adapting classifiers learned from source to target domains. By utilizing the correspondence information
across source and target domains, Huang and Wang [12]
advance dictionary learning to derive a common feature
space, which can be applied for the tasks of cross-domain
classification and synthesis. As noted in [23], adaptation
problems with significant domain differences or distribution mismatches (e.g., pose-invariant face recognition [23]
or image-to-text classification [28]) generally require semisupervised settings for achieving satisfactory performance.
For unsupervised domain adaptation, one can collect labeled data in the source domain, while only unlabeled data
to be recognized can be observed in the target domain during training (no cross-domain instance pair is available either). Since there is no label information available in the
target domain, how to transfer such information from the
source domain becomes a challenging task. Based on Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) [9], recent approaches
choose to eliminate the domain difference by matching
cross-domain data distributions [30, 24, 20, 17]. As discussed in Section 2, the basic idea of such methods is to derive a common feature space, in which the marginal and/or
conditional distributions of cross-domain can be matched.
However, existing approaches for unsupervised domain
adaptation typically assume that the label numbers of the
source and target domains are the same (e.g., [20, 18, 17]).
They also expect that the data of each class presented in the
source or target domains exhibit similar data distributions.
In practice, the number of categories in the source domain is
14121

