Rolling Shutter Super-Resolution
Abhijith Punnappurath, Vijay Rengarajan, and Rajagopalan A.N.
Department of Electrical Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, India
jithuthatswho@gmail.com, {vijay.ap,raju}@ee.iitm.ac.in

Abstract
Classical multi-image super-resolution (SR) algorithms,
designed for CCD cameras, assume that the motion among
the images is global. But CMOS sensors that have increasingly started to replace their more expensive CCD counterparts in many applications do not respect this assumption
if there is a motion of the camera relative to the scene during the exposure duration of an image because of the rowwise acquisition mechanism. In this paper, we study the
hitherto unexplored topic of multi-image SR in CMOS cameras. We initially develop an SR observation model that
accounts for the row-wise distortions called the “rolling
shutter” (RS) effect observed in images captured using nonstationary CMOS cameras. We then propose a unified RSSR framework to obtain an RS-free high-resolution image
(and the row-wise motion) from distorted low-resolution images. We demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed scheme
using synthetic data as well as real images captured using
a hand-held CMOS camera. Quantitative and qualitative
assessments reveal that our method significantly advances
the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
With the evergrowing capabilities of high-resolution displays, super-resolution (SR) continues to be an active area
of research as it offers a signal processing solution to the
inherent problem of resolution limitation in low-cost imaging sensors (e.g., cell phone cameras). The goal of multiimage SR methods is to recover a high-resolution (HR) image from a set of low-resolution (LR) input images. The
basic principle being that changes in the LR images caused
by the motion of the camera and/or the scene provides additional information that can be utilized to reconstruct the
HR image. Based on prior knowledge about the observation
model that maps the HR image to the LR ones, multi-image
SR algorithms attempt to recover the HR image under the
constraint that the recovered image should result in the observed LR images upon applying the same model. Classical

SR algorithms formulate this observation model so as to explain the image formation process in CCD cameras where
the data is acquired by the sensor array all at once during the
exposure time. Hence, CCD cameras are also called global
shutter (GS) cameras because all elements in the sensor array are exposed at the same time. However, cameras employing CMOS sensors have a significantly different capture mechanism as compared to GS cameras. Each row in
the CMOS sensor array has its own unique exposure duration, and the acquired data is read out at different times using a common circuit. As a result, the amount of circuitry,
and thereby the cost, is reduced. In fact, this lower cost is
the reason for the increasing popularity of CMOS sensors
in many imaging applications.
Traditional GS-SR algorithms [4, 5] assume that the
camera is stationary during the exposure time itself, and
that the motion is only between one LR image capture to
the next i.e., there is no blur in any of the captured images.
Therefore, SR methods usually include two parts: (i) registration, where the motion between LR images is estimated,
and (ii) image reconstruction, where the HR image is recovered from the LR images. However, camera shake is a
common occurrence in hand-held imaging devices such as
cell phones which have now become ubiquitous. Motivated
by this fact, recent works [16, 20] address the more general
situation of camera motion during the exposure time of a
single image itself. This manifests as blur in the LR captured images for a GS camera, and the problem becomes
one of blind deconvolution and super-resolution. However,
in the case of CMOS cameras, the task of SR becomes significantly more challenging because motion during exposure leads to what is called the ‘rolling shutter’ (RS) effect1
(see Fig. 1). This distortion of the captured image results
from each row of sensors observing a different warp of the
scene, and is a direct consequence of the row-wise acquisition principle in CMOS cameras. Clearly, the classical
GS motion estimation step that assumes a global motion be1 For large motion, the observed images can also incur blurring in addition to being RS affected. However, analysing such a compounded scenario is beyond the scope of this paper.

1558

