Semantically-Aware Aerial Reconstruction from Multi-Modal Data
Randi Cabezas
Julian Straub
John W. Fisher III
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{rcabezas,straub,fisher}@csail.mit.edu

Abstract
We consider a methodology for integrating multiple sensors along with semantic information to enhance scene
representations. We propose a probabilistic generative
model for inferring semantically-informed aerial reconstructions from multi-modal data within a consistent mathematical framework. The approach, called SemanticallyAware Aerial Reconstruction (SAAR), not only exploits inferred scene geometry, appearance, and semantic observations to obtain a meaningful categorization of the data,
but also extends previously proposed methods by imposing structure on the prior over geometry, appearance, and
semantic labels. This leads to more accurate reconstructions and the ability to fill in missing contextual labels via
joint sensor and semantic information. We introduce a new
multi-modal synthetic dataset in order to provide quantitative performance analysis. Additionally, we apply the
model to real-world data and exploit OpenStreetMap as a
source of semantic observations. We show quantitative improvements in reconstruction accuracy of large-scale urban
scenes from the combination of LiDAR, aerial photography, and semantic data. Furthermore, we demonstrate the
model’s ability to fill in for missing sensed data, leading to
more interpretable reconstructions.

1. Introduction
Humans integrate various sensory, semantic, and contextual cues to construct internal representations of the world
for robustly reasoning within their environment. This ability is little diminished in the face of sparse and noisy observations. Furthermore, humans easily extrapolate the structure of the surrounding large-scale environment from their
local surroundings using cues and prior experiences of similar scenes. Such inferential feats are supported by semantic
understanding and categorization of scene elements. Motivated by such abilities we develop an approach for scene
reconstruction that integrates sensor data along with georeferenced semantic labels. With some exceptions, existing
approaches focus solely on obtaining a semantic labeling

Figure 1: Top: Lubbock scene inferred geometry and labels.
Bottom: Aerial image, LiDAR and OSM observations.
from sensor data. We construct a probabilistic generative
model that allows multi-modal data fusion, integrates semantic observations, and captures the notion that different
scene components exhibit different properties via a structured prior over the different modalities. The approach,
Semantically-Aware Aerial Reconstruction (SAAR), infers
semantically-meaningful categories of data which are used
in the reconstruction as category-specific priors, resulting in
improved reconstruction accuracy.
SAAR builds on the work of Cabezas et al. [4], by
adding semantic observations from OpenStreetMap (OSM)
[12] to the sensor data already used there: aerial oblique
imagery, and Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR). Each
of these sources provides complementary features for reasoning about urban scenes. We further expand on [4] by introducing a novel structured prior, to regularize reconstructions. In contrast to prior semantic reconstruction work, our
goal is to (1) exploit the learned categories to improve the
reconstruction and (2) fill in missing sensor data.
Previous work in the area of semantic labeling can be
categorized based on the domain of the labels: image-space
or 3D-space. In the first category, Sudderth et al. [31] and
Wang et al. [35] focus on the extraction of pixel-wise labels

2156

