Online Object Tracking with Proposal Selection
Yang Hua

Karteek Alahari

Cordelia Schmid

Inria∗

Abstract
Tracking-by-detection approaches are some of the most
successful object trackers in recent years. Their success is
largely determined by the detector model they learn initially
and then update over time. However, under challenging
conditions where an object can undergo transformations,
e.g., severe rotation, these methods are found to be lacking. In this paper, we address this problem by formulating it
as a proposal selection task and making two contributions.
The first one is introducing novel proposals estimated from
the geometric transformations undergone by the object, and
building a rich candidate set for predicting the object location. The second one is devising a novel selection strategy using multiple cues, i.e., detection score and edgeness
score computed from state-of-the-art object edges and motion boundaries. We extensively evaluate our approach on
the visual object tracking 2014 challenge and online tracking benchmark datasets, and show the best performance.

1. Introduction
Over the past few years, the tracking-by-detection framework has emerged as one of the successful paradigms for
tracking objects [33, 37, 44, 50]. It formulates the tracking
problem as the task of detecting an object, which is likely to
undergo changes in appearance, size, or become occluded,
over time [3, 4, 17, 18, 19, 26, 31, 41, 47, 49]. These approaches begin by training an object detector with an initialization (in the form of a bounding box) in the first frame,
and then update this model over time. Naturally, the choice
of exemplars used to update and improve the object model
is critical [23, 47, 51].
Consider the motocross example shown in Figure 1.
Here, the target (biker and his motorbike) undergoes several deformations as the biker performs an acrobatics routine, which leads to significant changes in the aspect ratio
as well as the rotation angle of the bounding box. State-ofthe-art tracking methods, e.g., [23, 47], rely on axis-aligned
bounding boxes and thus are ill-equipped to capture the accurate extents of the object in such scenarios. In this paper,
∗ LEAR team, Inria Grenoble Rhône-Alpes, Laboratoire Jean Kuntzmann, CNRS, Univ. Grenoble Alpes, France.

Figure 1. Sample frames (cropped) from the jogging (top row) and
motocross (bottom row) sequences [33]. The ground truth annotation (green) in the first frame (left) is used to train our tracker
and the winner [12] of VOT2014 challenge [33]. We show these
two tracking results (right) on another frame in the sequence. Our
method (yellow) successfully tracks objects undergoing deformations unlike [12] (red). Best viewed in pdf.

we aim to address this issue by treating the tracking problem as the task of selecting the best proposal containing the
object of interest from several candidates. To this end, we
propose a novel method to generate candidates which capture the extents of the object accurately, by estimating the
transformation(s) undergone by the object.
The focus of this paper is the problem of tracking a single target in monocular video sequences. The target is provided as a ground truth annotation in the first frame, as in
a standard tracking-by-detection setup [19, 26]. We learn
an object detector model from this annotation and evaluate it in subsequent frames to propose candidate locations
that are likely to contain the target. While these proposals
are sufficient to track objects undergoing a small subset of
transformations over time, such as translation shown in Figure 1-top, they cannot handle generic transformations, e.g.,
similarity transformation shown in Figure 1-bottom. We
address this problem by: (i) introducing novel additional
proposals to improve the candidate location set, and (ii) using multiple cues to select the proposal that is most likely
to contain the target. Additional proposals are computed

3092

