Dual-Feature Warping-based Motion Model Estimation
1
1

Shiwei Li

2

Lu Yuan

2

1

Jian Sun
2

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Long Quan

Microsoft Research

{luyuan, jiansun}@microsoft.com

{slibc, quan}@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
To break down the geometry assumptions of conventional
motion models (e.g., homography, affine), warping-based
motion model recently becomes popular and is adopted
in many latest applications (e.g., image stitching, video
stabilization). With high degrees of freedom, the accuracy of model heavily relies on data-terms (keypoint correspondences). In some low-texture environments (e.g., indoor) where keypoint feature is insufficient or unreliable,
the warping model is often erroneously estimated.
In this paper we propose a simple and effective approach
by considering both keypoint and line segment correspondences as data-term. Line segment is a prominent feature in
artificial environments and it can supply sufficient geometrical and structural information of scenes, which not only
helps lead to a correct warp in low-texture condition, but
also prevents the undesired distortion induced by warping.
The combination aims to complement each other and benefit for a wider range of scenes. Our method is general and
can be ported to many existing applications. Experiments
demonstrate that using dual-feature yields more robust and
accurate result especially for those low-texture images.

1. Introduction
The theory of conventional 2D motion models1 is well
studied [10, 22]. These models are widely used in many applications, including image registration [22], panorama [2] ,
and video stabilization [21], since they are parametric, computationally efficient and robust to outliers compared with
general motion models (e.g., optical flow [13]). Nevertheless, these conventional models are limited by ideal geometry assumptions. For example, homography only provides
high accuracy modeling for single-plane scene or purely rotational camera motion.
To break down these geometry assumptions, some
warping-based motion models (a.k.a., mesh-based warping
or multiple homographies) are proposed in recent years. Im1 “conventional 2D motion model” refers to 3 × 3 homography, affine
or similarity transformation.

(a) keypoints

(b) homography by keypoints

(c) result of APAP [27]

keypoint-based approach

(d) dual features

(e) homography by dual features (f) our final dual-feature warp

our dual-feature approach

Figure 1. Top: the well-used keypoint-based approach (APAP [27]
is the state-of-the-art warping-based model). Bottom: Our proposed dual-feature approach.

age warping is originally used for image editing (e.g., shape
manipulation [14], image resizing [3]). Recently, warping is also used to tackle the two-image alignment problem, such as image stitching [27, 29, 4, 15], video stabilization [16, 9, 19], and produces promising results. Such
warping-based models adopt meshes transform to represent
the camera motion. Comparing with single homography,
it has more flexibility of dealing with scenes with multiple
planes and parallax due to higher degree-of-freedom (DoF).
The estimation of warping-based models leverages
matched keypoints in two images with smoothness constraints. The lack of reliable keypoints would easily cause
misalignments (shown in Figure 1(b)(c)). Moreover, the
distortion artifact is often induced by the flexible warps
(shown in Figure 1(c)) due to insufficient corresponding information (i.e., data-term). This artifact is highly noticeable
and unpleasant. Although some warping models avoid distortion at salient regions [16] as possible as they can or alleviate the perspective distortion [4], the structural contents
or rigid objects may not be explicitly preserved.
To deal with this problem, we resort to the line feature in
image content, and consider it as another type of data term.
Line structure is prominent in artificial scenarios (e.g., Figure 1(d)). The line feature can not only be considered as the
complement to keypoints, but also provide strong geometri14283

