Weakly-Supervised Alignment of Video With Text
P. Bojanowski1,∗ R. Lajugie1,†
1

INRIA

2

E. Grave2,‡

Columbia University

F. Bach1,† I. Laptev1,∗ J. Ponce3,∗ C. Schmid1,§
3

ENS / PSL Research University

Abstract
Suppose that we are given a set of videos, along with natural language descriptions in the form of multiple sentences
(e.g., manual annotations, movie scripts, sport summaries
etc.), and that these sentences appear in the same temporal
order as their visual counterparts. We propose in this paper
a method for aligning the two modalities, i.e., automatically
providing a time (frame) stamp for every sentence. Given
vectorial features for both video and text, this can be cast
as a temporal assignment problem, with an implicit linear
mapping between the two feature modalities. We formulate
this problem as an integer quadratic program, and solve its
continuous convex relaxation using an efficient conditional
gradient algorithm. Several rounding procedures are proposed to construct the final integer solution. After demonstrating significant improvements over the state of the art on
the related task of aligning video with symbolic labels [7],
we evaluate our method on a challenging dataset of videos
with associated textual descriptions [37], and explore bagof-words and continuous representations for text.

1. Introduction
Fully supervised approaches to action categorization
have shown good performance in short video clips [46].
However, when the goal is not only to classify a clip where
a single action happens, but to compute the temporal extent
of an action in a long video where multiple activities may
take place, new difficulties arise. In fact, the task of identifying short clips where a single action occurs is at least as
difficult as classifying the corresponding action afterwards.
This is reminiscent of the gap in difficulty between categorization and detection in still images. In addition, as noted
∗ WILLOW project-team, Département d’Informatique de l’Ecole Normale Supérieure, ENS/INRIA/CNRS UMR 8548, Paris, France.
† SIERRA project-team, Département d’Informatique de l’Ecole Normale Supérieure, ENS/INRIA/CNRS UMR 8548, Paris, France.
‡ Department of Applied Physics & Applied Mathematics, Columbia
University, New York, NY, USA.
§ LEAR project-team, INRIA Grenoble Rhône-Alpes, Laboratoire Jean
Kuntzmann, CNRS, Univ. Grenoble Alpes, France

Figure 1: An example of video to natural text alignment using our
method on the TACoS [37] dataset.

in [7], manual annotations are very expensive to get, even
more so when working with a long video clip or a film
shot, where many actions can occur. Finally, as mentioned
in [13, 41], it is difficult to define exactly when an action
occurs. This makes the task of understanding human activities much more difficult than finding objects or people in
images.
In this paper, we propose to learn models of video content with minimal manual intervention, using natural language sentences as a weak form of supervision. This has
the additional advantage of replacing purely symbolic and
essentially meaningless hand-picked action labels with a
semantic representation. Given vectorial features for both
video and text, we address the problem of temporally aligning the video frames and the sentences, assuming the order
is preserved, with an implicit linear mapping between the
two feature modalities (Fig. 1). We formulate this problem
as an integer quadratic program, and solve its continuous
convex relaxation using an efficient conditional gradient algorithm.
Related work. Many attempts at automatic image captioning have been proposed over the last decade: Duygulu et
al. [9] were among the first to attack this problem; they proposed to frame image recognition as machine translation.
These ideas were further developed in [3]. A second important line of work has built simple natural language models as
conditional random fields of a fixed size [10]. Typically this
corresponds to fixed language templates such as: hObject,
Action, Scenei. Much of the work on joint representations
14462

