Amodal Completion and Size Constancy in Natural Scenes
Abhishek Kar, Shubham Tulsiani, João Carreira and Jitendra Malik
University of California, Berkeley - Berkeley, CA 94720
{akar,shubhtuls,carreira,malik}@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of enriching current object detection systems with veridical object sizes and relative depth
estimates from a single image. There are several technical
challenges to this, such as occlusions, lack of calibration
data and the scale ambiguity between object size and distance. These have not been addressed in full generality in
previous work. Here we propose to tackle these issues by
building upon advances in object recognition and using recently created large-scale datasets. We first introduce the
task of amodal bounding box completion, which aims to
infer the the full extent of the object instances in the image. We then propose a probabilistic framework for learning category-specific object size distributions from available annotations and leverage these in conjunction with
amodal completions to infer veridical sizes of objects in
novel images. Finally, we introduce a focal length prediction approach that exploits scene recognition to overcome
inherent scale ambiguities and demonstrate qualitative results on challenging real-world scenes.

Figure 1: Perceiving the veridical size of objects in realistic scenes, from a single image, requires disentangling size
and depth, being able to compensate for occlusions and to
determine intrinsic camera parameters. We tackle all three
of these problems, leveraging recent developments in object
recognition and large annotated object and scene datasets.

1. Introduction
Consider Figure 1. Humans can effortlessly perceive two
chairs of roughly the same height and tell that one is much
closer than the other, though still further away than the person, who is taller than the chairs. Compare this to what a
state-of-the-art object detector tells us about the image: that
there are two chairs, 120 and 40 pixels tall, and one person with 200 pixels from top to bottom. How can we enable
computer vision systems to move beyond this crude 2D representation and allow them to capture richer models of their
environments, such as those that humans take for granted?
The 3D world is a lot more structured than it looks like
from the retina (or from a camera sensor), where objects
jump around with each saccade and grow and shrink as we
move closer or farther from them. We do not perceive any
of this because our brains have learned priors about how visual inputs correlate with the underlying environment, and
this allows us to directly access realistic and rich models

of scenes. The priors we use can be categorized as being
related to either geometry or familiarity.
Image projection properties, such as the fact that the distance of an object from the camera dictates apparent size
and that parallel lines in the scene vanish in the image, provide useful signal for perceiving structure. Familiarity cues
are complementary and impose expectations on individual
objects and configurations – we expect most objects to be
supported by another surface and we have the notion of familiar size – similar objects are of similar sizes. In this
work, we exploit geometry and familiarity cues and develop
a framework to build richer models of the visual input than
those given by current computer vision systems, which are
still largely confined to the 2D image plane.
The notion that certain geometrical cues can aid perception has been known since the time of Euclid - the points
in the image where objects touch the ground together with
1127

