Structured Indoor Modeling
Satoshi Ikehata

Hang Yan
Washington University in St. Louis

Yasutaka Furukawa

Abstract

ing approaches exist. However, their output is either a pure
polygon soup [30] or a set of planar patches [31].

This paper presents a novel 3D modeling framework that
reconstructs an indoor scene as a structured model from
panorama RGBD images. A scene geometry is represented
as a graph, where nodes correspond to structural elements
such as rooms, walls, and objects. The approach devises a
structure grammar that defines how a scene graph can be
manipulated. The grammar then drives a principled new
reconstruction algorithm, where the grammar rules are sequentially applied to recover a structured model. The paper also proposes a new room segmentation algorithm and
an offset-map reconstruction algorithm that are used in the
framework and can enforce architectural shape priors far
beyond existing state-of-the-art. The structured scene representation enables a variety of novel applications, ranging
from indoor scene visualization, automated floorplan generation, Inverse-CAD, and more. We have tested our framework and algorithms on six synthetic and five real datasets
with qualitative and quantitative evaluations. The source
code and the data are available at the project website [15].

We establish a computational framework and algorithms
for reconstructing structured indoor model from panorama
RGBD images. We introduce a novel 3D model representation “structure graph”, whose nodes represent structural
elements such as rooms, doors, and objects, and the edges
represent their geometric relationships. “Structure grammar” then defines a list of possible graph transformations.
This grammar drives a principled new reconstruction algorithm, where the rules are sequentially applied to naturally
segment, annotate, and reconstruct architectural scenes.

1. Introduction
Indoor scenes exhibit rich geometric and functional
structures, which are carefully designed to optimize the
quality of our private, social and economic activities. A
fundamental task in indoor modeling is to discover structural elements constituting an indoor scene, such as rooms,
doors, and walls, then reconstructs a structured 3D model
consisting of such elements. The potential applications of
such 3D models range from architecture, civil engineering,
digital mapping, urban geography, real estate, and more.
Indoor scene understanding and reconstruction has been
an active research topic in computer vision. However, existing work has focused on small-scale indoor scenes such
as a single room or a corner of a single room [11, 24]. Semantic reconstruction (SR) has been active in Computer Vision and Robotics [14], but their focus is again small-scale
and/or on clutter-analysis. Furthermore, they assign semantics to an existing geometry, as opposed to leverage the semantics for reconstruction. Building-scale indoor model-

The framework allows one to design a different geometric representation (e.g., mesh, depthmap, or point-cloud)
and a different reconstruction algorithm to enforce the most
effective architectural prior for each structural element. An
effective choice is possible, since our approach is top-down
and the full context is given in reconstructing each element.
The paper also proposes new room segmentation and
offset-map reconstruction algorithms that produce high
quality yet extremely compact 3D models. Despite the flexible representation, our framework guarantees to produce a
manifold mesh, which enables a wide range of new applications. Our framework is evaluated qualitatively and quantitatively with both the synthetic and real data.
In summary, the contributions of the paper are three-fold:
Framework contribution: A principled new structured
model representation and a reconstruction framework. This
framework is general and applicable to other domains, such
as outdoor architectural scenes or man-made objects, where
the subjects consist of structural elements with regularities.
Technical contribution: A room segmentation and reconstruction algorithm that classifies room connection types,
and an offset-map reconstruction algorithm that produces
extremely compact model by enforcing both the lowentropy and the low-rank structure in the output label space.
System contribution: This paper is the first to 1) produce
segmented and annotated models from the level of rooms to
objects, 2) generate floorplans automatically, and 3) enable
a compelling Inverse-CAD application for indoor scenes.
11323

