Guiding the Long-Short Term Memory model for Image Caption Generation
Xu Jia
KU Leuven ESAT-PSI, iMinds

Efstratios Gavves∗
QUVA Lab, University of Amsterdam

Xu.Jia@esat.kuleuven.be

E.Gavves@uva.nl

Basura Fernando*
ACRV, The Australian National University

Tinne Tuytelaars
KU Leuven ESAT-PSI, iMinds

basura.fernando@anu.edu.au

Tinne.Tuytelaars@esat.kuleuven.be

Abstract
In this work we focus on the problem of image caption
generation. We propose an extension of the long short term
memory (LSTM) model, which we coin gLSTM for short.
In particular, we add semantic information extracted from
the image as extra input to each unit of the LSTM block,
with the aim of guiding the model towards solutions that are
more tightly coupled to the image content. Additionally, we
explore different length normalization strategies for beam
search to avoid bias towards short sentences. On various
benchmark datasets such as Flickr8K, Flickr30K and MS
COCO, we obtain results that are on par with or better than
the current state-of-the-art.

LSTM
a man in a blue shirt is sitting on a bench

Semantic Information
Retrieval Result: a man riding a bucking
bull at a rodeo, a man is being thrown off a
bull during a rodeo, bullrider at a rodeo
riding a bull, four men in a rodeo with a bull
bucking, three people wrestle with a bull at
a rodeo, men on horses in the rodeo try to
rope in a bull, a man wearing blue pants is
riding a bucking bull, the cowboy prepares
to lasso the bull
Semantic embedding:

gLSTM

Guide

a man in a red shirt stands on a bull

1. Introduction
Recent successes in visual classification have shifted the
interest of the community towards higher-level, more complicated tasks, such as image caption generation [7, 9, 17,
19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 26, 27, 28, 37, 38, 39]. Although for a human describing a picture is natural, it is quite difficult for
a computer to imitate this task. It requires the computer to
have some level of semantic understanding of the content of
an image, including which kinds of objects there are, what
they look like, what they are doing, and so on. Last but not
least, this semantic understanding has to be structured into
a human-like sentence.
Inspired by recent advances in machine translation [1,
5, 32], neural machine translation models have lately been
applied to the image caption generation task [7, 17, 26, 37,
38], with remarkable success. In particular, compared to
template-based methods [9, 20, 28, 39], that use a rigid sentence structure, and transfer-based methods [21, 22, 23, 27],
that re-use descriptions available in the training data, meth∗ This work was carried out while he was in KU Leuven ESAT-PSI.

Figure 1: Image caption generation using LSTM and the
proposed gLSTM. The generation by LSTM and gLSTM
and the cross-modal result that is used as guidance, are
marked respectively in green, red and blue.
ods based on neural machine translation models stand out
thanks to their capability to generate new sentences. They
manage to effectively generalize beyond the sentences seen
at training time, which is possible thanks to the language
model learnt. Most neural machine translation models follow an encoder-decoder pipeline [1, 5, 32], where the sentence in the source language is first encoded into a fixedlength embedding vector, which is then decoded to generate
a new sentence in the target language. For machine translation, parallel corpora are typically used for learning and
evaluating the model [1,5,32]. The pairs of sentences in the
source and target languages usually share similar sentence
structures (often including regular phrases and the same order of words). This structural information is encoded in the
fixed-length embedding vector and is helpful to the translation.
Applied to caption generation, the aim is to “translate”

2407

