Multi-scale Learning for Low-resolution Person Re-identification
Xiang Li1 , Wei-Shi Zheng∗1 , Xiaojuan Wang1 , Tao Xiang2 , and Shaogang Gong2
1
School of Information Science and Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science, Queen Mary University of London, UK
lixiang651@gmail.com, wszheng@ieee.org, xiaojuanwang.cs@gmail.com
t.xiang@qmul.ac.uk, s.gong@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
In real world person re-identification (re-id), images of
people captured at very different resolutions from different
locations need be matched. Existing re-id models typically normalise all person images to the same size. However,
a low-resolution (LR) image contains much less information about a person, and direct image scaling and simple
size normalisation as done in conventional re-id methods cannot compensate for the loss of information. To solve
this LR person re-id problem, we propose a novel joint multi-scale learning framework, termed joint multi-scale
discriminant component analysis (JUDEA). The key component of this framework is a heterogeneous class mean discrepancy (HCMD) criterion for cross-scale image domain
alignment, which is optimised simultaneously with discriminant modelling across multiple scales in the joint learning framework. Our experiments show that the proposed
JUDEA framework outperforms existing representative reid methods as well as other related LR visual matching models applied for the LR person re-id problem.

1. Introduction
Person re-identiﬁcation (re-id) is a task of matching
pedestrians observed from non-overlapping camera views
in a surveillance system. A signiﬁcant challenge for person
re-id is that people are often captured in different camera views at signiﬁcantly different distances to the cameras,
resulting in very different image resolutions. An example
is shown in Fig. 1. In the ﬁrst camera view (top image)
the target person walked close to the camera with his appearance details clearly visible in the captured normal resolution image, while the resolution of his image becomes
much lower when he reappeared in a different view (bottom image) and was much further away from the camera.
This difference in resolution between matching views, com∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1. A typical person re-id scenario. The resolution of a person’s images in two different camera views are signiﬁcantly different, beyond the scope for simple image size normalisation by
interpolation.

pounded by changes in lighting, pose and occlusion, makes
re-identiﬁcation extremely hard and unreliable.
Although resolution difference is a common problem for
re-id, it is largely ignored by existing approaches. In particular, existing methods focus on solving the challenges
caused by view, pose, and lighting changes by exploring
invariant and discriminant features [25, 8, 6, 33, 7, 18, 13,
21, 40, 16] or developing reliable and robust distance metrics [8, 11, 27, 41, 23, 31, 26, 17, 39, 38, 35]. When it
comes to the low-resolution (LR) person re-id problem, that
is, matching LR person images to normal (higher) resolution ones, most (if not all) methods would simply normalize input images to a uniform normal scale. However LR
person images contain much less information than those of
normal resolution and many appearance details have been
lost. A simple image magniﬁcation by interpolation thus
would not recover the lost information in the LR person images. Other Bag of Words (BoW) based methods [42, 21]
do not explicitly require any normalisation of image size.
Nevertheless, the small number of keypoints for BoW computation in LR person images will still lead to the loss of
image details. Existing re-id models therefore do not offer
a solution to the LR person re-id problem.
In this work, for the ﬁrst time, a principled solution to L-

3765

