An Exploration of Parameter Redundancy in Deep Networks with
Circulant Projections
Yu Cheng1,3∗
1

Felix X. Yu2,4∗ Rogerio S. Feris1 Sanjiv Kumar2 Alok Choudhary3 Shih-Fu Chang4

IBM Research

2

Google Research

3

Abstract
We explore the redundancy of parameters in deep neural networks by replacing the conventional linear projection in fully-connected layers with the circulant projection. The circulant structure substantially reduces memory
footprint and enables the use of the Fast Fourier Transform to speed up the computation. Considering a fullyconnected neural network layer with d input nodes, and
d output nodes, this method improves the time complexity
from O(d2 ) to O(d log d) and space complexity from O(d2 )
to O(d). The space savings are particularly important for
modern deep convolutional neural network architectures,
where fully-connected layers typically contain more than
90% of the network parameters. We further show that the
gradient computation and optimization of the circulant projections can be performed very efficiently. Our experiments
on three standard datasets show that the proposed approach
achieves this significant gain in storage and efficiency with
minimal increase in error rate compared to neural networks
with unstructured projections.

1. Introduction
Deep neural network-based methods have recently
achieved dramatic accuracy improvements in many areas of
computer vision, including image classification [23, 45, 25],
object detection [11, 33], face recognition [38, 36], and text
recognition [2, 20].
These high-performing methods rely on deep networks
containing millions or even billions of parameters. For example, the work by Krizhevsky et al. [23] achieved breakthrough results on the 2012 ImageNet challenge using a network containing 60 million parameters with five convolutional layers and three fully-connected layers. The top face
verification results on the Labeled Faces in the Wild (LFW)
dataset were obtained with networks containing hundreds
of millions of parameters, using a mix of convolutional,
∗ indicates equal contributions.

Northwestern University

4

Columbia University

locally-connected, and fully-connected layers [38, 35]. In
architectures that rely only on fully-connected layers, the
number of parameters can grow to billions [5].
As larger neural networks are considered, with more layers and also more nodes in each layer, reducing their storage and computational costs becomes critical to meet the
requirements of practical applications. Current efforts towards this goal focus mostly on the optimization of convolutional layers [21, 26, 9], which consume the bulk of
computational processing in modern convolutional architectures. We instead explore the redundancy of parameters
in fully-connected layers, which are often the bottleneck in
terms of memory consumption. Our solution relies on a
simple and efficient approach based on circulant projections
to significantly reduce the storage and computational costs
of fully-connected neural network layers, while mantaining
competitive error rates. Our work brings the following advantages:
• Fully-connected layers in modern convolutional architectures typically contain over 90% of the network parameters. Our approach significantly reduces the cost to store
these networks in memory, which is crucial for GPUs or
embedded systems with low-memory footprint.
• The proposed method enables FFT-based computation,
which provides speed up for the fully connected layers.
This is especially useful for neural networks with a large
portion of fully connected layers or entirely based on
fully connected layers [34, 5].
• With much fewer parameters, our method is empirically
shown to require less training data.

1.1. Overview of the proposed approach
A basic computation in a fully-connected neural network
layer is
h(x) = φ(Rx),
(1)
where R ∈ Rk×d , and φ(·) is a element-wise nonlinear
activation function. The above operation connects a layer

2857

