Learning to Combine Mid-level Cues for Object Proposal Generation
Tom Lee

Sanja Fidler
Sven Dickinson
University of Toronto

{tshlee,fidler,sven}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
In recent years, region proposals have replaced sliding
windows in support of object recognition, offering more discriminating shape and appearance information through improved localization. One powerful approach for generating region proposals is based on minimizing parametric energy functions with parametric maxflow. In this paper, we
introduce Parametric Min-Loss (PML), a novel structured
learning framework for parametric energy functions. While
PML is generally applicable to different domains, we use
it in the context of region proposals to learn to combine a
set of mid-level grouping cues to yield a small set of object
region proposals with high recall. Our learning framework
accounts for multiple diverse outputs, and is complemented
by diversification seeds based on image location and color.
This approach casts perceptual grouping and cue combination in a novel structured learning framework which yields
baseline improvements on VOC 2012 and COCO 2014.

1. Introduction
For many years, the recognition community focused on
the problem of object detection, in which a strong object
prior was “tested” at all possible locations using the bruteforce approach of sliding windows. Bottom-up segmentation, e.g. [26, 9, 31], was clearly unnecessary in the presence of a strong object prior, and while the complexity of
this framework grew linearly with the number of detectors,
parallel processing allowed a significant number of classes
to be detected before a linear search became intractable. At
that point, the concept of an “objectness” detector was introduced [2], resurrecting interest in bottom-up saliency and
attention. By testing which of the window locations contained salient object information, the linear search of detectors could be restricted to a small subset of windows. While
an objectness detector could arguably be considered a weak
form of perceptual grouping (with the grouping provided by
the sliding window), bottom-up segmentation still remained
in the shadows.

Learning
Diversification

Figure 1. Our approach takes an input image, partitions it into
superpixels, and groups superpixels into region proposals using a
novel structured learning framework for parametric energy functions, called Parametric Min-Loss (PML). The parametric energy
function combines mid-level cues with weights that are trained to
generate multiple region proposals. Finally, we diversify the energy function to generate a diverse set of region proposals.

Only when the number of categories grew to thousands
or more did the community advance the need for more discriminative features such as shape and appearance which,
in turn, require bottom-up region segmentation. The extraction of such “region proposals”, e.g. [29, 5], meant that
brute-force sliding window searches, numbering in the tens
or hundreds of thousands, could be replaced by the extraction of hundreds or thousands of region proposals. Each
proposal offers (boundary) shape, appearance, and scale information which, for a correct proposal, can be exploited to
recognize an object (or part of an object) or select a small
number of object detectors that can be applied to the region.
As long as the region proposals exhibit good recall, there’s
a chance that the object(s) will be recognized.
The return to bottom-up region segmentation is an invitation to integrate the many mid-level cues that ultimately
play a role in such perceptual grouping, including proximity, symmetry closure, similarity, and continuity, to name a
few. But even with computational models of such cues, how
should they be combined and what is their relative importance? As shown in Figure 1, we explore these issues within
11680

