Infinite Feature Selection
Giorgio Roffo

Simone Melzi

Marco Cristani

giorgio.roffo@univr.it

simone.melzi@univr.it

marco.cristani@univr.it

University of Verona, Department of Computer Science, Strada le Grazie 15, 37134, Verona, Italy

Abstract
Filter-based feature selection has become crucial in
many classification settings, especially object recognition,
recently faced with feature learning strategies that originate thousands of cues. In this paper, we propose a feature
selection method exploiting the convergence properties of
power series of matrices, and introducing the concept of infinite feature selection (Inf-FS). Considering a selection of
features as a path among feature distributions and letting
these paths tend to an infinite number permits the investigation of the importance (relevance and redundancy) of a
feature when injected into an arbitrary set of cues. Ranking the importance individuates candidate features, which
turn out to be effective from a classification point of view,
as proved by a thoroughly experimental section. The Inf-FS
has been tested on thirteen diverse benchmarks, comparing
against filters, embedded methods, and wrappers; in all the
cases we achieve top performances, notably on the classification tasks of PASCAL VOC 2007-2012.

1. Introduction
In many modern classification scenarios, the number of
adopted features is usually very large, and it is continuously
growing due to several causes, from technological reasons
(Internet 2.0, Big Data) to methodological advancements
(e.g., deep learning). Obviously, the management of highdimensional data requires a strong feature selection to individuate irrelevant and/or redundant features and avoid overfitting [17]. Feature selection techniques can be partitioned
into three classes [17]: wrappers, which use classifiers to
score a given subset of features; embedded methods, which
inject the selection process into the learning of the classifier;
filter methods, which analyze intrinsic properties of data,
ignoring the classifier. Most of these methods can perform
two operations, ranking and subset selection: in the former,
the importance of each individual feature is evaluated, usually by neglecting potential interactions among the elements
of the joint set [8]; in the latter, the final subset of features

to be selected is provided. In some cases, these two operations are performed sequentially (first the ranking, then the
selection) [20, 5, 15, 37, 25, 36]; in other cases, only the selection is carried out [16]. Generally, the subset selection is
always supervised, while in the ranking case, methods can
be supervised or not.
Generally, feature selection is NP-hard [17]; if there
are n features in total, the goal is to select the optimal
n
combinations; therefore,
subset of m≪n, to evaluate m
suboptimal search strategies are considered (see Sec.2).
With the filters, features are first considered individually,
ranked, and then a subset is extracted, some examples
are MutInf [37], Relief-F [25], and SW Relief-F [36].
Conversely, with wrapper and embedded methods, subsets
of features are sampled, evaluated, and finally kept as the
final output, for instance, FSV [5, 15], SVM-RFE [20],
Ens.SVM-RFE [36], and SW SVM-RFE [36].
In this paper, we propose a filter algorithm, which performs the ranking step in an unsupervised manner, followed
by a simple cross-validation strategy for selecting the best
m features. The most appealing characteristic of the approach is that it evaluates the importance of a given feature
while considering all the possible subsets of features. Moreover, the score of each feature is influenced by all the other
features of the set; this technique resembles the one for
building path integrals [29], customized for the data clustering field [39] or the study of centralities on graphs [4].
The idea is to map the feature selection problem to an affinity graph, and then to consider a subset of features as a path
connecting them. The cost of the path is given by the combination of pairwise relationships between the features, here
modeled as a function of both the variance and correlation
of the features, embedded in a cost matrix. By construction, the method allows to use convergence properties of the
power series of matrices, and evaluate in an elegant fashion
the relevance and redundancy of a feature with respect to all
the other ones taken together. For this reason, we dub our
approach infinite feature selection (Inf-FS).
The results are impressive: our approach is extensively tested on 13 benchmarks of cancer classification and
14202

