Semantic Image Segmentation via Deep Parsing Network
Ziwei Liu∗ Xiaoxiao Li∗ Ping Luo Chen Change Loy Xiaoou Tang
Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{lz013,lx015,pluo,ccloy,xtang}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
This paper addresses semantic image segmentation by
incorporating rich information into Markov Random Field
(MRF), including high-order relations and mixture of label
contexts. Unlike previous works that optimized MRFs
using iterative algorithm, we solve MRF by proposing a
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), namely Deep Parsing Network (DPN)1 , which enables deterministic end-toend computation in a single forward pass. Specifically,
DPN extends a contemporary CNN architecture to model
unary terms and additional layers are carefully devised to
approximate the mean field algorithm (MF) for pairwise
terms. It has several appealing properties. First, different
from the recent works that combined CNN and MRF, where
many iterations of MF were required for each training
image during back-propagation, DPN is able to achieve
high performance by approximating one iteration of MF.
Second, DPN represents various types of pairwise terms,
making many existing works as its special cases. Third,
DPN makes MF easier to be parallelized and speeded up
in Graphical Processing Unit (GPU). DPN is thoroughly
evaluated on the PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset, where a single DPN model yields a new state-of-the-art segmentation
accuracy of 77.5%.

1. Introduction
Markov Random Field (MRF) or Conditional Random
Field (CRF) has achieved great successes in semantic image segmentation, which is one of the most challenging
problems in computer vision. Existing works such as
[31, 29, 9, 34, 11, 2, 8, 25, 22] can be generally categorized
into two groups based on their deﬁnitions of the unary and
pairwise terms of MRF.
In the ﬁrst group, researchers improved labeling accuracy by exploring rich information to deﬁne the pair∗ indicates shared ﬁrst authorship.
1 Project

page:
http://personal.ie.cuhk.edu.hk/
˜lz013/projects/DPN.html. For more technical details, please
contact the corresponding author Ping Luo via pluo.lhi@gmail.com.

wise functions, including long-range dependencies [16, 17],
high-order potentials [37, 36], and semantic label contexts
[21, 26, 38]. For example, Krähenbühl et al. [16] attained
accurate segmentation boundary by inferring on a fullyconnected graph. Vineet et al. [37] extended [16] by
deﬁning both high-order and long-range terms between
pixels. Global or local semantic contexts between labels
were also investigated by [38]. Although they accomplished
promising results, they modeled the unary terms as SVM or
Adaboost, whose learning capacity becomes a bottleneck.
The learning and inference of complex pairwise terms are
often expensive.
In the second group, people learned a strong unary classiﬁer by leveraging the recent advances of deep learning,
such as the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). With
deep models, these works [23, 24, 25, 22, 3, 28, 39, 30, 19]
demonstrated encouraging results using simple deﬁnition of
the pairwise function or even ignore it. For instance, Long
et al. [22] transformed fully-connected layers of CNN into
convolutional layers, making accurate per-pixel classiﬁcation possible using the contemporary CNN architectures
that were pre-trained on ImageNet [6]. Chen et al. [3]
improved [22] by feeding the outputs of CNN into a MRF
with simple pairwise potentials, but it treated CNN and
MRF as separated components. A recent advance was
obtained by [30], which jointly trained CNN and MRF by
passing the error of MRF inference backward into CNN, but
iterative inference of MRF such as the mean ﬁeld algorithm
(MF) [27] is required for each training image during backpropagation (BP). Zheng et al. [39] further showed that
the procedure of MF inference can be represented as a
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN), but their computational
costs are similar. We found that directly combing CNN
and MRF as above is inefﬁcient, because CNN typically
has millions of parameters while MRF infers thousands of
latent variables; and even worse, incorporating complex
pairwise terms into MRF becomes impractical, limiting the
performance of the entire system.
This work proposes a novel Deep Parsing Network
(DPN), which is able to jointly train CNN and complex
pairwise terms. DPN has several appealing properties.

1377

