Visual Madlibs: Fill in the blank Description Generation and Question
Answering
Licheng Yu, Eunbyung Park, Alexander C. Berg, Tamara L. Berg
Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill
{licheng, eunbyung, aberg, tlberg}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a new dataset consisting of
360,001 focused natural language descriptions for 10,738
images. This dataset, the Visual Madlibs dataset, is collected using automatically produced fill-in-the-blank templates designed to gather targeted descriptions about: people and objects, their appearances, activities, and interactions, as well as inferences about the general scene or its
broader context. We provide several analyses of the Visual Madlibs dataset and demonstrate its applicability to
two new description generation tasks: focused description
generation, and multiple-choice question-answering for images. Experiments using joint-embedding and deep learning methods show promising results on these tasks.

1. Introduction
Much of everyday language and discourse concerns the
visual world around us, making understanding the relationship between the physical world and language describing that world an important challenge problem for AI.
Understanding this complex and subtle relationship will
have broad applicability toward inferring human-like understanding for images, producing natural human robot interactions, and for tasks like natural language grounding in NLP.
In computer vision, along with improvements in deep learning based visual recognition, there has been an explosion of
recent interest in methods to automatically generate natural
language descriptions for images [6, 10, 16, 35, 17, 22] or
videos [34, 9]. However, most of these methods and existing datasets have focused on only one type of description, a
generic description for the entire image.
In this paper, we collect a new dataset of focused, targeted, descriptions, the Visual Madlibs dataset1 , as illustrated in Figure 1. To collect this dataset, we introduce
automatically produced fill-in-the-blank templates designed
to collect a range of different descriptions for visual content in an image. This is inspired by Madlibs, a childrens’
1 http://tamaraberg.com/visualmadlibs/

Figure 1. An example from the Visual Madlibs Dataset, including
a variety of targeted descriptions for people and objects.

word game where one player prompts another for a list of
words to substitute for blanks in a story. In our case, a user
might be presented with an image and a fill-in-the-blank
template such as “The frisbee is [blank]” and asked to fill
in the [blank] with a description of the appearance of frisbee. Alternatively, they could be asked to fill in the [blank]
with a description of what the person is doing with the frisbee. Fill-in-the-blank questions can be targeted to collect
descriptions about people and objects, their appearances,
activities, and interactions, as well as descriptions of the
general scene or the broader emotional, spatial, or temporal
context of an image (examples in Fig 2). Using these templates, we collect 360,001 targeted descriptions for 10,738
images from the MS COCO collection [23].
With this new dataset, we can develop methods to generate more focused descriptions. Instead of asking an algo-

2461

