Global Structure-from-Motion by Similarity Averaging
Zhaopeng Cui and Ping Tan
Simon Fraser University
{zhaopeng.cui, pingtan}@sfu.ca

Abstract
Global structure-from-motion (SfM) methods solve all
cameras simultaneously from all available relative motions.
It has better potential in both reconstruction accuracy and
computation efficiency than incremental methods. However,
global SfM is challenging, mainly because of two reasons.
Firstly, translation averaging is difficult, since an essential
matrix only tells the direction of relative translation. Secondly, it is also hard to filter out bad essential matrices
due to feature matching failures. We propose to compute
a sparse depth image at each camera to solve both problems. Depth images help to upgrade an essential matrix to
a similarity transformation, which can determine the scale
of relative translation. Thus, camera registration is formulated as a well-posed similarity averaging problem. Depth
images also make the filtering of essential matrices simple and effective. In this way, translation averaging can
be solved robustly in two convex L1 optimization problems,
which reach the global optimum rapidly. We demonstrate
this method in various examples including sequential data,
Internet data, and ambiguous data with repetitive scene
structures.

1. Introduction
Structure-from-motion (SfM) methods estimate 3D
scene structures and camera poses from 2D images. The
‘gold standard’ algorithm, bundle adjustment (BA)[40],
minimizes the reprojection error to achieve a maximum
likelihood estimation. SfM methods can be roughly categorized as incremental or global according to their ways
to initialize BA. Incremental methods (e.g. [38]) initialize
cameras one by one. They are typically slow and subject
to large drifting errors [9], though impressive results are
demonstrated [2] on huge scale Internet image sets. Global
methods (e.g. [15]) initialize all cameras simultaneously
and have better potential in efficiency and accuracy.
Global SfM methods face two major challenges. Firstly,
motion averaging, in particular, translation averaging is
hard. It is hard to determine global camera positions from

local relative translations encoded in epipolar geometry
(EG). Many translation estimation methods [15, 4, 3, 29]
degenerate at collinear camera motion, because an essential
matrix does not tell the scale of translation (i.e. the baseline
length).
Secondly, global SfM methods are more fragile on noisy
data, e.g. Internet images, due to poor relative motion estimation caused by feature matching failures. Global methods have to carefully filter out wrong EGs before motion
averaging. In comparison, local methods benefit from the
RANSAC process to exclude bad feature correspondences
when adding additional cameras to the reconstruction. EG
filtering is still an open problem despite various consistency
filters adopted in [21, 27, 42].
We tackle both problems by constructing a sparse ‘depth
image’ for each camera, which contains depth values at a
sparse set of feature points. Depth images upgrade an essential matrix to a similarity transformation, which encodes the
relative rotation, translation, and scale between two depth
images. The relative scale change encodes the baseline
length, so that similarity averaging is much well-posed. In
comparison, from essential matrices, translations can only
be solved for cameras in a parallel rigid graph [29]. While
some methods [34, 26, 12, 42] use depths of scene points
to go beyond the parallel rigid graph, they exploit the depth
information of a single point at a time and are sensitive to
outlier points. Our method based on depth images is a more
holistic approach.
Our similarity averaging algorithm includes three steps,
i.e. rotation averaging, scale averaging, and scale-aware
translation averaging. We take the robust method in [8] for
rotation averaging. Both our scale and translation averaging
are formulated as convex L1 optimization problems, which
converge rapidly to a global optimum.
At the same time, depth images make the filtering of bad
EGs easy. During the construction of depth images, we filter
pairwise relative motions by the depth consistency of reconstructed feature points, which excludes EGs with large errors. For pathological data with repetitive scene structures
(e.g. examples published in [33]), our depth images allow
straightforward ‘missing correspondences’ analysis [44] to
1864

