Confidence Preserving Machine for Facial Action Unit Detection
Jiabei Zeng1 Wen-Sheng Chu2 Fernando De la Torre2 Jeffrey F. Cohn2,3 Zhang Xiong1
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China 100191
2
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 15213
3
Department of Psychology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 15260
Abstract

easy negative samples

hard samples

easy positive samples

1. Introduction
Facial expressions convey varied and nuanced meanings.
Small variations in timing and packaging of smiles, for instance, can communicate a polite greeting, felt enjoyment,
embarrassment, or social discomfort. To analyze information afforded by facial expression, Ekman and Friesen proposed the Facial Action Coding System (FACS) [20]. FACS
describes a facial activity in terms of anatomically based
Action Units (AUs). AUs can occur alone or in combinations to represent nearly all possible facial expressions. AUs
have a temporal envelope that minimally include an onset
(or start) and an offset (or stop) and may include changes
in intensity. There has been encouraging progress on facial
AU detection during the past decades, especially for posed
facial actions [11, 14, 17, 39, 44, 49].
Yet, accurate detection of spontaneous facial actions remains challenging [14, 32, 33, 41]. A number of sources of

confident classifiers

(b)

test samples

test subject

Varied sources of error contribute to the challenge of
facial action unit detection. Previous approaches address
specific and known sources. However, many sources are unknown. To address the ubiquity of error, we propose a Confident Preserving Machine (CPM) that follows an easy-tohard classification strategy. During training, CPM learns
two confident classifiers. A confident positive classifier separates easily identified positive samples from all else; a confident negative classifier does same for negative samples.
During testing, CPM then learns a person-specific classifier using “virtual labels” provided by confident classifiers.
This step is achieved using a quasi-semi-supervised (QSS)
approach. Hard samples are typically close to the decision
boundary, and the QSS approach disambiguates them using spatio-temporal constraints. To evaluate CPM, we compared it with a baseline single-margin classifier and stateof-the-art semi-supervised learning, transfer learning, and
boosting methods in three datasets of spontaneous facial behavior. With few exceptions, CPM outperformed baseline
and state-of-the art methods.

training subjects

(a)

QSS Classifier

Figure 1. The main idea of the proposed Confidence Preserving
Machine (CPM). (a) A pair of classifiers (red line and blue line),
refered as confident classifiers, are learned to cooperatively separate easy and hard samples. (b) These confident classifiers are
applied to recognize easy samples in a test subject. Then, a quasisemi-supervised (QSS) classifier (black dash line) is learned by
propagating predictions from the easy test samples to hard ones.

error have been identified. They include individual differences in participants (e.g., gender, ethnicity), video resolution, head yaw, and low intensity. To model these variability, typically a highly non-linear decision boundary is necessary to infer a correct AU. A highly non-linear decision
boundary typically lead to over-fitting, and it has been previously shown that existing algorithms generalize poorly to
unseen subjects [10, 40]. Standard supervised approaches,
such as SVM [21] and Boosting [23], use a single hyperplane to separate positive and negative samples. While these
classifiers may perform well on samples with high-intensity
AUs, frontal head pose or on particular subjects, they often
fail with various appearance changes and subtle AUs (i.e.,
low intensity). In this paper, we refer to these samples as
easy samples and hard samples, respectively.
To reduce errors occasioned above, we propose a twostage learning framework that combines multiple classifiers

3622

