Improving ferns ensembles by sparsifying
and quantising posterior probabilities
Antonio L. Rodriguez
Vitor Sequeira
Joint Research Centre, Institute for Transuranium Elements. Ispra, Italy.
{antonio.rodriguez,vitor.sequeira}@jrc.ec.europa.eu

Abstract
Ferns ensembles offer an accurate and efficient multiclass non-linear classification, commonly at the expense
of consuming a large amount of memory. We introduce a
two-fold contribution that produces large reductions in their
memory consumption. First, an efficient L0 regularised cost
optimisation finds a sparse representation of the posterior
probabilities in the ensemble by discarding elements with
zero contribution to valid responses in the training samples. As a by-product this can produce a prediction accuracy gain that, if required, can be traded for further reductions in memory size and prediction time. Secondly, posterior probabilities are quantised and stored in a memoryfriendly sparse data structure. We reported a minimum of
75% memory reduction for different types of classification
problems using generative and discriminative ferns ensembles, without increasing prediction time or classification error. For image patch recognition our proposal produced a
90% memory reduction, and improved in several percentage
points the prediction accuracy.

1. Introduction
Initially proposed in [1], random forest classifiers offered
interesting computational advantages over previous classification techniques. A random forest basically consist of an
ensemble of random decision trees. Given an input item that
should be classified, each random tree emits a prediction
for each one of the different possible classes. The random
forest averages these predictions to aggregate them into a
single, better classification.
Several contributions improved the performance and reduced the computational requirements of these classifiers,
making them more suitable for a wider range of applications. In [20] the authors introduced ferns ensembles. Unlike random trees, ferns evaluate a fixed set of binary features on the input sample. This made unnecessary the large
tree structures of binary tests, and made more efficient the

processing of each new input sample. Ferns ensembles also
replaced the simple addition of class probabilities, used to
combine trees predictions in random forests, with the naive
Bayes aggregation, improving significantly the classification accuracy for tasks such as image feature recognition
[19, 15]. Ferns ensembles are commonly trained using a
generative formulation. Given an input sample the classifier estimates the probability for each class. The output prediction will be the class with the highest probability. Ferns
can also be trained using a discriminative approach where
misclassifications are directly penalised. For example by
minimising a cost similar to the regularised Hinge loss, as it
is done for the training of support vector machines (SVM).
A ferns ensemble could be trained by optimising the multiclass version of the margin error [5, 10]. In [13] the authors optimise the regularised Hinge loss producing one-vsall predictions for each single class, that are later averaged
to produce the aggregated prediction.
Their inherent non-linear multiclass formulation, their
efficiency, and accuracy made random forests and ferns ensembles specifically suited for real-time applications where
a fast, accurate classification is needed. These classifiers
achieved a significant popularity for visual recognition tasks
such as image patch classification [14] and human pose estimation [24]. Once trained, evaluating the probabilities for a
thousand classes will usually take a few milliseconds using
commodity hardware. A small number of pixel-wise comparisons of values in regular or depth images, and a small
number of additions, are enough to recognise image patches
or features with high accuracy. These classifiers have also
been used for a large variety of problems such as object
categorisation [27], image classification [4], simultaneous
location and mapping [6, 19], unsupervised detection and
tracking [22], sensor relocalisation [11], face recognition
[8], vehicle detection and tracking [9], pedestrian detection
[18], or hand pose estimation [13].
Most of these proposals provided state-of-the-art results
for the specific problem. However, random forests and ferns
usually trade their computational advantages for the disadvantage of consuming a large amount of memory. The

4103

