Multiresolution hierarchy co-clustering for semantic segmentation
in sequences with small variations
David Varas
Mónica Alfaro
Ferran Marques
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya Barcelona Tech, Spain
{david.varas,ferran.marques}@upc.edu ∗

Abstract
This paper presents a co-clustering technique that, given
a collection of images and their hierarchies, clusters nodes
from these hierarchies to obtain a coherent multiresolution representation of the image collection. We formalize
the co-clustering as a Quadratic Semi-Assignment Problem and solve it with a linear programming relaxation approach that makes effective use of information from hierarchies. Initially, we address the problem of generating an
optimal, coherent partition per image and, afterwards, we
extend this method to a multiresolution framework. Finally,
we particularize this framework to an iterative multiresolution video segmentation algorithm in sequences with small
variations. We evaluate the algorithm on the Video Occlusion/Object Boundary Detection Dataset, showing that
it produces state-of-the-art results in these scenarios.

1. Introduction
The goal of co-clustering is to robustly segment a reference image (or various reference images) within a collection
of closely related images (for instance, multiple views of a
given scene or a video sequence with small variations) without any prior knowledge of the number of clusters. This is
closely related with the correlation clustering problem [3].
Co-clustering approaches that model the problem as
a Quadratic Semi-Assignment Problem [7] have been reported to outperform other co-clustering strategies [12].
However, such solutions present inconsistencies on the clusters propagation among images which prevent to obtain a
coherent labeling through the collection of video images.
The goal of unsupervised video segmentation is to efficiently extract coherent groups of voxels from sequences
to represent the video information with many less primitives. Video segmentation techniques can be classified into
∗ This work has been done in the framework of the project BIGGRAPHTEC2013-43935-R, financed by the Spanish Ministerio de Economı́a y
Competitividad and the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF).

Figure 1. Example of the video segmentation results on a sequence
with little variation. Results are obtained with the minimum number of regions to achieve a given quality. First row: original frames
of sequence zoe1 from the Video Occlusion/Object Boundary Detection Dataset. Second row: segmentation results of [13]. Third
row: segmentation results of [26]. Fourth row: our results.

three categories [26]: (a) frame-by-frame processing, that
leads to low temporal coherence results [5]; (b) iterative
processing, that improves the temporal coherence while requiring reasonable algorithm complexity [19]; and (c) 3D
volume processing, that leads to the best results but implies high complexity algorithms and memory requirements
[13]. Regardless of the previous classification, it is nowadays widely accepted that multiresolution descriptions provide a richer framework for subsequent analysis, both in
the image [1] as in the video case [13]. This way, current
techniques mainly rely on motion information to build a set
of coherent partition sequences, describing the video at different resolutions. Video sequences with global motion or
little variation in the scene pose problems to motion-based
segmentation approaches. In these cases, to strongly rely

4579

