Segment-Phrase Table
for Semantic Segmentation, Visual Entailment and Paraphrasing
Hamid Izadinia†
Fereshteh Sadeghi†
Santosh K. Divvala‡,† Hannaneh Hajishirzi† Yejin Choi†
†

{izadinia,fsadeghi,yejin}@cs.uw.edu

Test image

{santoshd,alif}@allenai.org

Web Image
Data

Visual Entailment

|=
=
==|

Pooling

Linguistic constraints

Segment-Phrase Table
Horse riding
Horse face

Output

The Allen Institute for AI

hannaneh@uw.edu

Web Text
Data

Semantic Segmentation

Cut

‡

University of Washington

Ali Farhadi‡,†

Portrait horse

Visual Paraphrasing

|=
=
==|

Cat
standing up

.
.
.

.
.
.

Horse jumping

:

Chimpanzee
lying

Horse leaping

Relative Similarity

Bear running

Horse legs

Horse standing

Horse grazing

Horse
jumping

>

Bear
Cat
standing up standing up

:
Deer
Cat
standing up standing up

Figure 1: This paper introduces segment-phrase table as a bi-modal resource of correspondences between textual phrases and
visual segments. We show that this table facilitates richer semantic understanding and reasoning that are of great potential for
both vision and Natural Language Processing (NLP). It allows linguistic constraints to be incorporated into semantic image
segmentation (left), and visual cues to improve entailment and paraphrasing (right).

Abstract
We introduce Segment-Phrase Table (SPT), a large collection of bijective associations between textual phrases
and their corresponding segmentations. Leveraging recent
progress in object recognition and natural language semantics, we show how we can successfully build a highquality segment-phrase table using minimal human supervision. More importantly, we demonstrate the unique value
unleashed by this rich bimodal resource, for both vision as
well as natural language understanding. First, we show that
fine-grained textual labels facilitate contextual reasoning
that helps in satisfying semantic constraints across image
segments. This feature enables us to achieve state-of-the-art
segmentation results on benchmark datasets. Next, we show
that the association of high-quality segmentations to textual
phrases aids in richer semantic understanding and reasoning of these textual phrases. Leveraging this feature, we
motivate the problem of visual entailment and visual paraphrasing, and demonstrate its utility on a large dataset.

1. Introduction
Vision and language are among the primary modalities
through which we humans acquire knowledge. A successful AI system would therefore need to leverage both these
modalities together to arrive at a coherent and consistent understanding of the world. Although great progress has been
made in well-constrained settings at the category level (e.g.,
objects, attributes, actions), several challenges (including
scalability, modeling power, etc.,) have prevented us from
bridging the gaps at higher levels. In recent years, impressive results have been demonstrated in aligning these two
modalities at a much higher level [11, 40, 26], specifically,
images to sentences, where an important enabling factor is
the availability of large-scale image databases [8, 29], combined with deep learning methods [24, 17].
The key ingredient in aligning vision and language involves reasoning about inter-modal correspondences [12,
20, 21]. In this work, we target phrase-level associations, a
relatively unexplored direction compared to category-level
and sentence-level associations. The goal is to achieve the

10

