Simultaneous Deep Transfer Across Domains and Tasks
Eric Tzeng∗ , Judy Hoffman∗ , Trevor Darrell
UC Berkeley, EECS & ICSI

Kate Saenko
UMass Lowell, CS

{etzeng,jhoffman,trevor}@eecs.berkeley.edu

saenko@cs.uml.edu

Abstract
Source domain!

Recent reports suggest that a generic supervised deep
CNN model trained on a large-scale dataset reduces, but
does not remove, dataset bias. Fine-tuning deep models in
a new domain can require a significant amount of labeled
data, which for many applications is simply not available.
We propose a new CNN architecture to exploit unlabeled and
sparsely labeled target domain data. Our approach simultaneously optimizes for domain invariance to facilitate domain
transfer and uses a soft label distribution matching loss to
transfer information between tasks. Our proposed adaptation method offers empirical performance which exceeds
previously published results on two standard benchmark visual domain adaptation tasks, evaluated across supervised
and semi-supervised adaptation settings.

1. Introduction
Consider a group of robots trained by the manufacturer
to recognize thousands of common objects using standard
image databases, then shipped to households around the
country. As each robot starts to operate in its own unique
environment, it is likely to have degraded performance due
to the shift in domain. It is clear that, given enough extra supervised data from the new environment, the original
performance could be recovered. However, state-of-the-art
recognition algorithms rely on high capacity convolutional
neural network (CNN) models that require millions of supervised images for initial training. Even the traditional
approach for adapting deep models, fine-tuning [14, 29],
may require hundreds or thousands of labeled examples for
each object category that needs to be adapted.
It is reasonable to assume that the robot’s new owner
will label a handful of examples for a few types of objects,
but completely unrealistic to presume full supervision in
the new environment. Therefore, we propose an algorithm
that effectively adapts between the training (source) and test
(target) environments by utilizing both generic statistics from
∗ Authors contributed equally.

! !
! !

!!!!
!!!!

!
!

le Mug

Bott

Target domain!

1. Maximize domain confusion!

ir
p
rd
Cha Lapto eyboa
K

!
!

g
p
le
rd
air
Bott Mu Ch Laptoeyboa
K

2. Transfer task correlation!

Figure 1. We transfer discriminative category information from
a source domain to a target domain via two methods. First, we
maximize domain confusion by making the marginal distributions
of the two domains as similar as possible. Second, we transfer correlations between classes learned on the source examples directly to
the target examples, thereby preserving the relationships between
classes.

unlabeled data collected in the new environment as well as a
few human labeled examples from a subset of the categories
of interest. Our approach performs transfer learning both
across domains and across tasks (see Figure 1). Intuitively,
domain transfer is accomplished by making the marginal
feature distributions of source and target as similar to each
other as possible. Task transfer is enabled by transferring
empirical category correlations learned on the source to the
target domain. This helps to preserve relationships between
categories, e.g., bottle is similar to mug but different from
keyboard. Previous work proposed techniques for domain
transfer with CNN models [12, 24] but did not utilize the
learned source semantic structure for task transfer.
To enable domain transfer, we use the unlabeled target
data to compute an estimated marginal distribution over the
new environment and explicitly optimize a feature repre14068

