Photometric Stereo in a Scattering Medium
Zak Murez1 , Tali Treibitz2 , Ravi Ramamoorthi1 , and David Kriegman1,3

1. Introduction
Obtaining 3D information about an object submersed in
fog, haze, water, or biological tissue is difficult because of
scattering [5, 15, 22]. In this paper, we focus on photometric stereo, which estimates surface normals from intensity changes under varying illumination. In air, photometric
stereo produces high-quality geometry, even in textureless
regions with small details, and is a widely used 3D reconstruction method.
In a scattering medium, however, light propagation is
affected by scattering which degrades the performance of
photometric algorithms unless accounted for (Fig. 1). Distance dependent attenuation caused by the medium has been
dealt with in the past [16]. Here, our contributions lie in
handling three scattering effects (Fig. 2), based on a single
scatter model [25]: 1) light traveling from the source to the
object is blurred due to forward scattering; 2) light traveling from the object to the camera is blurred due to forward

Previous Method
Our Method 1

Photometric stereo is widely used for 3D reconstruction.
However, its use in scattering media such as water, biological tissue and fog has been limited until now, because of
forward scattered light from both the source and object, as
well as light scattered back from the medium (backscatter).
Here we make three contributions to address the key modes
of light propagation, under the common single scattering
assumption for dilute media. First, we show through extensive simulations that single-scattered light from a source
can be approximated by a point light source with a single
direction. This alleviates the need to handle light source
blur explicitly. Next, we model the blur due to scattering of
light from the object. We measure the object point-spread
function and introduce a simple deconvolution method. Finally, we show how imaging fluorescence emission where
available, eliminates the backscatter component and increases the signal-to-noise ratio. Experimental results in a
water tank, with different concentrations of scattering media added, show that deconvolution produces higher-quality
3D reconstructions than previous techniques, and that when
combined with fluorescence, can produce results similar to
that in clear water even for highly turbid media.

Our Method 2

Abstract

Naïve Method

University of California, San Diego , 2 University of Haifa , 3 Dropbox ,
{zmurez,ravir,kriegman}@cs.ucsd.edu, ttreibitz@univ.haifa.ac.il

Ground Truth

1

a

Uncorrected
Err Z: 14% Err N: 26°

b

Backscatter Subtracted
Err Z: 10% Err N: 25°

c

Deblurred Reflectance
Err Z: 4% Err N: 26°

d

Deblurred Fluorescence
Err Z: 4% Err N: 13°

e

Clear Water

Figure 1. 3D shape recovery of a squirt gun using photometric stereo in a scattering medium. [Left] one of the input images,
[Right] reconstruction results. Err Z is the mean absolute error
in the heights and captures the overall shape error, while Err N
is the mean angular error in the normals and captures the error
caused by noise. a) Result of standard photometric stereo in air.
It ignores the medium effects, and thus the shape is not well defined. b) Reconstruction result of a recent method [32]. c) By
applying our method to account for blur due to scattering from
the object, we improve the previous result and recover the correct
shape. However the surface still exhibits noise due to a small dynamic range after backscatter subtraction. d) Using fluorescence
to optically eliminate the backscatter prior to deblurring reduces
the noise and produces the best result. e) Result in clear water.

3415

