Deep Neural Decision Forests
Peter Kontschieder1

Madalina Fiterau∗,2

Microsoft Research1
Cambridge, UK

Antonio Criminisi1

Carnegie Mellon University2
Pittsburgh, PA

Abstract
We present Deep Neural Decision Forests – a novel approach that unifies classification trees with the representation learning functionality known from deep convolutional
networks, by training them in an end-to-end manner. To
combine these two worlds, we introduce a stochastic and
differentiable decision tree model, which steers the representation learning usually conducted in the initial layers of a (deep) convolutional network. Our model differs
from conventional deep networks because a decision forest provides the final predictions and it differs from conventional decision forests since we propose a principled,
joint and global optimization of split and leaf node parameters. We show experimental results on benchmark machine
learning datasets like MNIST and ImageNet and find onpar or superior results when compared to state-of-the-art
deep models. Most remarkably, we obtain Top5-Errors of
only 7.84%/6.38% on ImageNet validation data when integrating our forests in a single-crop, single/seven model
GoogLeNet architecture, respectively. Thus, even without
any form of training data set augmentation we are improving on the 6.67% error obtained by the best GoogLeNet architecture (7 models, 144 crops).

1. Introduction
Random forests [1, 4, 7] have a rich and successful history in machine learning in general and the computer vision
community in particular. Their performance has been empirically demonstrated to outperform most state-of-the-art
learners when it comes to handling high dimensional data
problems [6], they are inherently able to deal with multiclass problems, are easily distributable on parallel hardware
architectures while being considered to be close to an ideal
learner [11]. These facts and many (computationally) appealing properties make them attractive for various research
∗ The major part of this research project was undertaken when Madalina
was an intern with Microsoft Research Cambridge, UK.

Samuel Rota Bulò1,3

Fondazione Bruno Kessler3
Trento, Italy

areas and commercial products. In such a way, random
forests could be used as out-of-the-box classifiers for many
computer vision tasks such as image classification [3] or
semantic segmentation [5, 32], where the input space (and
corresponding data representation) they operate on is typically predefined and left unchanged.
One of the consolidated findings of modern, (very) deep
learning approaches [19, 23, 36] is that their joint and unified way of learning feature representations together with
their classifiers greatly outperforms conventional feature
descriptor & classifier pipelines, whenever enough training
data and computation capabilities are available. In fact, the
recent work in [12] demonstrated that deep networks could
even outperform humans on the task of image classification.
Similarly, the success of deep networks extends to speech
recognition [38] and automated generation of natural language descriptions of images [9].
Addressing random forests to learn both, proper representations of the input data and the final classifiers in a joint
manner is an open research field that has received little attention in the literature so far. Notable but limited exceptions are [18, 24] where random forests were trained in
an entangled setting, stacking intermediate classifier outputs with the original input data. The approach in [28]
introduced a way to integrate multi-layer perceptrons as
split functions, however, representations were learned only
locally at split node level and independently among split
nodes. While these attempts can be considered early forms
of representation learning in random forests, their prediction accuracies remained below the state-of-the-art.
In this work we present Deep Neural Decision Forests –
a novel approach to unify appealing properties from representation learning as known from deep architectures with
the divide-and-conquer principle of decision trees. We
introduce a stochastic, differentiable, and therefore backpropagation compatible version of decision trees, guiding
the representation learning in lower layers of deep convolutional networks. Thus, the task for representation learning
is to reduce the uncertainty on the routing decisions of a
sample taken at the split nodes, such that a globally defined

1467

