Mode-Seeking on Hypergraphs for Robust Geometric Model Fitting
Hanzi Wang1,∗ , Guobao Xiao1,∗ , Yan Yan1 , David Suter2
1

Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart City, School of Information Science and Engineering, Xiamen University, China
2

School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide, Australia

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel geometric model ﬁtting method, called Mode-Seeking on Hypergraphs (MSH),
to deal with multi-structure data even in the presence of severe outliers. The proposed method formulates geometric
model ﬁtting as a mode seeking problem on a hypergraph in
which vertices represent model hypotheses and hyperedges
denote data points. MSH intuitively detects model instances
by a simple and effective mode seeking algorithm. In addition to the mode seeking algorithm, MSH includes a similarity measure between vertices on the hypergraph and a
“weight-aware sampling” technique. The proposed method
not only alleviates sensitivity to the data distribution, but also is scalable to large scale problems. Experimental results
further demonstrate that the proposed method has signiﬁcant superiority over the state-of-the-art ﬁtting methods on
both synthetic data and real images.

(a)

*equal contribution

Weighting Score

0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
−1
−1
0

p2

The minimum T−distance

(c)

1. Introduction
Geometric model ﬁtting is a challenging research problem for a variety of applications in computer vision, such as
optical ﬂow calculation, motion segmentation and homography/fundamental matrix estimation. Given that data may
contain outliers, the task of geometric model ﬁtting is to
robustly estimate the number and the parameters of model
instances in the data.
A number of robust geometric model ﬁtting methods
(e.g., [2, 5, 6, 10, 16, 19]) have been proposed to work on
the task. One of the most popular robust ﬁtting methods is
RANSAC [5] due to its efﬁciency and simplicity. However, RANSAC is sensitive to the inlier scale and is originally
designed to ﬁt single-structure data. During the past few
decades, many ﬁtting methods have been proposed to deal
with multi-structure data, such as KF [2], PEARL [6], AKSWH [19], J-linkage [16] and T-linkage [10].
Recently, some hypergraph based methods, e.g., [7, 9,
12, 13, 20], have been proposed for model ﬁtting. Com-

(b)

0
1

1

p1

(d)

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Vertices

(e)

(f)

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed algorithm: (a) and (b) An image pair with SIFT features. (c) Hypergraph modelling in which
each vertex represents a model hypothesis and each hyperedge denotes a data point. (d) Weighted vertices (plotted using the ﬁrst
two parameters of the corresponding model hypotheses). (e) Mode seeking by searching for “authority peaks” on the hypergraph.
(f) Data points segmented according to the detected modes.

pared with a simple graph, a hypergraph involves high order similarities instead of pairwise similarities used on the
graph and it can describe more complex relationships among modes of interest. For example, Liu and Yan [9] proposed to use a random consensus graph (RCG) to ﬁt structures in data. Purkait et al. [13] proposed to use large hyperedges for face clustering and motion segmentation.
However, current ﬁtting methods are still far from being
practical to deal with real-world problems. Data clustering based ﬁtting methods (e.g., J-linkage and KF), are often
sensitive to unbalanced data (i.e., the numbers of inliers be4321
2902

