Multi-scale recognition with DAG-CNNs
Songfan Yang
College of Electronics and Information Engineering,
Sichuan University, China

Deva Ramanan
Robotics Institute,
Carnegie Mellon University, USA

syang@scu.edu.cn

deva@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
We explore multi-scale convolutional neural nets (CNNs)
for image classification. Contemporary approaches extract
features from a single output layer. By extracting features
from multiple layers, one can simultaneously reason about
high, mid, and low-level features during classification. The
resulting multi-scale architecture can itself be seen as a
feed-forward model that is structured as a directed acyclic
graph (DAG-CNNs). We use DAG-CNNs to learn a set of
multi-scale features that can be effectively shared between
coarse and fine-grained classification tasks. While finetuning such models helps performance, we show that even
“off-the-self” multi-scale features perform quite well. We
present extensive analysis and demonstrate state-of-the-art
classification performance on three standard scene benchmarks (SUN397, MIT67, and Scene15). In terms of the
heavily benchmarked MIT67 and Scene15 datasets, our results reduce the lowest previously-reported error by 23.9%
and 9.5%, respectively.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural nets (CNNs), pioneered by
Lecun and collaborators [19], now produce state-of-the-art
performance on many visual recognition tasks [17, 30, 33].
An attractive property is that it appear to serve as universal feature extractors, either as “off-the-shelf” features or
through a small amount of “fine tuning”. CNNs trained on
particular tasks such as large-scale image classification [5]
transfer extraordinarily well to other tasks such as object
detection [11], scene recognition [40], image retrieval [12],
etc [28].
Hierarchical chain models: CNNs are hierarchical
feed-forward architectures that compute progressively invariant representations of the input image. However, the appropriate level of invariance might be task-dependent. Distinguishing people and dogs requires a representation that
is robust to large spatial deformations, since people and
dogs can articulate. However, fine-grained categorization

coarse classes

person

Fine classes

dog

SUV

sedan
Output
layer

LayerN

Output
classifier

LayerN

Output
classifier

LayerN

Layer2

Layer2

Layer2

Layer1

Layer1

Layer1

CNN

Multi-scale CNN

DAG-CNN

Figure 1. Recognition typically require features at multiple scales.
Distinguishing a person versus dog requires highly invariant features robust to the deformation of each category. On the other
hand, fine-grained recognition likely requires detailed shape cues
to distinguish models of cars (top). We use these observations to
revisit deep convolutional neural net (CNN) architectures. Typical
approaches train a classifier using features from a single output
layer (left). We extract multi-scale features from multiple layers
to simultaneously distinguish coarse and fine classes. Such features come “for free” since they are already computed during the
feed-forward pass (middle). Interestingly, the entire multi-scale
predictor is still a feed-forward architecture that is no longer chainstructured, but a directed-acyclic graph (DAG) (right). We show
that DAG-CNNs can be discriminatively trained in an end-to-end
fashion, yielding state-of-the-art recognition results across various
recognition benchmarks.

of car models (or bird species) requires fine-scale features
that capture subtle shape cues. We argue that a universal
architecture capable of both tasks must employ some form
of multi-scale features for output prediction.
Multi-scale representations: Multi-scale representations are a classic concept in computer vision, dating back
to image pyramids [4], scale-space theory [21], and multi-

1215

