Extended Depth of Field Catadioptric Imaging Using Focal Sweep
Ryunosuke Yokoya∗
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027

Shree K. Nayar
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027

yokoya@cs.columbia.edu

nayar@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
Catadioptric imaging systems use curved mirrors to capture wide fields of view. However, due to the curvature of the
mirror, these systems tend to have very limited depth of field
(DOF), with the point spread function (PSF) varying dramatically over the field of view and as a function of scene
depth. In recent years, focal sweep has been used extensively to extend the DOF of conventional imaging systems.
It has been shown that focal sweep produces an integrated
point spread function (IPSF) that is nearly space-invariant
and depth-invariant, enabling the recovery of an extended
depth of field (EDOF) image by deconvolving the captured
focal sweep image with a single IPSF. In this paper, we use
focal sweep to extend the DOF of a catadioptric imaging
system. We show that while the IPSF is spatially varying when a curved mirror is used, it remains quasi depthinvariant over the wide field of view of the imaging system.
We have developed a focal sweep system where mirrors of
different shapes can be used to capture wide field of view
EDOF images. In particular, we show experimental results
using spherical and paraboloidal mirrors.

1. Introduction
Capturing images with wide fields of view is highly beneficial in applications such as surveillance, teleconferencing, and autonomous navigation [21, 22, 23, 28, 29]. Fisheye lenses and anamorphic lenses are often used to capture a wide field of view (FOV). However, they require
the use of a large number of lenses to correct for various
optical aberrations, and are difficult to design when the
FOV is greater than a hemisphere. In contrast, catadioptric imaging systems, which use a combination of mirrors
and lenses, provide the designer with significantly greater
flexibility in terms of resolution and FOV [21, 22, 23, 28].
Since the optical properties of mirrors are independent of
the wavelength of light, they do not produce chromatic aber∗ He was a visiting scientist from Sony Corporation, Japan.

rations like lenses do, which is a major advantage. However, when a curved mirror is used, the optical system suffers from greater field curvature and astigmatism which, in
turn, severely limits the depth of field (DOF).
An image formed via a curved mirror, such as a spherical or a paraboloidal mirror, has spatially varying blur [1],
which means that the entire FOV cannot be captured in focus with a single image. This problem is aggravated in
low-light conditions, where the system needs to be operated with a low F-number (large aperture). The problem becomes even more prominent when the system uses an image
sensor with a high resolution. One way to reduce the image
blur caused by a curved mirror is to use additional (corrective) lenses, or multiple mirrors that offset each other’s field
curvature effects [25]. This, however, causes the system to
be bulky and expensive.
A well-studied approach to extending the DOF of a conventional imaging system is focal sweep [2, 18, 20], in
which the focal plane is translated during the exposure time
of the image. It has been shown that a point spread function
(PSF) of the captured image is both nearly space-invariant
and nearly depth-invariant [20]. This PSF is called the integrated PSF (IPSF) and is used to deconvolve the captured
image to obtain one that has large DOF, without a significant reduction in signal-to-noise ratio (SNR).
The goal of this paper is to explore the use of focal sweep
to extend the DOF of a catadioptric imaging system. Unlike the IPSF of a conventional imaging system, the IPSF
of a catadioptric one with a curved mirror is spatially varying. To determine the suitability of focal sweep for extended
DOF (EDOF) catadioptric imaging, we seek to address the
following questions: (a) For any given point in the image,
what is the IPSF produced by a pre-selected focal sweep
range? (b) How much scene information is preserved by
this IPSF and how depth-invariant is it? (c) How does the
IPSF vary over the space of the image? (d) What is the optimal sweep range for a desired DOF?
We begin by developing a ray-tracing system for computing the PSF of a catadioptric imaging system with given
optical parameters. We use our ray-tracer to compute the
4321
3505

