A Self-paced Multiple-instance Learning Framework for Co-saliency Detection
Dingwen Zhang1, Deyu Meng2, Chao Li1, Lu Jiang3, Qian Zhao2, and Junwei Han1*
1
School of Automation, Northwestern Polytechnical University
2
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
{zhangdingwen2006yyy,junweihan2010,lllcho1314,timmy.zhaoqian}@gmail.com
dymeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, lujiang@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
As an interesting and emerging topic, co-saliency
detection aims at simultaneously extracting common
salient objects in a group of images. Traditional
co-saliency detection approaches heavily rely on human
knowledge for designing hand-crafted metrics to explore
the intrinsic patterns underlying co-salient objects. Such
strategies, however, always suffer from poor generalization
capability to flexibly adapt to various scenarios in real
applications, especially due to their lack of insightful
understanding of the biological mechanisms of human
visual co-attention. To alleviate this problem, we propose a
novel framework for this task, by naturally reformulating it
as a multiple-instance learning (MIL) problem and further
integrating it into a self-paced learning (SPL) regime. The
proposed framework on one hand is capable of fitting
insightful metric measurements and discovering common
patterns under co-salient regions in a self-learning way by
MIL, and on the other hand tends to promise the learning
reliability and stability by simulating the human learning
process through SPL. Experiments on benchmark datasets
have demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed
framework as compared with the state-of-the-arts.1

1. Introduction
The rapid development of the imaging equipment, e.g.,
cameras and smartphones, and the growing popularity of
social media, e.g., Flickr and Facebook, have resulted in an
explosion of digital images accessible in forms of personal
and internet photo-groups. Typically, such image groups
are huge in size and share common objects or events. Thus,
it is of great interest to identify the common and attractive
objects from all images in such groups. However, in
practice, the image groups are also quite complex due to
diverse background, illumination conditions, and view
point variations. Consequently, detecting the common and
attractive objects is also of great challenge. Against this
problem, co-saliency detection, as depicted in Fig. 1, has
* Corresponding author.

594

Figure 1: Examples illustrating the co-saliency detection problem
(the upper row) and its potential applications (two lower rows).

been proposed and attracting intensive research attention in
the recent years.
Co-saliency detection aims at exploring the most
important information, i.e., the common and salient
foreground object regions, from the image group with
implying priorities based on the human visual co-attention
[1]. As one extension of the traditional saliency detection [2,
3], co-saliency detection additionally explores the global
information at the group level. Thus it can not only be used
in the multi-camera system [4] directly, but also provide
useful common foreground prior for some real-world
applications, such as video foreground co-segmentation [5]
and image co-localization [6, 7]. In this paper, we mainly
focus on the fundament of this problem while specific
applications are beyond the scope of this paper.
Most existing works in co-saliency detection heavily rely
on manually designed metrics, e.g., the intra-image contrast
and the inter-image consistency, to formulate the properties
of the co-salient regions for achieving satisfactory

