Capturing and Inferring Dense Full-Body Human-Scene Contact
Chun-Hao P. Huang1

Hongwei Yi1 Markus Höschle1 Matvey Safroshkin1 Tsvetelina Alexiadis1
Senya Polikovsky1 Daniel Scharstein2 Michael J. Black1
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 Middlebury College

MultiIOI_201019_ID03585_parkingLot_

{paul.huang, firstname.lastname, black}@tuebingen.mpg.de, schar@middlebury.edu

Calibration06_Settings09_OverFence_
_1

a(a)

b (b)

c
(c)

Framevideos
id: 302,
447in natural scenarios and standard clothing together with ground-truth 3D
Figure 1. RICH is a new dataset containing
of402,
people
body pose and shape (a-b). A key novelty of RICH is that it also contains 3D scene scans, which enable dense and accurate labeling of
human-scene contact (c, green). We exploit this to learn a regressor called BSTRO that takes an image and infers human-scene contact.

Abstract
Inferring human-scene contact (HSC) is the first step toward understanding how humans interact with their surroundings. While detecting 2D human-object interaction
(HOI) and reconstructing 3D human pose and shape (HPS)
have enjoyed significant progress, reasoning about 3D
human-scene contact from a single image is still challenging. Existing HSC detection methods consider only a few
types of predefined contact, often reduce the body and scene
to a small number of primitives, and even overlook image
evidence. To predict human-scene contact from a single
image, we address the limitations above from both data
and algorithmic perspectives. We capture a new dataset
called RICH for “Real scenes, Interaction, Contact and
Humans.” RICH contains multiview outdoor/indoor video
sequences at 4K resolution, ground-truth 3D human bodies captured using markerless motion capture, 3D body
scans, and high resolution 3D scene scans. A key feature
of RICH is that it also contains accurate vertex-level contact labels on the body. Using RICH, we train a network
that predicts dense body-scene contacts from a single RGB
image. Our key insight is that regions in contact are always occluded so the network needs the ability to explore

the whole image for evidence. We use a transformer to
learn such non-local relationships and propose a new BodyScene contact TRansfOrmer (BSTRO). Very few methods
explore 3D contact; those that do focus on the feet only,
detect foot contact as a post-processing step, or infer contact from body pose without looking at the scene. To our
knowledge, BSTRO is the first method to directly estimate
3D body-scene contact from a single image. We demonstrate that BSTRO significantly outperforms the prior art.
Our code and dataset are available for research purposes
at: https://rich.is.tue.mpg.de

1. Introduction
Understanding human actions and behaviors has long
been studied in computer vision, with applications in
robotics, healthcare, virtual try-on, AR/VR, and beyond.
Remarkable progress has been made in both 2D human pose
detection [7,28,32,42,67,82] and 3D human pose and shape
estimation (HPS) from a single image [5, 36, 39, 40, 44, 56,
81, 95], thanks to realistic datasets annotated with 2D keypoints [1,33,46] and 3D data [30,34,49,66,77]. Despite this
progress, something important is missing. Even the most
basic human activities, such as walking, involve interaction

13274

