AdaptPose: Cross-Dataset Adaptation for 3D Human Pose Estimation by
Learnable Motion Generation
Mohsen Gholami, Bastian Wandt, Helge Rhodin, Rabab Ward, and Z. Jane Wang
University of British Columbia
{mgholami, rababw, zjanew}@ece.ubc.ca {wandt, rhodin}@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of cross-dataset generalization of 3D human pose estimation models. Testing a
pre-trained 3D pose estimator on a new dataset results in a
major performance drop. Previous methods have mainly
addressed this problem by improving the diversity of the
training data. We argue that diversity alone is not sufficient
and that the characteristics of the training data need to be
adapted to those of the new dataset such as camera viewpoint, position, human actions, and body size. To this end,
we propose AdaptPose, an end-to-end framework that generates synthetic 3D human motions from a source dataset
and uses them to fine-tune a 3D pose estimator. AdaptPose
follows an adversarial training scheme. From a source 3D
pose the generator generates a sequence of 3D poses and
a camera orientation that is used to project the generated
poses to a novel view. Without any 3D labels or camera
information AdaptPose successfully learns to create synthetic 3D poses from the target dataset while only being
trained on 2D poses. In experiments on the Human3.6M,
MPI-INF-3DHP, 3DPW, and Ski-Pose datasets our method
outperforms previous work in cross-dataset evaluations by
14% and previous semi-supervised learning methods that
use partial 3D annotations by 16%.

1. Introduction
Monocular 3D human pose estimation aims to reconstruct the 3D skeleton of the human body from 2D images.
Due to pose and depth ambiguities, it is well known to be an
inherently ill-posed problem. However, deep learning models are able to learn 2D to 3D correspondences and achieve
impressively accurate results when trained and tested on
similar datasets [1, 3, 6, 14, 27, 31, 32].
An often disregarded aspect is that the distribution of features in a dataset e.g. camera orientation and body poses
differ from one dataset to another. Therefore, a pre-trained
network underperforms when applied to images captured

Source Domain

Motion
Generator

Target Domain

Synthetic Motion

✅3d labels
✅Camera intrinsics
✅Camera extrinsics

Domain?

❌3d labels
❌Camera intrinsics
❌Camera extrinsics
✅Sample videos

Figure 1. AdaptPose generates synthetic motions to improve the
cross-dataset generalization. The source dataset has 3D labels
and camera information, while the target dataset has only sample videos. The synthetic motions are generated to belong to the
target dataset. Therefore fine-tuning the 3D pose estimator with
synthetic motions improves the generalization of the model.

from a different viewpoint or when they contain an activity
that is not present in the training dataset [42, 45]. As an example, Figure 1 shows images from the Human3.6M [15]
dataset on the left and images from the Ski-Pose [33, 35]
dataset on the right which we define as source domain and
target domain, respectively. Camera viewpoint, position,
human action, speed of motion, and body size significantly
differ between the source and target domain. This large domain gap causes 3D pose estimation models trained on the
source domain to make unreliable predictions for the target
domain [42, 45, 46]. We address this problem by generating
synthetic 3D data that lies within the distribution of the target domain and fine-tuning the pose estimation network by
the generated synthetic data. Our method does not require
3D labels or camera information from the target domain and
is only trained on sample videos from the target domain.
To the best of our knowledge, there are only two approaches that generate synthetic 2D-3D human poses for
cross-dataset generalization of 3D human pose estimators
[13, 23]. Li et al. [23] randomly generate new 2D-3D
pairs of the source dataset by substituting parts of the human body in 3D space and projecting the new 3D pose to

13075

