Uncertainty-Aware Deep Multi-View Photometric Stereo
Berk Kaya1

Suryansh Kumar1 * Carlos Oliveira1 Vittorio Ferrari2
ETH Zürich1 , Google Research2 , KU Leuven3

Abstract
This paper presents a simple and effective solution to
the longstanding classical multi-view photometric stereo
(MVPS) problem. It is well-known that photometric stereo
(PS) is excellent at recovering high-frequency surface details, whereas multi-view stereo (MVS) can help remove the
low-frequency distortion due to PS and retain the global geometry of the shape. This paper proposes an approach that
can effectively utilize such complementary strengths of PS
and MVS. Our key idea is to combine them suitably while
considering the per-pixel uncertainty of their estimates. To
this end, we estimate per-pixel surface normals and depth
using an uncertainty-aware deep-PS network and deepMVS network, respectively. Uncertainty modeling helps select reliable surface normal and depth estimates at each
pixel which then act as a true representative of the dense
surface geometry. At each pixel, our approach either selects or discards deep-PS and deep-MVS network prediction depending on the prediction uncertainty measure. For
dense, detailed, and precise inference of the object’s surface
profile, we propose to learn the implicit neural shape representation via a multilayer perceptron (MLP). Our approach
encourages the MLP to converge to a natural zero-level set
surface using the confident prediction from deep-PS and
deep-MVS networks, providing superior dense surface reconstruction. Extensive experiments on the DiLiGenT-MV
benchmark dataset show that our method provides highquality shape recovery with a much lower memory footprint
while outperforming almost all of the existing approaches.

1. Introduction
In the coming decade, dense 3D data acquisition of objects is likely to become one of the most important problems
in computer vision and industrial machine vision. Moreover, it can be helpful for a wide range of other cutting-edge
scientific disciplines such as metrology [12], geometry processing [4], forensics [44], etc. At present, it is widely accepted that methods such as structure-from-motion [21,55],
* Corresponding Author (k.sur46@gmail.com)

Luc Van Gool1,3

multi-view stereo [12], photometric stereo [30, 54, 61], and
other standalone approaches [34,35,43,47,60] are not sufficient on their own to provide detailed and precise 3D reconstruction for all kinds of surfaces [44]. Therefore, methods
that combine complementary surface estimates by leveraging more than one modality are often preferred [36, 46].
Among the passive 3D shape acquisition methods, multiview stereo (MVS) has become the most popular approach
[13, 55, 62], especially after the proliferation of cheap digital cameras for high-quality imaging. Yet, MVS works best
for Lambertian textured surfaces and gives unreliable results for non-textured objects with non-Lambertian surface
reflectance property. Moreover, high-frequency surface details such as indentations and scratches are difficult to recover using MVS methods (see Fig.1(a)).
On the other hand, photometric stereo (PS) is magnificent at recovering high-frequency surface details using
light-varying images [61]. It is also effective for nontextured, and non-Lambertian surfaces [6]. PS allows the
recovery of per-pixel depth of the object by integration of
the estimated surface normals [24]. However, PS suffers
from the main shortcoming: The recovered surface profile is
globally deformed by a low-frequency distortion [46]. Such
distortion is likely due to numerical integration of the surface normal map without explicit constraints between multiple disconnected regions of the object’s surface [46,52,64]
or non-directional lighting effects (see Fig.1(b)).
Combining the complementary responses of MVS and
PS is known as multi-view photometric stereo (MVPS)
[22]. In this paper, we propose an approach that can effectively exploit such complementary surface information. Our
work leverages recent advances in deep neural networks. To
this end, we use a PatchMatch-based deep-MVS network
[59] to infer the per-pixel depth and a CNN-based deepPS network [27] to infer per-pixel surface normal. But, we
know that such deep network models have their accuracy
limits and can predict erroneous depth or surface normals
in certain parts of the object. In that case, if we naively
combine the output predicted by these networks, we may
end up having a bad overall result. To resolve this, we extend the deep-PS and deep-MVS networks with per-pixel
uncertainty estimation capability. Using the prediction uncertainty as a measure, we select and combine only reliable

12601

