Retrieval-based Spatially Adaptive Normalization for Semantic Image Synthesis
Yupeng Shi 1 , Xiao Liu 1 , Yuxiang Wei 2 , Zhongqin Wu 1 , Wangmeng Zuo2,3 (

)

1

Tomorrow Advancing Life, 2 Harbin Institute of Technology, 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory
{csypshi, ender.liux, yuxiang.wei.cs}@gmail.com wuzhongqin@tal.com wmzuo@hit.edu.cn

(a) SPADE
(b) SEAN
(c) Ours
Figure 1. Synthesized results of SPADE [22], SEAN [34] and our method. (a) With the class-level guidance, SPADE produces blurry
synthesis results. (b) With the region-level style vector, SEAN generates better details, but still prefers spatially uniform synthesis result.
(c) Benefited from pixel level fine-grained guidance, our RESAIL is effective in generating visually plausible image with clear details.

Abstract
Semantic image synthesis is a challenging task with
many practical applications. Albeit remarkable progress
has been made in semantic image synthesis with spatiallyadaptive normalization, existing methods usually normalize the feature activations under the coarse-level guidance
(e.g., semantic class). However, different parts of a semantic object (e.g., wheel and window of car) are quite different in structures and textures, making blurry synthesis results usually inevitable due to the missing of fine-grained
guidance. In this paper, we propose a novel normalization module, termed as REtrieval-based Spatially AdaptIve normaLization (RESAIL), for introducing pixel level
fine-grained guidance to the normalization architecture.
Specifically, we first present a retrieval paradigm by finding a content patch of the same semantic class from training set with the most similar shape to each test semantic mask. Then, the retrieved patches are composited into
retrieval-based guidance, which can be used by RESAIL for
pixel level fine-grained modulation on feature activations,
thereby greatly mitigating blurry synthesis results. Moreover, distorted ground-truth images are also utilized as alternatives of retrieval-based guidance for feature normalization, further benefiting model training and improving visual quality of generated images. Experiments on several
challenging datasets show that our RESAIL performs favorably against state-of-the-arts in terms of quantitative metrics, visual quality, and subjective evaluation. The source
code is available at https://github.com/ShiYupeng/RESAIL-For-SIS.

1. Introduction
Semantic image synthesis aims to generate photorealistic image from the given semantic map. It is an im-

portant problem in computer vision that can be adopted in
a variety of downstream tasks such as virtual idol, special
effect, robotics [13] and image manipulation [9].
Humans have a remarkable ability to produce new creation from past experiences as references. In their early
ages, children can paint a picture including flowers, sky and
buildings by referring to templates of representative objects
and backgrounds. Thus, producing something from references is a natural way for image generation because editing the references and stitching them is relatively easy than
creating the entire image out of thin air. Inspired by this
spirit, early works have well studied reference-based image
synthesis, where proper references are searched from external memories [4, 7, 11, 14, 16]. Nonetheless, the retrieval,
editing and stitching are conducted in separated and handcrafted manners, which are optimized in a sub-optimal way.
SIMS [23] leverages deep network for further improving the
quality of reference-based synthesized results, but it simply
takes the retrieved image as network input, which is limited
in synthesizing complex real-world scenes.
With the recent advance of deep generative networks,
some recent studies [21,22,24,25,34] tackle semantic image
synthesis using a spatially-adaptive normalization architecture, achieving significant performance improvements.
However, with the coarse-level guidance (e.g., semantic
class), these methods modulate the activations inside each
semantic object in spatially uniform manner, regardless of
the huge internal variation of the objects. This inevitably
leads to blurry results, especially for large semantic object
with complex parts. We take two representative spatiallyadaptive normalization architectures as examples in Fig. 1.
SPADE [22] leverages the semantic layout as input and
learns the modulation parameters through several convo-

11224

