An Efficient Training Approach for Very Large Scale Face Recognition
Kai Wang1, 2 * Shuo Wang 2 * Panpan Zhang1 Zhipeng Zhou2 Zheng Zhu3
Xiaobo Wang4 Xiaojiang Peng5 Baigui Sun2 Hao Li 2 Yang You1²
1
National University of Singapore 2 Alibaba Group 3 Tsinghua University
4
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 5 Shenzhen Technology University
Code: https://github.com/tiandunx/FFC

Abstract
Face recognition has achieved significant progress in
deep learning era due to the ultra-large-scale and welllabeled datasets. However, training on the outsize datasets
is time-consuming and takes up a lot of hardware resource.
Therefore, designing an efficient training approach is indispensable. The heavy computational and memory costs
mainly result from the million-level dimensionality of the
fully connected (FC) layer. To this end, we propose a
novel training approach, termed Faster Face Classification (F2 C), to alleviate time and cost without sacrificing
the performance. This method adopts Dynamic Class Pool
(DCP) for storing and updating the identities’ features dynamically, which could be regarded as a substitute for the
FC layer. DCP is efficiently time-saving and cost-saving,
as its smaller size with the independence from the whole
face identities together. We further validate the proposed
F2 C method across several face benchmarks and private
datasets, and display comparable results, meanwhile the
speed is faster than state-of-the-art FC-based methods in
terms of recognition accuracy and hardware costs. Moreover, our method is further improved by a well-designed
dual data loader including indentity-based and instancebased loaders, which makes it more efficient for updating
DCP parameters.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) has achieved many remarkable results in computer vision tasks [4, 6, 7, 26, 27,
37, 38, 39, 40]. Face recognition can be regarded as one of
the most popular research topics in computer vision. Many
large scale and well-labelled datasets have been released
over the past decade [11, 15, 47, 49, 53]. The training
* Equal

contribution.

(kai.wang@comp.nus.edu.sg,

shuo514@sina.com)
² Corresponding author (youy@comp.nus.edu.sg).

wang-

process of face recognition aims to learn identity-related
embedding space, where the intra-class distances are reduced and inter-class distances are enlarged in the meanwhile. Previous works [11, 42, 43] have proved that training on a large dataset can obtain a substantial improvement
over a small dataset. To this end, academia and industry
collected ultra-large-scale datasets including 10 even 100
million face identities. Google collected 200 million face
images consisting of 8 million identities [28]. Tsinghua introduced WebFace260M [53] including 260 million faces,
which is the largest public face dataset and achieves stateof-the-art performance.
In general, these ultra-large-scale datasets boost the face
recognition performance by a large margin. However, with
the growth of face identities and limitations of hardware,
there are mainly two problems in training phase. The first
problem results from the training time and hardware resource occupancy. As shown in Fig 1, the time cost and
GPU memory occupancy of the FC layer are much greater
than those of the backbone when the face identities reach
10 million. To address these issues, many previous methods [1, 20] focus on reducing the time and resource cost of
the FC layer. Previous methods can be summarized into two
categories. One [1] tries to distribute the whole FC to different GPUs, introducing heavy communication costs. The
other [50] attempts to reduce the computing cost by selecting a certain ratio of neurons from the FC layer randomly,
but it still needs to store the whole FC parameters. When
the identities reach 10 or 100 million, storing the whole FC
parameters is extremely expensive. How to effectively reduce the computational and memory costs caused by the
high-dimensional FC layer? An intuitive idea is to decrease
the size of FC or design an alternative paradigm, which is
hardly explored before. The second problem is related to the
update efficiency and speed of FC parameters. As pointed
by [9], the optimal solution for the class center is actually
the mean of all samples of this class. Identities that have
rare samples with very low frequency of sampling will have
very little opportunity to updat class centers through their

4083

