Structure-Aware Flow Generation for Human Body Reshaping
Jianqiang Ren, Yuan Yao, Biwen Lei, Miaomiao Cui, Xuansong Xie
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
{jianqiang.rjq, ryan.yy, biwen.lbw, miaomiao.cmm}@alibaba-inc.com, xingtong.xxs@taobao.com

Abstract
Body reshaping is an important procedure in portrait
photo retouching. Due to the complicated structure and
multifarious appearance of human bodies, existing methods either fall back on the 3D domain via body morphable
model or resort to keypoint-based image deformation, leading to inefficiency and unsatisfied visual quality. In this
paper, we address these limitations by formulating an endto-end flow generation architecture under the guidance of
body structural priors, including skeletons and Part Affinity Fields, and achieve unprecedentedly controllable performance under arbitrary poses and garments. A compositional attention mechanism is introduced for capturing both
visual perceptual correlations and structural associations
of the human body to reinforce the manipulation consistency among related parts. For a comprehensive evaluation,
we construct the first large-scale body reshaping dataset,
namely BR-5K, which contains 5,000 portrait photos as
well as professionally retouched targets. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach significantly outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods in terms of visual
performance, controllability, and efficiency. The dataset
is available at our website: https://github.com/
JianqiangRen/FlowBasedBodyReshaping.

1. Introduction
Portrait photography retouching is widely used in various fields, such as social media, weddings, and advertisements. While automatic face reshaping is well researched
[18, 24, 28, 33] and employed in many applications (e.g., Instagram, Tictok), automatic body reshaping, which generally aims to make figure looks more shapely and attractive,
is still far from being settled due to the complicated structure and appearance of human bodies. In fact, body reshaping is a troublesome task even for professional artists. The
artists usually rely on Liquify tool in image editing software, adjust the distortion brush frequently, and manually
edit through every single part of body areas. It takes considerable skill and time to achieve a visually pleasing result.
Traditional solutions for body reshaping task can be cat-

Input

Result

Input

Result

Figure 1. Our approach provides an efficient and controllable solution for human body reshaping, allowing figures to be more slender (top) or muscular (bottom). The corresponding deformation
flows are showcased in the top-left corners. All of the images presented in this paper are included in the proposed BR-5K dataset.

egorized into either rule-based or 3D model-based methods.
The rule-based methods employ non-rigid image deformation [12, 16] according to a set of body contour keypoints
following some hand crafted rules, and 3D model-based approaches [15, 30, 31, 39] try to reconstruct 3D morphable
model from a single portrait image, and adjust body shape
by manipulating a small set of parameters corresponding
to body semantic attributes. Unfortunately, neither of them
can satisfy the quality and efficiency requirements in practice. Rule-based methods can only work under standard
poses and garments, and body contour detection is not robust enough for generating a reliable, quality-assured reshaping result. 3D model-based methods are learned from
a limited number of full-body scans so that cannot span the
entire human shape space, especially for extreme camera directions and poses. Moreover, precisely recovering and registering a 3D model to image is challenging as well, generally needing considerable user assistance for pose and shape
fitting [39], or extra depth information [15, 30].
Powered by deep generative technology [9, 25, 40], several methods [13, 41] propose to directly generate person
images guided by pose information. Nevertheless, they are

7754

