Physically Disentangled Intra- and Inter-domain Adaptation
for Varicolored Haze Removal
Yi Li, Yi Chang*, Yan Gao, Changfeng Yu, Luxin Yan
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Multispectral Information Processing,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology

1. Introduction
Haze, as a common weather phenomenon, would result
in low contrast and severe visibility degradation, which not
only leads to poor visual quality but also does serious harm
to high-level vision tasks, such as scene classification [35],
object detection [25] and semantic segmentation [41]. The
* Corresponding author.

Bluish

Learning-based image dehazing methods have achieved
marvelous progress during the past few years. On one hand,
most approaches heavily rely on synthetic data and may
face difficulties to generalize well in real scenes, due to the
huge domain gap between synthetic and real images. On the
other hand, very few works have considered the varicolored
haze, caused by chromatic casts in real scenes. In this work,
our goal is to handle the new task: real-world varicolored
haze removal. To this end, we propose a physically disentangled joint intra- and inter-domain adaptation paradigm, in
which intra-domain adaptation focuses on color correction
and inter-domain procedure transfers knowledge between
synthetic and real domains. We first learn to physically
disentangle haze images into three components complying
with the scattering model: background, transmission map,
and atmospheric light. Since haze color is determined by
atmospheric light, we perform intra-domain adaptation by
specifically translating atmospheric light from varicolored
space to unified color-balanced space, and then reconstructing color-balanced haze image through the scattering model.
Consequently, we perform inter-domain adaptation between
the synthetic and real images by mutually exchanging the
background and other two components. Then we can reconstruct both identity and domain-translated haze images with
self-consistency and adversarial loss. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method over the
state-of-the-art for real varicolored image dehazing.

Grayish

Abstract

Orange

{li yi, yichang, gaoyan 117, ycf, yanluxin}@hust.edu.cn

Haze Image

DA-Dehazing

Ours

Figure 1. The visual examples of dehazing results for real-world
varicolored haze images. The second and third column show the
results of DA-Dehazing [42] and proposed method, respectively.

haze procedure can be mathematically formulated via the
well-known atmosphere scattering model [29, 34]:
  I(x) = J(x)t(x)+A(1-t(x)), \label {eq1} \vspace *{-3mm} 
(1)
where I(x) is observed haze image, and J(x) is haze-free
background to be restored. A and t(x) = e−βd(x) denote
atmospheric light and transmission map, and β and d(x)
represent scattering coefficient and depth respectively. The
goal of dehazing is to estimate J(x) from hazy input I(x).
The image dehazing has been extensively studied during
the past few years [6, 7, 11, 18, 25, 28, 31, 39, 50]. Benefitting
from powerful representation ability of convolutional neural
networks (CNNs), CNN-based supervised learning methods
have made marvelous progress [8, 12, 13, 32, 37, 45]. Since it
is difficult to obtain labeled clean groundtruth, it is widely
accepted to simulate paired clean/haze images via the scattering model for CNN training. However, the inter-domain
gap between real and synthetic data makes these supervised
methods hard to generalize well for the real haze images. To
overcome this issue, the semi-supervised [9, 27, 33, 42] and
the unsupervised dehazing methods [17, 23, 24, 30, 46, 47]
have been naturally proposed. The unsupervised methods
mainly utilize the prior knowledge of the real images by min-

5841

