Neural 3D Scene Reconstruction with the Manhattan-world Assumption

This paper addresses the challenge of reconstructing
3D indoor scenes from multi-view images. Many previous works have shown impressive reconstruction results on
textured objects, but they still have difficulty in handling
low-textured planar regions, which are common in indoor
scenes. An approach to solving this issue is to incorporate
planer constraints into the depth map estimation in multiview stereo-based methods, but the per-view plane estimation and depth optimization lack both efficiency and multiview consistency. In this work, we show that the planar
constraints can be conveniently integrated into the recent
implicit neural representation-based reconstruction methods. Specifically, we use an MLP network to represent the
signed distance function as the scene geometry. Based on
the Manhattan-world assumption, planar constraints are
employed to regularize the geometry in floor and wall regions predicted by a 2D semantic segmentation network.
To resolve the inaccurate segmentation, we encode the semantics of 3D points with another MLP and design a novel
loss that jointly optimizes the scene geometry and semantics in 3D space. Experiments on ScanNet and 7-Scenes
datasets show that the proposed method outperforms previous methods by a large margin on 3D reconstruction quality. The code and supplementary materials are available at
https://zju3dv.github.io/manhattan_sdf.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 3D scenes from multi-view images is a
cornerstone of many applications such as augmented reality, robotics, and autonomous driving. Given input images, traditional methods [43, 44, 58] generally estimate the
depth map for each image based on the multi-view stereo
(MVS) algorithms and then fuse estimated depth maps into
3D models. Although these methods achieve successful reThe authors from Zhejiang University are affiliated with the State Key
Lab of CAD&CG and the ZJU-SenseTime Joint Lab of 3D Vision. ∗ Equal
contribution. † Corresponding author: Xiaowei Zhou.

Semantic segmentation

Abstract

Geometry

Haoyu Guo1∗ Sida Peng1∗ Haotong Lin1 Qianqian Wang2
Guofeng Zhang1 Hujun Bao1 Xiaowei Zhou1†
1
Zhejiang University 2 Cornell University

Joint optimization

Figure 1. Core idea. We represent the geometry and semantics of
3D scenes with implicit neural representations, which enables the
joint optimization of geometry reconstruction and semantic segmentation in 3D space based on the Manhattan-world assumption.

construction in most cases, they have difficulty in handling
low-textured regions, e.g., floors and walls of indoor scenes,
due to the unreliable stereo matching in these regions.
To improve the reconstruction of low-textured regions,
a typical approach is leveraging the planar prior of manmade scenes, which has long been explored in literature
[8,10,11,41,48,51]. A renowned example is the Manhattanworld assumption [8], i.e., the surfaces of man-made scenes
should be aligned with three dominant directions. These
works either use plane estimation as a postprocessing step
to inpaint the missing depth values in low-textured regions,
or integrate planar constraints in stereo matching or depth
optimization. However, all of them focus on optimizing
per-view depth maps instead of the full scene models in 3D
space. As a result, depth estimation and plane segmentation
could still be inconsistent among views, yielding suboptimal reconstruction quality as demonstrated by our experimental results in Section 5.3.
There is a recent trend to represent 3D scenes as implicit neural representations [32, 46, 55] and learn the representations from images with differentiable renderers. In
particular, [49, 54, 55] use a signed distance field (SDF) to
represent the scene and render it into images based on the
sphere tracing or volume rendering. Thanks to the welldefined surfaces of SDFs, they recover high-quality 3D ge-

5511

