Privacy-preserving Online AutoML for Domain-Specific Face Detection
Chenqian Yan1† * Yuge Zhang1† Quanlu Zhang1 Yaming Yang1
Xinyang Jiang1 Yuqing Yang1 Baoyuan Wang2
Microsoft Research1 Xiaobing.ai2
im.cqyan@gmail.com,{yugzhan,quzha,yayaming,xinyangjiang,yuqyang}@microsoft.com,wangbaoyuan@xiaobing.ai

Abstract

recommend

Task 2

tuning experience
update

Performance
ranker (T2)

transmit

recommend
tuning experience
Task N

Search Space

* Work done as an intern at MSRA. † Equal contribution.

Performance
ranker (T1)

transmit

͙

Face detection [6, 28, 51, 68, 69] is one of the most fundamental problems in computer vision. Although, rapid
progress has been made lately for the general cases, bespoken face detection models are still in high-demand for
domain-specific scenarios. This is because, the challenges
for detecting faces from an outdoor surveillance camera
might be different from a panoramic indoor fish-eye camera
[13]; likewise, the challenges for detecting occluded faces
(e.g., masks [21]) are also quite different from selfie faces

update

͙

1. Introduction

Task 1

Server

Time

Despite the impressive progress of general face detection, the tuning of hyper-parameters and architectures is
still critical for the performance of a domain-specific face
detector. Though existing AutoML works can speedup such
process, they either require tuning from scratch for a new
scenario or do not consider data privacy. To scale up, we
derive a new AutoML setting from a platform perspective.
In such setting, new datasets sequentially arrive at the platform, where an architecture and hyper-parameter configuration is recommended to train the optimal face detector
for each dataset. This, however, brings two major challenges: (1) how to predict the best configuration for any
given dataset without touching their raw images due to the
privacy concern? and (2) how to continuously improve the
AutoML algorithm from previous tasks and offer a better
warm-up for future ones? We introduce “HyperFD”, a new
privacy-preserving online AutoML framework for face detection. At its core part, a novel meta-feature representation
of a dataset as well as its learning paradigm is proposed.
Thanks to HyperFD, each local task (client) is able to effectively leverage the learning “experience” of previous tasks
without uploading raw images to the platform; meanwhile,
the meta-feature extractor is continuously learned to better trade off the bias and variance. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our design.

Client

update

Performance
ranker (TN)

transmit

recommend
tuning experience

Meta-feature extractor
Configuration encoder

Dataset embedding
Configuration embedding

Figure 1. Overview of HyperFD framework, which aims to build
a shared AutoML platform that enables exchanging tuning experience among customers, without access to customers’ raw datasets.
The performance ranker consists of meta-feature extractor and
configuration encoder. Both are continuously updated to incorporate tuning experience on the latest task.

captured by cellphone cameras [30]. Therefore, extensive
manual parameter tuning and large computing resource is
required in order to obtain the best specialized model for
each domain. To scale up the scenarios, we see a clear industry demand of building shared AI model training platform so as to leverage pretrained representation from other
relevant tasks. For example, Microsoft Custom Vision [34]
can train specialized object detection models given a set of
user-uploaded images for engineers without deep learning
background. This, however, comes at the cost of sacrificing
the face data privacy, for face detection models. Similarly,
other AutoML tools (e.g., NNI [35]) either do not consider
the data privacy or still require tuning from scratch for a
new scenario, which is not secure and scalable.
The training of domain-specific face detection for realworld scenarios requires a new problem setup from a
platform perspective, where the platform receives new

4134

