COTS: Collaborative Two-Stream Vision-Language Pre-Training Model
for Cross-Modal Retrieval

1

Haoyu Lu1,2 Nanyi Fei1 Yuqi Huo1 Yizhao Gao1 Zhiwu Lu1,2, * Ji-Rong Wen1,2
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
{lhy1998, feinanyi, bnhony, gaoyizhao, luzhiwu, jrwen}@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
Large-scale single-stream pre-training has shown dramatic performance in image-text retrieval. Regrettably, it
faces low inference efficiency due to heavy attention layers.
Recently, two-stream methods like CLIP and ALIGN with
high inference efficiency have also shown promising performance, however, they only consider instance-level alignment between the two streams (thus there is still room for
improvement). To overcome these limitations, we propose
a novel COllaborative Two-Stream vision-language pretraining model termed COTS for image-text retrieval by enhancing cross-modal interaction. In addition to instancelevel alignment via momentum contrastive learning, we
leverage two extra levels of cross-modal interactions in
our COTS: (1) Token-level interaction – a masked visionlanguage modeling (MVLM) learning objective is devised
without using a cross-stream network module, where variational autoencoder is imposed on the visual encoder to generate visual tokens for each image. (2) Task-level interaction – a KL-alignment learning objective is devised between
text-to-image and image-to-text retrieval tasks, where the
probability distribution per task is computed with the negative queues in momentum contrastive learning. Under a fair
comparison setting, our COTS achieves the highest performance among all two-stream methods and comparable performance (but with 10,800× faster in inference) w.r.t. the
latest single-stream methods. Importantly, our COTS is also
applicable to text-to-video retrieval, yielding new state-ofthe-art on the widely-used MSR-VTT dataset.

1. Introduction
The pretrain-then-finetune paradigm has achieved great
success in the field of natural language processing (NLP),
where models are first pre-trained with large-scale data
(e.g., BERT [10], RoBERTa [30], and GPT3 [5]) and then
finetuned for each downstream task. Recently, this prac* The corresponding author.

tice has also shown its effectiveness in the vision-language
(VL) domain [9, 17–19, 28, 37, 52], where the performance
on various VL tasks (e.g., image-text retrieval, video-text
retrieval, and visual question answering) has been significantly improved by vision-language pre-training (VLP).
VLP models typically take huge image-text pairs as input and aim to learn joint image-text representations with
single- and cross-modal pre-training objectives, such as
masked token prediction and image-text matching.
Existing VLP models can be divided into two groups:
single-stream models and two-stream ones. Single-stream
VLP models (see Figure 1(a)) often utilize cross-modal
fusion modules (e.g., Transformer [43] layers) to model
fine-grained interactions between image regions and text
words. Although these models achieve promising performance, they have two limitations: (1) During inference,
all possible query-candidate pairs need to be fed into the
fusion modules to calculate similarity scores, resulting in
huge computational cost. (2) To obtain meaningful image regions, single-stream models typically adopt object
detectors, which are expensive in both computation and
data annotation. For example, extracting object regions
from a 800×1,333 image takes about 900ms for Faster RCNN [39], while ViT-base [11] only needs 15ms (i.e., 60×
faster). In contrast, two-stream VLP models [22, 44] apply separate image and text encoders and match image-text
pairs on the final embedding level. Although two-stream
models (see Figure 1(b)–(c)) are much more efficient than
single-stream ones, they only achieve sub-optimal results
due to the lack of closer image-text interactions. Therefore,
a few works [42, 46] (see Figure 1(b)) reconsider object detectors, and most recent ones (e.g., CLIP [37], ALIGN [18],
and WenLan [17]) resort to extra large pre-training data
crawled from the Internet. However, they still fail to model
fine-grained interactions between the two modalities.
To address the inefficiency of single-stream VLP models and the lack of closer vision-language interactions of
two-stream ones, we propose a novel COllaborative TwoStream vision-language pre-training model termed COTS

15692

