SimMIM: a Simple Framework for Masked Image Modeling
Zhenda Xie1 * Zheng Zhang2* Yue Cao2*
Yutong Lin3 Jianmin Bao2 Zhuliang Yao1 Qi Dai2 Han Hu2*
1
Tsinghua University 2 Microsoft Research Asia 3 Xi’an Jiaotong University
{t-zhxie,zhez,yuecao,t-yutonglin,jianmin.bao,t-zhuyao,qid,hanhu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
This paper presents SimMIM, a simple framework for
masked image modeling. We have simplified recently proposed relevant approaches, without the need for special
designs, such as block-wise masking and tokenization via
discrete VAE or clustering. To investigate what makes a
masked image modeling task learn good representations, we
systematically study the major components in our framework, and find that the simple designs of each component
have revealed very strong representation learning performance: 1) random masking of the input image with a moderately large masked patch size (e.g., 32) makes a powerful pre-text task; 2) predicting RGB values of raw pixels by direct regression performs no worse than the patch
classification approaches with complex designs; 3) the prediction head can be as light as a linear layer, with no
worse performance than heavier ones. Using ViT-B, our
approach achieves 83.8% top-1 fine-tuning accuracy on
ImageNet-1K by pre-training also on this dataset, surpassing previous best approach by +0.6%. When applied to a
larger model with about 650 million parameters, SwinV2H, it achieves 87.1% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet-1K using
only ImageNet-1K data. We also leverage this approach to
address the data-hungry issue faced by large-scale model
training, that a 3B model (SwinV2-G) is successfully trained
to achieve state-of-the-art accuracy on four representative
vision benchmarks using 40× less labelled data than that
in previous practice (JFT-3B). The code is available at
https://github.com/microsoft/SimMIM .

1. Introduction
“What I cannot create, I do not understand.”
— Richard Feynman
“Masked signal modeling” is one such task that learns
to create: masking a portion of input signals and trying to
predict these masked signals. In NLP, following this phi* Equal. Zhenda, Yutong, Zhuliang are long-term interns at MSRA.

Figure 1. An illustration of our simple framework for masked language modeling, named SimMIM. It predicts raw pixel values of
the randomly masked patches by a lightweight one-layer head, and
performs learning using a simple ℓ1 loss.

losophy, self-supervised learning approaches built on the
masked language modeling tasks have largely repainted the
field [2,12,30], i.e., learning very large-scale language models by using huge amounts of unlabeled data has been shown
to generalize well to a broad range of NLP applications.
In computer vision, although there are pioneers leveraging this philosophy for self-supervised representation learning [13, 57, 58], in previous years, this line of work was
almost buried by the contrastive learning approaches [8, 20,
48]. The different difficulties of applying this task to the
language and visual domains can be explained by the differences between two modalities. One of the differences is
that images exhibit stronger locality: pixels that are close to
each other tend to be highly correlated [25], so the task can
be done by duplicating close pixels rather than by semantic reasoning. Another difference is that visual signals are
raw and low-level, while text tokens are human-generated
high-level concepts. This raises a question of whether the
prediction of low-level signals is useful for high-level visual recognition tasks. A third difference is that the visual
signal is continuous, and the text token is discrete. It is unknown how classification-based masked language modeling
approaches can be adapted to handle continuous visual signals well.
Until recently, there have been trials that attempt to
bridge modality gaps and resolve the obstacles, by introduc-

9653

