Learning to Imagine: Diversify Memory for
Incremental Learning using Unlabeled Data
Wei-Shi Zheng1,2,3†
Yi-Xing Peng1,3 *
Yu-Ming Tang1,3 *
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
1

{tangym9, pengyx23}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

wszheng@ieee.org

Exemplars

airplane
+ blue sky? Imagine it!
…

Deep neural network (DNN) suffers from catastrophic
forgetting when learning incrementally, which greatly limits
its applications. Although maintaining a handful of samples
(called “exemplars”) of each task could alleviate forgetting to some extent, existing methods are still limited by the
small number of exemplars since these exemplars are too
few to carry enough task-specific knowledge, and therefore
the forgetting remains. To overcome this problem, we propose to “imagine” diverse counterparts of given exemplars
referring to the abundant semantic-irrelevant information
from unlabeled data. Specifically, we develop a learnable
feature generator to diversify exemplars by adaptively generating diverse counterparts of exemplars based on semantic information from exemplars and semantically-irrelevant
information from unlabeled data. We introduce semantic
contrastive learning to enforce the generated samples to be
semantic consistent with exemplars and perform semanticdecoupling contrastive learning to encourage diversity of
generated samples. The diverse generated samples could
effectively prevent DNN from forgetting when learning new
tasks. Our method does not bring any extra inference cost
and outperforms state-of-the-art methods on two benchmarks CIFAR-100 and ImageNet-Subset by a clear margin.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the rapid development of
deep neural networks (DNNs) in various tasks [10, 15, 26].
However, when a pretrained deep model learns a new task,
it tends to forget the knowledge learned from previous tasks
in the absence of the corresponding training data [1, 7, 9,
17, 19]. Such a catastrophic forgetting phenomenon greatly
limits the real-world application of deep models because it
* Both authors contributed equally
† Corresponding author

Diverse
Counterparts

Refer to

Unlabeled
data

Grey sky

Blue sky

…
Road

…

Indoor

(a) Intuitive understanding of our method.
Feature Generator

Exemplars
Semantic
information

Generate

Feature space visualization

Unlabeled data
Exemplar

Dropped data
Generated exemplar

(b) Illustration of our method and TSNE visualization.

Figure 1. (a). Our motivation. We propose to ‘imagine’ diverse
counterparts of the limited exemplars referring to the semanticallyirrelevant information from unlabeled data. (b). We propose a
feature generator to ‘imagine’ diverse counterparts by adaptively
mixing semantic information from exemplars with semanticallyirrelevant information from unlabeled data. In the TSNE visualization, blue/green/red dots are the features of one class’s generated samples/exemplars/real data. We observe that the exemplars
and generated samples cover real data. Best viewed in color.

is impractical to maintain the training data of each task due
to privacy concerns and so forth [4, 11, 20, 22, 29, 30, 32].
To overcome catastrophic forgetting, incremental learning methods are developed. Previous works widely adopt
rehearsal strategy [3, 6, 16, 22, 32]: storing a limited quantity of samples called exemplars from the original training
dataset and reusing them against forgetting when the model

9549

