Text-to-Image Synthesis based on Object-Guided Joint-Decoding Transformer
Fuxiang Wu1,2 , Liu Liu3 , Fusheng Hao1,2 , Fengxiang He4 , Jun Cheng1,2∗
1
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Robotics and Intelligent System,
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, CAS, China
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
3
The University of Sydney, Australia
4
JD.com, Beijing, China
{fx.wu1, fs.hao, jun.cheng}@siat.ac.cn, liu.liu1@sydney.edu.au, hefengxiang@jd.com.

Abstract
Object-guided text-to-image synthesis aims to generate images from natural language descriptions built by two-step
frameworks, i.e., the model generates the layout and then
synthesizes images from the layout and captions. However,
such frameworks have two issues: 1) complex structure,
since generating language-related layout is not a trivial
task; 2) error propagation, because the inappropriate
layout will mislead the image synthesis and is hard to be
revised. In this paper, we propose an object-guided jointdecoding module to simultaneously generate the image
and the corresponding layout. Specially, we present the
joint-decoding transformer to model the joint probability
on images tokens and the corresponding layouts tokens,
where layout tokens provide additional observed data
to model the complex scene better. Then, we describe a
novel Layout-VQGAN for layout encoding and decoding to
provide more information about the complex scene. After
that, we present the detail-enhanced module to enrich the
language-related details based on two facts: 1) visual
details could be omitted in the compression of VQGANs;
2) the joint-decoding transformer would not have sufficient
generating capacity. The experiments show that our
approach is competitive with previous object-centered
models and can generate diverse and high-quality objects
under the given layouts.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image synthesis is an important task in computer
vision [10, 16, 25, 27, 30, 37], which generates images from
textual descriptions. Recently, GAN-based methods have
achieved many promising results [36, 39, 42]. However,
GANs, which include both generators and discriminators,
∗ J. Cheng is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. The proposed model includes an object-guided jointdecoding transformer and a detail-enhanced module: 1) the jointdecoding transformer simultaneously handles the object-centered
layout tokens and image tokens, 2) the detail-enhanced module
enriches the language-related finer-grained details to obtain a more
realistic image.

are known to have difficulty in reaching the stable convergence to simulate complex distributions over images conditioned on the text. For complex scenes with multi objects,
the synthesizing results by GAN-based models are far from
satisfactory. Because a complex scene may include various
objects with different viewpoints and sizes, which is usually
not mentioned in captions.
The layout, consistinig of bounding boxes and object labels, can provide semantic information of the scene. The
layout information is beneficial to model the corresponding image. The previous models [8, 9, 14] are usually built
by two-step structures: firstly, the model generates the layout and then synthesizes images from the layout and captions. Such structures are complex and would suffer from
the problem of error propagation. Nonetheless, the autoregressive models could jointly handle the layout and image, denoted as one-step, and layouts can provide additional
semantic information to model the complex scene. For example, as shown in the left part of Figure 1, given “A colorful kite flying through a cloudy blue sky”, the model would

18113

