Exploring Frequency Adversarial Attacks for Face Forgery Detection
Shuai Jia1 Chao Ma1 * Taiping Yao2 Bangjie Yin2 Shouhong Ding2 Xiaokang Yang1
1
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Youtu Lab, Tencent
{jiashuai,chaoma,xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn
{taipingyao,ericshding}@tencent.com, jamesyin10@gmail.com

Abstract
Various facial manipulation techniques have drawn serious public concerns in morality, security, and privacy. Although existing face forgery classifiers achieve promising
performance on detecting fake images, these methods are
vulnerable to adversarial examples with injected imperceptible perturbations on the pixels. Meanwhile, many face
forgery detectors always utilize the frequency diversity between real and fake faces as a crucial clue. In this paper, instead of injecting adversarial perturbations into the spatial
domain, we propose a frequency adversarial attack method
against face forgery detectors. Concretely, we apply discrete cosine transform (DCT) on the input images and introduce a fusion module to capture the salient region of adversary in the frequency domain. Compared with existing
adversarial attacks (e.g. FGSM, PGD) in the spatial domain, our method is more imperceptible to human observers
and does not degrade the visual quality of the original images. Moreover, inspired by the idea of meta-learning, we
also propose a hybrid adversarial attack that performs attacks in both the spatial and frequency domains. Extensive experiments indicate that the proposed method fools
not only the spatial-based detectors but also the state-ofthe-art frequency-based detectors effectively. In addition,
the proposed frequency attack enhances the transferability
across face forgery detectors as black-box attacks.

(a) Original image

(b) FGSM [51]

(c) PGD [31]

(d) Ours

Figure 1. Illustration of adversarial examples generated by
FGSM [15], PGD [31] and our method. The original image is
classified as a fake face by the face forgery detector. After implementing these attacks, the adversarial examples are misclassified as real faces. Compared with FGSM [15] and PGD [31], our
method associated with the frequency adversarial attack generates
more natural perturbations, where the image quality of the adversarial example is much closer to the original image.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of generative adversarial
network (GAN), face forgery generation attracts increasing attention, such as Deepfake [46], FaceSwap [25],
Face2Face [45], and NeuralTextures [44]. These techniques
derive plenty of interesting applications, for instance, trying
on makeup virtually and editing faces in the film industry.
However, despite the positive aspect, face forgery generation may be maliciously abused, causing serious problems
* Corresponding author.

of security and privacy. Therefore, it is essential to design
face forgery detection methods to distinguish the manipulated face from the real one.
Various face forgery detectors [1,7,8,38] are proposed to
learn the decision boundary between real and fake faces and
achieve significant performance on multiple datasets [9,37].
However, existing methods are vulnerable to the adversarial examples, which leaves a serious backdoor for the security of detectors. For instance, a forged face image that is
classified correctly as fake by adding adversarial perturba-

4103

