Contextual Debiasing for Visual Recognition with Causal Mechanisms
Ruyang Liu*1
1

Hao Liu*2

Ge Li

1

Haodi Hou2

TingHao YU2

School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University

{ruyang@stu,geli@ece}.pku.edu.cn

2

Tao Yang2

Tencent AI Department

{paulhliu,haodihou,maxwellyu,rigorosyang}@tencent.com

Abstract
As a common problem in the visual world, contextual bias means the recognition may depend on the cooccurrence context rather than the objects themselves,
which is even more severe in multi-label tasks due to multiple targets and the absence of location. Although some
studies have focused on tackling the problem, removing the
negative effect of context is still challenging because it is
difficult to obtain the representation of contextual bias. In
this paper, we propose a simple but effective framework employing causal inference to mitigate contextual bias. We
first present a Structural Causal Model (SCM) clarifying
the causal relation among object representations, context,
and predictions. Then, we develop a novel Causal Context
Debiasing (CCD) Module to pursue the direct effect of an
instance. Specifically, we adopt causal intervention to eliminate the effect of confounder and counterfactual reasoning
to obtain a Total Direct Effect (TDE) free from the contextual bias. Note that our CCD framework is orthogonal to
existing statistical models and thus can be migrated to any
other backbones. Extensive experiments on several multilabel classification datasets demonstrate the superiority of
our model over other state-of-the-art baselines.

1. Introduction
Context is a very common element in the visual world.
For a single instance in an image, its context consists
of other co-occurrence instances together with the background. In multi-target tasks like multi-label classification and detection, context (or, instance relation) modeling
seems to have considerable potential to improve the performance. For example, the cutlery in the soup is probably
a spoon rather than a fork or knife. In fact, from recurrent neural networks [40, 46], to graph convolutional networks [5,10,47], until the popular transformer-based frameworks [19, 53], recent years have witnessed numerous attempts to model the label relations in multi-instance images.
Despite the remarkable progress these models have
made, they may overlook a basic question: is modeling con-

text always beneficial in visual recognition? As is illustrated
in Fig. 1, we uncovered an ever-overlooked phenomenon
in multi-label classification: context may mislead the classifier, either giving the nonexistent object a high score in
the scene where it usually arises, or ignoring the object appearing in a rare background. The occurrence can be partly
blamed on the biased data or weak backbones; but too much
attention on the label relationships will ultimately aggravate
the bias. Although some works [30,47] have questioned the
necessity of label modeling, they do not address the problem of contextual bias and lack the fundamental theory.
Contextual bias is not a fresh topic in the academic
world. In fact, it is widely reported in many fields [11, 32].
Recent works [13] also give insight into the reason for
contextual bias in computer vision: neural networks are
statistics-based and ”lazy”. When the networks find the
context is enough to recognize most of the objects, they often do not focus on the representations of instances. When
the training data is limited (e.g. few-shot learning) or deficient (e.g. long-tail distribution), the problem is more severe and obvious. In fact, there have been some works
[36, 49, 52] attending to the bias in these situation, nevertheless, they do not work on balanced datasets like MSCOCO [23] or other common tasks.
Paradoxically, context is not always bad. On one hand,
bias towards context would mislead the prediction in some
cases. On the other hand, it is somewhat reasonable. The
appearance of contextual bias means the network indeed
captured the inter-dependencies of classes: fork or knife is
indeed more rational to appear on the dining table as opposed to on the street or grasslands, and rough intervention
will damage the learning of the feature [18]. Actually, in the
tasks like scene graph generation [45] or human object interactions [45] where the datasets are seriously biased, context priori has proved to be beneficial to the results. However, it does not mean contextual bias can be neglected. A
more robust and sensible prediction should come from the
object itself rather than the context, and classification by
context is more likely the expediency. For tasks like multilabel classification, whose datasets are balanced and large,
contextual bias will damage the final prediction.
Mitigating the contextual bias in common multi-label

12755

