Towards Better Plasticity-Stability Trade-off in Incremental Learning: A Simple
Linear Connector
Guoliang Lin
Sun Yat-sen University
Guangdong, China

Hanlu Chu
South China Normal University
Guangdong, China

Hanjiang Lai ∗
Sun Yat-sen University
Guangdong, China

lingliang@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

hlchu@m.scnu.edu.cn

laihanj3@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Plasticity-stability dilemma is a main problem for incremental learning, where plasticity is referring to the ability to learn new knowledge, and stability retains the knowledge of previous tasks. Many methods tackle this problem
by storing previous samples, while in some applications,
training data from previous tasks cannot be legally stored.
In this work, we propose to employ mode connectivity in
loss landscapes to achieve better plasticity-stability tradeoff without any previous samples. We give an analysis of
why and how to connect two independently optimized optima of networks, null-space projection for previous tasks
and simple SGD for the current task, can attain a meaningful balance between preserving already learned knowledge and granting sufficient flexibility for learning a new
task. This analysis of mode connectivity also provides us
a new perspective and technology to control the trade-off
between plasticity and stability. We evaluate the proposed
method on several benchmark datasets. The results indicate our simple method can achieve notable improvement,
and perform well on both the past and current tasks. On
10-split-CIFAR-100 task, our method achieves 79.79% accuracy, which is 6.02% higher. Our method also achieves
6.33% higher accuracy on TinyImageNet. Code is available
at https://github.com/lingl1024/Connector.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep neural networks have been reported
promising performance on various tasks. In the dynamic
world, the deep model also needs to be updated as new data
becomes available. Hence, Incremental Learning (IL) [7,
31] has received much attention, which studies the problem
of continually learning from sequential tasks.
In this paper, we consider the data-free incremental
learning [36], where the training samples from previous
∗ Hanjiang Lai is the corresponding author.

tasks do not exist. Hence, the main criterion of data-free
IL [9, 33] is that no data from the previous tasks is stored
when continually refining the model as new data becomes
available. It is a direct cause of catastrophic forgetting problem [24], and the plasticity-stability dilemma [3, 28] is a
more general problem: (1) plasticity: the deep model should
learn the new knowledge of the current task, and (2) stability: it should also preserve the knowledge of previous tasks.
Many algorithms have been proposed to strike a balance
between plasticity and stability. An intuitive solution is to
generate samples from previous tasks, e.g., ILCAN [40]
generates samples to preserve the old knowledge. The
regularization-based methods use the extra regularization
term in the loss function to consolidate previous knowledge,
such as EWC [21] using the Fisher information to calculate each parameter’s importance. The architectural methods [24] learn the dynamic architecture of the deep network,
e.g., DER [41] freezes the previously learned representation
and dynamically expands the network for new task. The
algorithm-based methods learn parameter updating rules to
preserve the performance of previous tasks. For example,
GEM [27] constrains new task updates which do not interfere with the previous knowledge. Adam-NSCL [37] updates network parameters in the null space of all previous
tasks and achieves a promising performance on remembering previous knowledge. Although Adam-NSCL can preserve previous knowledge very well, the strong null-space
projection also hurts the performance of the current task.
On the other side, many researches have focused on the
connectivity in neural network loss landscapes [12,13]. The
previous works [14] found that two minima of independently trained deep networks can be connected in weight
space, where the loss along the path remains low. Further,
the recent works [13] and [38] showed that there exists a linear path of high accuracy to connect two minima when the
networks share only a few epochs of the initialized SGD
trajectory. Mode Connectivity SGD (MC-SGD) [29] is designed for incremental learning, which enforces the final
weight linearly connected to all tasks’ minima. Although

89

