O MNIVORE: A Single Model for Many Visual Modalities
Rohit Girdhar∗

Mannat Singh∗

Nikhila Ravi∗

Laurens van der Maaten
Meta AI

Armand Joulin

Ishan Misra∗

https://facebookresearch.github.io/omnivore

Image (RGB)

Depth map (D)

Single-view 3D (RGBD)

Video (RGBT)

Figure 1. O MNIVORE is a single vision model for many different visual modalities. It learns to construct representations that are aligned
across visual modalities, without requiring training data that specifies correspondences between those modalities. Using O MNIVORE’s
shared visual representation, we successfully identify nearest neighbors of left: an image (ImageNet-1K validation set) in vision datasets that
contain right: depth maps (ImageNet-1K training set), single-view 3D images (ImageNet-1K training set), and videos (Kinetics-400 validation set).

Abstract
Prior work has studied different visual modalities in isolation and developed separate architectures for recognition of images, videos, and 3D data. Instead, in this paper, we propose a single model which excels at classifying
images, videos, and single-view 3D data using exactly the
same model parameters. Our ‘O MNIVORE’ model leverages the flexibility of transformer-based architectures and is
trained jointly on classification tasks from different modalities. O MNIVORE is simple to train, uses off-the-shelf standard datasets, and performs at-par or better than modalityspecific models of the same size. A single O MNIVORE model
obtains 86.0% on ImageNet, 84.1% on Kinetics, and 67.1%
on SUN RGB-D. After finetuning, our models outperform
prior work on a variety of vision tasks and generalize across
modalities. O MNIVORE’s shared visual representation naturally enables cross-modal recognition without access to
correspondences between modalities. We hope our results
motivate researchers to model visual modalities together.
∗ Equal technical contribution.

1. Introduction
Computer vision research spans multiple modalities related to our perception of the visual world, such as images,
videos, and depth. In general, we study each of these modalities in isolation, and tailor our computer vision models to
learn the best features from their specificities. While these
modality-specific models achieve impressive performance,
sometimes even surpassing humans on their specific tasks,
they do not possess the flexibility that a human-like vision
system doesÐthe ability to work across modalities. We argue that the first step towards a truly all-purpose vision system is to build models that work seamlessly across modalities, instead of being over-optimized for each modality.
Beyond their flexibility, such modality-agnostic models
have several advantages over their traditional, modalityspecific counterparts. First, a modality-agnostic model can
perform cross-modal generalization: it can use what it has
learned from one modality to perform recognition in other
modalities. For example, it can recognize pumpkins in 3D
images even if it has only seen labeled videos of pumpkins.
In turn, this allows existing labeled datasets to be used more

16102

