Source-Free Domain Adaptation via Distribution Estimation
Ning Ding1 , Yixing Xu2 , Yehui Tang1,2 , Chao Xu1 , Yunhe Wang2∗ , Dacheng Tao3
1

Key Lab of Machine Perception (MOE), School of Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
2

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

3

JD Explore Academy, China

dingning@stu.pku.edu.cn, {yixing.xu, yunhe.wang}@huawei.com, yhtang@pku.edu.cn
xuchao@cis.pku.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Traditional Domain Adaptation

Abstract
Domain Adaptation aims to transfer the knowledge
learned from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain whose data distributions are different. However, the training data in source domain required by most
of the existing methods is usually unavailable in real-world
applications due to privacy preserving policies. Recently,
Source-Free Domain Adaptation (SFDA) has drawn much
attention, which tries to tackle domain adaptation problem without using source data. In this work, we propose
a novel framework called SFDA-DE to address SFDA task
via source Distribution Estimation. Firstly, we produce robust pseudo-labels for target data with spherical k-means
clustering, whose initial class centers are the weight vectors (anchors) learned by the classifier of pretrained model.
Furthermore, we propose to estimate the class-conditioned
feature distribution of source domain by exploiting target
data and corresponding anchors. Finally, we sample surrogate features from the estimated distribution, which are then
utilized to align two domains by minimizing a contrastive
adaptation loss function. Extensive experiments show that
the proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance
on multiple DA benchmarks, and even outperforms traditional DA methods which require plenty of source data.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have achieved remarkable performance on
many visual tasks such as classification [19], object detection [8], semantic segmentation [28], etc. However, the success of CNNs relies heavily on the hypothesis that the distributions of the training data is identical to that of the test
data. Thus, models trained with data from a certain scenario (source domain) can hardly generalize well to other
real-world application scenarios (target domains), and may
* Corresponding author.

Source Dataset

truck

skateboard

horse

bike

F

G

F

G

Cross-Entropy Loss
Adaptation Loss

(1) Pretraining stage

Target Dataset

Weights
initialization

F

Cross-Entropy Loss

(2) Adaptation stage

G

Adaptation Loss

Source-Free Domain Adaptation

Figure 1. (Top) Traditional domain adaptation methods require
data from both source domain and target domain simultaneously.
(Bottom) In source-free domain adaptation, source data can only
be used in the pretraining stage, and cannot be accessed in the
later adaptation stage. Adaptation is achieved by utilizing target
data and the model pretrained on source domain.

suffer from severe performance drop. Moreover, the difficulty of collecting enough labeled training data also hinders
CNNs from directly learning with target domain data. Unfortunately, CNNs deployed in real-world scenarios always
encounter new situations, such as the change of weather and
variation of illumination in autonomous driving.
Therefore, a lot of attention is paid to the domain shift
problem [1, 43] mentioned above, and Domain Adaptation
(DA) theory has been developed to solve it. DA algorithms
directly help deep models transfer knowledge learned from
a fully annotated source domain to a separately distributed
target domain whose annotations are entirely unavailable.
Existing advances in deep learning-based DA methods [4,
24,30,34] generally achieve model transferability by means
of mapping two different data distributions simultaneously
into a mutual feature space shared across two domains.
However, people are getting more aware of the importance of privacy data protection nowadays. Strict policies
regarding data privacy concerns have been published all

7212

