Relative Pose from a Calibrated and an Uncalibrated Smartphone Image
Yaqing Ding1,4 , Daniel Barath2 , Jian Yang1 , Zuzana Kukelova3
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
Computer Vision and Geometry Group, Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
3
Visual Recognition Group, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
4
Centre for Mathematical Sciences, Lund University
dingyaqing@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new minimal and a nonminimal solver for estimating the relative camera pose together with the unknown focal length of the second camera. This configuration has a number of practical benefits,
e.g., when processing large-scale datasets. Moreover, it is
resistant to the typical degenerate cases of the traditional
six-point algorithm. The minimal solver requires four point
correspondences and exploits the gravity direction that the
built-in IMU of recent smart devices recover. We also propose a linear solver that enables estimating the pose from
a larger-than-minimal sample extremely efficiently which
then can be improved by, e.g., bundle adjustment. The methods are tested on 35654 image pairs from publicly available
real-world and new datasets. When combined with a recent
robust estimator, they lead to results superior to the traditional solvers in terms of rotation, translation and focal
length accuracy, while being notably faster.

1. Introduction
Estimating the relative pose of two cameras using a, typically, minimal set of point correspondences is a classical
computer vision problem [23]. It has a number of applications, including pose-graph initialization for global [5, 36,
50, 52] and incremental [44, 45, 53] Structure-from-Motion,
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping algorithms [37,
38], augmented and virtual reality [33], multi-motion fitting
in videos [51], and surveillance [34, 35]. Nowadays, with
the popularity of smartphones equipped with various sensors, new possibilities arise for pose estimation exploiting
the additional information provided by other built-in sensors, e.g., Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU). In this paper,
we focus on exploiting the gravity direction recovered by an
IMU in the case when one of the cameras is fully calibrated,
while the focal length of the other one is unknown.

Figure 1. Almost everyone has a smartphone equipped with a camera and an IMU sensor. While the y-axes of cameras can be usually aligned using the gravity direction extracted from the IMU,
the internal calibration of some cameras may be corrupted or not
available. Here, by using as little as one calibrated camera (the person in red), we can estimate the relative poses and focal lengths of
the remaining cameras.

Depending on the camera configuration, there have been
a number of solutions proposed over the years. Assuming
that both cameras are calibrated and, thus, the intrinsic matrices are known, one can estimate the relative pose from
five correspondences [22,27,32,40,46]. This setting is used
in many applications and is generally regarded as a solved
problem with efficient stable solutions and only a few degeneracies. When we do not have access to an accurate calibration, jpeg-exif headers often contain useful information,
e.g., the focal length. This header is, however, sometimes
corrupted, e.g., for images from the Internet, or the included
focal length is incorrect, e.g., due to image resizing.
In the case when we are not given an accurate calibration a priori, it is safe, in practice, to assume that the pixels

12766

