Does text attract attention on e-commerce images: A novel saliency prediction
dataset and method

1

Lai Jiang1 *, Yifei Li1∗ , Shengxi Li1†, Mai Xu1† , Se Lei1 , Yichen Guo1 , Bo Huang
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China

Abstract
E-commerce images are playing a central role in attracting people’s attention when retailing and shopping online,
and an accurate attention prediction is of significant importance for both customers and retailers, where its research
is yet to start. In this paper, we establish the first dataset
of saliency e-commerce images (SalECI), which allows for
learning to predict saliency on the e-commerce images. We
then provide specialized and thorough analysis by highlighting the distinct features of e-commerce images, e.g.,
non-locality and correlation to text regions. Correspondingly, taking advantages of the non-local and self-attention
mechanisms, we propose a salient SWin-Transformer backbone, followed by a multi-task learning with saliency and
text detection heads, where an information flow mechanism
is proposed to further benefit both tasks. Experimental results have verified the state-of-the-art performances of our
work in the e-commerce scenario.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, online retailing has revolutionized the shopping habits in daily life, which provides significantly improved efficiency and hands-on experiences for both costumers and retailers. The sudden break of Coronavirus-19
further emphasized the importance and popularity of online
shopping. Since “a picture is worth a thousand words”, the
e-commerce image, exhibiting rich and heuristic content,
has been a workhorse in promoting products on online shopping and it therefore plays a vital role in the shopping activities, including introducing products, aiding visual search,
attracting costumers, and affecting their final decisions.
Due to the intrinsic nature of retailing, the main goal of
e-commerce images is to attract costumer attentions at a
glimpse; this is mainly two-fold: 1) attracting costumers to
focus on the product when they are wandering on shopping,
and 2) attracting to focus on specific parts in images that
highlight distinguishable and “have-to-buy” features of the
* Both authors contributed equally to this research.
† Corresponding authors: Shengxi Li (LiShengxi@buaa.edu.cn), Mai

Xu (MaiXu@buaa.edu.cn)

Figure 1. Saliency maps of ground-truth, DeepGace IIE [26],
UNISAL [7], and the proposed method. As shown, the existing methods on natural images trend to over- or under-predict the
saliency values of text regions in e-commerce images.

product. Consequently, the e-commerce image is typically
a combination of pictures and texts, to achieve the goal of
both effectively attracting and introducing to the costumers.
Thus, saliency prediction on e-commerce images is of significant importance to provide both enhanced guiding information and shopping experience for costumers.
The existing works of saliency prediction almost focus
on the natural images, from the perspective of either lowlevel handcrafted cues [14, 44] or data-driven deep neural networks (DNNs) [7, 18, 27, 29]. However, with the
fundamental goal of retailing, the e-commerce images are
specially designed, especially with short but precise texts.
Thus, the e-commerce images are basically different from
the widely analysed natural images, which for example,
are created by the goals of beauty, recording, etc. Consequently, the existing methods are inadequate in predicting saliency of the e-commerce images. For example, the
object region in natural images, one of the most important
high-level cues when predicting saliency in existing methods [13, 17], may be equally and even less salient than the
text regions in e-commerce images that highlight key features and brands of products. Fig. 1 illustrates the limitation
of the existing saliency prediction methods on e-commerce
images, where the most recent methods on natural images,
i.e., DeepGace IIE [26] and UNISAL [7], trend to over- or

2088

