NICGSlowDown: Evaluating the Efficiency Robustness of
Neural Image Caption Generation Models
Simin Chen

Zihe Song
Mirazul Haque
Cong Liu
The University of Texas at Dallas
800 W Campbell Rd, Richardson, TX 75080

Wei Yang

{simin.chen, zihe.song, mirazul.haque, cong, wei.yang}@utdallas.edu

Abstract
Neural image caption generation (NICG) models have
received massive attention from the research community
due to their excellent performance in visual understanding. Existing work focuses on improving NICG model accuracy while efficiency is less explored. However, many
real-world applications require real-time feedback, which
highly relies on the efficiency of NICG models. Recent research observed that the efficiency of NICG models could
vary for different inputs. This observation brings in a new
attack surface of NICG models, i.e., An adversary might
be able to slightly change inputs to cause the NICG models to consume more computational resources. To further
understand such efficiency-oriented threats, we propose a
new attack approach, NICGSlowDown, to evaluate the efficiency robustness of NICG models. Our experimental results show that NICGSlowDown can generate images with
human-unnoticeable perturbations that will increase the
NICG model latency up to 483.86%. We hope this research
could raise the community’s concern about the efficiency
robustness of NICG models.

robot). In such application scenarios, the responsiveness
of NICG models is crucial. However, existing NICG techniques mainly focus on improving model accuracy or defending the adversarial accuracy-based attacks [6,9,36–38].
Whether the NICG model can maintain efficiency under adversarial pressure is still a blank domain.
In order to study the efficiency robustness of NICG models, the first thing we need to do is to figure out what factors
will affect NICG model efficiency. In this paper, we investigate a natural property of NICG models. The NICG model
producing output tokens is a Markov Process; hence the
number of underlying decoder calls is non-deterministic.
Thus, the computational consumption of NICG models is
naturally non-deterministic. This natural property discloses
a potential vulnerability of NICG models. Adversaries may
be able to design specific adversarial inputs to increase computational cost in NICG models significantly. Such efficiency vulnerability could lead to severe outcomes in realworld scenarios. For example, efficiency-based attacks may
cause a large magnitude of redundant computational resources and affect the user experience, such as increasing
the device battery consumption or extending the response
latency. In this paper, we plan to investigate such potential
vulnerability by answering the following questions:

1. Introduction
Neural Image Caption Generation (NICG) models have
received wide attention from both academia and industry in
recent years [1, 9, 36–38]. NICG model combines computer
vision and natural language processing techniques for image understanding and textual description generation. Designing NICG models is a challenging task but could have
a massive impact in the real world [1, 7, 22, 30], such as
helping people with visual impairment to understand visual
inputs, enhancing the accuracy of image search engines, or
transferring images to text/audio in social media, etc.
Real-world applications rely on real-time feedback (e.g.,
transferring image to audio for people with visual impairment, generating context caption of camera feed for

Can we make unnoticeable modifications to image
inputs to significantly increase the computational
consumption of NICG models and degrade the model
efficiency? If so, how severe the efficiency degradation can be?
Existing work on adversarial machine learning (ML) [3,
4, 10, 23, 24, 27, 29, 32] can not answer the aforementioned
questions because of the following two reasons: (i) existing
adversarial attacks mainly focus on the classification DNN
model, whose output is a deterministic numeric vector representing the likelihood for different categories. In contrast,
our target model is the NICG model, whose output generation process is a non-deterministic Markov process, and the

15365

