Exact Feature Distribution Matching for
Arbitrary Style Transfer and Domain Generalization

1

Yabin Zhang1 , Minghan Li1 , Ruihuang Li1 , Kui Jia2 , Lei Zhang1∗
Hong Kong Polytechnic University 2 South China University of Technology

{csybzhang,csrhli,cslzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk, liminghan0330@gmail.com, kuijia@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Arbitrary style transfer (AST) and domain generalization (DG) are important yet challenging visual learning
tasks, which can be cast as a feature distribution matching problem. With the assumption of Gaussian feature distribution, conventional feature distribution matching methods usually match the mean and standard deviation of features. However, the feature distributions of real-world data
are usually much more complicated than Gaussian, which
cannot be accurately matched by using only the first-order
and second-order statistics, while it is computationally prohibitive to use high-order statistics for distribution matching. In this work, we, for the first time to our best knowledge, propose to perform Exact Feature Distribution Matching (EFDM) by exactly matching the empirical Cumulative
Distribution Functions (eCDFs) of image features, which
could be implemented by applying the Exact Histogram
Matching (EHM) in the image feature space. Particularly,
a fast EHM algorithm, named Sort-Matching, is employed
to perform EFDM in a plug-and-play manner with minimal cost. The effectiveness of our proposed EFDM method
is verified on a variety of AST and DG tasks, demonstrating new state-of-the-art results. Codes are available at
https://github.com/YBZh/EFDM .

1. Introduction
Distribution matching is a long-standing statistical learning problem [39]. With the popularity of deep models
[20, 27], matching the distribution of deep features has attracted growing interest for its effectiveness in solving complex vision tasks. For instance, in arbitrary style transfer
(AST) [12, 21], image styles can be interpreted as feature
distributions and style transfer can be achieved by crossdistribution feature matching [25, 34]. Furthermore, by using style transfer techniques to augment training data, one
can address the domain generalization (DG) tasks [13, 72],
∗ Corresponding author

which target at generalizing the models learned in some
source domains to other unseen domains. The most popular
method of feature distribution matching is to match feature
mean and standard deviation by assuming that features follow Gaussian distribution [21,32,37,41,72]. Unfortunately,
the feature distributions of real-world data are usually too
complicated to be modeled by Gaussian, as illustrated in
Fig. 1. Therefore, feature distribution matching by using
only mean and standard deviation is less accurate. It is desired to find more effective methods for more accurate and
even Exact Feature Distribution Matching (EFDM).
Intuitively, EFDM can be done by matching the highorder statistics of features. Actually, high-order central moments have been explicitly introduced in [25, 63] to match
distributions more precisely. However, considering highorder statistics in this way would introduce intensive computational overhead. Furthermore, the EFDM could only
be theoretically achieved by matching central moments of
infinite order [63], which is prohibitive in practice. Motivated by the Glivenko–Cantelli theorem [54], which states
that the empirical Cumulative Distribution Function (eCDF)
asymptotically converges to the Cumulative Distribution
Function when the number of samples approaches infinity,
Risser et al. [46] introduce the classical Histogram Matching (HM) [16, 58] method as an auxiliary measurement
to minimize the feature distribution divergence. Unfortunately, HM can only approximately match eCDFs when
there are equivalent feature values in inputs, since HM
merges equivalent values as a single point and applies a
point-wise transformation. (A toy example is illustrated in
Fig. 2). This commonly happens for digital images with discrete integer values (e.g., 8-bits digital images). For features
generated by deep models, equivalent feature values are also
ineluctable due to their dependency on discrete image pixels and the use of activation functions, e.g., ReLU [42] and
ReLU6 [26] (please refer to Fig. 3 for more details). All
these facts impede the effectiveness of EFDM via HM.
To solve the above mentioned problem, we, for the first
time to our best knowledge, propose to perform EFDM by
exactly matching the eCDFs of image features, resulting

8035

