Human Mesh Recovery from Multiple Shots
Georgios Pavlakos, Jitendra Malik, Angjoo Kanazawa
University of California, Berkeley
Input video

shot change

shot change

Camera frame

cross-shot smoothness:

Canonical frame

∥Θi − Θi+1∥

Figure 1. Human Mesh Recovery from Multiple Shots. Videos from edited media, like movies, include sudden shot changes that lead
to discontinuities between the frames (top), which reduce the rich potential of a film to a series of short independent temporal sequences.
However, within the same scene, the underlying 4D structure of the scene changes smoothly. We leverage this insight and treat the different
shots as multi-view cues that provide complementary information about the 3D human body underlying these shot boundaries. This leads
to both more accurate 3D reconstructions (middle, bottom) and longer 3D pose sequences. These serve as a great source of data for training
deep learning models that enable direct human mesh recovery on movie data.

Abstract
Videos from edited media like movies are a useful, yet
under-explored source of information, with rich variety of
appearance and interactions between humans depicted over
a large temporal context. However, the richness of data
comes at the expense of fundamental challenges such as
abrupt shot changes and close up shots of actors with heavy
truncation, which limits the applicability of existing 3D human understanding methods. In this paper, we address these
limitations with the insight that while shot changes of the
same scene incur a discontinuity between frames, the 3D
structure of the scene still changes smoothly. This allows
us to handle frames before and after the shot change as
multi-view signal that provide strong cues to recover the 3D

state of the actors. We propose a multi-shot optimization
framework that realizes this insight, leading to improved
3D reconstruction and mining of sequences with pseudoground truth 3D human mesh. We treat this data as valuable
supervision for models that enable human mesh recovery
from movies; both from single image and from video, where
we propose a transformer-based temporal encoder that can
naturally handle missing observations due to shot changes
in the input frames. We demonstrate the importance of our
insight and proposed models through extensive experiments.
The tools we develop open the door to processing and analyzing in 3D content from a large library of edited media, which could be helpful for many downstream applications. Code, models and data are available at: https:
//geopavlakos.github.io/multishot/

1485

