DIFNet: Boosting Visual Information Flow for Image Captioning
Mingrui Wu1∗ , Xuying Zhang1 ,* Xiaoshuai Sun124†, Yiyi Zhou1 ,
Chao Chen3 , Jiaxin Gu3 , Xing Sun3 , Rongrong Ji124
1
Media Analytics and Computing Lab, School of Informatics, Xiamen University, 361005, China.
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University. 3 Youtu Lab, Tencent.
4
Fujian Engineering Research Center of Trusted Artificial Intelligence Analysis and Application,
Xiamen University, 361005, China.
mingrui0001@gmail.com, zhangxuying@stu.xmu.edu.cn, xssun@xmu.edu.cn, zhouyiyi@xmu.edu.cn,
{aaronccchen, jiaxingu}@tencent.com, winfred.sun@gmail.com, rrji@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Current Image Captioning (IC) methods predict textual
words sequentially based on the input visual information
from the visual feature extractor and the partially generated
sentence information. However, for most cases, the partially generated sentence may dominate the target word prediction due to the insufficiency of visual information, making the generated descriptions irrelevant to the content of
the given image. In this paper, we propose a Dual Information Flow Network (DIFNet1 ) to address this issue, which
takes segmentation feature as another visual information
source to enhance the contribution of visual information
for prediction. To maximize the use of two information
flows, we also propose an effective feature fusion module
termed Iterative Independent Layer Normalization (IILN)
which can condense the most relevant inputs while retraining modality-specific information in each flow. Experiments
show that our method is able to enhance the dependence of
prediction on visual information, making word prediction
more focused on the visual content, and thus achieves new
state-of-the-art performance on the MSCOCO dataset, e.g.,
136.2 CIDEr on COCO Karpathy test split.

1. Introduction
Image captioning is a task of generating a description in
natural language based on a given image. It needs a model
to understand the given image from multiple aspects, including identifying objects, actions, as well as relationships,
and generate a language description for that image.
* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding Author
1 Source code is available at: https://github.com/mrwu-mac/
DIFNet

Feature
Extraction

IC
model

Classical IC Paradigm
…talking on a cell phone.
Contribution
for captioning

Partially Generated Sentence:
A baby sitting on the floor…
DIFNet
Feature
Extraction

IC
model

…playing with a
remote control.

Ground Truth: A child holding a tv remote like a phone.

Figure 1. Comparison between the popular captioning paradigm
(top) and the proposed Dual Information FLow Network (DIFNet).
(bottom). Compared with existing methods, DIFNet introduces
the visual representation of the dual information flow to facilitate
reliable and accurate image understanding.

Inspired by the development of neural machine translation, the encoder-decoder framework has been widely used
in image captioning tasks. The encoder takes a set of visual
features (such as grid feature [10]) extracted by an offline
CNN-based network as input and further encodes them into
visual-language space. Then the decoder uses the visual
information provided by the encoder and the partially generated caption to predict the next word. Most existing approaches [5, 9, 22] follow this paradigm to build their captioning networks, , as shown in Fig.1 (top). However, they
suffer from a main drawback: the visual information from
the visual feature extractor is insufficient and sometimes inaccurate. Although the research of feature extractors has
made great progress [15, 25], key visual information, such
as action and depth information, may still be ignored, even
using the powerful visual-language pre-trained models [8].
The above drawback leads to an insufficient visual infor-

18020

