YouMVOS: An Actor-centric Multi-shot Video Object Segmentation Dataset
Donglai Wei1† Siddhant Kharbanda2†∗ Sarthak Arora2∗ Roshan Roy2∗ Nishant Jain2∗ Akash Palrecha2∗
Tanav Shah2∗ Shray Mathur2∗ Ritik Mathur2∗ Abhijay Kemkar2∗ Anirudh Chakravarthy2∗ Zudi Lin2
Won-Dong Jang2 Yansong Tang3,4 Song Bai5 James Tompkin6 Philip H.S. Torr4 Hanspeter Pfister2
1

Boston College 2 Harvard University 3 Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University
4
University of Oxford 5 ByteDance Inc. 6 Brown University

Figure 1: Multi-shot video object segmentation (MVOS). In multi-shot videos, MVOS aims to track and segment selected
recurring objects despite changes in appearance (e.g., person in green masks) and disconnected shots (e.g., person in red
masks). We show sample (a) frames, (b) segmentation masks, and (c) timelines for the Gangnam Style video in our dataset.

Abstract
Many video understanding tasks require analyzing multishot videos, but existing datasets for video object segmentation (VOS) only consider single-shot videos. To address
this challenge, we collected a new dataset—YouMVOS—of
200 popular YouTube videos spanning ten genres, where
each video is on average five minutes long and with 75
shots. We selected recurring actors and annotated 431K
segmentation masks at a frame rate of six, exceeding previous datasets in average video duration, object variation,
and narrative structure complexity. We incorporated good
practices of model architecture design, memory management, and multi-shot tracking into an existing video segmentation method to build competitive baseline methods.
Through error analysis, we found that these baselines still
fail to cope with cross-shot appearance variation on our
YouMVOS dataset. Thus, our dataset poses new challenges in multi-shot segmentation towards better video analysis. Data, code, and pre-trained models are available at
https://donglaiw.github.io/proj/youMVOS
† Equally contributed.
∗ Research completed during internships at Harvard University.

1. Introduction
The broad computer vision goal of video understanding
must include the analysis of multi-shot videos with complex narratives [25, 32], including depictions of people and
objects that vary in their visual appearance and space-time
relationships across shot transitions. Video object segmentation (VOS) [37, 56] plays an essential role in video understanding. In multi-shot videos, this task requires accurately
tracking and masking the same object across cuts despite
appearance changes (Fig. 1). If multi-shot VOS is achieved,
then it can ease video applications like editing [6] for privacy
blur, relighting, or semantic color grading, and help in the
analysis of poses and actions of specific objects. In the long
term, multi-shot VOS data and methods can build towards a
more sophisticated high-level video understanding.
Methods for VOS and the related video instance segmentation (VIS) problem are developed on datasets with
single-shot videos that span only several seconds—a limitation highlighted in a recent survey [52]. Consequently, VOS
methods often lose track of object instances in multi-shot
videos, especially in videos with fast cuts and many object
appearance changes, such as in music videos. As there are
no existing multi-shot VOS datasets, it is hard to characterize
these errors and reliably improve performance.

21044

