Group Contextualization for Video Recognition
Yanbin Hao
University of Science and Technology of China
Hefei, China

Hao Zhang*
Singapore Management University
Singapore

haoyanbin@hotmail.com

hzhang@smu.edu.sg

Chong-Wah Ngo
Singapore Management University
Singapore

Xiangnan He
University of Science and Technology of China
Hefei, China

cwngo@smu.edu.sg

xiangnanhe@gmail.com

Abstract
Learning discriminative representation from the complex
spatio-temporal dynamic space is essential for video recognition. On top of those stylized spatio-temporal computational units, further refining the learnt feature with axial contexts is demonstrated to be promising in achieving
this goal. However, previous works generally focus on utilizing a single kind of contexts to calibrate entire feature
channels and could hardly apply to deal with diverse video
activities. The problem can be tackled by using pair-wise
spatio-temporal attentions to recompute feature response
with cross-axis contexts at the expense of heavy computations. In this paper, we propose an efficient feature refinement method that decomposes the feature channels into several groups and separately refines them with different axial
contexts in parallel. We refer this lightweight feature calibration as group contextualization (GC). Specifically, we
design a family of efficient element-wise calibrators, i.e.,
ECal-G/S/T/L, where their axial contexts are information
dynamics aggregated from other axes either globally or locally, to contextualize feature channel groups. The GC module can be densely plugged into each residual layer of the
off-the-shelf video networks. With little computational overhead, consistent improvement is observed when plugging in
GC on different networks. By utilizing calibrators to embed feature with four different kinds of contexts in parallel,
the learnt representation is expected to be more resilient
to diverse types of activities. On videos with rich temporal variations, empirically GC can boost the performance
of 2D-CNN (e.g., TSN and TSM) to a level comparable to
the state-of-the-art video networks. Code is available at
https://github.com/haoyanbin918/GroupContextualization.
* Hao Zhang is the corresponding author.

Corner kick

Arm wrestling

澻濠濣濖濕濠澔濄濙濦濧濤濙濗濨濝濪濙

Moving something across a surface until it falls down

Bee keeping

Ice skating

澻濠濣濖濕濠澔濇濤濕濨濝濕濠澔濄濙濦濧濤濙濗濨濝濪濙

Moving something and something closer to each other

澻濠濣濖濕濠澔濈濙濡濤濣濦濕濠澔濄濙濦濧濤濙濗濨濝濪濙

Blocked shot

激濣濗濕濠澔濄濙濦濧濤濙濗濨濝濪濙

Layup

Figure 1. Perspective/axial preference of different video activities.
The scene change caused by quick camera movement yearns for
global context for recognizing the soccer highlight “Corner kick”.
“Arm wrestling”, “Bee keeping” and “Ice skating” can be easily
recognized even by a single keyframe. Whereas, the SomethingSomething activity examples (middle) rely much on temporal relations. The group activities, i.e., “Blocked shot” and “Layup”,
require a model to localize sub-activities.

1. Introduction
The 3D spatio-temporal nature of video signals allows
video content to be flexibly analyzed from different perspectives or axes. Specifically, the signals can be transformed along various dimensions to capture the activities
underlying a video. For example, in Figure 1, the soccer
highlight “Corner kick” may require projection of the 3D
video signal into a 1D vector to globally summarize the
quick camera movement causing scene change. The less
temporal activity categories “Arm wrestling”, “Bee keeping” and “Ice skating” occurring in near static scenes prefer a 2D image representation to capture spatial perspective
for classification. By contrast, the video events “Moving
something across a surface until it falls down” and “Moving something and something closer to each other” require
modeling of temporal relations over time axis. When it

928

