Unpaired Deep Image Deraining Using Dual Contrastive Learning
Xiang Chen 1,2 , Jinshan Pan 2 , Kui Jiang 3 , Yufeng Li 1 , Yufeng Huang 1 ,
Caihua Kong 1 , Longgang Dai 1 , Zhentao Fan 1
1
Shenyang Aerospace University, 2 Nanjing University of Science and Technology, 3 Wuhan University
https://cxtalk.github.io/projects/DCD-GAN.html

Abstract
Learning single image deraining (SID) networks from
an unpaired set of clean and rainy images is practical
and valuable as acquiring paired real-world data is almost infeasible. However, without the paired data as the
supervision, learning a SID network is challenging. Moreover, simply using existing unpaired learning methods (e.g.,
unpaired adversarial learning and cycle-consistency constraints) in the SID task is insufficient to learn the underlying relationship from rainy inputs to clean outputs as
there exists significant domain gap between the rainy and
clean images. In this paper, we develop an effective unpaired SID adversarial framework which explores mutual
properties of the unpaired exemplars by a dual contrastive
learning manner in a deep feature space, named as DCDGAN. The proposed method mainly consists of two cooperative branches: Bidirectional Translation Branch (BTB)
and Contrastive Guidance Branch (CGB). Specifically, BTB
exploits full advantage of the circulatory architecture of adversarial consistency to generate abundant exemplar pairs
and excavates latent feature distributions between two domains by equipping it with bidirectional mapping. Simultaneously, CGB implicitly constrains the embeddings of different exemplars in the deep feature space by encouraging
the similar feature distributions closer while pushing the
dissimilar further away, in order to better facilitate rain removal and help image restoration. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our method performs favorably against
existing unpaired deraining approaches on both synthetic
and real-world datasets, and generates comparable results
against several fully-supervised or semi-supervised models.

1. Introduction
Images captured under complicated rain weather environments often suffer from unfavorable visibility by rain
streaks. Such these degraded images usually affect many
computer vision tasks (including detection [20], segmen-

Figure 1. Derained results on a real-world rainy image by unpaired
learning approaches. Directly employing existing unpaired learning methods, e.g., CycleGAN and DCLGAN, does not effecively
remove rain streaks.

tation [38] and video surveillance [28], etc.) with drastic
performance drop. Thus, it is of great interest to develop an
effective algorithm to recover high-quality rain-free images.
In general, the rain process is usually modeled by the
following linear superimposition model:
O = B + R,

(1)

where O, B, and R denote the rainy image, clean image,
and rain streaks, respectively. The goal of single image deraining (SID) is to estimate clean image B from the input
rainy image O. This is an ill-posed problem as only rainy
image is known. To make the problem well-posed, conventional methods [17, 19, 23, 47] usually impose certain priors
on the clean images and rain components. Although decent
results have been achieved, the priors are based on empirical
statistical results and may not model the inherent properties
of the clean images and rain components, which thus do not
effectively remove the rain well.
Recently, numerous data-driven learning methods have
developed [15, 27, 42, 45, 49]. Although remarkable performance has been achieved, these fully-supervised methods
need paired synthetic data which does not model the realworld degradation well. Therefore, these methods usually
do not perform well when handling the real-world rainy images due to the domain gap between the training and test
data. Moreover, obtaining large scale paired real-world data
for training in complex rainy environments is challenging.
To overcome these problems, the semi-supervised [13,

2017

