Whose Hands are These?
Hand Detection and Hand-Body Association in the Wild
Supreeth Narasimhaswamy1 , Thanh Nguyen2 , Mingzhen Huang3 , Minh Hoai1,2
1
Stony Brook University, 2 VinAI Research, 3 University at Buffalo

Abstract
We study a new problem of detecting hands and finding
the location of the corresponding person for each detected
hand. This task is helpful for many downstream tasks such
as hand tracking and hand contact estimation. Associating
hands with people is challenging in unconstrained conditions since multiple people can be present in the scene with
varying overlaps and occlusions.
We propose a novel end-to-end trainable convolutional
network that can jointly detect hands and the body location for the corresponding person. Our method first detects a set of hands and bodies and uses a novel Hand-Body
Association Network to predict association scores between
them. We use these association scores to find the body location for each detected hand. We also introduce a new
challenging dataset called BodyHands containing unconstrained images with hand and their corresponding body
locations annotations. We conduct extensive experiments
on BodyHands and another public dataset to show the effectiveness of our method. Finally, we demonstrate the benefits of hand-body association in two critical applications:
hand tracking and hand contact estimation. Our experiments show that hand tracking and hand contact estimation methods can be improved significantly by reasoning
about the hand-body association. Code and data can be
found at http://vision.cs.stonybrook.edu/
˜supreeth/BodyHands/

1. Introduction
Hand analysis is an important problem in Computer
Vision with applications in human understanding, action,
gesture, and sign-language recognition. The visual analysis of human hands is also vital for Augmented & Virtual Reality applications. Although the Computer Vision community has studied problems such as hand detection [7, 13, 23, 24, 30, 39, 49, 58, 59], hand pose estimation [17, 44, 51, 66, 67], hand tracking [48, 52, 53, 55, 63],
and hand contact estimation [5, 33, 36, 47], there has been
no significant effort in studying hand-body association.

Figure 1. Hand Detection & Hand-Body Association. We develop a method to detect hands and their corresponding body locations. Hands and bodies belonging to the same person have bounding boxes in the same color and identification numbers.

In this work, we study the problem of detecting hands
in an image and finding the location of the corresponding person for each detected hand. This task is useful for
action recognition and scene understanding, especially for
multiple-person images and videos. For example, it is helpful to identify people when understanding hand gestures in
human-human communication. Another example is to assess the motor and social skills of children with mental disorders by tracking their hands and how hands interact with
objects and other people in a tabletop game. Hand-body association helps develop safety applications and assists people working with hand-held tools in manufacturing settings.
Detecting hands and associating them with suitable bodies is challenging in unconstrained conditions. As shown
in Fig. 1, an image may contain multiple people with substantial overlaps and occlusions between hands and bodies.
One approach is to detect hands and people separately and
use heuristics based on their sizes, distances, or overlapping areas to establish correspondences between hands and
bodies. However, such methods do not perform well due
to the extreme articulation of hands and bodies, leading to
tremendous variations in the relative locations and sizes between a hand and the corresponding human body. An alternative method is to use a human pose detector to find

4889

