Towards Bidirectional Arbitrary Image Rescaling: Joint Optimization and Cycle
Idempotence
Zhihong Pan1 , Baopu Li1 , Dongliang He2
Mingde Yao2,3 , Wenhao Wu2 , Tianwei Lin2 , Xin Li2 , Errui Ding2
1
Baidu Research (USA), Sunnyvale, CA 94089, USA
2
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
3
University of Science and Technology of China

Abstract
Deep learning based single image super-resolution models have been widely studied and superb results are
achieved in upscaling low-resolution images with fixed
scale factor and downscaling degradation kernel. To improve real world applicability of such models, there are
growing interests to develop models optimized for arbitrary upscaling factors. Our proposed method is the first
to treat arbitrary rescaling, both upscaling and downscaling, as one unified process. Using joint optimization of both
directions, the proposed model is able to learn upscaling
and downscaling simultaneously and achieve bidirectional
arbitrary image rescaling. It improves the performance
of current arbitrary upscaling models by a large margin
while at the same time learns to maintain visual perception quality in downscaled images. The proposed model is
further shown to be robust in cycle idempotence test, free
of severe degradations in reconstruction accuracy when the
downscaling-to-upscaling cycle is applied repetitively. This
robustness is beneficial for image rescaling in the wild when
this cycle could be applied to one image for multiple times.
It also performs well on tests with arbitrary large scales and
asymmetric scales, even when the model is not trained with
such tasks. Extensive experiments are conducted to demonstrate the superior performance of our model.

1. Introduction
In real world applications, it is common to rescale an image with arbitrary scale factors, either scaling up or down,
for various purposes like display, storage or transmission.
While recent deep learning based image super-resolution
(SR) method have advanced the performance of image upscaling significantly, they are mostly optimized for fixed
scale factors and known downscaling degradation kernels.
Lately, there are growing interests in SR models that sup-

GT

IRN-C1

IRN-C2

Ours-C1

Ours-C5

Figure 1. Visual examples of quality degradation from multiple
downscaling-to-upscaling cycles: IRN [29] and ours.

port arbitrary scale factors and great successes have been
achieved, including arbitrary upscaling for scale factors in
certain range [11], or learning a continuous image representation to resize it at any larger resolution [6], or asymmetric
arbitrary upscaling where the vertical and horizontal scale
factors could be different [26]. Like standard SR models,
these methods are all optimized for the unidirectional upscaling process. In contrast, another line of image rescaling models [14, 25, 29] are developed to optimize the downscaling process together with the inverse upscaling and are
able to improve accuracy on the upscaling task significantly
comparing to unidirectional SR models of the same scale
factors. Currently these bidirectional rescaling models are
limited to a specific integer scale as far as we know.
Here we propose a joint optimization process that is able
to learn arbitrary downscaling and arbitrary upscaling simultaneously. By modeling both downscaling and upscaling as equivalent subpixel splitting and merging processes
and learning through a downscaling-to-upscaling cycle, the
proposed method is able to achieve the best arbitrary upscaling accuracy while maintaining high perception-quality
in downscaled outputs. An LIIF [6]-like subpixel weight
function (SVF) and a novel subpixel weight function (SWF)
are introduced for subpixel splitting and merging respectively. Using ground-truth (GT) image as supervision for
high-resolution (HR) reconstruction, plus a weak supervision in low-resolution (LR), the proposed model, jointly
optimized for both upscaling and downscaling, is able to

17389

