CrossLoc: Scalable Aerial Localization Assisted by Multimodal Synthetic Data
Qi Yan, Jianhao Zheng, Simon Reding, Shanci Li, Iordan Doytchinov
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) - TOPO laboratory
{firstname.lastname}@epfl.ch

crossloc.github.io

Geodata

TOPO-DataGen

CrossLoc

Synthetic RGB
LiDAR point cloud
Enc. 1

Enc. 3

Enc. 2

Enc. 𝑁

Scene Coordinates
Terrain Model
Decoder

Depth

Orthophotos

Semantics

Depth
Normals

OR
Georeferenced
images

Scene Coordinates
PnP Solver

Latin Hypercube
Sampling

Semantics

6D pose

Figure 1: Left. The proposed TOPO-DataGen workflow generates multimodal synthetic datasets over large scales using offthe-shelf geodata. Right. We present CrossLoc, a cross-modal visual representation learning method for absolute localization.
It learns to predict scene coordinates via self-supervised geometric tasks and external labels such as semantics if available.

Abstract
We present a visual localization system that learns to
estimate camera poses in the real world with the help of
synthetic data. Despite significant progress in recent years,
most learning-based approaches to visual localization target at a single domain and require a dense database of
geo-tagged images to function well. To mitigate the data
scarcity issue and improve the scalability of the neural localization models, we introduce TOPO-DataGen, a versatile synthetic data generation tool that traverses smoothly
between the real and virtual world, hinged on the geographic camera viewpoint. New large-scale sim-to-real
benchmark datasets are proposed to showcase and evaluate the utility of the said synthetic data. Our experiments
reveal that synthetic data generically enhances the neural
network performance on real data. Furthermore, we introduce CrossLoc, a cross-modal visual representation learn-

ing approach to pose estimation that makes full use of the
scene coordinate ground truth via self-supervision. Without any extra data, CrossLoc significantly outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods and achieves substantially higher
real-data sample efficiency. Our code and datasets are all
available at crossloc.github.io .

1. Introduction
Due to vulnerabilities in the reception of satellite positioning (GNSS) signals, on which aerial systems rely for
navigation and controls, alternative methods are in demand
for absolute large-scale localization. The dead-reckoning
navigation systems have improved significantly in recent
years; however, residual drift is always a challenge for
long-term applications [21, 30]. In contrast, the availability of small and low-cost cameras has made them popular
sensors for capturing information on the surrounding land17358

