KNN Local Attention for Image Restoration
Hunsang Lee1 , Hyesong Choi2 , Kwanghoon Sohn1 , Dongbo Min2†
1
Yonsei University, Korea, 2 Ewha W. University, Korea
hslee91@yonsei.ac.kr, hyesongchoi2010@gmail.ac.kr, khsohn@yonsei.ac.kr, dbmin@ewha.ac.kr

Abstract
Recent works attempt to integrate the non-local operation with CNNs or Transformer, achieving remarkable performance in image restoration tasks. The global similarity, however, has the problems of the lack of locality and
the high computational complexity that is quadratic to an
input resolution. The local attention mechanism alleviates
these issues by introducing the inductive bias of the locality with convolution-like operators. However, by focusing
only on adjacent positions, the local attention suffers from
an insufficient receptive field for image restoration. In this
paper, we propose a new attention mechanism for image
restoration, called k-NN Image Transformer (KiT), that rectifies the above mentioned limitations. Specifically, the KiT
groups k-nearest neighbor patches with locality sensitive
hashing (LSH), and the grouped patches are aggregated
into each query patch by performing a pair-wise local attention. In this way, the pair-wise operation establishes nonlocal connectivity while maintaining the desired properties
of the local attention, i.e., inductive bias of locality and linear complexity to input resolution. The proposed method
outperforms state-of-the-art restoration approaches on image denoising, deblurring and deraining benchmarks. The
code will be available soon.

1. Introduction
Image restoration aims to recover a clean image from
various type of degradations (e.g. noise, blur, rain, and
compression artifacts), which has a huge impact on the
performance of downstream tasks such as image classification [14, 56], object detection [22, 46], segmentation [4, 10],
and to name a few. It is a highly ill-posed inverse problem
as there may exist multiple number of solutions for a single degraded image. Recent restoration works [17, 36, 76]
attempt to establish a mapping relation between clean and
*This work was supported by the Mid-Career Researcher Program through the NRF of Korea (NRF-2021R1A2C2011624 and NRF2021R1A2C2006703) and the Yonsei University Research Fund of 2021
(2021-22-0001).
† Corresponding author: dbmin@ewha.ac.kr

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Comparisons of different attention approaches: (a)
Global attention [18, 45, 57] computes self-similarity between
patches globally, (b) Local attention [33, 59] measures selfsimilarity within a single patch at the pixel-level, and (c) the proposed method aggregates similar k patches with a pair-wise local
attention at the pixel-level.

degraded images by leveraging the representation power
of the convolutional neural networks (CNNs). A series
of local operations used in the CNNs is, however, inherently less capable of capturing a long-range dependency,
exhibiting certain limitations in deliberating global information over an entire image. To enlarge the receptive field,
increasing network depth [51], dilated convolution [66],
and hierarchical architecture [40] have been proposed, but
the receptive field still does not secure global information
as it is limited to local regions. Recently, non-local operation, which mostly contributed to non-learning based
restoration approaches [5, 15], has again emerged as a
promising solution with the success of non-local neural networks [58]. As similar patterns tend to repeat within a natural image, non-local self-similarity of computing the response at a single position by weighted sum of all positions has served as an important cue for an image restoration [16, 28, 32, 37, 38, 43, 53, 77, 78]. A non-local selfsimilarity of [58] could capture the long-range dependency
within deep networks, but the quadratic complexity with respect to the input feature resolution limits the network capacity. Consequently, it is employed only in relatively lowresolution feature maps of specific layers [16, 32, 77].
More recently, Vision Transformer (ViT) [18] proposed
a new approach to apply the global attention mechanism,
which can be viewed as the non-local operation, of the
Transformer [55] to vision tasks by splitting an image into

2139

