ABO: Dataset and Benchmarks for Real-World 3D Object Understanding
Jasmine Collins1 , Shubham Goel1 , Kenan Deng2 , Achleshwar Luthra3 , Leon Xu1,2 ,
Erhan Gundogdu2 , Xi Zhang2 , Tomas F. Yago Vicente2 , Thomas Dideriksen2 ,
Himanshu Arora2 , Matthieu Guillaumin2 , and Jitendra Malik1
1

UC Berkeley, 2 Amazon, 3 BITS Pilani

catalog images

high-resolution geometry & texture

physically-based renderings

Figure 1. ABO is a dataset of product images and realistic, high-resolution, physically-based 3D models of household objects. We
use ABO to benchmark the performance of state-of-the-art methods on a variety of realistic object understanding tasks.

Abstract
We introduce Amazon Berkeley Objects (ABO), a new
large-scale dataset designed to help bridge the gap between
real and virtual 3D worlds. ABO contains product catalog
images, metadata, and artist-created 3D models with complex geometries and physically-based materials that correspond to real, household objects. We derive challenging benchmarks that exploit the unique properties of ABO
and measure the current limits of the state-of-the-art on
three open problems for real-world 3D object understanding: single-view 3D reconstruction, material estimation,
and cross-domain multi-view object retrieval.

1. Introduction
Progress in 2D image recognition has been driven by
large-scale datasets [15, 26, 37, 43, 56]. The ease of collecting 2D annotations (such as class labels or segmentation
masks) has led to the large scale of these diverse, in-thewild datasets, which in turn has enabled the development
of 2D computer vision systems that work in the real world.

Theoretically, progress in 3D computer vision should follow from equally large-scale datasets of 3D objects. However, collecting large amounts of high-quality 3D annotations (such as voxels or meshes) for individual real-world
objects poses a challenge. One way around the challenging problem of getting 3D annotations for real images is
to focus only on synthetic, computer-aided design (CAD)
models [10, 35, 70]. This has the advantage that the data
is large in scale (as there are many 3D CAD models available for download online) but many of the models are low
quality or untextured and do not exist in the real world.
This has led to a variety of 3D reconstruction methods that
work well on clear-background renderings of synthetic objects [13, 24, 46, 65] but do not necessarily generalize to
real images, new categories, or more complex object geometries [5, 6, 58].
To enable better real-world transfer, another class of 3D
datasets aims to link existing 3D models with real-world
images [63, 64]. These datasets find the closest matching
CAD models for the objects in an image and have human
annotators align the pose of each model to best match the

21126

