CodedVTR: Codebook-based
Sparse Voxel Transformer with Geometric Guidance
*

Tianchen Zhao1 , Niansong Zhang1 , Xuefei Ning1 , He Wang2 , Li Yi13 , Yu Wang1
1
Tsinghua University 2 Peking University 3 Shanghai Qizhi Institude
{suozhang1998,foxdoraame,ericyi0124}@gmail.com
hewang@pku.edu.cn

niansong.zhang@outlook.com

yu-wang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Transformers have gained much attention by outperforming convolutional neural networks in many 2D vision
tasks. However, they are known to have generalization
problems and rely on massive-scale pre-training and sophisticated training techniques. When applying to 3D tasks,
the irregular data structure and limited data scale add to
the difficulty of transformer’s application. We propose CodedVTR (Codebook-based Voxel TRansformer), which improves data efficiency and generalization ability for 3D
sparse voxel transformers. On the one hand, we propose the
codebook-based attention that projects an attention space
into its subspace represented by the combination of “prototypes” in a learnable codebook. It regularizes attention
learning and improves generalization. On the other hand,
we propose geometry-aware self-attention that utilizes geometric information (geometric pattern, density) to guide
attention learning. CodedVTR could be embedded into existing sparse convolution-based methods, and bring consistent performance improvements for indoor and outdoor 3D
semantic segmentation tasks.

Voxel Transformer

CodedVTR

𝑥

𝑥
Relation
Learning

Relation
Learning

Feature
Extraction

Feature
Extraction

Geometric-Aware
Codebook

attn_map
𝛾 = 𝑓(𝑥)

Coded
attn_map

𝛾 ′ = ∑𝑤𝑖 ⋅ Θ𝑖

Figure 1. CodedVTR is a novel transformer-based building block
for voxel-based 3D scene understanding tasks. We propose the
codebook-based attention to alleviate the transformer’s generalization problem, which is exacerbated in 3D tasks. Taking 3D
point cloud’s unique properties into consideration, we also propose the geometry-aware attention to leverage the geometric information into attention learning,

1. Introduction
Recent advances in deep learning have significantly
pushed forward representation learning on 3D point clouds.
3D deep learning models enable autonomous driving and
robotic systems to perceive raw 3D sensor data. In this process, the 3D semantic segmentation task plays a crucial role
in real-world scene understanding. It aims to classify each
point into pre-defined semantic categories (e.g., car, pedestrian, table, floor, etc.), which provides point-wise perception information of the whole 3D scene. For 3D semantic segmentation on large-scale scenes, point-based methods [20, 22, 30] split the scene into cubical chunks and ap* Corresponding Author

ply point-wise operations to each chunk. Differently, voxelbased approaches [3, 10, 21, 33] directly voxelize the whole
scene and apply 3D sparse convolution to voxels, which
usually yields superior efficiency and performance. In this
paper, we follow the voxel-based scheme and focus on designing sparse voxel-based architecture for the 3D semantic
segmentation task.
Transformers [24] have received massive attention and
achieved state-of-the-art performance in many vision tasks
such as image classification and semantic segmentation [15]. It discards the convolution-like inductive bias
and adopts more general-purpose self-attention operations.
Although less inductive bias gives transformers potentially

1435

