TransVPR: Transformer-Based Place Recognition with
Multi-Level Attention Aggregation
Ruotong Wang* Yanqing Shen* Weiliang Zuo Sanping Zhou Nanning Zheng†
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
{wrt072@stu., qing1159364090@stu., weiliang.zuo@, spzhou@, nnzheng@mail.}xjtu.edu.cn

Input image

Fused attention

Key patches

Low-level attention

Mid-level attention

High-level attention

Abstract
Visual place recognition is a challenging task for applications such as autonomous driving navigation and mobile
robot localization. Distracting elements presenting in complex scenes often lead to deviations in the perception of visual place. To address this problem, it is crucial to integrate
information from only task-relevant regions into image representations. In this paper, we introduce a novel holistic
place recognition model, TransVPR, based on vision Transformers. It benefits from the desirable property of the selfattention operation in Transformers which can naturally aggregate task-relevant features. Attentions from multiple levels of the Transformer, which focus on different regions of
interest, are further combined to generate a global image
representation. In addition, the output tokens from Transformer layers filtered by the fused attention mask are considered as key-patch descriptors, which are used to perform
spatial matching to re-rank the candidates retrieved by the
global image features. The whole model allows end-to-end
training with a single objective and image-level supervision. TransVPR achieves state-of-the-art performance on
several real-world benchmarks while maintaining low computational time and storage requirements.

1. Introduction
Visual Place Recognition (VPR) is an essential and challenging problem in autonomous driving and robot localization systems, which is usually defined as an image retrieval
problem [27]. Given a query image, the algorithm has to
determine whether it is taken from a place already seen and
identify the corresponding images from a database. There
are two types of image representations commonly used in
VPR tasks. Global image features [2, 8, 18, 21, 37, 38, 54]
abstract the whole image into a compact feature vector
without geometrical information. Patch-level descriptors
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1.
Visualization of multi-level attentions from
TransVPR. Low-level attention maps mainly focus on small objects and textural areas on the surface of buildings. Mid-level attentions focus on objects in the air, such as street lamps and tree
canopies, while high-level attentions tend to outline the contours
of the ground and the lane lines. All these attention masks are
combined to generate global image representations as well as keypatch descriptors.

[12, 14, 23, 26, 32, 60] describe particular patches or keypoints in an image and can be used to perform spatial matching between image pairs using cross-matching algorithms
(e.g. RANSAC [16]). To achieve a good trade-off between
accuracy and efficiency, a commonly used two-stage strategy is to retrieve candidates with global features and then
re-rank them using patch-level descriptor matching [40,51].
Several recent researches [6, 19, 45, 52] have attempted to
design a holistic system to extract both types of features.
Most recently, Patch-NetVLAD [19] has used an integral
feature space to derive patch descriptors from the global image feature and has achieved state-of-the-art performance
in several benchmarks. However, an important factor that
may reduce the robustness of Patch-NetVLAD is that its extracted features unselectively encode the information from
all regions of an image.
It needs to be emphasized that the ability to identify taskrelevant regions in an image is critical to VPR systems.

13648

