Multi-View Depth Estimation by Fusing
Single-View Depth Probability with Multi-View Geometry
Gwangbin Bae
Ignas Budvytis
Roberto Cipolla
University of Cambridge
{gb585,ib255,rc10001}@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Multi-view depth estimation methods typically require
the computation of a multi-view cost-volume, which leads
to huge memory consumption and slow inference. Furthermore, multi-view matching can fail for texture-less surfaces, reflective surfaces and moving objects. For such failure modes, single-view depth estimation methods are often more reliable. To this end, we propose MaGNet, a
novel framework for fusing single-view depth probability
with multi-view geometry, to improve the accuracy, robustness and efficiency of multi-view depth estimation. For each
frame, MaGNet estimates a single-view depth probability
distribution, parameterized as a pixel-wise Gaussian. The
distribution estimated for the reference frame is then used
to sample per-pixel depth candidates. Such probabilistic
sampling enables the network to achieve higher accuracy
while evaluating fewer depth candidates. We also propose depth consistency weighting for the multi-view matching score, to ensure that the multi-view depth is consistent with the single-view predictions. The proposed method
achieves state-of-the-art performance on ScanNet [8], 7Scenes [38] and KITTI [15]. Qualitative evaluation demonstrates that our method is more robust against challenging
artifacts such as texture-less/reflective surfaces and moving objects. Our code and model weights are available at
https://github.com/baegwangbin/MaGNet.

1. Introduction
Depth estimation is pivotal to 3D scene reconstruction
and understanding. Owing to the advances in deep convolutional neural networks, many attempts have been made
to estimate the pixel-wise metric depth from RGB images.
Both single-view and multi-view methods have been proposed. The two families of solutions rely on different cues
and therefore inherit different strengths and weaknesses.
Single-view methods [1, 11–13, 25, 26, 28, 34, 50, 54] use
monocular cues, such as texture gradients and objects with

known size. A deep feature extractor (e.g. [18, 40]) is used
to encode such cues into a dense feature map, from which a
decoder regresses the per-pixel depth. With suitable supervision, single-view methods can learn the depth of weaklytextured or reflective surfaces. However, their accuracy is
limited due to the inherent ambiguity of the problem.
Multi-view methods [6, 17, 27, 29, 30, 51], on the other
hand, use geometric cues. The key assumption adopted by
these methods is that if the estimated depth for a particular
pixel is correct, it will be projected to visually similar pixels
in the other images. While such hard-coded multi-view geometry reduces the ambiguity and leads to better accuracy,
there are several limitations: A large number of depth candidates should be evaluated in order for the correct depth
to be found; The multi-view consistency assumption is violated in the presence of occlusion and object motion; Lastly,
the multi-view matching becomes unreliable for texture-less
or reflective surfaces.
We argue that both monocular and geometric cues
should be exploited in order to complement the limitation of
one another. The ambiguity in single-view depth can be reduced by performing multi-view matching. The efficiency
of multi-view matching can be improved by sampling the
depth candidates near the single-view depth. The failure
cases of multi-view matching (e.g. on texture-less/reflective
surfaces) can be prevented by enforcing the consistency
with the single-view depth.
To this end, we introduce MaGNet (Monocular and
Geometric Network), a novel framework for fusing singleview depth probability with multi-view geometry. MaGNet
uses a sequence of monocular images with known intrinsics
and camera poses as input. The forward pass consists of the
following steps: (1) The network estimates the single-view
depth probability distribution of each image, parameterized
as a pixel-wise Gaussian; (2) For each pixel in the reference
image, a small number of depth candidates are sampled
from the estimated depth probability distribution; (3) The
sampled candidates are projected to the neighboring views
and the matching scores are measured in terms of the dot
product between the feature vectors; (4) The matching score

2842

