Graph Sampling Based Deep Metric Learning for
Generalizable Person Re-Identification
Shengcai Liao*
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence (IIAI)
Masdar City, Abu Dhabi, UAE

Ling Shao
Terminus Group
China

scliao@ieee.org

ling.shao@ieee.org

Abstract
Recent studies show that, both explicit deep feature
matching as well as large-scale and diverse training data
can significantly improve the generalization of person reidentification. However, the efficiency of learning deep
matchers on large-scale data has not yet been adequately
studied. Though learning with classification parameters
or class memory is a popular way, it incurs large memory
and computational costs. In contrast, pairwise deep metric learning within mini batches would be a better choice.
However, the most popular random sampling method, the
well-known PK sampler, is not informative and efficient for
deep metric learning. Though online hard example mining has improved the learning efficiency to some extent,
the mining in mini batches after random sampling is still
limited. This inspires us to explore the use of hard example mining earlier, in the data sampling stage. To do
so, in this paper, we propose an efficient mini-batch sampling method, called graph sampling (GS), for large-scale
deep metric learning. The basic idea is to build a nearest neighbor relationship graph for all classes at the beginning of each epoch. Then, each mini batch is composed of a randomly selected class and its nearest neighboring classes so as to provide informative and challenging examples for learning. Together with an adapted competitive baseline, we improve the state of the art in generalizable person re-identification significantly, by 25.1%
in Rank-1 on MSMT17 when trained on RandPerson. Besides, the proposed method also outperforms the competitive baseline, by 6.8% in Rank-1 on CUHK03-NP when
trained on MSMT17. Meanwhile, the training time is significantly reduced, from 25.4 hours to 2 hours when trained
on RandPerson with 8,000 identities. Code is available at
https://github.com/ShengcaiLiao/QAConv.

* Shengcai Liao is the corresponding author.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification is a popular computer vision
task, where the goal is to find a person, given in a query
image, from the search over a large set of gallery images.
In the last two years, generalizable person re-identification
has gain increasing attention due to both its research and
practical value [11, 12, 17, 21, 26, 46, 48]. This task studies the generalizability of a learned person re-identification
model in unseen scenarios, and employs direct cross-dataset
evaluation [10, 38] for performance benchmarking.
For deep metric learning, beyond feature representation
learning and loss designs, explicit deep feature matching
schemes are shown to be effective for matching person images [1, 14, 17, 24, 28], due to the advantages in addressing pose and viewpoint changes, occlusions, and misalignments. In particular, a recent method, called query-adaptive
convolution (QAConv) [17], has proved that explicit convolutional matching between gallery and query feature maps
is quite effective for generalizable person re-identification.
However, these methods all require more computational
costs compared to conventional feature learning methods.
Beyond novel generalizable algorithms, another way to
improve generalization is to enlarge the scale and diversity
of the training data. For example, a recent dataset called
RandPerson [33] synthesized 8,000 identities, while [31]
and [2] both collected 30K persons for re-identification
training. These studies all observed improved generalization ability for person re-identification. However, the efficiency of deep metric learning from large-scale data has not
yet been adequately studied in person re-identification.
There are some popular ways of learning deep person
re-identification models, including classification (with the
ID loss [43]), metric learning (with a pairwise loss [5, 38]
or triplet loss [9]), and their combinations (e.g. ID + triplet
loss). Using an ID loss is convenient for classification learning. However, in large-scale deep learning, involving classifier parameters incurs large memory and computational
costs in both the forward and backward passes. Similarly,

7359

