Long-Short Temporal Contrastive Learning of Video Transformers
Jue Wang1
Gedas Bertasius2
Du Tran1
1
2
Facebook AI Research
UNC Chapel Hill

Abstract
Video transformers have recently emerged as a competitive alternative to 3D CNNs for video understanding. However, due to their large number of parameters and reduced
inductive biases, these models require supervised pretraining on large-scale image datasets to achieve top performance. In this paper, we empirically demonstrate that selfsupervised pretraining of video transformers on video-only
datasets can lead to action recognition results that are on
par or better than those obtained with supervised pretraining on large-scale image datasets, even massive ones such
as ImageNet-21K. Since transformer-based models are effective at capturing dependencies over extended temporal
spans, we propose a simple learning procedure that forces
the model to match a long-term view to a short-term view
of the same video. Our approach, named Long-Short Temporal Contrastive Learning (LSTCL), enables video transformers to learn an effective clip-level representation by
predicting temporal context captured from a longer temporal extent. To demonstrate the generality of our findings,
we implement and validate our approach under three different self-supervised contrastive learning frameworks (MoCo
v3, BYOL, SimSiam) using two distinct video-transformer
architectures, including an improved variant of the Swin
Transformer augmented with space-time attention. We
conduct a thorough ablation study and show that LSTCL
achieves competitive performance on multiple video benchmarks and represents a convincing alternative to supervised
image-based pretraining.

1. Introduction
Since the introduction of AlexNet [36], deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have emerged as the prominent model in numerous computer vision tasks [21, 22, 30,
54, 64, 65]. More recently, the Transformer model [61] has
received much attention due to its impressive performance
in the field of natural language processing (NLP) [15].
While CNNs rely on the local operation of convolution,
the building block of transformers is self-attention [61]
which is particularly effective at modelling long-range de-

Lorenzo Torresani1,3
3
Dartmouth

pendencies. In the image domain, the Vision Transformer
(ViT) [16] was proposed as a convolution-free architecture
which uses self-attention between non-overlapping patches
in all layers of the model. ViT was shown to be competitive with state-of-the-art CNNs on the task of image categorization. In the last few months, several adaptations of
ViT to video have been proposed [3, 6, 44]. In order to
capture salient temporal information from the video, these
works typically extend the self-attention mechanism to operate along the time axis in addition to within each frame.
Since video transformers have a larger numbers of parameters and fewer inductive biases compared to CNNs, they
typically require large-scale pretraining on supervised image datasets, such as ImageNet-21K [52] or JFT [3], in order to achieve top performance.
Self-supervised learning has been shown to be an effective solution to eliminate the need for large-scale supervised
pretraining of transformers both in NLP [15] as well as in
image-analysis [9, 59]. In this work, we show that, even in
the video domain, self-supervised learning provides an effective way for pretraining video transformers. Specifically,
we introduce Long-Short Temporal Contrastive Learning
(LSTCL), a contrastive formulation that maximizes representation similarity between a long video clip (say, 8 seconds long) and a much shorter clip (say, 2 seconds long)
where both clips are sampled from the same video. We argue that by training the short-clip representation to match
the long-clip representation, the model is forced to extrapolate from a short extent the contextual information exhibited in the longer temporal span. As the long clip includes
temporal segments not included in the short clip, this selfsupervised strategy trains the model to anticipate the future
and to predict the past from a small temporal window in order to match the representation extracted from the long clip.
We believe that this is a good pretext for video representation learning, as it can be accomplished only by a successful
understanding and recognition of the structure and correlation of atomic actions in a long video. Furthermore, such
framework is particularly suitable for video transformers as
they have been recently shown to effectively capture longterm temporal cues [6]. In this work we demonstrate that
these long-term temporal cues can be effectively encoded

14010

