3D Shape Reconstruction from 2D Images with Disentangled Attribute Flow
Xin Wen1,2, ,* Junsheng Zhou1,∗ , Yu-Shen Liu1†, Hua Su3 , Zhen Dong4 , Zhizhong Han5
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China1
JD Logistics, JD.com, Beijing, China2 Kuaishou Technology, Beijing, China3
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China4
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA5
wenxin16@jd.com zhoujs21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn
shlw@kuaishou.com dongzhenwhu@whu.edu.cn h312h@wayne.edu

Abstract
Reconstructing 3D shape from a single 2D image is
a challenging task, which needs to estimate the detailed
3D structures based on the semantic attributes from 2D
image. So far, most of the previous methods still struggle to extract semantic attributes for 3D reconstruction
task. Since the semantic attributes of a single image are
usually implicit and entangled with each other, it is still
challenging to reconstruct 3D shape with detailed semantic structures represented by the input image. To address
this problem, we propose 3DAttriFlow to disentangle and
extract semantic attributes through different semantic levels in the input images. These disentangled semantic attributes will be integrated into the 3D shape reconstruction process, which can provide definite guidance to the
reconstruction of specific attribute on 3D shape. As a result, the 3D decoder can explicitly capture high-level semantic features at the bottom of the network, and utilize
low-level features at the top of the network, which allows
to reconstruct more accurate 3D shapes. Note that the explicit disentangling is learned without extra labels, where
the only supervision used in our training is the input image and its corresponding 3D shape. Our comprehensive
experiments on ShapeNet dataset demonstrate that 3DAttriFlow outperforms the state-of-the-art shape reconstruction methods, and we also validate its generalization ability
on shape completion task. Code is available at https:
//github.com/junshengzhou/3DAttriFlow.

* Equal contribution.
† The corresponding author is Yu-Shen Liu.

This work was supported by National Key R&D Program of China (2018YFB0505400,
2020YFF0304100), the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(62072268), and in part by Tsinghua-Kuaishou Institute of Future Media
Data.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing a 3D shape from a 2D image (2D-to-3D
reconstruction) is a crucial task for bridging the gap between the 2D and 3D visual understanding. The typical
paradigm is to firstly capture the semantic features of the
2D images through an image encoder, and then correctly reconstruct them in 3D space through a 3D decoder. Among
the multiple representation forms of 3D shapes (i.e. voxel,
point cloud and mesh), this paper mainly focuses on reconstructing 3D point cloud from the input image, due to
its lightweight storage consumption and capability of representing various complicated shapes.
As addressed by the typical paradigm of most previous
methods [26,37,42,51], the key of 2D-to-3D reconstruction
is how to precisely interpret the semantic attribute from images into the 3D space. Thanks to the recent progress of 2D
computer vision, there are many well-known methods (e.g.
AlexNet [16], VGG [32] and ResNet [12]) to encode semantic attributes into image features, and their efficiencies have
also been proved by a wide range of cross-modal tasks (e.g.
image captioning [34, 53], cross-modal retrieval [35, 57]).
However, for the research of 2D-to-3D reconstruction, how
to interpret visual information from 2D domain to 3D domain for accurate 3D reconstruction still remains a difficult
task. Because most previous methods [26, 37, 38, 42, 51, 52]
only rely on the feature channels (e.g. element-wise add,
feature concatenation and attention mechanism) to convey
the visual information from the image encoder to the 3D decoder, which only contains implicit geometric information
with limited semantic attributes as the guidance to shape
reconstruction. For example, an overall geometric information such as the number of legs will determine the table to have three or four legs. Such geometric information can be easily noticed and reconstructed by the decoder.
On the other hand, the detailed semantic attributes like the
length or bending of legs will specifically determine the de-

3803

