Global Context with Discrete Diffusion in Vector Quantised Modelling
for Image Generation
Minghui Hu1

Yujie Wang2
1

Tat-Jen Cham1

Nanyang Technological University

{e200008,yang0478}@e.ntu.edu.sg

Jianfei Yang1
2

P.N.Suganthan1

Sensetime Research

{astjcham,epnsugan}@ntu.edu.sg

wangyujie@sensetime.com

Abstract
The integration of Vector Quantised Variational AutoEncoder (VQ-VAE) with autoregressive models as generation
part has yielded high-quality results on image generation.
However, the autoregressive models will strictly follow the
progressive scanning order during the sampling phase. This
leads the existing VQ series models to hardly escape the
trap of lacking global information. Denoising Diffusion
Probabilistic Models (DDPM) in the continuous domain
have shown a capability to capture the global context, while
generating high-quality images. In the discrete state space,
some works have demonstrated the potential to perform text
generation and low resolution image generation. We show
that with the help of a content-rich discrete visual codebook
from VQ-VAE, the discrete diffusion model can also generate high fidelity images with global context, which compensates for the deficiency of the classical autoregressive
model along pixel space. Meanwhile, the integration of the
discrete VAE with the diffusion model resolves the drawback
of conventional autoregressive models being oversized, and
the diffusion model which demands excessive time in the
sampling process when generating images. It is found that
the quality of the generated images is heavily dependent
on the discrete visual codebook. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that the proposed Vector Quantised Discrete
Diffusion Model (VQ-DDM) is able to achieve comparable performance to top-tier methods with low complexity. It
also demonstrates outstanding advantages over other vectors quantised with autoregressive models in terms of image
inpainting tasks without additional training.

1. Introduction
Vector Quantised Variational AutoEncoder (VQ-VAE)
[34] is a popular method developed to compress images
into discrete representations for the generation. Typically,
after the compression and discretization representation by
the convolutional network, an autoregressive model is used

Figure 1. FID v.s. Operations and Parameters. The size of the
blobs is proportional to the number of network parameters, the
X-axis indicates FLOPs on a log scale and the Y-axis is the FID
score.

to model and sample in the discrete latent space, including
PixelCNN family [5,22,35], transformers family [4,24], etc.
However, in addition to the disadvantage of the huge number of model parameters, these autoregressive models can
only make predictions based on the observed pixels (left upper part of the target pixel) due to the inductive bias caused
by the strict adherence to the progressive scan order [3, 15].
If the conditional information is located at the end of the autoregressive sequence, it is difficult for the model to obtain
relevant information.
A recent alternative generative model is the Denoising
Diffusion Model, which can effectively mitigate the lack of
global information [10, 29], also achieving comparable or
state-of-the-art performance in text [1,12], image [6,28,33]
and speech generation [19] tasks. Diffusion models are parameterised Markov chains trained to translate simple distributions to more sophisticated target data distributions in
a finite set of steps. Typically the Markov chain begins with
an isotropic Gaussian distribution in continuous state space,
with the transitions of the chain for reversing a diffusion
process that gradually adds Gaussian noise to source images. In the inverse process, as the current step is based on
the global information of the previous step in the chain, this

11502

