Image Dehazing Transformer with Transmission-Aware 3D Position Embedding
Chunle Guo1
1
4

Qixin Yan2

Saeed Anwar3

TMCC, CS, Nankai University

Beijing Jiaotong University

5

Tianjin University

Sun Yat-sen University

guochunle@nankai.edu.cn
rmcong@bjtu.edu.cn

2

Runmin Cong4
6

3

Wenqi Ren5

Chongyi Li6 *

Australian National University

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

qxyan@tju.edu.cn

rwq.renwenqi@gmail.com

saeedanwarcse@gmail.com
lichongyi25@gmail.com

https://li-chongyi.github.io/Proj_DeHamer.html

Abstract
Despite single image dehazing has been made promising progress with Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs),
the inherent equivariance and locality of convolution still
bottleneck dehazing performance. Though Transformer has
occupied various computer vision tasks, directly leveraging
Transformer for image dehazing is challenging: 1) it tends
to result in ambiguous and coarse details that are undesired
for image reconstruction; 2) previous position embedding
of Transformer is provided in logic or spatial position order
that neglects the variational haze densities, which results in
the sub-optimal dehazing performance.
The key insight of this study is to investigate how to
combine CNN and Transformer for image dehazing. To
solve the feature inconsistency issue between Transformer
and CNN, we propose to modulate CNN features via learning modulation matrices (i.e., coefficient matrix and bias
matrix) conditioned on Transformer features instead of simple feature addition or concatenation. The feature modulation naturally inherits the global context modeling capability of Transformer and the local representation capability
of CNN. We bring a haze density-related prior into Transformer via a novel transmission-aware 3D position embedding module, which not only provides the relative position
but also suggests the haze density of different spatial regions. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method,
DeHamer, attains state-of-the-art performance on several
image dehazing benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Single image dehazing aims to restore the haze-free image from the hazy counterpart that suffers from the reduced
contrast and dull colors caused by spatial variant haze densities. This task has been a longstanding and challenging problem with a wide range of applications, such as
* Chongyi Li (lichongyi25@gmail.com) is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. Thumbnail of main idea. Transformer is introduced
into image dehazing via 1) transmission-aware 3D position embedding and 2) feature modulation. The proposed method combines the global modeling capability of Transformer and the local
representation capability of CNN.

surveillance systems and autonomous driving. To solve this
ill-posed problem, prior-based methods like Dark Channel
Prior (DCP) [14] and Color Attenuation Prior (CAP) [37]
adopt priors as external information to estimate the parameters of the hazy image formation model. The robustness
of these methods is limited, especially facing challenging
scenes. With the learning capability of CNNs, CNN-based
dehazing networks have achieved impressive performance
by either estimating the imaging model’s parameters [25] or
directly learning the haze-free counterpart [20]. However,
these networks are still bottlenecked by the local nature of
the convolution for modeling the long-range dependencies
and the translation equivariance [12]. Global context and
spatially variant operations are particularly important for
haze removal [8].
Although Transformer has swept across many computer
vision tasks [6, 21, 31], directly using it in image dehazing
exits some inherent issues: 1) despite Transformer is able
to provide long-distance feature dependencies via the cascaded self-attention, even in the early stage, it lacks the capability of retaining local feature details, thus leading to ambiguous and coarse details for image reconstruction; 2) previous position embedding methods neglect the differences
among the regions with variational haze densities, which
affects image dehazing performance.

5812

