Deep Decomposition for Stochastic Normal-Abnormal Transport
Peirong Liu1

Yueh Lee2

Stephen Aylward3

Marc Niethammer1

1 Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, USA
2 Department of Radiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, USA
3 Kitware Inc., New York, USA
{peirong, mn}@cs.unc.edu

stephen.aylward@kitware.com

Abstract
Advection-diffusion equations describe a large family of
natural transport processes, e.g., fluid flow, heat transfer,
and wind transport. They are also used for optical flow
and perfusion imaging computations. We develop a machine learning model, D2 -SONATA, built upon a stochastic advection-diffusion equation, which predicts the velocity
and diffusion fields that drive 2D/3D image time-series of
transport. In particular, our proposed model incorporates a
model of transport atypicality, which isolates abnormal differences between expected normal transport behavior and
the observed transport. In a medical context such a normalabnormal decomposition can be used, for example, to quantify pathologies. Specifically, our model identifies the advection and diffusion contributions from the transport timeseries and simultaneously predicts an anomaly value field
to provide a decomposition into normal and abnormal advection and diffusion behavior. To achieve improved estimation performance for the velocity and diffusion-tensor fields
underlying the advection-diffusion process and for the estimation of the anomaly fields, we create a 2D/3D anomalyencoded advection-diffusion simulator, which allows for supervised learning. We further apply our model on a brain
perfusion dataset from ischemic stroke patients via transfer learning. Extensive comparisons demonstrate that our
model successfully distinguishes stroke lesions (abnormal)
from normal brain regions, while reconstructing the underlying velocity and diffusion tensor fields.

1. Introduction
Partial differential equations (PDEs) are used to describe
many transport phenomena, e.g., fluid dynamics, heat conduction, and wind dynamics [12]. However, it is expensive
to numerically solve PDEs especially in high spatial dimensions and across large timescales [6]. Recent deep learning
This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH)
under award number NIH 2R42NS086295 and NIH R21NS125369.

yueh lee@med.unc.edu

approaches have made data-driven solutions to PDEs possible [8, 16, 33, 38, 46, 51, 55, 56].
While the aforementioned deep learning approaches help
to speed-up PDE solutions, we are instead interested in inverse PDE problems [34, 59]. Specifically, our goal is to
estimate the spatially varying velocity and diffusion tensor fields (referred to as advection-diffusion parameters
throughout this manuscript) for general advection-diffusion
PDEs. Limited work on estimating the parameter fields of
advection-diffusion equations exists. Tartakovsky et al. [59]
use a deep neural network (DNN) to estimate 2D diffusion
fields from diffusion PDEs. Bézenac et al. [12] learn velocity and diffusion fields of advection-diffusion PDEs by
DNNs in 2D. Koundal et al. [29] use optimal mass transport combined with a spatially constant diffusion. Optimization approaches were proposed [35, 36, 63] to estimate the advection-diffusion parameters of an advectiondiffusion equation in 3D. Though promising, the numerical
optimization approach is time-consuming, especially when
dealing with large datasets. Moreover, the methods above
assume isotropic diffusion (i.e., they do not estimate more
general diffusion tensors), which may be insufficient to accurately model complex materials (e.g., anisotropic porous
media, brain tissue) where diffusion is mostly anisotropic.
The YETI approach by Liu et al. [37] is a deep learning framework to estimate advection-diffusion parameters
from transport image time-series. It addresses some key
challenges regarding identifiability (i.e., whether the resulting transport should be attributed to advection or diffusion) and physical constraints (e.g., vector fields should be
divergence-free for fluid flow, diffusion tensors should be
positive semi-definite (PSD)). Applied on brain perfusion
images for stroke lesion detection, YETI achieved clear improvements over existing approaches. However, there is still
room for improvement. First, while YETI estimates the
advection-diffusion parameters well, it would be useful to
quantify the inherent uncertainty in the resulting solutions
instead of interpreting the results deterministically. This

18791

