GroupNet: Multiscale Hypergraph Neural Networks for
Trajectory Prediction with Relational Reasoning
Chenxin Xu1 , Maosen Li1 , Zhenyang Ni1 , Ya Zhang1,2 , Siheng Chen1,2*
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{xcxwakaka,maosen_li,0107nzy,ya_zhang,sihengc}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

Scale 1

Demystifying the interactions among multiple agents from
their past trajectories is fundamental to precise and interpretable trajectory prediction. However, previous works
only consider pair-wise interactions with limited relational
reasoning. To promote more comprehensive interaction modeling for relational reasoning, we propose GroupNet, a multiscale hypergraph neural network, which is novel in terms
of both interaction capturing and representation learning.
From the aspect of interaction capturing, we propose a trainable multiscale hypergraph to capture both pair-wise and
group-wise interactions at multiple group sizes. From the
aspect of interaction representation learning, we propose
a three-element format that can be learnt end-to-end and
explicitly reason some relational factors including the interaction strength and category. We apply GroupNet into both
CVAE-based prediction system and previous state-of-the-art
prediction systems for predicting socially plausible trajectories with relational reasoning. To validate the ability of
relational reasoning, we experiment with synthetic physics
simulations to reflect the ability to capture group behaviors,
reason interaction strength and interaction category. To
validate the effectiveness of prediction, we conduct extensive experiments on three real-world trajectory prediction
datasets, including NBA, SDD and ETH-UCY; and we show
that with GroupNet, the CVAE-based prediction system outperforms state-of-the-art methods. We also show that adding
GroupNet will further improve the performance of previous
state-of-the-art prediction systems.

Scale 2

Interaction category / Strength :
Avoiding collision / High

1. Introduction
Multi-agent trajectory prediction aims to predict future
trajectories of agents conditioned on past movements. This
task is not only critical to numerous real-world applications,
such as autonomous driving and human behavior understand* Corresponding author.

Code is available at: https://github.com/MediaBrainSJTU/GroupNet

Scale 3

Avoiding collision / Low
Meeting / Median
Companying / Median

Multi-agent Scene

Multiscale Hypergraph

Reasoning

Figure 1. GroupNet captures both pair-wise and group-wise interactions among multiple agents from their trajectories and infers the
interaction category and strength for each interaction group.

ing, but also serves as a foundation to bridge the knowledge
of the past and the action for the future. At least three factors
would affect each agent’s dynamics: ego momentum, instantaneous intent, and social influence from the other agents.
The first factor has been well studied [36]; the second factor
is unpredictable; and the third factor is an emerging research
topic and the focus of this work. To demystify the social influence, we need to model and reason the interactions among
agents based on their past spatio-temporal states, potentially
leading to precise and interpretable trajectory prediction.
Many works have tried to model the interactions through
social operations [1, 13, 43], graph-based modeling [14, 15,
18, 23] and attention mechanism [27, 33, 38]. Although these
methods have greatly improved the empirical performances
of trajectory prediction, they underestimate the significance
of relational reasoning. Some previous works, such as
NRI [17] and Evolvegraph [23], took a step forward towards
explicit relational reasoning; however, they still have limitation from two aspects. First, only pair-wise interactions are
modeled. In many scenarios, such as on a basketball court, a
group of players execute a defensive strategy cooperatively;
in the ocean, a school of fish coordinate their movements
to evade predators, reflecting collective behaviors. While
this kind of group-wise interaction is common, they have
rarely been modeled. Second, only interaction categories
are explicitly reasoned by the current methods, while the
intensity level of the agent interaction cannot be reflected.
To further promote more comprehensive relational reasoning in trajectory prediction, this work puts efforts on two
aspects: interaction capturing and interaction representation

6498

