SIGMA: Semantic-complete Graph Matching for Domain Adaptive Object
Detection
Wuyang Li
Xinyu Liu
Yixuan Yuan*
City University of Hong Kong
{wuyangli2, xliu423}-c@my.cityu.edu.hk yxyuan.ee@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Domain Adaptive Object Detection (DAOD) leverages a
labeled domain to learn an object detector generalizing to
a novel domain free of annotations. Recent advances align
class-conditional distributions by narrowing down crossdomain prototypes (class centers). Though great success,
they ignore the significant within-class variance and the
domain-mismatched semantics within the training batch,
leading to a sub-optimal adaptation. To overcome these
challenges, we propose a novel SemantIc-complete Graph
MAtching (SIGMA) framework for DAOD, which completes
mismatched semantics and reformulates the adaptation with
graph matching. Specifically, we design a Graph-embedded
Semantic Completion module (GSC) that completes mismatched semantics through generating hallucination graph
nodes in missing categories. Then, we establish crossimage graphs to model class-conditional distributions and
learn a graph-guided memory bank for better semantic
completion in turn. After representing the source and target
data as graphs, we reformulate the adaptation as a graph
matching problem, i.e., finding well-matched node pairs
across graphs to reduce the domain gap, which is solved
with a novel Bipartite Graph Matching adaptor (BGM). In
a nutshell, we utilize graph nodes to establish semanticaware node affinity and leverage graph edges as quadratic
constraints in a structure-aware matching loss, achieving
fine-grained adaptation with a node-to-node graph matching. Extensive experiments verify that SIGMA outperforms existing works significantly. Our code is available
at https://github.com/CityU-AIM-Group/SIGMA.

1. Introduction
Well-trained object detectors [23, 24, 33] have been
proven to achieve promising performance with a consistent
* Yixuan Yuan is the corresponding author.
This work was supported by Hong Kong Research Grants Council (RGC)
General Research Fund 11211221 (CityU 9043152).

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed SemantIc-complete Graph
MAtching (SIGMA) framework for DAOD.

distribution of training and test data. However, deploying
these methods in a novel domain leads to the catastrophic
performance degradation due to the domain gap [3], which
significantly limits the generalization and transferability of
object detectors. Furthermore, this challenge also restricts
the application of object detection in real-world scenarios,
such as self-driving under distinctive weather conditions
and video analysis containing novel scenes.
To overcome this limitation, Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation (UDA) methods have been explored to adapt
the unlabeled target domain and the annotated source domain, and one of the main streams of UDA works is to align
feature distributions between source and target domains.
Early works [3, 12, 27] adopt a pixel-to-pixel adaptation
in terms of hierarchical features, yielding a global alignment of the whole image with per-pixel adaptation. Some
works [3, 37, 41] focus on foreground objects and conduct
more precise adaptation on those regions of interest. Recently, some works [32,37,41,42] aim to align cross-domain
class-conditional distributions in the implicit feature space
and achieve adaptation in a category-to-category manner.
These works model category centers with prototypes and
minimize the distance of cross-domain prototypes to bridge
the domain gap at the category level.
Though satisfactory performance, there are still two
challenges in existing category-level adaptation works [32,
37, 41, 42]. Firstly, these works neglect the significant
within-class variance and directly align handcraft category

5291

