Geometric Anchor Correspondence Mining with Uncertainty Modeling for
Universal Domain Adaptation

1

Liang Chen 1 , Yihang Lou 2 , Jianzhong He 2 *, Tao Bai 2 , Minghua Deng 1†
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, 2 Intelligent Vision Dept, Huawei Technologies

Abstract
Universal domain adaptation (UniDA) aims to transfer
the knowledge learned from a label-rich source domain to
a label-scarce target domain without any constraints on
the label space. However, domain shift and category shift
make UniDA extremely challenging, which mainly lies in
how to recognize both shared “known” samples and private “unknown” samples. Previous works rarely explore
the intrinsic geometrical relationship between the two domains, and they manually set a threshold for the overconfident closed-world classifier to reject “unknown” samples.
Therefore, in this paper, we propose a Geometric anchorguided Adversarial and conTrastive learning framework
with uncErtainty modeling called GATE to alleviate these
issues. Specifically, we first develop a random walk-based
anchor mining strategy together with a high-order attention mechanism to build correspondence across domains.
Then a global joint local domain alignment paradigm is designed, i.e., geometric adversarial learning for global distribution calibration and subgraph-level contrastive learning for local region aggregation. Toward accurate target
private samples detection, GATE introduces a universal
incremental classifier by modeling the energy uncertainty.
We further efficiently generate novel categories by manifold mixup, and minimize the open-set entropy to learn the
“unknown” threshold adaptively. Extensive experiments on
three benchmarks demonstrate that GATE significantly outperforms previous state-of-the-art UniDA methods.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved impressive progress
in image recognition tasks given abundant labeled data,
however, they do not generalize well to novel unlabeled domain [28]. Annotating massive data from various domains
is an expensive and time-consuming task, and these domains often sample from different distributions against each
other. Such so-called domain shift would degenerate the
* This work is completed in Huawei Technologies.
† Corresponding Author.

model performance heavily [15]. To alleviate this issue, domain adaptation (DA) transfers knowledge from the labelrich source domain to the label-scarce target domain by diminishing the feature discrepancy across two domains [10].
Suppose that the label spaces of two domains are Cs and Ct ,
respectively, traditional unsupervised DA usually assumes
Cs = Ct , i.e., close-set DA (CDA) [38]. In complex realworld scenarios, however, this assumption may not be easily satisfied. There are several situations we may encounter:
Ct ⊂ Cs , i.e., partial DA (PDA) [2]; Cs ⊂ Ct , i.e., openset DA (ODA) [29]; Cs ∩ Ct ̸= ∅, Cs ∪ Ct ̸= Cs or Ct ,
i.e., open-partial DA (OPDA) [16]. Although these variants
have recently been resolved independently, the downside is
that a method that is applicable to one variant may not be applicable to another. More difficultly, we cannot know which
of these variants will occur in advance.
To better tackle these general situations, universal DA
(UniDA) is raised to account for both domain shift and category shift, allowing two domains to own their private categories [44]. It assumes that we have no prior knowledge
about their label space differences, thus being very practical in the real world. In UniDA, we aim to classify the
target samples into either one of the “known” labels or the
“unknown” label. However, there exist two main technical challenges in UniDA. First, we should constrain the domain bias removal into the common categories between two
domains, and need to separate their respective private categories simultaneously. Second, we need to detect the potential “unknown” samples in the target domain without any
target label supervision or other prior information. These
two challenges are complementary and mutually constraining, since better removal of feature discrepancy can help
identify the “unknown” sample, whereas, in turn, the model
can help separate the common and private categories once
it learns the concept of “unknown”.
Recently, several efforts have been devoted to settling
the UniDA task. For the first challenge, UAN [44] exploits
both the domain similarity and the prediction uncertainty
of each sample to incorporate a weighting mechanism into
the adversarial network for promoting common-class adaptation. DANCE [32] moves each target sample either to a

16134

