Mutual Information-driven Pan-sharpening
Man Zhou1,2 ,* Keyu Yan1,2 ,* Jie Huang2 , Zihe Yang2 , Xueyang Fu2† , Feng Zhao2
1
Hefei Institute of Physical Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
University of Science and Technology of China, China
{manman,keyu,hj0117,yangzh10}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {xyfu,fzhao956}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Pan-sharpening aims to integrate the complementary information of texture-rich PAN images and multi-spectral
(MS) images to produce the texture-rich MS images. Despite the remarkable progress, existing state-of-the-art Pansharpening methods don’t explicitly enforce the complementary information learning between two modalities of
PAN and MS images. This leads to information redundancy not being handled well, which further limits the performance of these methods. To address the above issue, we
propose a novel mutual information-driven Pan-sharpening
framework in this paper. To be specific, we first project the
PAN and MS image into modality-aware feature space independently, and then impose the mutual information minimization over them to explicitly encourage the complementary information learning. Such operation is capable
of reducing the information redundancy and improving the
model performance. Extensive experimental results over
multiple satellite datasets demonstrate that the proposed algorithm outperforms other state-of-the-art methods qualitatively and quantitatively with great generalization ability to
real-world scenes.

C

C Concatenation

(a) Input Fusion Network

* Co-first authors contributed equally, † corresponding author.

This
work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (NSFC) under Grant 61901433; and in part by the USTC Research
Funds of the Double First-Class Initiative under Grant YD2100002003.

(b) Feature Fusion Network

INN

Feature maps

Convolutions

(c) Ours

Figure 1. The categorization of existing Pan-sharpening methods.
MS feature

PAN feature

Without
Mutual information

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of remote sensors, explosive
satellite images are available for a wide range of applications like military systems, environmental monitoring, and
mapping services. Due to the physical limitations, satellites
usually capture both multi-spectral (MS) and panchromatic
(PAN) sensors to simultaneously obtain complementary information. To be specific, MS images possess high spectral
but limited spatial resolution while PAN images have rich
spatial information but low spectral resolution. To generate
images with both high spectral and spatial resolutions, the

CNN

CNN

With
Mutual information

Figure 2. The information redundancy reduction after integrating
mutual information minimization constraint, and the average features of P2 and M2 are visualized, defined in Figure 4.

Pan-sharpening technique by fusing the MS and PAN images has drawn increasing attention from both image processing and remote sensing communities.
Treated as a fusion task, considerable Pan-sharpening
methods have been developed with two main fusion strategies: 1) image-level fusion and 2) feature-level fusion. As
shown in Figure 1 (a), the first category directly concatenates the MS and PAN images along the channel dimension

1798

