Bongard-HOI: Benchmarking Few-Shot Visual Reasoning
for Human-Object Interactions
Huaizu Jiang1∗ , Xiaojian Ma2 *, Weili Nie3 , Zhiding Yu3 , Yuke Zhu3,4 , Anima Anandkumar3,5
1
Northeastern University 2 UCLA 3 NVIDIA 4 UT Austin 5 Caltech
h.jiang@northeastern.edu, xiaojian.ma@ucla.edu, {wnie,zhidingy}@nvidia.com,
yukez@cs.utexas.edu, anima@caltech.edu

github.com/nvlabs/Bongard-HOI

positive examples
ride bicycle

Abstract
A significant gap remains between today’s visual pattern
recognition models and human-level visual cognition especially when it comes to few-shot learning and compositional
reasoning of novel concepts. We introduce Bongard-HOI,
a new visual reasoning benchmark that focuses on compositional learning of human-object interactions (HOIs) from
natural images. It is inspired by two desirable characteristics from the classical Bongard problems (BPs): 1) few-shot
concept learning, and 2) context-dependent reasoning. We
carefully curate the few-shot instances with hard negatives,
where positive and negative images only disagree on action labels, making mere recognition of object categories
insufficient to complete our benchmarks. We also design
multiple test sets to systematically study the generalization
of visual learning models, where we vary the overlap of
the HOI concepts between the training and test sets of fewshot instances, from partial to no overlaps. Bongard-HOI
presents a substantial challenge to today’s visual recognition models. The state-of-the-art HOI detection model
achieves only 62% accuracy on few-shot binary prediction
while even amateur human testers on MTurk have 91% accuracy. With the Bongard-HOI benchmark, we hope to further
advance research efforts in visual reasoning, especially in
holistic perception-reasoning systems and better representation learning.

1. Introduction
In recent years, great strides have been made on visual recognition benchmarks, such as ImageNet [8] and
COCO [33]. Nonetheless, there remains a considerable gap
between machine-level pattern recognition and human-level
cognitive reasoning. Current image understanding models
typically require a large amount of training data yet struggle
* First two authors contributed equally.

negative examples
!ride bicycle

Query images:

Labels:

positive

negative

Figure 1. Illustration of a few-shot learning instance from our
Bongard-HOI benchmark. The positive images in the top left
part follow the visual relationship of riding a bike between the
person and objects while such a relationship does not exist in the
negative examples. Note that an actual problem in Bongard-HOI
contains 6 images of positive examples, 6 negative examples, and 1
query image, which is different from the illustration here.

to generalize beyond the visual concepts seen during training.
In contrast, humans can reason about new visual concepts
in a compositional manner from just a few examples [21].
To march towards human-level visual cognition, we need to
depart from conventional benchmarks on closed-vocabulary
recognition tasks and aim to systematically examine compositional and few-shot learning of novel visual concepts.
While existing benchmarks such as miniImageNet [46],
Meta-Dataset [44], and ORBIT [44] have been dedicated
to studying few-shot visual learning, they focus on recog-

19056

