Dual-path Image Inpainting with Auxiliary GAN Inversion
Wentao Wang1 , Li Niu1 *, Jianfu Zhang2 , Xue Yang1 , Liqing Zhang1∗
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Tensor Learning Team, RIKEN AIP
{wwt117,ustcnewly,yangxue-2019-sjtu,lqzhang}@sjtu.edu.cn, jianfu.zhang@riken.jp

Abstract
Deep image inpainting can inpaint a corrupted image
using a feed-forward inference, but still fails to handle large
missing area or complex semantics. Recently, GAN inversion based inpainting methods propose to leverage semantic information in pretrained generator (e.g., StyleGAN) to
solve the above issues. Different from feed-forward methods, they seek for a closest latent code to the corrupted
image and feed it to a pretrained generator. However, inferring the latent code is either time-consuming or inaccurate. In this paper, we develop a dual-path inpainting network with inversion path and feed-forward path, in which
inversion path provides auxiliary information to help feedforward path. We also design a novel deformable fusion
module to align the feature maps in two paths. Experiments
on FFHQ and LSUN demonstrate that our method is effective in solving the aforementioned problems while producing more realistic results than state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1. Illustration of four types of inpainting methods. (a)
Feed-forward inpainting method. (b) Optimization-based GAN
inversion inpainting method. [25] (c) Learning-based GAN inversion inpainting method. [12] (d) Ours. The modules marked in
orange are optimized during training.

1. Introduction
Image inpainting [3] aims to fill the semantically appropriate and visually faithful contents in the missing regions
of corrupted images. Numerous applications such as image
editing, missing region repairing in image/video, and object
removing benefit from the advance of image inpainting.
In recent years, deep neural networks have brought
breakthroughs in image inpainting. Most deep inpainting
methods [8,16,18,20,22,24,28–31] are single feed-forward
methods. As shown in Figure 1 (a), they usually train a
convolutional neural network with adversarial training and
inpaint the corrupted image by feed-forward inference. Although great progress has been achieved in inpainting quality and speed compared with conventional methods, they
still fail to process images with large missing areas or generate the results with good semantics [12,25]. As an alterna* Corresponding author.

tive, GAN inversion [23] inpainting methods [12,25], which
are rarely studied, have shown promising results for solving the above problems. They usually utilize a pretrained
generative model (e.g., StyleGAN [9, 10] and BigGAN [4])
to provide semantic prior. Differing from feed-forward inpainting methods, they first seek for the closest latent code
in the latent space (input to the pretrained generator) for
the corrupted image and then invert the latent code back
to a complete image using the pretrained generator. There
are two strategies to obtain the latent code: optimizationbased strategy [25] and learning-based strategy [12]. For
optimization-based strategy (see Figure 1(b)), optimization
algorithm is adopted to iteratively update the latent code z
which minimizes the reconstruction loss between generated
image Ig and ground truth Igt . For learning-based strategy (see Figure 1(c)), instead of directly optimizing the latent code z, an encoder network is used to infer the latent

11421

