Unified Transformer Tracker for Object Tracking
Fan Ma1,3 * Mike Zheng Shou2 Linchao Zhu1
Haoqi Fan3 Yilei Xu3 Yi Yang4 Zhicheng Yan3†
1
ReLER Lab, AAII, University of Technology Sydney 2 National University of Singapore
3
Meta AI 4 Zhejiang University
Abstract

Visual object tracking is one of the fundamental computer vision tasks with numerous applications [10, 25, 40,
55]. Unlike clearly defined object classification and detection problems [18, 19, 46, 50], object tracking is considered
in different scenarios and can be categorized into two main
paradigms 1) Single Object Tracking (SOT) is to track an
annotated target from any object category in the first frame
throughout a video [13, 25]; 2) Multiple Object Tracking
(MOT) aims at estimating bounding boxes and identities of
objects in videos where categories of targets are known and
* This work was done during Fan’s internship at Meta AI.
† Correspondence author.

7UDFN7UDQVIRUPHU

6275HVXOWV

&RUUHODWLRQ

%DFNERQH

1. Introduction

027
'HWHFWRUVSHFLILHG

%DFNERQH

As an important area in computer vision, object tracking has formed two separate communities that respectively
study Single Object Tracking (SOT) and Multiple Object
Tracking (MOT). However, current methods in one tracking
scenario are not easily adapted to the other due to the divergent training datasets and tracking objects of both tasks. Although UniTrack [45] demonstrates that a shared appearance model with multiple heads can be used to tackle individual tracking tasks, it fails to exploit the large-scale tracking datasets for training and performs poorly on the single
object tracking. In this work, we present the Unified Transformer Tracker (UTT) to address tracking problems in different scenarios with one paradigm. A track transformer is
developed in our UTT to track the target in both SOT and
MOT where the correlation between the target feature and
the tracking frame feature is exploited to localize the target.
We demonstrate that both SOT and MOT tasks can be solved
within this framework, and the model can be simultaneously
end-to-end trained by alternatively optimizing the SOT and
MOT objectives on the datasets of individual tasks. Extensive experiments are conducted on several benchmarks with
a unified model trained on both SOT and MOT datasets.

627
8VHU6SHFLILHG

7UDFNLQJ)UDPHV

0275HVXOWV
7DUJHWER[

&DWHJRU\

'DWDVHW

627

8VHUVSHFLILHG

1RWOLPLWHG

/D627*27N7UDFNLQJ1HW

027

'HWHFWHG

/LPLWHG

&URZGKXPDQ027

Figure 1. Unified transformer tracker for both single object
tracking (SOT) and multiple object tracking (MOT) task. The
target box in SOT is specified in the first frame while all boxes
in reference frames are from the detection model in MOT. We use
one tracking model to predict target localization in tracking frames
for both tasks.

objects could appear or disappear [53,55]. Current methods
in the tracking community solve individual tasks separately
by training models on the individual datasets for either SOT
or MOT.
Siamese architecture is widely applied in SOT where
various designs focus on improving the discriminative representation of objects [10,13,25,49]. For MOT, tracking by
detection is the most popular paradigm and achieves highest tracking performance on several benchmarks [2, 37, 55].
This paradigm is not applicable for SOT as the model would
fail to detect objects of unseen categories in SOT. Some
MOT methods [24, 60] use the Siamese tracker in SOT [4]
to predict the location of the targets in tracking frames and
fuse the predicted boxes with the detection boxes to enhance
the detection results. However, these methods are not competitive to the tracking-by-detection methods in MOT. Albeit the Siamese trackers have been applied in both tracking
tasks, none of these works are able to address two tracking

8781

