Open-Vocabulary Instance Segmentation
via Robust Cross-Modal Pseudo-Labeling
Dat Huynh1 *
1
1

Jason Kuen2
Zhe Lin2
Northeastern University

Jiuxiang Gu2
Ehsan Elhamifar1
2
Adobe Research

{huynh.dat,e.elhamifar}@northeastern.edu

2

{kuen, zlin, jigu}@adobe.com

Abstract
Open-vocabulary instance segmentation aims at segmenting novel classes without mask annotations. It is an important step toward reducing laborious human supervision.
Most existing works first pretrain a model on captioned
images covering many novel classes and then finetune it
on limited base classes with mask annotations. However,
the high-level textual information learned from caption pretraining alone cannot effectively encode the details required
for pixel-wise segmentation. To address this, we propose a
cross-modal pseudo-labeling framework, which generates
training pseudo masks by aligning word semantics in captions with visual features of object masks in images. Thus,
our framework is capable of labeling novel classes in captions via their word semantics to self-train a student model.
To account for noises in pseudo masks, we design a robust
student model that selectively distills mask knowledge by
estimating the mask noise levels, hence mitigating the adverse impact of noisy pseudo masks. By extensive experiments, we show the effectiveness of our framework, where
we significantly improve mAP score by 4.5% on MS-COCO
and 5.1% on the large-scale Open Images & Conceptual
Captions datasets compared to the state-of-the-art.1

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation is a crucial yet challenging task of
segmenting all objects in an image with applications in autonomous driving, surveillance systems, and medical imaging. Segmentation works have achieved impressive results
thanks to advances in training high capacity models with
large amounts of mask annotations [1–4]. To be specific,
most methods adopt a two-stage object detection architecture [5] for this task by learning an additional mask head to
segment objects within box proposals [6–9]. Recent works
* This work was done during Dat Huynh’s internship at Adobe Research.
1 Code is available at https://github.com/hbdat/cvpr22_
cross_modal_pseudo_labeling.

Figure 1. Conventional pseudo-labeling (top) only segments objects based on visual modality, which produces incorrect labels
and misses novel object classes. Our method (bottom) leverages
both visual and textual modalities by aligning semantics of caption words with visual features of object masks to correctly label
objects and generalize to novel classes without mask annotations.

focus on high-quality mask segmentation by increasing the
prediction resolutions using dynamic networks [10, 11] or
boundary refinement [12–14]. Despite their success, these
works all require costly mask annotations of every class. As
a result, it is difficult to scale such systems to hundreds or
thousands of classes due to their high mask annotation costs
for training. In this work, we aim to significantly reduce the
amount of mask supervision by segmenting novel classes
using low-cost captioned images.
One of the most popular ways to increase the number
of segmentation classes is partially-supervised learning. It
utilizes weak image-level [15–17] or box-level [18–23] supervision to segment objects that have no mask annotations,
thus lowering the annotation costs. Despite the successes
of partially-supervised methods, they can only segment the
classes covered by the image/box-level annotation and not
a wide general range of novel classes.
Different from previous approaches that are limited to
classes with mask annotations, zero-shot instance/semantic
segmentation aims to segment novel classes without train-

7020

