Text to Image Generation with Semantic-Spatial Aware GAN
†

Wentong Liao1*, Kai Hu1* , Michael Ying Yang2 , Bodo Rosenhahn1
1

TNT, Leibniz University Hannover, Germany, 2 SUG, University of Twente, The Netherlands

Input Text

Abstract
Text-to-image synthesis (T2I) aims to generate photorealistic images which are semantically consistent with the
text descriptions. Existing methods are usually built upon
conditional generative adversarial networks (GANs) and
initialize an image from noise with sentence embedding,
and then refine the features with fine-grained word embedding iteratively. A close inspection of their generated images reveals a major limitation: even though the generated image holistically matches the description, individual
image regions or parts of somethings are often not recognizable or consistent with words in the sentence, e.g.
“a white crown”. To address this problem, we propose a
novel framework Semantic-Spatial Aware GAN for synthesizing images from input text. Concretely, we introduce a
simple and effective Semantic-Spatial Aware block, which
(1) learns semantic-adaptive transformation conditioned on
text to effectively fuse text features and image features, and
(2) learns a semantic mask in a weakly-supervised way
that depends on the current text-image fusion process in
order to guide the transformation spatially. Experiments
on the challenging COCO and CUB bird datasets demonstrate the advantage of our method over the recent stateof-the-art approaches, regarding both visual fidelity and
alignment with input text description. Code available at
https://github.com/wtliao/text2image.

1. Introduction
The great advances made in Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [7, 20, 22, 38, 11, 35, 2, 13] boost a remarkable evolution in synthesizing photo-realistic images with
diverse conditions, such as layout [19, 8], text [34, 30] and
scene graph [12, 1, 5]. Particularly, generating images conditioned on text descriptions (see Fig. 1) has been catching increasing attention in computer vision and natural language processing communities because: (1) it bridges the
gap between these two domains, and (2) linguistic descrip* Equal contribution
† Kai Hu contributed to this work when he was doing his master thesis

supervised by Wentong Liao at TNT.

GT

Generated Image

This is a gray bird
with black wings and
white wingbars light
yellow sides and
yellow eyebrows.

A horse in a grassy
field set against a
foggy mountain
range.

Figure 1: Examples of images generated by our method (3rd
column) conditioned on the given text descriptions.
tion (text) is the most natural and convenient medium for
human being to describe a visual scene. Nonetheless, T2I
remains a challenging task because of the cross-modal problem (text to image transformation) and the ability to keep
the generated image holistically as well as locally semantically consistent with the given text.
The most recent T2I methods are usually multi-stage
refinement frameworks which generates an initial image
from noise with sentence embedding and refines the details
with fine-grained word embedding in each following stage
[34, 35, 10, 30, 16, 31]. In each stage, there is a pair of generator and discriminator to synthesize higher-resolution image and decide whether the generated image is real enough,
respectively. This method has proved effective in synthesizing high-resolution images. However, multiple generatordiscriminator pairs lead to higher computation and more
unstable training processes. Moreover, the quality of the
image generated by the earlier generator decides the final
output. If the early generated image is poor, the later generators can not improve its quality. To address this problem,
the one-stage generator is introduced in [28] which has one
generator-discriminator pair. In this work, we also follow
this one-stage structure.
On the other hand, the generated image should be holis18187

