Connecting the Complementary-view Videos:
Joint Camera Identification and Subject Association
Ruize Han1 , Yiyang Gan1 , Jiacheng Li1 , Feifan Wang1 , Wei Feng1†, Song Wang2†
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of South Carolina, USA
{han ruize, realgump, threeswords, wff, wfeng}@tju.edu.cn, songwang@cec.sc.edu

Abstract
We attempt to connect the data from complementary
views, i.e., top view from drone-mounted cameras in the air,
and side view from wearable cameras on the ground. Collaborative analysis of such complementary-view data can
facilitate to build the air-ground cooperative visual system
for various kinds of applications. This is a very challenging problem due to the large view difference between top
and side views. In this paper, we develop a new approach
that can simultaneously handle three tasks: i) localizing the
side-view camera in the top view; ii) estimating the view
direction of the side-view camera; iii) detecting and associating the same subjects on the ground across the complementary views. Our main idea is to explore the spatial
position layout of the subjects in two views. In particular,
we propose a spatial-aware position representation method
to embed the spatial-position distribution of the subjects in
different views. We further design a cross-view video collaboration framework composed of a camera identification
module and a subject association module to simultaneously
perform the above three tasks. We collect a new synthetic
dataset consisting of top-view and side-view video sequence
pairs for performance evaluation and the experimental results show the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
With the advancement of mobile-camera technologies,
human group events such as surprise parties, group games
and sports events, are increasingly recorded by various mobile cameras. Wearable cameras, such as GoPro or mobile
phone camera, worn by one of the persons (referred to as
subjects in this paper) on the ground can provide side views
of the human group [7, 24, 33]. Unmanned aerial vehicles
(UAVs), such as drones in the air, can provide top views
of the same human group [10]. The video analysis tasks
† Co-corresponding authors.

in such two views are both well studied [17, 39, 40]. However, the collaborative analysis of these two views is rarely
studied. We can see from Figure 1 that the data collected
from these two views well complement each other – the topview video contains no mutual occlusions and well exhibits
a global picture and the spatial distribution of the subjects,
while the side-view video can capture the detailed appearance, behavior, and activity of subjects of interest in a much
closer distance. We believe that their collaborative analysis
can help build the air-ground cooperative visual system for
comprehensive scene understanding, activity analysis, etc.
To achieve this goal, the first challenging problem is to
effectively connect these two complementary views. For
this we propose to study the following three tasks as shown
in Figure 1. Task I: Camera location identification – to localize the side-view camera in the top-view video; Task II:
View direction estimation – to infer the view direction of the
side-view camera (in the top view); Task III: Cross-view
multiple human detection and association – to detect every
subject present in each view and identify the same person
across the two views.
This is a very challenging problem and different from
existing works. The biggest challenge lies in that the large
(approximately orthogonal) view difference in our setting,
which makes the classical features, e.g., appearance and
motion, no longer useful for connecting the two views.
Specifically, Tasks I & II are different from prior works on
identifying the first-person camera in a third-person camera [6,35], where the third-person cameras usually adopt the
egocentric or surveillance cameras, and their altitudes and
angles are similar with the first-person cameras. In this paper, the third-person camera is mounted on a drone, leading
to very limited field-of-view (FOV) overlap with the firstperson view. This makes prior approaches [6, 35] on modeling the cross-view correspondence fail in our tasks. Task
III looks like a specific person re-identification (re-id) problem – for each subject in one view, re-identifying him/her in
the other view. However, this is a very challenging person
re-id problem because the same subject may show totally

2416

