X-Pool: Cross-Modal Language-Video Attention for Text-Video Retrieval
Junwei Ma1 *
Noël Vouitsis1,2 *
Satya Krishna Gorti1 *
Keyvan Golestan1
Maksims Volkovs1
Animesh Garg2,3,4
Guangwei Yu1
1

Layer 6 AI

2

3

University of Toronto

Vector Institute

Abstract
In text-video retrieval, the objective is to learn a crossmodal similarity function between a text and a video that
ranks relevant text-video pairs higher than irrelevant pairs.
However, videos inherently express a much wider gamut of
information than texts. Instead, texts often capture subregions of entire videos and are most semantically similar to
certain frames within videos. Therefore, for a given text, a
retrieval model should focus on the text’s most semantically
similar video sub-regions to make a more relevant comparison. Yet, most existing works aggregate entire videos without directly considering text. Common text-agnostic aggregations schemes include mean-pooling or self-attention
over the frames, but these are likely to encode misleading visual information not described in the given text. To address
this, we propose a cross-modal attention model called XPool that reasons between a text and the frames of a video.
Our core mechanism is a scaled dot product attention for a
text to attend to its most semantically similar frames. We
then generate an aggregated video representation conditioned on the text’s attention weights over the frames. We
evaluate our method on three benchmark datasets of MSRVTT, MSVD and LSMDC, achieving new state-of-the-art results by up to 12% in relative improvement in Recall@1.
Our findings thereby highlight the importance of joint textvideo reasoning to extract important visual cues according
to text. Full code and demo can be found at: layer6ailabs.github.io/xpool/.

1. Introduction
The advent of video content platforms like TikTok,
YouTube and Netflix have enabled the mass outreach of
videos around the world. The ability to retrieve videos
that are most semantically similar to a provided text-based
search query allows us to quickly find relevant information
and to make sense of massive amounts of video data.
* Authors contributed equally to this work.

4

NVIDIA

A pope traveling on open
body vehicle and blessing
the peoples.

Man in black suit is
having meeting with
group of people.
A female reporter gives
updates on foreign
relations and tragedies.

A bus is going on the road and it is fallen in the big dig.

Figure 1. Illustration of the joint text and visual representations
for a single video and its captions taken verbatim from the MSRVTT dataset. Since the video is capturing more content than each
individual text, aggregating the entire video regardless of the input
text can be misleading.

The task of text-video retrieval is an approach to solve
this problem wherein the objective is for a model to learn a
similarity function between texts and videos. To compute
the similarity between both modalities, a common technique is to first embed a text and a video into a joint latent
space and then apply a distance metric such as the cosine
similarity between the text and video embeddings [5,12,22].
However, there is an important discrepancy between
both modalities that makes such a direct comparison challenging. Videos inherently express a much wider gamut of
information than texts, so a text generally cannot fully capture the entire contents of a video. Instead, texts are most
semantically similar to sub-regions of videos, represented
as a subset of frames. Depending on the given text, the
frames that are the most semantically similar would differ,
so multiple equally valid texts can match a particular video.
For example, in Figure 1, we show frames of a sample video
from the MSR-VTT dataset [40]. The frames depict various
scenes from international news and express different visual
content. Moreover, we show multiple captions associated
with this video, and observe that each caption best matches
a different video frame but can seem irrelevant to others.
In this example, we would expect the same video to be re-

5006

