Self-Distillation from the Last Mini-Batch for Consistency Regularization
Yiqing Shen1*† , Liwu Xu2* , Yuzhe Yang2 , Yaqian Li2‡ , Yandong Guo2
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 OPPO Research Institute
shenyq@sjtu.edu.cn, {xuliwu, liyaqian}@oppo.com, ippllewis@gmail.com, yandong.guo@live.com

Abstract
Knowledge distillation (KD) shows a bright promise as
a powerful regularization strategy to boost generalization
ability by leveraging learned sample-level soft targets. Yet,
employing a complex pre-trained teacher network or an
ensemble of peer students in existing KD is both timeconsuming and computationally costly. Various self KD
methods have been proposed to achieve higher distillation
efficiency. However, they either require extra network architecture modification or are difficult to parallelize. To
cope with these challenges, we propose an efficient and
reliable self-distillation framework, named Self-Distillation
from Last Mini-Batch (DLB). Specifically, we rearrange the
sequential sampling by constraining half of each mini-batch
coinciding with the previous iteration. Meanwhile, the rest
half will coincide with the upcoming iteration. Afterwards,
the former half mini-batch distills on-the-fly soft targets
generated in the previous iteration. Our proposed mechanism guides the training stability and consistency, resulting in robustness to label noise. Moreover, our method is
easy to implement, without taking up extra run-time memory or requiring model structure modification. Experimental results on three classification benchmarks illustrate that
our approach can consistently outperform state-of-the-art
self-distillation approaches with different network architectures. Additionally, our method shows strong compatibility with augmentation strategies by gaining additional performance improvement. The code is available at https:
//github.com/Meta-knowledge-Lab/DLB.

1. Introduction
Knowledge Distillation (KD), first introduced by Bucilua et al. [2], was later popularized by Hinton et al. [10].
Numerous previous researches have demonstrated the success of KD in various learning tasks to boost the generalization ability. For example, in the case of network compression, the two-stage offline KD is widely used to transfer
* Equal Contribution. ‡ Corresponding Author.
† This work was done during the internship at OPPO Research Institute.

dark knowledge from a cumbersome pre-trained model to a
light student model that learns from teachers’ intermediate
feature maps [21], logits [10], attention maps [40], or auxiliary outputs [43]. However, training a high-capacity teacher
network heavily relies on large computational sources and
run-in memory. To alleviate the time-consuming preparation of static teachers, online distillation is introduced [44],
where an ensemble of peer students learns mutually from
each other. Online KD achieves equivalent performance improvement, compared with offline KD, with higher computational efficiency. Thus, this line is subsequently extended
by many following works to a more capable self-ensemble
teacher [3,8,14,33]. Other applications of KD include semisupervised learning, domain adaptation, transfer learning
and etc [18, 26, 28]. The main scope of this paper focuses
on the KD paradigm itself.
Conventional KD approaches, both online and offline,
have achieved satisfying empirical performance [24]. Yet,
existing KD approaches suffer from an obstacle in the low
knowledge transferring efficiency [35]. Additionally, high
computation and run-in memory costs restrict their deployment onto the end devices, such as mobile phones, digital
cameras [4]. To cope with these limitations, self-knowledge
distillation has received increasing popularity, which enables a student model to distill knowledge from itself. The
absence of a complex pre-trained teacher and an ensemble
of peer students in self-KD contributes to a marginal improvement in the training efficiency.
One popular formulation of self KD, such as Be Your
Own Teacher (BYOT), requires heavy network architecture modifications, which largely increases their difficulty
to generalize onto various network structures [19,32,43]. In
another line, history information, including previous training logits or model snapshots, is utilized to construct a
virtual teacher for extra supervision signals as self distillation. Initially, born again networks (BAN) sequentially
distill networks with identical parameters as its last generation [7]. An advancement achieved by snapshot distillation is to take the secondary information from the prior
mini-generation i.e. a couple of epochs, within one generation [36]. This virtual teacher update frequency is further

11943

