Panoptic Neural Fields: A Semantic Object-Aware Neural Scene Representation
Abhijit Kundu 1 Kyle Genova 1 Xiaoqi Yin 1 Alireza Fathi 1 Caroline Pantofaru 1
Leonidas Guibas 1,4 Andrea Tagliasacchi 1,3 Frank Dellaert 1,2 Thomas Funkhouser 1
1

Google Research

2

Georgia Tech

3

Simon Fraser University

4

Stanford University
Color

Panoptic Neural Field

Depth

Input Images
Instance Segmentation

Semantic Segmentation

Figure 1. Panoptic Neural Fields (PNF) is an object-aware neural scene representation that decomposes a dynamic 3D scene into a set of
objects (things) and background (stuff ), each represented by a separate MLP based neural function. Our model predicts a panoptic-radiance
field that represents the color, density, instance, and category label of any 3D point at any given time. The model is trained from RGB
images alone and can describe dynamic challenging 3D scenes as shown above.

Abstract
We present Panoptic Neural Fields (PNF), an objectaware neural scene representation that decomposes a scene
into a set of objects (things) and background (stuff). Each
object is represented by an oriented 3D bounding box and
a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) that takes position, direction, and time and outputs density and radiance. The background stuff is represented by a similar MLP that additionally outputs semantic labels. Each object MLPs are
instance-specific and thus can be smaller and faster than
previous object-aware approaches, while still leveraging
category-specific priors incorporated via meta-learned initialization. Our model builds a panoptic radiance field representation of any scene from just color images. We use offthe-shelf algorithms to predict camera poses, object tracks,
and 2D image semantic segmentations. Then we jointly optimize the MLP weights and bounding box parameters using
analysis-by-synthesis with self-supervision from color images and pseudo-supervision from predicted semantic segmentations. During experiments with real-world dynamic
scenes, we find that our model can be used effectively for
several tasks like novel view synthesis, 2D panoptic segmentation, 3D scene editing, and multiview depth prediction.

1. Introduction
The ability to understand the content within an image
is an essential task in computer vision, and over time we
have witnessed a rapid increase in task complexity. Over
a short period of time, we have progressed from the task
of identifying the overall presence of objects within an image (i.e. classification [26] and object detection [17, 20]), to
fine grained pixel-by-pixel classification (i.e. semantic segmentation [31, 47]), and to the ability to differentiate between object instances of the same class (i.e. panoptic segmentation [6, 24]).
However image level representations described above
have limited applications. Instead we are interested in full
3D scene understanding which is important for autonomous
driving [21], semantic mapping [58], and many other applications involving navigation or operation in the physical
world [7]. Given a sequence of RGB images, our goal is to
infer: 1) a 3D reconstruction of the observed geometry, 2) a
radiance field of the scene, 3) a decomposition of the scene
into potentially dynamic things (e.g., cars) and background
stuff (e.g., grass), 4) a category and instance label for every
3D point, as illustrated in Figure 1.
In recent years, neural 3D scene representations like

12871

