MPViT : Multi-Path Vision Transformer for Dense Prediction
Youngwan Lee1,2 Jonghee Kim1 Jeffrey Willette2 Sung Ju Hwang2,3
1

Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI), South Korea
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), South Korea
3
AITRICS, South Korea

2

ViT-variants : Single-scale patch + Single-Path structure

Abstract

Single-Scale
Patch Embedding

Transformer

Ours : Multi-scale Patches + Multi-Path structure
..
.

...

..
.

Transformer

Transformer

Aggregation

Multi-Scale
Patch Embedding

...
......

Since its introduction, the Transformer [48] has had a
huge impact on natural language processing (NLP) [4, 13,
39]. Likewise, the advent of Vision Transformer (ViT) [15]
has moved the computer vision community forward. As a
result, there has been a recent explosion in Transformerbased vision works, spanning tasks such as static image
classification [16, 33, 45, 46, 52, 53, 59, 60], object detection [5, 11, 63], and semantic segmentation [49, 57] to temporal tasks such as video classification [1, 3, 17] and object
tracking [7, 37, 51].

..
.

...

1. Introduction

...
...

Dense computer vision tasks such as object detection
and segmentation require effective multi-scale feature representation for detecting or classifying objects or regions
with varying sizes. While Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) have been the dominant architectures for such
tasks, recently introduced Vision Transformers (ViTs) aim
to replace them as a backbone. Similar to CNNs, ViTs
build a simple multi-stage structure (i.e., fine-to-coarse)
for multi-scale representation with single-scale patches.
In this work, with a different perspective from existing
Transformers, we explore multi-scale patch embedding and
multi-path structure, constructing the Multi-Path Vision
Transformer (MPViT). MPViT embeds features of the same
size (i.e., sequence length) with patches of different scales
simultaneously by using overlapping convolutional patch
embedding. Tokens of different scales are then independently fed into the Transformer encoders via multiple paths
and the resulting features are aggregated, enabling both fine
and coarse feature representations at the same feature level.
Thanks to the diverse, multi-scale feature representations,
our MPViTs scaling from tiny (5M) to base (73M) consistently achieve superior performance over state-of-the-art
Vision Transformers on ImageNet classification, object detection, instance segmentation, and semantic segmentation.

Transformer

Figure 1. Top: The state-of-the-art ViT-variants [33, 54, 60] use
single-scale patches and single-path Transformer encoders. Bottom: MPViT uses multi-scale patch embedding, each embedded
patch following a path to an independent Transformer encoder, allowing simulatneous representations of fine and coarse features.

It is crucial for dense prediction tasks such as object
detection and segmentation to represent features at multiple scales for discriminating between objects or regions
of varying sizes. Modern CNN backbones which show
better performance for dense prediction leverage multiple
scales at the convolutional kernel level [18, 28, 29, 42, 43],
or feature level [30, 38, 50]. Inception Network [42] or
VoVNet [28] exploits multi-grained convolution kernels at
the same feature level, yielding diverse receptive fields and
in turn boosting detection performance. HRNet [50] represents multi-scale features by simultaneously aggregating
fine and coarse features throughout the convolutional layers.
Although CNN models are widely utilized as feature
extractors for dense predictions, the current state-of-the-

7287

