SwapMix: Diagnosing and Regularizing
the Over-Reliance on Visual Context in Visual Question Answering
Vipul Gupta1 Zhuowan Li2 Adam Kortylewski2 Chenyu Zhang2 Yingwei Li2 Alan Yuille2
1
2
Pennsylvania State University
Johns Hopkins University
vkg5164@psu.edu

{zli110, akortyl1, czhan129, yingwei.li, ayuille1}@jhu.edu

Abstract

Context Perturbation
Tennis Ball → Soccer Ball

While Visual Question Answering (VQA) has progressed
rapidly, previous works raise concerns about robustness of
current VQA models. In this work, we study the robustness of VQA models from a novel perspective: visual context. We suggest that the models over-rely on the visual
context, i.e., irrelevant objects in the image, to make predictions. To diagnose the models’ reliance on visual context and measure their robustness, we propose a simple
yet effective perturbation technique, SwapMix. SwapMix
perturbs the visual context by swapping features of irrelevant context objects with features from other objects in the
dataset. Using SwapMix we are able to change answers to
more than 45% of the questions for a representative VQA
model. Additionally, we train the models with perfect sight
and find that the context over-reliance highly depends on
the quality of visual representations. In addition to diagnosing, SwapMix can also be applied as a data augmentation strategy during training in order to regularize the
context over-reliance. By swapping the context object features, the model reliance on context can be suppressed effectively. Two representative VQA models are studied using SwapMix: a co-attention model MCAN and a largescale pretrained model LXMERT. Our experiments on the
popular GQA dataset show the effectiveness of SwapMix
for both diagnosing model robustness, and regularizing the
over-reliance on visual context. The code for our method is
available at https://github.com/vipulgupta1011/swapmix

1. Introduction
Visual Question Answering (VQA) is a challenging task
that requires a model to answer open-ended questions based
on images. In recent years, VQA performance is greatly
boosted by different techniques including intra- and intermodality attentions [7,49], large scale multi-modal pretraining [26, 27, 42], etc. However, previous works study the
robustness of VQA models and show that the models may

Question: What color is the woman’s dress?
Ground-truth answer: Orange.
Model prediction: Orange.
Model prediction: White.

Figure 1. VQA models over-rely on visual context. By swapping
features of irrelevant context objects, we can perturb the model
prediction. Here the tennis ball (in yellow box) is an irrelevant
context object for the question. Changing feature of the tennis ball
to feature of soccer ball results in change in model prediction.

exploit language prior [2, 33, 34], statistical bias [1, 16] or
dataset shortcuts [20, 21] to answer questions.
While previous works studied VQA robustness from the
perspective of language context, in this work, we study the
robustness of VQA models from a different view: visual
context. The visual context refers to the background in the
image or the irrelevant objects that are not needed during the
reasoning process to answer the question. For example, in
Figure 1, the tennis ball is irrelevant for the question ”What
color is the women’s dress”, so we say it is a context object.
Ideally, a model with real perception and reasoning ability
should be robust to the irrelevant context. However, in our
work, we find that VQA models are vulnerable to context
changes, which suggests the models’ over-reliance on the
irrelevant context in the image.
To study the role of visual context, we propose a simple
perturbation strategy named SwapMix, which perturbs the
visual context by swapping features of context object with
features from another object in the dataset. We first identify
the visual features corresponding to irrelevant objects in the
image, then randomly swap them with feature vectors of another similar object from the dataset. For example, in Figure
1, the tennis ball is a context object for the given question,

5078

