3D Photo Stylization:
Learning to Generate Stylized Novel Views from a Single Image
Fangzhou Mu1 * Jian Wang2† Yicheng Wu2† Yin Li1†
1
University of Wisconsin-Madison 2 Snap Research
1

2

{fmu2, yin.li}@wisc.edu

Single content image + style

{jwang4, yicheng.wu}@snap.com

Stylized view 1

Stylized view 2

Figure 1. 3D photo stylization. Given a single content image, our method synthesizes novel views of the scene in an arbitrary style. In
doing so, our method delivers immersive viewing experience of a memorable moment within existing photos.

1. Introduction

Abstract
Visual content creation has spurred a soaring interest
given its applications in mobile photography and AR / VR.
Style transfer and single-image 3D photography as two representative tasks have so far evolved independently. In this
paper, we make a connection between the two, and address
the challenging task of 3D photo stylization — generating
stylized novel views from a single image given an arbitrary
style. Our key intuition is that style transfer and view synthesis have to be jointly modeled. To this end, we propose a
deep model that learns geometry-aware content features for
stylization from a point cloud representation of the scene,
resulting in high-quality stylized images that are consistent
across views. Further, we introduce a novel training protocol to enable the learning using only 2D images. We demonstrate the superiority of our method via extensive qualitative
and quantitative studies, and showcase key applications of
our method in light of the growing demand for 3D content
creation from 2D image assets.1

* Work partially done when Fangzhou was an intern at Snap Research
† co-corresponding authors
1 Project page: http://pages.cs.wisc.edu/

˜fmu/style3d

Given an input content image and a reference style image, neural style transfer [4, 13, 14, 16, 22, 24, 32, 35, 42, 50]
creates a novel image that “paints” the content with the
style. Despite a high quality stylized image, the result is
limited to the same viewpoint of the content image. What
if we can render stylized images from different views? See
Fig. 1 for two examples. When displayed with parallax,
this capacity will provide drastically more immersive visual
experience for 2D images, and support the application of
interactive browsing of 3D photos on mobile and AR/VR
devices. In this paper, we address this new task of generating stylized images of novel views from a single input
image and an arbitrary reference style image, as illustrated
in Fig. 1. We refer to this task as 3D photo stylization — a
marriage between style transfer and novel view synthesis.
3D photo stylization has several major technical barriers.
As observed in [21], directly combining existing methods of
style transfer and novel view synthesis yields blurry or inconsistent stylized images, even with dense 3D geometry
obtained from structure from motion and multi-view stereo.
This challenge is further manifested with a single content
image as the input, where a method must resort to monocu-

16273

