Zoom in

Efficient Large-scale Localization by Global Instance Recognition
Fei Xue†

Ignas Budvytis† Daniel Olmeda Reino‡ Roberto Cipolla†
†
University of Cambridge ‡ Toyota Motor Europe

{fx221, ib255, rc10001}@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Hierarchical frameworks consisting of both coarse and
fine localization are often used as the standard pipeline
for large-scale visual localization. Despite their promising performance in simple environments, they still suffer
from low efficiency and accuracy in large-scale scenes, especially under challenging conditions. In this paper, we
propose an efficient and accurate large-scale localization
framework based on the recognition of buildings, which are
not only discriminative for coarse localization but also robust for fine localization. Specifically, we assign each building instance a global ID and perform pixel-wise recognition of these global instances in the localization process.
For coarse localization, we employ an efficient reference
search strategy to find candidates progressively from the
local map observing recognized instances instead of the
whole database. For fine localization, predicted labels are
further used for instance-wise feature detection and matching, allowing our model to focus on fewer but more robust keypoints for establishing correspondences. The experiments in long-term large-scale localization datasets including Aachen and RobotCar-Seasons demonstrate that
our method outperforms previous approaches consistently
in terms of both efficiency and accuracy.

1. Introduction
Visual localization is a key technique of various applications, e.g., autonomous driving and robotics. Visual localization algorithms can be roughly categorized as imagebased [21, 64], scene coordinate-based [4–7], and structurebased [37, 40, 47, 56]. Image-based methods only yield
approximate poses [2, 15, 34, 43] and scene coordinatebased models don’t perform well in large-scale scenes [23].
Structure-based systems consisting of coarse (finding reference images in the database via image retrieval [2, 15, 58])
and fine localization (establishing correspondences between
the query and reference images by keypoint matching [10,
27, 35]), are preferred in real applications.
In the pipeline of structure-based systems, both coarse

daniel.olmeda.reino@toyota-europe.com

Query image

Instance mask

Reference image Query image with mask

1

Sparse 3D map

3
4

2

Zoom in
1 Global instance

recognition

2 Recognition-based

reference search

3 Instance-wise

4 Pose
detection & matching estimation

Figure 1. Overview of our framework. For each query image,
we first perform pixel-wise global instance recognition, results of
which are then used to find references from areas observing recognized instances instead of the whole database. Pixel-wise recognition masks are also used for instance-wise feature detection and
matching to provide robust correspondences for fine localization.
Finally, 2D-2D matches between the query and reference images
are converted to 2D-3D matches for pose estimation.

and fine localization are formulated as finding the closest candidates from a given set for the query data point,
e.g., image to image matches in coarse localization and
point to point matches in fine localization. Previous methods [10, 35, 37] employ exhaustive comparisons for all
query data with the rest in the database. This, however,
is computationally slow and suffers from low accuracy because of spurious wrong candidates, especially under challenging conditions, e.g., changes of illumination, season,
and weather. Some works [23, 47, 63] make use of semantics to improve both coarse and fine localization separately. For coarse localization, they filter unstable objects like trees [46, 63] or transfer images from night to
day [1]. For fine localization, additional segmentation networks are incorporated to reject semantically inconsistent
matches [18, 22, 23, 45, 47, 56]. Despite their promising improvements, modeling coarse and fine localization as two
independent tasks, they ignore the fact that coarse localization should provide reference images with enough valid

17348

