Forecasting Characteristic 3D Poses of Human Actions
Christian Diller1
1

Time

0

0.5

1.0

Thomas Funkhouser2

Technical University of Munich

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

Angela Dai1
2

Google

4.0

4.5

5.0

5.5 seconds

Action

Input

Target

“Drink”

Input

Target

“Play”

Target

Input

“Pass”

Figure 1. For a real-world 3d skeleton sequence of a human performing an action, we propose to forecast the semantically meaningful
characteristic 3d pose, representing the action goal for this sequence. As input, we take a short observation of a sequence of consecutive poses leading up to the target characteristic pose. Thus, we propose to take a goal-oriented approach, predicting the key moments
characterizing future behavior, instead of predicting continuous motion, which can occur at varying speeds with predictions more easily
diverging for longer-term (>1s) predictions. We develop an attention-driven probabilistic approach to capture the most likely modes of
possible future characteristic poses.

Abstract
We propose the task of forecasting characteristic 3d
poses: from a short sequence observation of a person,
predict a future 3d pose of that person in a likely actiondefining, characteristic pose – for instance, from observing
a person picking up an apple, predict the pose of the person eating the apple. Prior work on human motion prediction estimates future poses at fixed time intervals. Although
easy to define, this frame-by-frame formulation confounds
temporal and intentional aspects of human action. Instead,
we define a semantically meaningful pose prediction task
that decouples the predicted pose from time, taking inspiration from goal-directed behavior. To predict characteristic
poses, we propose a probabilistic approach that models the
possible multi-modality in the distribution of likely characteristic poses. We then sample future pose hypotheses
from the predicted distribution in an autoregressive fashion to model dependencies between joints. To evaluate our

method, we construct a dataset of manually annotated characteristic 3d poses. Our experiments with this dataset suggest that our proposed probabilistic approach outperforms
state-of-the-art methods by 26% on average.

1. Introduction
Future human pose forecasting is fundamental towards a
comprehensive understanding of human behavior, and consequently towards achieving higher-level perception in machine interactions with humans, such as autonomous robots
or vehicles. In fact, prediction is considered to play a foundational part in intelligence [3, 9, 13]. In particular, predicting the 3d pose of a human in the future lays a basis for both
structural and semantic understanding of human behavior,
and for an agent to take fine-grained anticipatory action towards the forecasted future. For example, a robotic surgical
assistant should predict in advance where best to place a tool
to assist the surgeon’s next action, what sensor viewpoints

15914

