NAN: Noise-Aware NeRFs for Burst-Denoising
Naama Pearl, Tali Treibitz
Dept. of Marine Technologies, School of Marine Sciences
University of Haifa, Israel

Simon Korman
Dept. of Computer Science
University of Haifa, Israel

{npearl@campus,ttreibitz@univ}.haifa.ac.il

skorman@cs.haifa.ac.il

Figure 1. Burst denoising in challenging real-world low-light scenes. The dark burst images, scaled before processing, contain high
levels of noise and significant camera motion that can be seen in their averages. The results of both BPN [31] and DeepRep [1] are generally
more blurry and lack detail compared to those of NAN, the proposed method. Blue rectangles mark a clear example for comparison. Green
and yellow ellipses show artifacts and missing detail correspondingly in competitor results. The reader is encouraged to zoom-in.

Abstract
Burst denoising is now more relevant than ever, as computational photography helps overcome sensitivity issues
inherent in mobile phones and small cameras. A major
challenge in burst-denoising is in coping with pixel misalignment, which was so far handled with rather simplistic assumptions of simple motion, or the ability to align in
pre-processing. Such assumptions are not realistic in the
presence of large motion and high levels of noise.
We show that Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs), originally suggested for physics-based novel-view rendering,
can serve as a powerful framework for burst denoising.
NeRFs have an inherent capability of handling noise as they
integrate information from multiple images, but they are
limited in doing so, mainly since they build on pixel-wise
operations which are suitable to ideal imaging conditions.
Our approach, termed NAN1 , leverages inter-view and
spatial information in NeRFs to better deal with noise. It
achieves state-of-the-art results in burst denoising and is
especially successful in coping with large movement and
occlusions, under very high levels of noise. With the rapid
advances in accelerating NeRFs, it could provide a powerful platform for denoising in challenging environments.
1 Refer to the project website: noise-aware-nerf.github.io

1. Introduction
Burst denoising has become the de-facto method for lowlight imaging, especially in handheld mobile devices that
perform onboard processing [5, 9]. It is built on capturing
multiple short-exposure (dark and noisy) frames, which are
then integrated into a single coherent image. The main challenge of compensating for motion and occlusion, especially
under high noise, is evident in limitations of current applications (e.g., mobile phone apps ask to “hold still” while capturing in night mode). Dealing with large parallax could significantly enhance denoising, by allowing the use of longer
bursts than (the typical 8) currently common in cameras,
and might enable more flexible imaging during movement
(e.g., from a vehicle).
Recently, methods based on Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRFs) have been demonstrated to be powerful in rendering novel views of scenes, enabling the synthesis of intricate
details due to reflections and occlusions, yet all these methods consider clean high-resolution images as inputs. Since
NeRFs integrate information from multiple images, they
have strong potential to be leveraged in multi-frame image
restoration tasks - applications they were not designed for.
We show in this paper that they can be very powerful for
burst denoising.
NeRFs serve as implicit scene priors and thus can inher-

12672

