Towards Diverse and Natural Scene-aware 3D Human Motion Synthesis
Jingbo Wang1 Yu Rong1 Jingyuan Liu2 Sijie Yan1 Dahua Lin1 Bo Dai3
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
S-Lab, Nanyang Technology University
{wj020,ry017,dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, jliucb@connect.ust.hk, yysijie@gmail.com, bo.dai@ntu.edu.sg

Figure 1. We decompose scene-aware human motions into three aspects, namely human-scene interaction anchor, path planning, and body
movements. Given the scene and the target action sequence, our framework first adopts specified schemes to generate diverse intermediate
results for each aspect. These results are then integrated into miscellaneous yet coherent human motions.

Abstract
The ability to synthesize long-term human motion sequences in real-world scenes can facilitate numerous applications. Previous approaches for scene-aware motion
synthesis are constrained by pre-defined target objects or
positions and thus limit the diversity of human-scene interactions for synthesized motions. In this paper, we focus on the problem of synthesizing diverse scene-aware human motions under the guidance of target action sequences.
To achieve this, we first decompose the diversity of sceneaware human motions into three aspects, namely interaction diversity (e.g. sitting on different objects with different
poses in the given scenes), path diversity (e.g. moving to
the target locations following different paths), and the motion diversity (e.g. having various body movements during
moving). Based on this factorized scheme, a hierarchical
framework is proposed, with each sub-module responsible
for modeling one aspect. We assess the effectiveness of our
framework on two challenging datasets for scene-aware human motion synthesis. The experiment results show that
the proposed framework remarkably outperforms previous
methods in terms of diversity and naturalness.

1. Introduction
The capability of synthesizing long human motion sequences is essential for a number of real-world applications, such as virtual reality and robotics. Beyond early
attempts that consider body movement synthesis in isolation [1, 2, 33, 35, 38], recent works [4, 11, 30, 31] begin to
explore the influences of surrounding scenes on human motion synthesis for different actions. Limited by the 2D representation of scene context [4, 31] or the reliance on manually assigned interacting targets [11, 30], these approaches
mainly focus on modeling the body movements and fail to
comprehensively investigate the inherent diversity of sceneaware human motions. In order to synthesize long-term
human motions guided by the scene context and the target
action sequence, we propose to model the inherent motion
diversity across different granularities, each contributing to
different aspects of human motion.
As shown in Figure 1, the diversity of scene-aware human motions can be factorized into three levels, given the
target action sequence (e.g. A man lies first. Then he sits
in different places. At last, he stands somewhere.). Firstly,
given the surrounding scene context and the target action
sequence, there exists a distribution of valid locations to re-

20460

