Fast Light-Weight Near-Field Photometric Stereo
Daniel Lichy1
Soumyadip Sengupta2
David W. Jacobs1
1
2
University of Maryland, College Park
University of Washington
dlichy@umd.edu, soumya91@cs.washington.edu, djacobs@cs.umd.edu

Figure 1. We present a fast light-weight approach for solving near-field Photometric Stereo (PS), which is particularly useful for capturing
large objects, e.g. a sofa, in a small confined space. We capture an object with an iPhone camera and a handheld flashlight. Our method is
significantly faster during inference and produces more accurate reconstructions than existing methods S20 [31] and L20 [18].

Abstract
We introduce the first end-to-end learning-based solution to near-field Photometric Stereo (PS), where the light
sources are close to the object of interest. This setup is especially useful for reconstructing large immobile objects.
Our method is fast, producing a mesh from 52 512×384
resolution images in about 1 second on a commodity GPU,
thus potentially unlocking several AR/VR applications. Existing approaches rely on optimization coupled with a farfield PS network operating on pixels or small patches. Using optimization makes these approaches slow and memory
intensive (requiring 17GB GPU and 27GB of CPU memory)
while using only pixels or patches makes them highly susceptible to noise and calibration errors. To address these
issues, we develop a recursive multi-resolution scheme to
estimate surface normal and depth maps of the whole image at each step. The predicted depth map at each scale is
then used to estimate ‘per-pixel lighting’ for the next scale.
This design makes our approach almost 45× faster and 2◦
more accurate (11.3◦ vs. 13.3◦ Mean Angular Error) than
the state-of-the-art near-field PS reconstruction technique,
which uses iterative optimization.

1. Introduction
In this work, we introduce a fast light-weight Photometric Stereo (PS) technique for near-field illumination. Photometric Stereo aims to reconstruct object geometry from
a sequence of images captured with a static camera and
varying light sources. Existing near-field PS approaches are
slow and extremely memory intensive. Being fast and lightweight enables users to capture images and process them on
their laptop within a few seconds, allowing multiple retakes

if needed. This light-weight reconstruction technique can
be extremely useful for several AR/VR applications. While
our method is primarily developed for calibrated lighting,
in line with existing far-field approaches, we also show how
our method can be extended to uncalibrated real-world captures by introducing a calibration network.
Near-field PS is often preferred over far-field or distant
lighting-based PS for both practical and theoretical reasons. It is extremely useful for capturing large objects, e.g.
furniture or humans, especially in a confined space like a
room [3, 16, 25]. This is because far-field PS approaches
assume the lighting to be distant, e.g. 10× the object dimensions is suggested by [33, 34], causing it to be unsuitable for 3D imaging in many indoor spaces. Additionally,
low-intensity LED lights on handheld devices (e.g. flashlight on a phone) may not be bright enough to illuminate an
object from a large distance [28]. Theoretically, in the case
of uncalibrated lighting, near-field PS has no linear ambiguity in contrast to far-field PS where there is the well-known
Generalized Bas-Relief ambiguity [4], as shown in [25].
We make our method fast and accurate by forgoing traditional optimization in favor of a recursive multi-scale algorithm. Our proposed method consists of two recursive
networks one for predicting surface normal and another for
depth maps. At each step of the recursion, we increase the
input image resolution by a factor of 2. We first analytically
estimate the relative lighting direction and attenuation factor for each pixel in the image (termed ‘per-pixel lighting’
for clarity) by upsampling the predicted depth map from
the previous step. We then infer the surface normal for this
scale given the input image, ‘per-pixel lighting,’ and esti-

12612

