Egocentric Deep Multi-Channel Audio-Visual Active Speaker Localization
Hao Jiang, Calvin Murdock, Vamsi Krishna Ithapu
Reality Labs Research at Meta
{haojiang,cmurdock,ithapu}@fb.com

Abstract
Augmented reality devices have the potential to enhance
human perception and enable other assistive functionalities
in complex conversational environments. Effectively capturing the audio-visual context necessary for understanding
these social interactions first requires detecting and localizing the voice activities of the device wearer and the surrounding people. These tasks are challenging due to their
egocentric nature: the wearer’s head motion may cause motion blur, surrounding people may appear in difficult viewing angles, and there may be occlusions, visual clutter, audio noise, and bad lighting. Under these conditions, previous state-of-the-art active speaker detection methods do
not give satisfactory results. Instead, we tackle the problem from a new setting using both video and multi-channel
microphone array audio. We propose a novel end-to-end
deep learning approach that is able to give robust voice activity detection and localization results. In contrast to previous methods, our method localizes active speakers from
all possible directions on the sphere, even outside the camera’s field of view, while simultaneously detecting the device wearer’s own voice activity. Our experiments show that
the proposed method gives superior results, can run in real
time, and is robust against noise and clutter.

Figure 1. Our novel multi-channel audio-visual deep network localizes active speakers from any direction on the sphere, even beyond the camera’s field of view. Here, predicted active speaker
probability heat maps are shown in the red channels of both the
images (rows 1,3) and voice maps (rows 2,4). These voice maps
are 360×180 cylindrical 2D projections of the sphere, where each
pixel corresponds to a direction in the device wearer’s local 3D coordinate system and the camera’s limited field of view is approximated by the central blue rectangle. Ground truth active speakers
are shown as purple bars below head bounding boxes and as blue
dots in the voice maps, while our method’s thresholded predictions
are shown as yellow bars. The overlaid text indicates ground truth
(purple) and predicted (yellow) wearer voice activity detections.

1. Introduction
Understanding conversational context and dynamics
from an egocentric perspective is vital for creating realistic and useful augmented reality (AR) experiences. These
attributes characterize the interactions of multiple speakers
in a given scene with the AR device wearer (i.e., ego). An
example such device may consist of glasses with outward
looking cameras and microphones so that audio-visual data
is captured from the wearer’s point of view. Modeling these
attributes involves not only detecting and tracking people
within a scene, but also localizing the voice activity within
a conversation. In this work, we focus on the task of active
speaker localization (ASL) with the goal of detecting the
spatio-temporal location of all active speakers both within
and outside the camera’s field of view (FOV). Closely re-

lated to the problem of active speaker detection (ASD), ASL
involves estimating the relative direction of arrival of speech
from an egocentric perspective. In this paper, active speakers typically correspond to the people who are speaking and
‘driving’ the conversations. The elements of our proposed
egocentric ASL problem are illustrated in Fig. 1.
A good ASL system needs to account for the changing
orientations of speakers from an egocentric point of view
and be robust to speakers moving in and out of the visual
field of view. In particular, natural conversations entail significant overlap between different speakers’ voice activity
and involve one or more speakers interrupting each other —
a classical attribute in conversational ecology called turn-

10544

