Semiconductor Defect Detection by Hybrid Classical-Quantum Deep Learning
Yuan-Fu Yang
Min Sun
National Tsing Hua University National Tsing Hua University
101, Section 2, Kuang-Fu Road, 101, Section 2, Kuang-Fu Road,
Hsinchu, Taiwan R.O.C.
Hsinchu, Taiwan R.O.C.
yfyangd@gmail.com

summin@ee.nthu.edu.tw

Abstract
With the rapid development of artificial intelligence and
autonomous driving technology, the demand for
semiconductors is projected to rise substantially. However,
the massive expansion of semiconductor manufacturing
and the development of new technology will bring many
defect wafers. If these defect wafers have not been correctly
inspected, the ineffective semiconductor processing on
these defect wafers will cause additional impact to our
environment, such as excessive carbon dioxide emission
and energy consumption.
In this paper, we utilize the information processing
advantages of quantum computing to promote the defect
learning defect review (DLDR). We propose a classicalquantum hybrid algorithm for deep learning on near-term
quantum processors. By tuning parameters implemented
on it, quantum circuit driven by our framework learns a
given DLDR task, include of wafer defect map
classification, defect pattern classification, and hotspot
detection. In addition, we explore parametrized quantum
circuits with different expressibility and entangling
capacities. These results can be used to build a future
roadmap to develop circuit-based quantum deep learning
for semiconductor defect detection.

defect maps are crucial for yield management because a
sudden increase in the problematic patterns can be
feedback to operation engineers to resolve the related issue.
Generally, it is known that conventional defect patterns
such as cluster, scratch, and ring are closely related to a
certain type of process. For example, as shown in Figure 1,
the defect map “Edge” is caused by the damaged low
thermal mass (LTM) pad. LTM is an industrial grade selfregulating heating cable used for pipelines and chambers.
Under the high temperature and high pressure of chemical
vapor deposition (CVD) process, LTM pad will gradually
get aged and cracked. Then, it will produce particles that
fall on the edge of wafer surface. Another example “Cluster”
is a mass of particles on the wafer surface during the
Etching process. This defect is usually caused by the aged
component of side O-ring. When this defect maps are
detected, it means that the chamber needs to maintenance
and replace aging parts with new ones.

1. Introduction
The industry presents a paradox. The achievement of
global climate goals will depend on semiconductors. They
are an integral part of solar arrays, wind turbines, and
electric vehicles. But chip manufacturing requires huge
amounts of energy and water, and it emit a lot of exhaust
gas during the production process. In addition to switching
to renewables, chipmakers could also implement
efficiencies in fabs to reduce their carbon footprint,
including ineffective processing on the defect wafer.
In the semiconductor manufacturing, there are three
main types of defects: wafer defect map, defect pattern, and
hotspot. Wafer defect map is used to visualize the
distribution of defect patterns and identify potential
process and tool issues. Continuous-monitoring wafer

2323

Figure 1: Defect map and its root cause.

The defect pattern is the unit that composes the wafer
map, which image is obtained by a higher resolution
inspection tool. Each defect pattern signals the root cause,
and engineers can diagnose the failure and prevent it from
happening again. As shown in Figure 2, the defect pattern
"Multi-dots" mainly occurs in the WET Etching chamber
pipeline and is caused by the dirty nozzles of xFlow.
Another example is “Fallon” that often occurs on the CVD
chamber. The main reason is the fall on particle caused by
the damage of the point-of-use (POU) filter. The damage
component must be replaced immediately to avoid this
defect from happening again.

