Revisiting Domain Generalized Stereo Matching Networks from a Feature
Consistency Perspective
Jiawei Zhang1 , Xiang Wang1 , Xiao Bai1 *, Chen Wang1 , Lei Huang2 ,
Yimin Chen1 , Lin Gu3,4 , Jun Zhou5 , Tatsuya Harada3,4 , Edwin R. Hancock6,1
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Software Development
Environment, Jiangxi Research Institute, Beihang University, China,
2
SKLSDE, Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing, China,
3
RIKEN AIP, Tokyo, Japan, 4 The University of Tokyo, 5 Griffith University, 6 University of York
Left Image

Abstract

PSMNet

Ours

(a)

Despite recent stereo matching networks achieving impressive performance given sufficient training data, they
suffer from domain shifts and generalize poorly to unseen
domains. We argue that maintaining feature consistency
between matching pixels is a vital factor for promoting
the generalization capability of stereo matching networks,
which has not been adequately considered. Here we address this issue by proposing a simple pixel-wise contrastive
learning across the viewpoints. The stereo contrastive feature loss function explicitly constrains the consistency between learned features of matching pixel pairs which are
observations of the same 3D points. A stereo selective
whitening loss is further introduced to better preserve the
stereo feature consistency across domains, which decorrelates stereo features from stereo viewpoint-specific style information. Counter-intuitively, the generalization of feature consistency between two viewpoints in the same scene
translates to the generalization of stereo matching performance to unseen domains. Our method is generic in nature
as it can be easily embedded into existing stereo networks
and does not require access to the samples in the target domain. When trained on synthetic data and generalized to
four real-world testing sets, our method achieves superior
performance over several state-of-the-art networks. The
code is available online1 .

1. Introduction
Estimating depth from images is a fundamental problem
in many computer vision applications such as autonomous
driving [42] and robot navigation [1]. Stereo matching is a
solution to this task, which finds the matching correspon* Corresponding author: Xiao Bai (baixiao@buaa.edu.cn).
1 https://github.com/jiaw-z/FCStereo

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Domain generalization performance of PSMNet with
and without our method on samples from (a) KITTI, (b) Middlebury, and (c) ETH3D training sets. All models are trained on the
synthetic SceneFlow dataset.

dences between stereo image pairs and recovers the depth
through triangulation.
Stereo matching is traditionally solved by a matching
cost computation process, which usually consists of four
steps [38]: matching cost computation, cost aggregation,
disparity regression, and disparity refinement. Recently,
end-to-end stereo matching networks [4, 15, 21, 30, 57] have
been developed based on the cost computation process of
traditional methods and achieved state-of-the-art accuracy.
However, the poor generalization performance on unseen
domains has been a major challenge for their real-world applications (see Figure 1 for an example).
A common approach to achieve generalization capability
is to learn domain-invariant representations [23, 24, 26, 32].
Some stereo matching networks [3, 40, 58] have made attempts to tackle this issue by conducting feature-level alignment to obtain domain-invariant features. These works
project the inputs into a domain-invariant feature space, reducing the reliance on domain-specific appearance properties and showing more robustness to domain shifts.
Here, we present a weaker constraint, stereo feature con-

13001

