Temporal Feature Alignment and Mutual Information Maximization for
Video-Based Human Pose Estimation
Zhenguang Liu1 , Runyang Feng2∗, Haoming Chen2* , Shuang Wu3* , Yixing Gao4 , Yunjun Gao1 , Xiang Wang5
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Zhejiang Gongshang University, 3 Black Sesame Technologies,
4
Jilin University, 5 National University of Singapore
{liuzhenguang2008, runyang2019.feng, chenhaomingbob}@gmail.com, wushuang@outlook.sg,
gaoyixing@jlu.edu.cn, gaoyj@zju.edu.cn, xiangwang1223@gmail.com

Abstract
Multi-frame human pose estimation has long been a
compelling and fundamental problem in computer vision.
This task is challenging due to fast motion and pose occlusion that frequently occur in videos. State-of-the-art
methods strive to incorporate additional visual evidences
from neighboring frames (supporting frames) to facilitate
the pose estimation of the current frame (key frame). One
aspect that has been obviated so far, is the fact that current methods directly aggregate unaligned contexts across
frames. The spatial-misalignment between pose features of
the current frame and neighboring frames might lead to unsatisfactory results. More importantly, existing approaches
build upon the straightforward pose estimation loss, which
unfortunately cannot constrain the network to fully leverage
useful information from neighboring frames.
To tackle these problems, we present a novel hierarchical alignment framework, which leverages coarse-to-fine
deformations to progressively update a neighboring frame
to align with the current frame at the feature level. We
further propose to explicitly supervise the knowledge extraction from neighboring frames, guaranteeing that useful
complementary cues are extracted. To achieve this goal,
we theoretically analyzed the mutual information between
the frames and arrived at a loss that maximizes the taskrelevant mutual information. These allow us to rank No.1
in the Multi-frame Person Pose Estimation Challenge on
benchmark dataset PoseTrack2017, and obtain state-of-theart performance on benchmarks Sub-JHMDB and PoseTrack2018. Our code is released at https://github.
com/Pose-Group/FAMI-Pose, hoping that it will be
useful to the community.

∗ Corresponding Authors

Figure 1. State-of-the-art methods like PoseWarper and DCPose
directly aggregate unaligned contexts from neighboring frames,
which may fail for scenes with fast motion or pose occlusion.
We perform temporal feature alignment between each supporting
frame and the key frame, delivering robust pose estimations.

1. Introduction
A key component of our capacity to interact with others lies in our ability to recognize the poses of humans
[36, 37, 48]. Likewise, detecting human poses is crucial for
an intelligent machine to adjust its action and properly allocate its attention when interacting with people. Nowadays,
pose estimation finds abundant applications in a wide spectrum of scenarios including action recognition, augmented
reality, surveillance, and tracking [39, 67].
An extensive body of literature focuses on pose estimation in static images, ranging from earlier approaches
[47, 57, 59, 70] utilising tree models or random forest models to recent attempts employing deep convolutional neural
networks [6, 42, 54, 60]. For pose estimation in videos, such
methods are severely challenged in handling deteriorated
video frames arising from scenes with fast motion and pose
occlusion. Incorporating and leveraging additional contexts
from neighboring frames is desirable to fill in the absent
motion dynamics within a single frame and facilitate pose

11006

