Multimodal Token Fusion for Vision Transformers
Yikai Wang1 Xinghao Chen2 Lele Cao1 Wenbing Huang3 Fuchun Sun1B Yunhe Wang2
1
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist),
State Key Lab on Intelligent Technology and Systems,
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 3 Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
wangyk17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xinghao.chen@huawei.com, caolele@gmail.com,
hwenbing@126.com, fuchuns@tsinghua.edu.cn, yunhe.wang@huawei.com

Abstract

tures and optimization schedules. As a result, vision transformer variants have shown great potential in many singlemodal vision tasks, such as classification [5, 19], segmentation [41, 44], detection [2, 7, 20, 45], image generation [14].

Many adaptations of transformers have emerged to address the single-modal vision tasks, where self-attention
modules are stacked to handle input sources like images.
Intuitively, feeding multiple modalities of data to vision
transformers could improve the performance, yet the innermodal attentive weights may be diluted, which could thus
greatly undermine the final performance. In this paper, we
propose a multimodal token fusion method (TokenFusion),
tailored for transformer-based vision tasks. To effectively
fuse multiple modalities, TokenFusion dynamically detects
uninformative tokens and substitute these tokens with projected and aggregated inter-modal features. Residual positional alignment is also adopted to enable explicit utilization of the inter-modal alignments after fusion. The design
of TokenFusion allows the transformer to learn correlations
among multimodal features, while the single-modal transformer architecture remains largely intact. Extensive experiments are conducted on a variety of homogeneous and heterogeneous modalities and demonstrate that TokenFusion
surpasses state-of-the-art methods in three typical vision
tasks: multimodal image-to-image translation, RGB-depth
semantic segmentation, and 3D object detection with point
cloud and images. Code will be released 1 2 .

Yet up until the date of this work, the attempt of extending vision transformers to handle multimodal data remains
scarce. When multimodal data with complicated alignment
relations are introduced, it poses great challenges in designing the fusion scheme for model architectures. The key
question to answer is how and where the interaction of features from different modalities should take place. There
have been a few methods for transformer-based visionlanguage fusion, e.g., VL-BERT [35] and ViLT [15]. In
these methods, vision and language tokens are directly concatenated before each transformer layer, making the overall
architecture very similar to the original transformer. Such
fusion is actually alignment-agnostic, which means the
inter-modal alignments are not explicitly utilized. We also
try to apply such intuitive fusion methods on multimodal
vision tasks (Sec. 4). Unfortunately, this intuitive transformer fusion cannot bring promising gains or may even
result in worse performance than the single-modal counterpart, which is mainly due to the fact that the inter-modal
interaction is not fully exploited. There are also several attempts for fusing multiple vision modalities. For example,
TransFuser [24] leverages transformer modules to connect
CNN backbones of images and LiDAR points. However,
these methods still neglect to find an effective and general
method to insert inter-modal alignments into transformers.

1. Introduction
Transformer is initially widely studied in the natural language community as a non-recurrent sequence model [37]
and it is soon extended to benefit vision-language tasks. Recently, numerous studies have further adopted transformers for computer vision tasks with well-adapted architecB Corresponding author: Fuchun Sun.
1 https://github.com/huawei-noah/noah-research
2 https://gitee.com/mindspore/models/tree/master/research/cv/TokenFusion

We aim to benefit the learning process by multimodal
data while also leveraging inter-modal alignments, which
are naturally available in many vision tasks, e.g., with camera intrinsics/extrinsics, a world-space point can be projected and correspond to a pixel on the camera plane. Unlike the alignment-agnostic fusion (will be described in
Sec. 3.1), the alignment-aware fusion explicitly involves

12186

