Collaborative Transformers for Grounded Situation Recognition
Junhyeong Cho1
Youngseok Yoon1
Suha Kwak1,2
Department of CSE, POSTECH1
Graduate School of AI, POSTECH2
{junhyeong99, yys8646, suha.kwak}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
Grounded situation recognition is the task of predicting
the main activity, entities playing certain roles within the
activity, and bounding-box groundings of the entities in the
given image. To effectively deal with this challenging task,
we introduce a novel approach where the two processes for
activity classification and entity estimation are interactive
and complementary. To implement this idea, we propose
Collaborative Glance-Gaze TransFormer (CoFormer) that
consists of two modules: Glance transformer for activity
classification and Gaze transformer for entity estimation.
Glance transformer predicts the main activity with the help
of Gaze transformer that analyzes entities and their relations, while Gaze transformer estimates the grounded entities by focusing only on the entities relevant to the activity
predicted by Glance transformer. Our CoFormer achieves
the state of the art in all evaluation metrics on the SWiG
dataset. Training code and model weights are available at
https://github.com/jhcho99/CoFormer.

1. Introduction
Humans make decisions via dual systems of thinking as
stated in the cognitive theory by Kahneman [13]. Those two
systems are known to work in tandem and complement each
other [8, 26]. Consider a comprehensive scene understanding task as a specific example of such decision making. As
illustrated in Figure 1, humans cast a quick glance to figure
out what is happening, and slowly gaze at details to analyze
which objects are involved and how they are related. These
two processes are mutually supportive, e.g., understanding
involved objects and their relations leads to more accurate
recognition of the event depicted in the scene.
Inspired by this, we propose a collaborative framework
which leverages the two processes for Grounded Situation
Recognition (GSR) [27]. GSR is a comprehensive scene understanding task that is recently introduced as an extension
of Situation Recognition (SR) [38]. The objective of SR is
to produce a structured image summary that describes the
main activity and entities playing certain roles within the

Glance

Gaze

Tugging
Dog

Outdoors

Ribbon

...

Figure 1. Two processes in comprehensive scene understanding.
Glance figures out what is happening, and Gaze analyzes entities
engaged in the main activity and their relations. In our CoFormer,
these two processes are interactive and complementary.

activity, where the roles are predefined for each activity by
a lexical database called FrameNet [7]. In GSR, those involved entities are grounded with bounding boxes; Figure 2
presents example results of GSR. Following conventions,
we call an activity verb and an entity noun in this paper.
The common pipeline of SR and GSR in the literature [3, 4, 18, 25, 27, 30, 37, 38] resembles the two processes:
predicting a verb (Glance), then estimating a noun for each
role associated with the predicted verb (Gaze). Regarding
this pipeline, correctness of the predicted verb is extremely
important since noun estimation entirely depends on the
predicted verb. If the result of verb prediction is incorrect,
then estimated nouns cannot be correct either because the
predicted verb determines the set of roles, i.e., the basis of
noun estimation. Moreover, verb prediction is challenging
since a verb is highly abstract and situations for the same
verb could significantly vary as shown in Figure 2. In spite
of its importance and difficulty, verb prediction has been
made in naı̈ve ways, e.g., using a single classifier on top
of a convolutional neural network (CNN), which is analogous to Glance only. Existing methods allow Glance to
assist Gaze by informing the predicted verb but not vice
versa; this could limit the performance of verb prediction,
and consequently, that of the entire pipeline.
We resolve the above issue by a collaborative framework
that enables Glance and Gaze to interact and complement

19659

