SWEM: Towards Real-Time Video Object Segmentation with Sequential
Weighted Expectation-Maximization
Zhihui Lin1∗ , Tianyu Yang2 , Maomao Li2 , Ziyu Wang3 , Chun Yuan4† , Wenhao Jiang3 , and Wei Liu3
1
…
Department of Computer Science and Technologies, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China 3 Tencent Data Platform, Shenzhen, China …
4
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Peng Cheng Lab, Shenzhen, China
{lin-zh14@mails, yuanc@sz}.tsinghua.edu.cn
{limaomao07, cswhjiang}@gmail.com

…
wl2223@columbia.edu

…

…

Abstract
Matching-based methods, especially those based on
space-time memory, are significantly ahead of other solutions in semi-supervised video object segmentation (VOS).
However, continuously growing and redundant template
features lead to an inefficient inference. To alleviate
this, we propose a novel Sequential Weighted ExpectationMaximization (SWEM) network to greatly reduce the redundancy of memory features. Different from the previous methods which only detect feature redundancy between
frames, SWEM merges both intra-frame and inter-frame
similar features by leveraging the sequential weighted EM
algorithm. Further, adaptive weights for frame features endow SWEM with the flexibility to represent hard samples,
improving the discrimination of templates. Besides, the proposed method maintains a fixed number of template features
in memory, which ensures the stable inference complexity of
the VOS system. Extensive experiments on commonly used
DAVIS and YouTube-VOS datasets verify the high efficiency
(36 FPS) and high performance (84.3% J &F on DAVIS
2017 validation dataset) of SWEM.

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised video object segmentation (VOS) has
seized great interest recent years [3, 6, 10, 16, 18, 21, 25, 28,
32, 33, 37, 38, 42, 43, 47, 49, 51] in the computer vision community. It aims to segment the objects of interest from the
background in a video, where only the mask annotation of
the first frame is provided during testing. A group of early
methods concentrate on on-line fine-tuning [2, 3, 19, 29, 30]
with the first annotated frame. However, these method tends
to suffer from model degradation caused by target appear*Work done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab
†Corresponding Author

tianyu-yang@outlook.com

wangziyukobe@163.com

…

…
SWEM

…

Memory

Memory

(a) STM

(b) SWEM

Figure 1. Instead of storing all past frames features as memory,
just like STM [32] and following methods [6, 16, 37, 38] do, our
SWEM sequentially
…updates a compact set of bases with a fixed
size, greatly reducing the inter-frame and intra-frame redundancy.
…

ance changesSWEM
as video goes on. Besides, propagation-based
methods use masks computed in previous frames to estimateMemory
masks in the current frame [7, 33, 45, 48], which is,
however, vulnerable to occlusions and rapid motion.
Recently, matching-based VOS methods [5, 6, 16, 17,
25, 28, 37, 38, 42, 43, 49, 52] have achieved striking performance. Such matching-based methods first exploit previous frames to construct target templates, and then calculate
the pixel-level correlations between the new coming frame
embeddings and the target templates to perform the segmentation. As seen in Figure 1, the Space-Time Memory
Network (STM) [32] and the following STM-like methods
[6, 16, 37, 38, 49] leverage memory networks to store template features every T frames endlessly, which is prone to
missing key-frame information and running out of memory
for long-term videos. Besides, given that the inter-frame
redundancy of video features would harm the efficiency of
matching, another group of methods AFB URR [25] and
Swift [43] take advantage of the similarity of inter-frame
features to selectively update partial features. Nonetheless, they all fail to balance the performance and efficiency
through a hand-crafted similarity threshold.
Although past efforts have achieved promising results,
we argue that both inter-frame redundancy and intra-frame
one pose the main obstacles that prevent efficient template

1362

