Image Segmentation Using Text and Image Prompts
Timo Lüddecke1,§ and Alexander Ecker1,2
1

2

Institute of Computer Science and CIDAS, University of Göttingen

MPI for Dynamics and Self-Organization, Göttingen

Abstract
Image segmentation is usually addressed by training a
model for a fixed set of object classes. Incorporating additional classes or more complex queries later is expensive as it requires re-training the model on a dataset that
encompasses these expressions. Here we propose a system that can generate image segmentations based on arbitrary prompts at test time. A prompt can be either a
text or an image. This approach enables us to create a
unified model (trained once) for three common segmentation tasks, which come with distinct challenges: referring
expression segmentation, zero-shot segmentation and oneshot segmentation. We build upon the CLIP model as a
backbone which we extend with a transformer-based decoder that enables dense prediction. After training on an
extended version of the PhraseCut dataset, our system generates a binary segmentation map for an image based on a
free-text prompt or on an additional image expressing the
query. We analyze different variants of the latter imagebased prompts in detail. This novel hybrid input allows
for dynamic adaptation not only to the three segmentation
tasks mentioned above, but to any binary segmentation task
where a text or image query can be formulated. Finally,
we find our system to adapt well to generalized queries
involving affordances or properties. Code is available at
https://eckerlab.org/code/clipseg

1. Introduction
The ability to generalize to unseen data is a fundamental
problem relevant for a broad range of applications in artificial intelligence. For instance, it is crucial that a household
robot understands the prompt of its user, which might involve an unseen object type or an uncommon expression
for an object. While humans excel at this task, this form of
inference is challenging for computer vision systems.
Image segmentation requires a model to output a prediction for each pixel. Compared to whole-image classification, segmentation requires not only predicting what can be
seen but also where it can be found. Classical semantic segmentation models are limited to segment the categories they
§

timo.lueddecke@uni-goettingen.de

Figure 1. Our key idea is to use CLIP to build a flexible zero/oneshot segmentation system that addresses multiple tasks at once.

have been trained on. Different approaches have emerged
that extend this fairly constrained setting (see Tab. 1):
• In generalized zero-shot segmentation, seen as well as
unseen categories needs to be segmented by putting
unseen categories in relation to seen ones, e.g. through
word embeddings [1] or WordNet [2].
• In one-shot segmentation, the desired class is provided
in form of an image (and often an associated mask) in
addition to the query image to be segmented.
• In referring expression segmentation, a model is
trained on complex text queries but sees all classes during training (i.e. no generalization to unseen classes).
To this work, we introduce the CLIPSeg model (Fig. 1),
which is capable of segmenting based on an arbitrary text
query or an example image. CLIPSeg can address all three
tasks named above. This multi-modal input format goes
beyond existing multi-task benchmarks such as Visual Decathlon [3] where input is always provided in form of images. To realize this system, we employ the pre-trained
CLIP model as a backbone and train a thin conditional
segmentation layer (decoder) on top. We use the joint
text-visual embedding space of CLIP for conditioning our
model, which enables us to process prompts in text form as
well as images. Our idea is to teach the decoder to relate
activations inside CLIP with an output segmentation, while
permitting as little dataset bias as possible and maintaining
the excellent and broad predictive capabilities of CLIP.
We employ a generic binary prediction setting, where
a foreground that matches the prompt has to be differentiated from background. This binary setting can be adapted

7086

