ObjectFormer for Image Manipulation Detection and Localization
Junke Wang1,2 , Zuxuan Wu1,2 † , Jingjing Chen1,2 , Xintong Han3 ,
Abhinav Shrivastava4 , Ser-Nam Lim5 , Yu-Gang Jiang1,2
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center on Intelligent Visual Computing
3
Huya Inc, 4 University of Maryland, 5 Meta AI

Abstract

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of deep generative models
like GANs [13, 25, 47] and VAEs [18, 33], a multitude of
image editing applications have become widely accessible
to the public [10,20,29,38]. These editing tools make it easy
and effective to produce photo-realistic images and videos
that could be used for entertainment, interactive design,
etc., which otherwise requires professional skills. However,
there are growing concerns on the abuse of editing techniques to manipulate image and video content for malicious
purposes. Therefore, it is crucial to develop effective image
manipulation detection methods to examine whether images
have been modified or not and identify regions in images
that have been modified.
Image manipulation techniques can be generally classified into three types: (1) splicing methods which copy regions from one image and paste to other images, (2) copy†Corresponding author.

Artifacts

Removal

Copy-move

Forged

Splicing

Recent advances in image editing techniques have posed
serious challenges to the trustworthiness of multimedia
data, which drives the research of image tampering detection. In this paper, we propose ObjectFormer to detect and
localize image manipulations. To capture subtle manipulation traces that are no longer visible in the RGB domain, we
extract high-frequency features of the images and combine
them with RGB features as multimodal patch embeddings.
Additionally, we use a set of learnable object prototypes
as mid-level representations to model the object-level consistencies among different regions, which are further used
to refine patch embeddings to capture the patch-level consistencies. We conduct extensive experiments on various
datasets and the results verify the effectiveness of the proposed method, outperforming state-of-the-art tampering detection and localization methods.

Authentic

Figure 1. Tampering images usually contain manipulated objects.
Thus, exploiting object-level consistency is crucial for manipulation detection.

move which shifts the spatial locations of objects within images, and (3) removal methods which erase regions from
images and inpaint missing regions with visually plausible
contents. As shown in Figure 1, to produce semantically
meaningful and perceptually convincing images, these approaches oftentimes manipulate images at the object-level,
i.e., adding/removing objects in images. While there are
some recent studies focusing on image manipulation detection [16, 43, 46], they typically use CNNs to directly map
input images to binary labels (i.e., authentic/manipulated)
without explicitly modeling object-level representations.
In contrast, we posit that image manipulation detection
should not only examine whether certain pixels are out
of distribution, but also consider whether objects are
consistent with each other. In addition, visual artifacts
brought by image editing that are no longer perceptible in
the RGB domain are oftentimes noticeable in the frequency
domain [6, 31, 39]. This demands a multimodal approach
that jointly models the RGB domain and the frequency domain to discover subtle manipulation traces.
In this paper, we introduce ObjectFormer, a multimodal
transformer framework for image manipulation detection

2364

