CPPF: Towards Robust Category-Level 9D Pose Estimation in the Wild
Yang You, Ruoxi Shi, Weiming Wang*, Cewu Lu*
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{qq456cvb, eliphat, wangweiming, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we tackle the problem of category-level 9D
pose estimation in the wild, given a single RGB-D frame.
Using supervised data of real-world 9D poses is tedious and
erroneous, and also fails to generalize to unseen scenarios.
Besides, category-level pose estimation requires a method
to be able to generalize to unseen objects at test time, which
is also challenging. Drawing inspirations from traditional
point pair features (PPFs), in this paper, we design a novel
Category-level PPF (CPPF) voting method to achieve accurate, robust and generalizable 9D pose estimation in the
wild. To obtain robust pose estimation, we sample numerous point pairs on an object, and for each pair our model
predicts necessary SE(3)-invariant voting statistics on object centers, orientations and scales. A novel coarse-to-fine
voting algorithm is proposed to eliminate noisy point pair
samples and generate final predictions from the population.
To get rid of false positives in the orientation voting process, an auxiliary binary disambiguating classification task
is introduced for each sampled point pair. In order to detect objects in the wild, we carefully design our sim-to-real
pipeline by training on synthetic point clouds only, unless
objects have ambiguous poses in geometry. Under this circumstance, color information is leveraged to disambiguate
these poses. Results on standard benchmarks show that our
method is on par with current state of the arts with realworld training data. Extensive experiments further show
that our method is robust to noise and gives promising results under extremely challenging scenarios. Our code is
available on https://github.com/qq456cvb/CPPF.

1. Introduction
Estimation of 3D position, orientation and scale of
novel objects, namely, category-level 9D pose estimation
in the wild, is of great importance in many fields, such as
* Cewu Lu and Weiming Wang are the corresponding authors. Cewu
Lu is member of Qing Yuan Research Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China and
Shanghai Qi Zhi institute.

Figure 1. An overview of our proposed voting scheme. During training, for each sampled point pairs on synthetic models, we
train a set of voting targets with a SE(3) invariant neural network.
When testing, objects are first segmented out, and then for each
object we randomly sample some point pairs to vote for the final
9D poses (translation, orientation and scale).

robotics [10, 23, 32] and human-object interactions [1, 20].
There are many prior works exploring this direction, but
with limitations, though. Some past works [3, 9, 17, 25, 31]
have explored the instance-level 6D pose estimation. However, they require exact object models and their sizes beforehand, which is often not realizable in real-world scenarios.
NOCS [32] introduces normalized object coordinate space
to give a consistent representation across intra-class objects.
Although it is able to achieve category-level pose estimations, it requires real-world pose annotations, which are tedious and limited by size. Besides, the 3D object scales
predicted by NOCS are simple heuristics and prone to object occlusions, which is inevitable in real world. We doubt
if one can leverage a sim-to-real approach that generalize
9D pose estimations from synthetic objects to real world,
since ground-truth pose annotations in real-world scenarios
are hard to acquire. Gao et al. [10] tries to solve this problem via comparing the appearance of objects of synthetic
objects and real objects, and finds a pose that minimize the

6866

