Beyond Cross-view Image Retrieval:
Highly Accurate Vehicle Localization Using Satellite Image
Yujiao Shi and Hongdong Li
The Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
firstname.lastname@anu.edu.au

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of vehicle-mounted
camera localization by matching a ground-level image with
an overhead-view satellite map. Existing methods often
treat this problem as cross-view image retrieval, and use
learned deep features to match the ground-level query image to a partition (e.g., a small patch) of the satellite map.
By these methods, the localization accuracy is limited by
the partitioning density of the satellite map (often in the order of tens meters). Departing from the conventional wisdom of image retrieval, this paper presents a novel solution that can achieve highly-accurate localization. The key
idea is to formulate the task as pose estimation and solve
it by neural-net based optimization. Specifically, we design a two-branch CNN to extract robust features from the
ground and satellite images, respectively. To bridge the vast
cross-view domain gap, we resort to a Geometry Projection module that projects features from the satellite map to
the ground-view, based on a relative camera pose. Aiming to minimize the differences between the projected features and the observed features, we employ a differentiable
Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) module to search for the optimal camera pose iteratively. The entire pipeline is differentiable and runs end-to-end. Extensive experiments on standard autonomous vehicle localization datasets have confirmed the superiority of the proposed method. Notably,
e.g., starting from a coarse estimate of camera location
within a wide region of 40m × 40m, with an 80% likelihood our method quickly reduces the lateral location error
to be within 5m on a new KITTI cross-view dataset.

1. Introduction
Image-based camera localization [3, 8, 14, 20, 29, 36, 40,
43, 58] has attracted increasing attention from the community due to its practical applications in various fields, including autonomous driving, virtual and augmented reality. Recently, this technique has been extended to the cross-view

(a) Cross-view image retrieval-based localization

(b) Proposed cross-view camera pose optimization

Figure 1. Comparison of two schemes for cross-view camera localization. (a) Conventional image retrieval-based scheme first
splits a large satellite map into small image patches and constructs
a reference database. Given a query image, they find the most
similar image from a database. GPS-tag of the retrieved image is
regarded as the query camera’s location. By this method, the localization accuracy is limited by the sample density of database
images. (b) The paper proposes a novel scheme for cross-view localization, which formulates the task as camera pose optimization.
We tentatively project the satellite deep features to a ground viewpoint from an initial camera pose estimate by a Geometry Projection module. Then, a differentiable Levernberg-Marquardt optimization procedure is applied to refine the camera pose estimation
by minimizing the differences between the predicted and observed
features.

setting, i.e., localization by matching a ground-level image
to an overhead-view satellite map to determine the ground
camera’s pose.
Existing learning-based image localization methods often treat this task as an instance of image retrieval, and solve
it by metric learning [5,17,27,37,46,47,49,51,55,57,60,63,
64, 67, 69]. They match a ground image to many candidate

17010

