Weakly But Deeply Supervised Occlusion-Reasoned Parametric Road Layouts
Buyu Liu1
Bingbing Zhuang1
Manmohan Chandraker1,2
1
2
NEC Laboratories America
UC San Diego

Abstract
We propose an end-to-end network that takes a single
perspective RGB image of a complex road scene as input,
to produce occlusion-reasoned layouts in perspective space
as well as a parametric bird’s-eye-view (BEV) space. In
contrast to prior works that require dense supervision such
as semantic labels in perspective view, our method only
requires human annotations for parametric attributes that
are cheaper and less ambiguous to obtain. To solve this
challenging task, our design is comprised of modules that
incorporate inductive biases to learn occlusion-reasoning,
geometric transformation and semantic abstraction, where
each module may be supervised by appropriately transforming the parametric annotations. We demonstrate how our
design choices and proposed deep supervision help achieve
meaningful representations and accurate predictions. We
validate our approach on two public datasets, KITTI and
NuScenes, to achieve state-of-the-art results with considerably less human supervision.

Figure 1. We propose an end-to-end model that inputs perspective
image and outputs parametric layouts in top-view. Compared to existing methods, ours requires only the parametric layout annotations
during training and achieves SOTA performance under complex
road scenarios. Moreover, it generates occlusion-reasoned (see
the predicted semantics on regions occluded by cars) pixel-level
semantics in both perspective and top view.

1. Introduction
Understanding road layout from images is essential for
real-world applications such as autonomous driving or path
planning [5, 8, 13, 31], where, besides the usual perspective
space outputs, top-view representations of geometry and
semantics have been popular. Non-parametric representations such as pixel-level semantics [31] generally require
labor-intensive and potentially ambiguous supervision in the
top-view, for example, when dealing with occluded regions.
On the other hand, parametric representations for top-view
layouts are desirable for their interpretability, which is beneficial for higher-level reasoning and decision-making in
downstream applications.
Parametric attributes such as presence of side roads or
number of lanes may be easily annotated by humans given
sensor inputs, and require less effort than pixel-level semantic annotations. However, besides parametric annotations1 in
1 Parametric and attribute-level annotations are used interchangeably in
our paper.

the bird’s-eye-view (BEV), i.e. top-view, previous works that
estimate parametric BEV layouts also require pixel-level supervision in perspective images [23, 46] or handle only very
simple road layouts [35]. This paper seeks to obtain parametric BEV maps as well as pixel-level semantics in both
the perspective and top views, but using only the cheaper
parametric supervision on attributes.
While relying on cheap supervision only is undoubtedly a
goal worth pursuing, removing the dense perspective supervision makes the problem harder. This is non-trivial, since
there exists a large gap between sparse parametric supervision and dense pixel-level semantic supervision. To bridge
the gap, one must reason about the underlying geometry
to map the parametric supervision to top-view and get the
correct semantics, even in occluded regions.
We address this challenge through two key insights. First,
rather than directly regressing the parametric BEV layout
from RGB image space, we introduce two intermediate steps
– a perspective semantics (PS) module and a top-view se-

17000

