TransWeather: Transformer-based Restoration of Images Degraded by Adverse
Weather Conditions
Jeya Maria Jose Valanarasu, Rajeev Yasarla, and Vishal M. Patel
Johns Hopkins University
{jvalana1,ryasarl1,vpatel36} @jhu.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Weather conditions like rain, fog, and snow reduce the
visibility and corrupt the information captured by an image.
This drastically affects the performance of many computer
vision algorithms like detection, segmentation and depth estimation [3, 5, 41, 52, 59] which are important parts of autonomous navigation and surveillance systems [28, 34–36].
Hence, it is essential to remove adverse weather effects
from images in order to make these vision systems more
reliable. Also, a clean image without any weather degrada-

Rain

Snow

Fog

Rain

Snow

Fog

Rain

EFog

ERain

ESnow

EFog

ERain

ESnow

Weather
Type
Queries

EE

DFog

DRain

DSnow

Task Specific SOTA

Snow

DD

D

(a) Task Specific Networks (b) All-in-One Network
All-in-One [23]

(c) TransWeather (Ours)
TransWeather (Ours)

35

3.11
dB
PSNR (dB)

Removing adverse weather conditions like rain, fog, and
snow from images is an important problem in many applications. Most methods proposed in the literature have been
designed to deal with just removing one type of degradation. Recently, a CNN-based method using neural architecture search (All-in-One) was proposed to remove all the
weather conditions at once. However, it has a large number of parameters as it uses multiple encoders to cater to
each weather removal task and still has scope for improvement in its performance. In this work, we focus on developing an efficient solution for the all adverse weather removal problem. To this end, we propose TransWeather, a
transformer-based end-to-end model with just a single encoder and a decoder that can restore an image degraded
by any weather condition. Specifically, we utilize a novel
transformer encoder using intra-patch transformer blocks
to enhance attention inside the patches to effectively remove smaller weather degradations. We also introduce a
transformer decoder with learnable weather type embeddings to adjust to the weather degradation at hand. TransWeather achieves significant improvements across multiple test datasets over both All-in-One network as well as
methods fine-tuned for specific tasks. TransWeather is also
validated on real world test images and found to be more
effective than previous methods. Implementation code can
be found in the supplementary document. Code is available
at https://github.com/jeya-maria-jose/TransWeather.

Fog

4.93
dB

Method

Inf.
Time
(in s)

30

6.34
dB

25

[67]

[73]

Attn GAN [37]

0.28

All-in-One [23]

0.33

MPRNet [67]

0.18

Swin-IR [27]

0.27

TransWeather

0.14

[40]

Test1

Snow100K-L

RainDrop

Rain Streak + Fog Removal

Snow Removal

Rain drop Removal

Figure 1. Top row: Weather Removal Frameworks - (a) Separate networks designed for each type of weather removal like rain,
fog and snow. (b) All-in-One Network [23] proposes a framework
with separate encoders for each task but a generic decoder. (c) Our
proposed method, Transweather, has a single encoder and a decoder and learns weather type queries to solve all adverse weather
removal efficiently. Bottom row: Performance Comparison - A
single model instance of TransWeather achieves significant performance boost when compared to both All-in-One framework and
state-of-the-art networks designed and trained individually for specific tasks while also being faster during inference.

tion is desired in photography. Early methods for weather
removal involve modelling priors for weather conditions
using empirical observations [13, 45, 46]. These priors
have to be modelled separately for each weather condition and a common prior modelled for all weather conditions is not effective. Recently, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) based solutions have been explored extensively for deraining [11, 37, 53, 56, 61, 63, 69, 70, 76], dehazing [8, 19, 41, 57, 69, 71, 72], desnowing [29, 44, 73] and
raindrop removal [37, 40, 66]. Transformer-based methods

2353

