ES6D: A Computation Efficient and Symmetry-Aware 6D Pose Regression
Framework
Ningkai Mo 1 *

Wanshui Gan 1,2 *

Naoto Yokoya 2,3

Shifeng Chen 1†

1

ShenZhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
2
The University of Tokyo, 3 RIKEN
[nk.mo19941001, wanshuigan]@gmail.com, yokoya@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp, shifeng.chen@siat.ac.cn

Abstract
In this paper, a computation efficient regression framework is presented for estimating the 6D pose of rigid
objects from a single RGB-D image, which is applicable to handling symmetric objects. This framework is
designed in a simple architecture that efficiently extracts
point-wise features from RGB-D data using a fully convolutional network, called XYZNet, and directly regresses
the 6D pose without any post refinement. In the case
of symmetric object, one object has multiple ground-truth
poses, and this one-to-many relationship may lead to estimation ambiguity. In order to solve this ambiguity problem, we design a symmetry-invariant pose distance metric,
called average (maximum) grouped primitives distance or
A(M)GPD. The proposed A(M)GPD loss can make the regression network converge to the correct state, i.e., all minima in the A(M)GPD loss surface are mapped to the correct poses. Extensive experiments on YCB-Video and TLESS datasets demonstrate the proposed framework’s substantially superior performance in top accuracy and low
computational cost. The relevant code is available in
https://github.com/GANWANSHUI/ES6D.git.

Figure 1. Comparison of A(M)GPD and ADD-S. Axis X shows
the rotation angle of the object (from 0° to 360°). Axis Y shows
the calculated distance. We set the initial pose as the ground truth.
As we can see, all minima are mapped to correct poses in the
A(M)GPD curve and several minima point to incorrect poses in
the ADD-S curve.

1. Introduction
Estimating the 6D object pose is important for realtime applications such as augmented reality (AR) [24], autonomous driving [3, 8], and robotics [4, 34]. In recent
years, methods based on the deep neural network (DNN)
have gradually emerged [17, 22, 25, 26, 40]. The RGB-Dbased method [35] fuses RGB features and point cloud fea* The first two authors contributed equally and should be regarded as
co-first authors.
† Corresponding author.

tures and shows exceptional robustness in handling heavy
occlusion and textureless situations. However, as discussed
below, regression methods [35, 38] will fail for some symmetric objects and its computational cost is still an obstacle for real-time application. In this paper, we propose a
RGB-D-based 6D pose regression framework that is more
computation efficient and applicable to symmetric objects.
Feature extraction from RGB-D data is a crucial part of
our framework. The methods in [12, 19, 35] obtain robust
features through a dense fusion network, which fuses RGB

6718

