3D-SPS: Single-Stage 3D Visual Grounding via
Referred Point Progressive Selection
Junyu Luo1,2 ∗ , Jiahui Fu1,2 *, Xianghao Kong1,2 , Chen Gao1,2 †,
Haibing Ren3 , Hao Shen3 , Huaxia Xia3 , Si Liu1,2
1

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University 2 Hangzhou Innovation Institute, Beihang University 3 Meituan Inc.

Two-Stage
(a) Sparse Proposals

Abstract

Ground Truth

Detection Stage

Matching Stage

tion

redic
ng P
Wro

* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author: Chen Gao.

tion

Visual Grounding (VG) aims to localize the target object in the scene based on an object-related linguistic description. In recent years, the 3D VG task has received
increasing attention owing to its wide applications, such

ic
Pred

1. Introduction

ng
Wro

3D visual grounding aims to locate the referred target
object in 3D point cloud scenes according to a free-form
language description. Previous methods mostly follow a
two-stage paradigm, i.e., language-irrelevant detection and
cross-modal matching, which is limited by the isolated architecture. In such a paradigm, the detector needs to sample
keypoints from raw point clouds due to the inherent properties of 3D point clouds (irregular and large-scale), to generate the corresponding object proposal for each keypoint.
However, sparse proposals may leave out the target in detection, while dense proposals may confuse the matching
model. Moreover, the language-irrelevant detection stage
can only sample a small proportion of keypoints on the
target, deteriorating the target prediction. In this paper,
we propose a 3D Single-Stage Referred Point Progressive
Selection (3D-SPS) method, which progressively selects
keypoints with the guidance of language and directly locates the target. Specifically, we propose a Descriptionaware Keypoint Sampling (DKS) module to coarsely focus
on the points of language-relevant objects, which are significant clues for grounding. Besides, we devise a Targetoriented Progressive Mining (TPM) module to finely concentrate on the points of the target, which is enabled by
progressive intra-modal relation modeling and inter-modal
target mining. 3D-SPS bridges the gap between detection
and matching in the 3D visual grounding task, localizing the
target at a single stage. Experiments demonstrate that 3DSPS achieves state-of-the-art performance on both ScanRefer and Nr3D/Sr3D datasets.

(b) Dense Proposals
Description:
There is a sofa chair
near a couch. The sofa
chair has a table on
each side.

(c) 3D-SPS

Single-Stage

Correct Prediction

Figure 1. Traditional two-stage 3D VG methods are limited by the
isolation of the detection stage and the matching stage. (a) Sparse
proposals may leave out the target in detection. (b) Dense
proposals could confuse the matching model. (c) 3D-SPS progressively selects keypoints (blue points→red points→green points)
and performs referring at a single stage. Noted that dense surfaces
are utilized only to help readers understand the example 3D scene,
while the input of our method only contains sparse point clouds.

as autonomous robots and human-machine interaction in
AR/VR/Metaverse. Even though much progress [29,33–38,
40, 41, 43] has been achieved in the 2D VG task, it is still
challenging to locate the referred target object in 3D scenes
since point clouds are irregular and large-scale.
Existing 3D VG methods [2, 7, 11, 39, 42, 44] are mainly
based on the detection-then-matching two-stage pipeline.
The first stage is language-irrelevant detection, where general 3D object detectors [4, 20, 23] are adopted to produce
numerous object proposals. The second stage is crossmodal matching, where specific vision-language attention

16454

