MonoJSG: Joint Semantic and Geometric Cost Volume for
Monocular 3D Object Detection

1

Qing Lian 1 , Peiliang Li2 , Xiaozhi Chen2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 2 DJI

qlianab@connect.ust.hk, peiliang.uav@gmail.com, cxz.thu@gmail.com

Abstract
Due to the inherent ill-posed nature of 2D-3D projection, monocular 3D object detection lacks accurate depth
recovery ability. Although the deep neural network (DNN)
enables monocular depth-sensing from high-level learned
features, the pixel-level cues are usually omitted due to the
deep convolution mechanism. To benefit from both the powerful feature representation in DNN and pixel-level geometric constraints, we reformulate the monocular object depth
estimation as a progressive refinement problem and propose
a joint semantic and geometric cost volume to model the
depth error. Specifically, we first leverage neural networks
to learn the object position, dimension, and dense normalized 3D object coordinates. Based on the object depth, the
dense coordinates patch together with the corresponding
object features is reprojected to the image space to build
a cost volume in a joint semantic and geometric error manner. The final depth is obtained by feeding the cost volume
to a refinement network, where the distribution of semantic
and geometric error is regularized by direct depth supervision. Through effectively mitigating depth error by the refinement framework, we achieve state-of-the-art results on
both the KITTI and Waymo datasets.1

1. Introduction
As a fundamental component in 3D perception, 3D object detection has drawn increasing attention from the area
of autonomous driving, robotic navigation, etc. Recently, it
has achieved remarkable progress based on lidar or stereo
sensing solutions. However, the high cost of lidar sensors
and the complicated online calibration in stereo cameras
limit their mass applications in downstream tasks. Therefore, researchers start to focus on a cheaper alternative,
monocular-based sensing solution. Yet due to the ill-posed
2D-3D projection, the localization accuracy of monocular
3D object detection is far behind the lidar and stereo-based
1 Code available at https://github.com/lianqing11/MonoJSG

Figure 1. From top to bottom: Visualization of the estimated corners in the image space, which can be used to constrain an initial
3D bounding box; Reproject the object patch to the original image
using the initial bounding boxes; Initial (green) and our MonoJSG refined (blue) bounding boxes in the BEV space respectively.
Compared with corners, photometric mismatch provides discriminative features for identifying localization error.

approaches.
Driven by powerful neural networks, multiple approaches [1, 16, 24, 35, 38, 39] are proposed to alleviate the
challenging monocular depth recovery from different perspectives. From the perspective of data formation, pseudolidar based approaches [22, 23, 35, 37] transform the input
images to pseudo point cloud and directly adopt lidar detectors on it. Although they achieve better performance
over traditional approaches [6,26], the heavy reliance on the
depth prediction network leads to high latency and overfitting [29]. From the perspective of geometry reasoning, ge-

1070

