On Guiding Visual Attention with Language Specification

Keyan Nasseri

Suzanne Petryk∗
Joseph Gonzalez

Lisa Dunlap∗
Trevor Darrell

Anna Rohrbach

UC Berkeley
Abstract
While real world challenges typically define visual categories with language words or phrases, most visual classification methods define categories with numerical indices.
However, the language specification of the classes provides
an especially useful prior for biased and noisy datasets,
where it can help disambiguate what features are taskrelevant. Recently, large-scale multimodal models have
been shown to recognize a wide variety of high-level concepts from a language specification even without additional
image training data, but they are often unable to distinguish classes for more fine-grained tasks. CNNs, in contrast,
can extract subtle image features that are required for finegrained discrimination, but will overfit to any bias or noise
in datasets. Our insight is to use high-level language specification as advice for constraining the classification evidence
to task-relevant features, instead of distractors. To do this,
we ground task-relevant words or phrases with attention
maps from a pretrained large-scale model. We then use this
grounding to supervise a classifier’s spatial attention away
from distracting context. We show that supervising spatial
attention in this way improves performance on classification tasks with biased and noisy data, including ∼3−15%
worst-group accuracy improvements and ∼41−45% relative
improvements on fairness metrics.

1. Introduction
When trained with limited or biased data, visual models
often learn unwanted correlations. For example, consider
building a classifier to distinguish two fine-grained categories of birds: “landbird” and “waterbird”. The background
features from their corresponding habitats such as forests
or beaches might be highly or perfectly correlated with the
numerical class labels. A baseline model may mistakenly
learn the unintended “location” task instead of the actual
task, and fail on examples of birds out of their usual habitat
(Fig. 1). However, knowledge that the task is about birds
can disambiguate what the model is meant to learn.
* Equal contribution.

Attention from
language speciﬁcation

Vanilla CNN

(GALS) CNN trained w/
language speciﬁcation

Landbird
On Land

Landbird
On Water

Figure 1. Guiding attention with language. Sample attention
from the Waterbirds biased dataset. During training, Landbirds
mostly appear on land backgrounds and Waterbirds mostly appear
on water backgrounds. At testing, each class appears equally on
land or on water. A CNN trained on this task learns to look at
the background, but if we use a multimodal model to translate the
language specification “a photo of a bird” into spatial supervision,
we can ensure that our CNN learns task-relevant features.

Previous work has considered incorporating knowledge of
the task as language specifications in the form of class names
or class descriptions which can directly serve as a prior over
visual model parameters [33, 47]. Several zero-shot methods condition models on attribute labels [17, 26, 49] (e.g.,
beak shape or wing color) or class descriptions [7, 19, 32, 54]
(e.g., from Wikipedia) to enable transfer to unseen classes.
However, this relies on the language specification being
class-discriminative – an assumption which does not hold
for some real-world tasks where only high-level task specification is given (e.g., in Fig. 1, we may only know that this is
a “bird” dataset, without the class names being provided or
even existing yet). Additionally, simply conditioning on language embeddings may not prevent a model from attending
to spurious correlations in biased datasets.
Even when language specifications are classdiscriminative, such models will perform poorly when there
is insufficient image and text data to learn a multimodal
model for rare or fine-grained classes (e.g., a large-scale
model such as CLIP [33] may not have seen enough examples of the relatively rare “landbird” or “waterbird” classes
during pretraining to have good zero-shot performance).

18092

