Consistency driven Sequential Transformers Attention Model
for Partially Observable Scenes

a

Samrudhdhi B. Rangreja , Chetan L. Srinidhib , James J. Clarka
McGill University, Canada. b Sunnybrook Research Institute, University of Toronto, Canada.

samrudhdhi.rangrej@mail.mcgill.ca, chetan.srinidhi@utoronto.ca, james.clark1@mcgill.ca

Abstract
Most hard attention models initially observe a complete
scene to locate and sense informative glimpses, and predict class-label of a scene based on glimpses. However, in
many applications (e.g., aerial imaging), observing an entire scene is not always feasible due to the limited time and
resources available for acquisition. In this paper, we develop a Sequential Transformers Attention Model (STAM)
that only partially observes a complete image and predicts informative glimpse locations solely based on past
glimpses. We design our agent using DeiT-distilled [44]
and train it with a one-step actor-critic algorithm. Furthermore, to improve classification performance, we introduce
a novel training objective, which enforces consistency between the class distribution predicted by a teacher model
from a complete image and the class distribution predicted
by our agent using glimpses. When the agent senses only
4% of the total image area, the inclusion of the proposed
consistency loss in our training objective yields 3% and 8%
higher accuracy on ImageNet and fMoW datasets, respectively. Moreover, our agent outperforms previous state-ofthe-art by observing nearly 27% and 42% fewer pixels in
glimpses on ImageNet and fMoW.

1. Introduction
High-performing image classification models such as EfficientNet [42], ResNet [15] and Vision Transformers (ViT)
[13] assume that a complete scene (or image) is available for
recognition. However, in many practical scenarios, a complete image is not always available at once. For instance,
an autonomous agent may acquire an image only partially
and through a series of narrow observations. The reasons
may include a small field of view, high acquisition cost, limited time for acquisition, or limited bandwidth between the
sensor and the computational unit. Often, an agent would
have partially acquired an image, and the system must perform recognition based on incomplete information. Models
trained on complete images prove inefficient while classify-

Figure 1. Schematic diagram of Sequential Transformers Attention Model (STAM). We divide an image (X) into equally-sized
non-overlapping glimpses. STAM sequentially observes informative glimpses (gt ) from an image. While never observing an image
entirely, STAM predicts the class-label of an image (y) based on
glimpses. At each t, our agent encodes past glimpses and their
locations (g0:t , l0:t ) into a Markov state st . It uses state st to predict class distribution p(yt |st ) and attention policy π(lt+1 |st ). We
sample the next glimpse location lt+1 from π(lt+1 |st ).

ing incomplete images. For example, the accuracy of DeiTSmall [44] drops by around 10% when 50% of the image regions are unavailable [25]. Moreover, they cannot perform
autonomous sensing.
Many developed autonomous agents that acquire a series
of most informative sub-regions from a scene to perform
classification from partial observations [5, 14, 24, 27]. Most
existing scalable approaches [14, 27, 45] initially glance at
an entire scene to locate the informative sub-regions. However, in practice, glancing at an entire scene is not always
feasible. Examples include time-sensitive rescue operations
using aerial imagery, an autonomous car driving in a new
territory, and a medical expert probing a tissue to find abnormalities. We develop an autonomous agent that predicts
locations of the most informative regions, called glimpses,
without observing the entire scene initially. Starting from
observing a glimpse at a random location, the autonomous
agent decides which location to attend next solely based on
the partial observations made so far.
We design our autonomous agent using a transformer architecture [13, 44, 47] and call it Sequential Transformers
Attention Model (STAM). Transformers efficiently model
long-range dependencies and are ideal for aggregating information from distant glimpses. At any given time, our

2518

