FWD: Real-time Novel View Synthesis with Forward Warping and Depth
Ang Cao, Chris Rockwell, Justin Johnson
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
{ancao,cnris,justincj}@umich.edu

Abstract
Novel view synthesis (NVS) is a challenging task requiring systems to generate photorealistic images of scenes from
new viewpoints, where both quality and speed are important
for applications. Previous image-based rendering (IBR)
methods are fast, but have poor quality when input views
are sparse. Recent Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) and
generalizable variants give impressive results but are not
real-time. In our paper, we propose a generalizable NVS
method with sparse inputs, called FWD , which gives highquality synthesis in real-time. With explicit depth and differentiable rendering, it achieves competitive results to the
SOTA methods with 130-1000× speedup and better perceptual quality. If available, we can seamlessly integrate sensor depth during either training or inference to improve image quality while retaining real-time speed. With the growing prevalence of depths sensors, we hope that methods
making use of depth will become increasingly useful.

1. Introduction
Given several posed images, novel view synthesis (NVS)
aims to generate photorealistic images depicting the scene
from unseen viewpoints. This long-standing task has applications in graphics, VR/AR, bringing life to still images. It
requires a deep visual understanding of geometry and semantics, making it appealing to test visual understanding.
Early work on NVS focused on image-based rendering (IBR), where models generate target views from a set
of input images. Light field [39] or proxy geometry (like
mesh surfaces) [12, 24, 61, 62] are typically constructed
from posed inputs, and target views are synthesized by resampling or blending warped inputs. Requiring dense input images, these methods are limited by 3D reconstruction
quality, and can perform poorly with sparse input images.
Recently, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [48] have become the leading methods for NVS, using MLPs to represent the 5D radiance field of the scene implicitly. The color
and density of each sampling point are queried from the
network and aggregated by volumetric rendering to get the

Source Image
Target Image
Warped Image
Est. Depth

Volume Rendering
"

Est. Depths

Warping
Ray Distance

ing

!
"

rp
Wa

Fuse
&
Refine

(a) Volume Rendering for NeRF variants

(b) Ours Forward Warping

Figure 1. Real-time Novel View Synthesis. We present a realtime and generalizable method to synthesize images from sparse
inputs. NeRF variants model the scene via an MLP, which is
queried millions of times during rendering and leads to low speeds.
Our method utilizes explicit depths and point cloud renderers for
fast rendering, inspired by SynSin [82]. The model is trained endto-end with a novel fusion transformer to give high-quality results,
where regressed depths and features are optimized for synthesis.

pixel color. With dense sampling points and differentiable
renderer, explicit geometry isn’t needed, and densities optimized for synthesis quality are learned. Despite impressive
results, they are not generalizable, requiring MLP fitting for
each scene with dense inputs. Also, they are extremely slow
because of tremendous MLP query times for a single image.
Generalizable NeRF variants like PixelNeRF [89], IBRNet [78] and MVSNeRF [9] emerge very recently, synthesizing novel views of unseen scenes without per-scene optimization by modeling an MLP conditioned on sparse inputs. However, they still query the MLP millions of times,
leading to slow speeds. Albeit the progress of accelerating NeRF with per-scene optimization [88, 27, 18], fast and
generalizable NeRF variants are still under-explored.
In this paper, we target a generalizable NVS method with
sparse inputs, refraining dense view collections. Both realtime speed and high-quality synthesis are expected, allowing interactive applications. Classical IBR methods are fast
but require dense input views for good results. Generalizable NeRF variants show excellent quality without perscene optimization but require intense computations, leading to slow speeds. Our method, termed FWD, achieves this

15713

