Look Closer to Supervise Better:
One-Shot Font Generation via Component-Based Discriminator
Yuxin Kong1 , Canjie Luo1 , Weihong Ma1 , Qiyuan Zhu2 , Shenggao Zhu2 , Nicholas Yuan2 , Lianwen Jin∗1,3
1
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, South China University of Technology.
2
Huawei Cloud AI. 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory.
{kongyxscut, canjie.luo, scutmaweihong, lianwen.jin, nicholas.jing.yuan}@gmail.com
{zhuqiyuan2, zhushenggao}@huawei.com

Abstract
Automatic font generation remains a challenging research issue due to the large amounts of characters with
complicated structures. Typically, only a few samples can
serve as the style/content reference (termed few-shot learning), which further increases the difficulty to preserve local
style patterns or detailed glyph structures. We investigate
the drawbacks of previous studies and find that a coarsegrained discriminator is insufficient for supervising a font
generator. To this end, we propose a novel ComponentAware Module (CAM), which supervises the generator to
decouple content and style at a more fine-grained level, i.e.,
the component level. Different from previous studies struggling to increase the complexity of generators, we aim to
perform more effective supervision for a relatively simple
generator to achieve its full potential, which is a brand
new perspective for font generation. The whole framework achieves remarkable results by coupling componentlevel supervision with adversarial learning, hence we call it
Component-Guided GAN, shortly CG-GAN. Extensive experiments show that our approach outperforms state-of-theart one-shot font generation methods. Furthermore, it can
be applied to handwritten word synthesis and scene text image editing, suggesting the generalization of our approach.

1. Introduction
To better tackle the few-shot font generation issue, we
rethink the following two questions: 1) What determines
people’s judgment on font styles? 2) How do people learn
to write a new character/glyph in the correct structure? To
answer the first question intuitively, we present a text string
in three different font styles in Figure 1. Since their overall
architectures are similar, we naturally pay more attention to
local details, including endpoint shapes, corner sharpness,
∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. A same text string presented in three different font styles.

stroke thickness, joined-up writing pattern, etc., which appear at a more local level, i.e., the components of a character. Although the components cannot present some font
style properties, such as the inclination and aspect ratio,
we argue that the components determine the font style to
a greater extent than the whole character shape. As for the
second question, one strong assumption is that when people
learn a complicated glyph, they first learn the components
that form the character. Intuitively, if all the components in
a glyph are properly written, we can obtain the glyph correctly. Drawing inspiration from the above observations, an
intuitive method for few-shot font generation is to utilize
the component information that is largely correlated with
the font style properties and glyph structures.
Few-shot font generation (FFG) has received considerable research interest in recent years due to its critical applications [3, 25, 26, 31, 36, 38]. An ideal FFG system can
greatly reduce the burden of the time-consuming and laborintensive font design process, particularly for those language systems with a massive number of glyphs, e.g., Chinese with more than 25,000 glyphs. Another application is
to create a cross-lingual font library, e.g., Chinese to Korean, given the fact that Adobe and Google take years to
create the Source Han Sans Font, a universal font style that
supports Chinese, Korean, and Japanese simultaneously.
Recently, several attempts have been made to few-shot
font generation; however, they all have certain limitations
and further improvements are therefore required. For instance, [26] learns to map the source font style to a fixed

13482

