Augmented Geometric Distillation for Data-Free Incremental Person ReID
Yichen Lu Mei Wang Weihong Deng∗
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{yichen.lu, wangmei1, whdeng}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Incremental learning (IL) remains an open issue for Person Re-identification (ReID), where a ReID system is expected to preserve preceding knowledge while learning incrementally. However, due to the strict privacy licenses and
the open-set retrieval setting, it is intractable to adapt existing class IL methods to ReID. In this work, we propose
an Augmented Geometric Distillation (AGD) framework to
tackle these issues. First, a general data-free incremental
framework with dreaming memory is constructed to avoid
privacy disclosure. On this basis, we reveal a “noisy distillation” problem stemming from the noise in dreaming memory, and further propose to augment distillation in a pairwise and cross-wise pattern over different views of memory to mitigate it. Second, for the open-set retrieval property, we propose to maintain feature space structure during
evolving via a novel geometric way and preserve relationships between exemplars when representations drift. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our AGD to
baseline with a margin of 6.0% mAP / 7.9% R@1 and it
could be generalized to class IL. Code is available here† .

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) aims at identifying all
images of the same person as the query from a gallery set
of large scale. Training on a certain dataset empirically empowers a ReID system to expert in the corresponding domain. However, it inhibits the ReID system from adapting
to the ever-changing environment, especially when dealing
with the streamed data or a sequence of ReID tasks from
incremental domains. We expect the system can widen its
generalization in incremental domain and retain its capability in base domain simultaneously, which is, briefly, to accumulate new knowledge while avoiding Catastrophic Forgetting [12, 29]. To overcome such similar limitation, Class
Incremental Learning (CIL) [5,10,18,24,33,44] is proposed
∗ Corresponding author
† https://github.com/eddielyc/Augmented-Geometric-Distillation

ReID Task 1

ReID Task 2

ReID Task 3

Dataset 1

Dataset 2

Dataset 3

Train

Replaying

Replaying

...

Eval
Domain 1

Domain 2

Domain 3

Figure 1. Illustration of data-free IL-ReID framework. The model
keeps evolving when training on a sequence of ReID tasks. Evaluation is adopted in all seen domains. Replaying is in a data-free
setting [37, 47] due to privacy issues in ReID, where no preceding
real data is stored, instead, dreaming memory drives relaying.

in classification task and efforts have been devoted to figuring out how to learn incrementally.
Despite the great success in CIL, it still faces challenges
when directly adopted to a ReID system due to the strict privacy issues and the open-set retrieval setting. First, in CIL,
reminding the networks of previous knowledge via replaying pre-stored exemplars is well-recognized [5, 19, 33] to
alleviate catastrophic forgetting. However, replaying memory of real data faces risks of violating privacy licenses in
ReID. Second, on one side, ReID is substantially an openset retrieval task, which puts more attention on constructing a robust feature space when compared with the closeset classification, since not only representations but also
their neighborhoods play key roles in retrieval ranking. On
the other side, feeding new knowledge sequentially will inevitably cause semantic drift [49] and distort the preceding
feature space, resulting in forgetting. Hence, there exists
a critical yet ignored contradiction between stabilizing the
feature space for preceding domains and adapting feature
space for the incremental domain.
Considering the limitations aforementioned, we conduct
further research on Incremental ReID (IL-ReID) [32] and
propose a novel Augmented Geometric Distillation (AGD)
framework which consists of Augmented Distillation (AD)
and Geometric Distillation (GD). First, to tackle the privacy issue, we first construct a general data-free incre-

7329

