Reusing the Task-specific Classifier as a Discriminator:
Discriminator-free Adversarial Domain Adaptation
Lin Chen* Huaian Chen* Zhixiang Wei Xin Jin Xiao Tan Yi Jin† Enhong Chen
University of Science and Technology of China
{chlin, anchen, zhixiangwei, jinxustc, tx2015}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
{jinyi08, cheneh}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Adversarial learning has achieved remarkable performances for unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA). Existing adversarial UDA methods typically adopt an additional
discriminator to play the min-max game with a feature extractor. However, most of these methods failed to effectively
leverage the predicted discriminative information, and thus
cause mode collapse for generator. In this work, we address this problem from a different perspective and design
a simple yet effective adversarial paradigm in the form of
a discriminator-free adversarial learning network (DALN),
wherein the category classifier is reused as a discriminator, which achieves explicit domain alignment and category
distinguishment through a unified objective, enabling the
DALN to leverage the predicted discriminative information
for sufficient feature alignment. Basically, we introduce a
Nuclear-norm Wasserstein discrepancy (NWD) that has definite guidance meaning for performing discrimination. Such
NWD can be coupled with the classifier to serve as a discriminator satisfying the K-Lipschitz constraint without the requirements of additional weight clipping or gradient penalty
strategy. Without bells and whistles, DALN compares favorably against the existing state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods on
a variety of public datasets. Moreover, as a plug-and-play
technique, NWD can be directly used as a generic regularizer to benefit existing UDA algorithms. Code is available at
https://github.com/xiaoachen98/DALN .

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved a significant
progress in many computer vision tasks [4, 5, 16, 37]. However, the success of these methods highly depends on large
amounts of annotated data [13, 47, 51], which is extremely
time-consuming and expensive to obtain. Moreover, due to
* indicates equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

S

T

S

G
C

T

G
C

(a)Bi-classifier
Bi-classifier
(a)

C

S

T

G
D

Extra Discriminator
(b) (b)
Additional
discriminator

C
(c)
(c) Ours
Ours

Figure 1. Illustration of different adversarial paradigms, in which
G, C, and D denote the feature extractor, task-specific classifier,
and discriminator, respectively. Different from typical paradigms
that adopt an (a) additional classifier C ′ (called bi-classifier) or (b)
additional discriminator D, we present a different perspective for
UDA and introduce a simple but effective adversarial paradigm
illustrated in (c), in which the original task-specific classifier C
is reused as a implicit discriminator, achieving explicit domain
alignment and category distinguishment via a unified objective.

the discrepancy [31,32] between training data and real-world
testing data, the DNN model trained on annotated data may
suffer from a dramatic performance decline in testing set
despite extensive annotation efforts. To address this problem,
unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) [6, 9, 30, 48], which
aims to transfer knowledge from a labeled source domain to
an unlabeled target domain in the presence of a domain shift,
has been deeply explored.
Inspired by the theoretical analysis of Ben-David et al. [2],
the existing UDA methods usually explore the idea of learning domain-invariant feature representations. Generally,
these methods can be categorized into two branches, i.e.,
moment matching methods [20, 24, 25, 43, 49] and adversarial learning methods [11, 12, 25, 39]. Moment matching
methods explicitly reduce the domain shift by matching
a well-defined distribution discrepancy of the source and
target domain features. Adversarial learning methods implicitly mitigate the domain shift by playing an adversarial
min-max two-player game, which drives the generator to
extract indistinguishable features to fool the discriminator.

7181

