Generating High Fidelity Data from Low-density Regions using Diffusion Models
Vikash Sehwag†

Caner Hazirbas‡ Albert Gordo‡ Firat Ozgenel‡ Cristian Canton Ferrer†
†
Princeton University, ‡ Meta AI

vvikash@princeton.edu, {hazirbas, agordo, firatozgenel, ccanton}@fb.com

(i) High density

(ii) Low density

(a) Real

(b) BigGAN-deep

(c) DDPM

(d) DDPM (Ours)

Figure 1. Real vs synthetic data. We compare synthetic images from different generative models with real images from the lowdensity (1.a.i) and high-density (1.a.ii) neighborhoods of the data manifold, respectively. In 1.b we show uniformly sampled images
from BigGAN [4] and in 1.c we display images generated using the conventional uniform sampling process from the diffusion model
(DDPM [10, 17]). While diffusion model achieves much higher diversity than GANs, uniform sampling from them rarely generates samples from low-density neighborhoods. (1.d) Our framework guides the sampling process in diffusion models to low-density regions and
generates novel high fidelity instances from these regions.1

Abstract
Our work focuses on addressing sample deficiency from
low-density regions of data manifold in common image
datasets. We leverage diffusion process based generative
models to synthesize novel images from low-density regions. We observe that uniform sampling from diffusion
models predominantly samples from high-density regions of
the data manifold. Therefore, we modify the sampling process to guide it towards low-density regions while simultaneously maintaining the fidelity of synthetic data. We rigorously demonstrate that our process successfully generates
novel high fidelity samples from low-density regions. We
further examine generated samples and show that the model
does not memorize low-density data and indeed learns to
generate novel samples from low-density regions.
1 ImageNet [8, 29] has no explicit category for humans, though one
might be present in some images. Thus generative models might generate
synthetic images that include a human. We further conduct a rigorous analysis to validate whether the network has memorized any such information
from training samples.

1. Introduction
Most common image datasets have a long-tailed distribution of sample density2 , where the majority of samples lie in
high-density neighborhoods of the data manifold. Samples
from low-density regions often comprise novel attributes
(Figure 1a) and have higher entropy than high-density samples [1]. However, due to their lower likelihood, curating
even a small amount of such samples requires a dedicated
effort [16].
Our goal is to leverage generative models to generate
synthetic images from low-density neighborhoods. A natural requirement for this task is that the model should generalize to low-density regions. While generative adversarial
networks (GANs) excel at generating high-fidelity samples,
they have poor coverage, thus struggle to generate highfidelity samples from low-density regions [4] (Figure 1b).
In contrast, autoregressive models have a high coverage but
2 We refer to the long-tail w.r.t. sample density for each class. It is
different from the long-tailed distribution over classes [24], i.e., when some
classes are heavily underrepresented than others.

11492

