A Voxel Graph CNN for Object Classification with Event Cameras
Yongjian Deng1
1
2
3

Hao Chen2∗

Hai Liu3

Youfu Li4 *

College of Computer Science, Beijing University of Technology

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University

The National Engineering Research Center for E-Learning, Central China Normal University
4

Department of Mechanical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong

yjdeng@bjut.edu.cn, haochen303@seu.edu.cn, hailiu0204@ccnu.edu.cn, meyfli@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Event cameras attract researchers’ attention due to their
low power consumption, high dynamic range, and extremely
high temporal resolution. Learning models on event-based
object classification have recently achieved massive success
by accumulating sparse events into dense frames to apply
traditional 2D learning methods. Yet, these approaches necessitate heavy-weight models and are with high computational complexity due to the redundant information introduced by the sparse-to-dense conversion, limiting the potential of event cameras on real-life applications. This study
aims to address the core problem of balancing accuracy
and model complexity for event-based classification models. To this end, we introduce a novel graph representation for event data to exploit their sparsity better and customize a lightweight voxel graph convolutional neural network (EV-VGCNN) for event-based classification. Specifically, (1) using voxel-wise vertices rather than previous
point-wise inputs to explicitly exploit regional 2D semantics of event streams while keeping the sparsity; (2) proposing a multi-scale feature relational layer (MFRL) to extract
spatial and motion cues from each vertex discriminatively
concerning its distances to neighbors. Comprehensive experiments show that our model can advance state-of-the-art
classification accuracy with extremely low model complexity (merely 0.84M parameters).

1. Introduction
Each pixel of event cameras is independent and only report lightness changes at the correspondent location (Fig.
1). This novel working principle enables their output to
be sparse and non-redundant [28, 37]. Consequently, event
* : Corresponding author

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61873220, 92167102, 62102083, 62173286, 61875068,
62177018), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province
(BK20210222), the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong (CityU
11213420), and the Science and Technology Development Fund, Macau
SAR (0022/2019/AKP).

ln L
Threshold

Y (pixels)

events (p=1)
events (p=-1)

T

T
X (pixels)

Figure 1. Left: A sketch of the working principle of event cameras (the detailed working principle is introduced in supplementary material). Events are produced asynchronously according to
the lightness (ln L) changes. Red and blue arrows represent positive and negative events, respectively. Right: The RGB image
captured from the traditional RGB camera (top) and event signals
in the original format produced from an event camera (bottom).

cameras hold advantages of low power consumption, high
response speed, and high dynamic range compared to traditional cameras [17]. How to tailor models for event data
with the particular format to perform core vision tasks, such
as object classification, has been a trending topic. Motivated by the huge success of learning-based methods on
vision tasks, developing data-driven approaches for event
data becomes a leading choice. For instance, many studies [5, 12, 19, 50, 51] resort to 2D convolutional neural networks (CNNs) by converting sparse events to dense frames.
These works achieve advanced performance utilizing wellpretrained 2D CNNs. Yet, the constructed dense representation and large size models sacrifice the sparsity of event data
(Fig. 2 (a)) while limiting the potential of event cameras on
mobile or wearable applications.
To exploit the sparsity of event data and build lowcomplexity models, recent researchers migrate learning
models initially designed for point clouds to event data,
such as the works [43, 47] migrate models from pointnetlike architecture [38] and the approaches [3, 31] utilize
graph neural networks. Although these approaches advance
in exploiting the sparsity advantage of event data, a fundamental question has never been investigated: Is point-wise

1172

