Smooth-Swap: A Simple Enhancement for Face-Swapping with Smoothness
Jiseob Kim1,2 , Jihoon Lee2 , Byoung-Tak Zhang1
1
Seoul National University, 2 Kakao Brain
jkim@bi.snu.ac.kr, jihoonlee.in@gmail.com, btzhang@bi.snu.ac.kr

Figure 1. Face-swapped images generated by our Smooth-Swap model. In the swapped images, the identities of the target images are
replaced with that of the source images. See the face-shape, hair, and mustache change in accordance with different sources.

Abstract
Face-swapping models have been drawing attention for
their compelling generation quality, but their complex architectures and loss functions often require careful tuning for successful training. We propose a new faceswapping model called ‘Smooth-Swap’, which excludes
complex handcrafted designs and allows fast and stable
training. The main idea of Smooth-Swap is to build smooth
identity embedding that can provide stable gradients for
identity change. Unlike the one used in previous models trained for a purely discriminative task, the proposed
embedding is trained with a supervised contrastive loss
promoting a smoother space. With improved smoothness,
Smooth-Swap suffices to be composed of a generic U-Netbased generator and three basic loss functions, a far simpler design compared with the previous models. Extensive
experiments on face-swapping benchmarks (FFHQ, FaceForensics++) and face images in the wild show that our
model is also quantitatively and qualitatively comparable
or even superior to the existing methods.

1. Introduction
Face swapping is a task to switch the person-identity of
a given face image with another, preserving other attributes
like facial expressions, head poses, and backgrounds. The
task has been highlighted for its wide use of real-world applications, such as anonymization in privacy protection and

the creation of new characters in the entertainment industry. With progress made over years [3, 6, 16, 21, 22, 28, 31,
33], state-of-the-art face-swapping models can generate a
swapped image of decent quality using a single shot of a
new source identity.
Despite the performance improvement, however, existing models usually adopt complex model architectures and
numerous loss functions to change face shape. Face shape is
a crucial component of identity, but changing it is a nontrivial task; it incurs a dramatic change of pixels, but no guidance can be given due to the inherent absence of the groundtruth swapped images. Thus, previous studies have focused
on using handcrafted components such as mask-based mixing [6] or 3D face-shape modeling [16, 31]. Although such
components are effective for changing shape and improving
the swapped-image quality, the models have added complexity of hyperparameters and loss functions that require
careful tuning for successful training.
In this study, we postulate that the approaches based on
handcrafted components are not the best way to resolve the
difficulty of face-swapping. We propose instead a new identity embedding model having improved smoothness, which
we assume to be related most to the gist of the problem. An
identity embedding model, or an embedder, plays a key role
during the training of the swapping model. It gives gradients for the generator, to which direction it has to tune to
change the identity. It is thus important the embedder has a
smooth space, since the gradients can be erroneous or noisy
otherwise. In our proposed model, Smooth-Swap, we con-

10779

