Think Global, Act Local: Dual-scale Graph Transformer for
Vision-and-Language Navigation
Shizhe Chen† , Pierre-Louis Guhur† , Makarand Tapaswi‡ , Cordelia Schmid† and Ivan Laptev†
†
Inria, École normale supérieure, CNRS, PSL Research University ‡ IIIT Hyderabad
https://cshizhe.github.io/projects/vln_duet.html

Instruction: “go into the
living room and water the
plant on the table.”

Observations
step 𝑡: panorama + GPS location

Topological Mapping
Graph
Update

b

map 𝑡-1

a

c

Global Action Planning
map 𝑡

f

Coarse-scale
Encoding

j

d

g

e

g

i

g

Panorama
Encoding

h

Dynamic
Fusion

Instruction
Fine-scale
Encoding

step 𝑡+1: panorama + GPS location
h

h

e

g

Local Actions

Shortest Route Planning

Environment

Next
Location

h

Figure 1. An agent is required to navigate in unseen environments to reach target locations according to language instructions. It only
obtains local observations of the environment and is allowed to make local actions, i.e., moving to neighboring locations. In this work,
and navigable
we propose to build topological maps on-the-fly to enable long-term action planning. The map contains visited nodes
nodes that can be reached from the previously visited nodes. Our method predicts global actions, i.e., all navigable nodes in the map,
and trades off complexity by combining a coarse-scale graph encoding with a fine-scale encoding
of observations at the current node .

Abstract
Following language instructions to navigate in unseen
environments is a challenging problem for autonomous embodied agents. The agent not only needs to ground languages in visual scenes, but also should explore the environment to reach its target. In this work, we propose a
dual-scale graph transformer (DUET) for joint long-term
action planning and fine-grained cross-modal understanding. We build a topological map on-the-fly to enable efficient exploration in global action space. To balance the
complexity of large action space reasoning and fine-grained
language grounding, we dynamically combine a fine-scale
encoding over local observations and a coarse-scale encoding on a global map via graph transformers. The proposed
approach, DUET, significantly outperforms state-of-the-art
methods on goal-oriented vision-and-language navigation
(VLN) benchmarks REVERIE and SOON. It also improves
the success rate on the fine-grained VLN benchmark R2R.

1. Introduction
Autonomous navigation is an essential ability for intelligent embodied agents. Given the convenience of natu-

ral language for human-machine interaction, autonomous
agents should also be able to understand and act according to human instructions. Towards this goal, Vision-andLanguage Navigation (VLN) [1] is a challenging problem
that has attracted a lot of recent research [2–9]. VLN requires an agent to follow language instructions and to navigate in unseen environments to reach a target location. Initial approaches to VLN [2–4] use fine-grained instructions
providing step-by-step navigation guidance such as “Walk
out of the bedroom. Turn right and walk down the hallway.
At the end of the hallway turn left. Walk in front of the couch
and stop”. This fine-grained VLN task enables grounding of
detailed instructions but is less practical due to the need of
step-by-step guidance. A more convenient interaction with
agents can be achieved by goal-oriented instructions [7, 8]
such as “Go into the living room and water the plant on
the table”. This task, however, is more challenging as it requires both the grounding of rooms and objects as well as
the efficient exploration of environments to reach the target.
In order to efficiently explore new areas, or correct previous decisions, an agent should keep track of already
executed instructions and visited locations in its memory. Many existing VLN approaches [2, 10–14] implement

16537

