A Style-aware Discriminator for Controllable Image Translation
Kunhee Kim Sanghun Park Eunyeong Jeon Taehun Kim Daijin Kim
Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH)
{kunkim,sanghunpark,eyjeon,taehoon1018,dkim}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
Current image-to-image translations do not control the
output domain beyond the classes used during training, nor
do they interpolate between different domains well, leading to implausible results. This limitation largely arises because labels do not consider the semantic distance. To mitigate such problems, we propose a style-aware discriminator
that acts as a critic as well as a style encoder to provide
conditions. The style-aware discriminator learns a controllable style space using prototype-based self-supervised
learning and simultaneously guides the generator. Experiments on multiple datasets verify that the proposed model
outperforms current state-of-the-art image-to-image translation methods. In contrast with current methods, the proposed approach supports various applications, including
style interpolation, content transplantation, and local image translation. The code is available at github.com/
kunheek/style-aware-discriminator.

1. Introduction
Image-to-image (I2I) translation aims to manipulate the
style of an existing image, where style refers to generic attributes that can be applied to any image in a dataset (e.g.,
texture or domain). Content generally refers to the remaining information, such as the pose and structure. This task
has shown significant progress with generative adversarial
network (GAN) [15] developments. Recent studies have expanded the functionality to multi-modal and multi-domains
using domain-specific discriminators and latent injection
[18], enabling the direct manipulation of existing images
using domain labels or reference images [10, 11, 31, 32, 40].
However, despite promising functionality advances,
there remains considerable room for development in terms
of controllability. For example, users can only control the
classes used for training. Although a reference image can
be used to control output but this can often lead to erroneous results, particularly for misrecognition within the
same class; and another common problem is inability to
fine-tune the output. Since the label space does not con-

sider the semantic distance between classes, the learned
style space cannot reflect these semantic distances, which
leads to unrealistic images when controlling the results by
manipulating the style code [32].
This study investigates I2I translation controllability, i.e.,
to be able to edit the result as desired using the style code,
without being limited to the previously defined label space.
The proposed model learns the style space using prototypebased self-supervised learning [6] with carefully chosen
augmentations. Although the current domain-specific discriminators are not designed for an external continuous
space, this is possible if the discriminator knows the style
internally. Therefore, we propose a Style-aware Discriminator, combining a style encoder and a discriminator into
a single module. Thus, the proposed model is somewhat
lighter by reducing one module and achieves better performance because of to the better representation space of the
discriminator. We used the style code sampled from prototypes during training to improve the controllability; and
feature-level and pixel-level reconstructions to improve the
consistency. Thus, the proposed model goes beyond image
translation to support various applications, including style
interpolation and content transplantation. Finally, we propose feedforward local image translation by exploiting spatial properties of the GAN feature space.
We evaluated the model on several challenging datasets:
Animal Faces HQ (AFHQ) [11], CelebA-HQ [22], LSUN
churches [41], Oxford-102 [34], and FlickrFaces-HQ
(FFHQ) [24]. Extensive experiments confirm that the proposed method outperforms current state-of-the-art models
in terms of both performance and efficiency without semantic annotations. The proposed model can also project an image into the latent space faster than baselines while achieving comparable reconstruction results.
The contributions from this study are summarized as follows: (i) We propose an integrated module for style encoding and adversarial losses for I2I translation, as well
as a data augmentation strategy for the style space. The
proposed method reduces the parameter count significantly
and does not require semantic annotations. (ii) We achieve
state-of-the-art results in truly unsupervised I2I translation

18239

