Progressive Minimal Path Method with Embedded CNN
Wei Liao
Independent Researcher
liaowei.post@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose Path-CNN, a method for the segmentation
of centerlines of tubular structures by embedding convolutional neural networks (CNNs) into the progressive minimal
path method. Minimal path methods are widely used for
topology-aware centerline segmentation, but usually these
methods rely on weak, hand-tuned image features. In contrast, CNNs use strong image features which are learned
automatically from images. But CNNs usually do not take
the topology of the results into account, and often require
a large amount of annotations for training. We integrate
CNNs into the minimal path method, so that both techniques
benefit from each other: CNNs employ learned image features to improve the determination of minimal paths, while
the minimal path method ensures the correct topology of the
segmented centerlines, provides strong geometric priors to
increase the performance of CNNs, and reduces the amount
of annotations for the training of CNNs significantly. Our
method has lower hardware requirements than many recent methods. Qualitative and quantitative comparison with
other methods shows that Path-CNN achieves better performance, especially when dealing with tubular structures with
complex shapes in challenging environments.

1. Introduction
Topology-aware centerline segmentation for tubular
structures plays a crucial role in computer vision. One of
its most important application areas is the quantitative analysis of roads and rivers in satellite images for measurement,
planning, or navigation. These are challenging tasks due to
the complex shape of roads and rivers, and the high variability of their environment.
When using common methods for object segmentation
for this task, usually a binary mask of the tubular structure
is computed in the first step. After that, post-processing, often based on heuristics, is necessary, in order to determine
the centerline and to deal with small gaps on the tubular
structure due to noise or image clutter. In contrast, minimal path methods based on Dijkstra’s algorithms [7] or

(a) Input image

(b) Segmented centerlines

Figure 1. Short cuts due to complex centerline geometry. (a) The
input is a satellite image of roads. (b) Start point (magenta box)
and end point (cyan circle) of a road are given. Results of a previous method using only hand-tuned tubularity measure (yellow
line) and two methods using CNNs (blue and green lines) contain
short cuts. Our approach achieves the correct centerline (red line),
although it is much longer than the results with short cuts.

the fast marching method [5] provide a more elegant solution. As in most minimal path methods, we assume that the
start point xs and end point xe of the centerline are given,
and focus on the determination of the path itself. Often,
the start and end points are automatically obtained using
application specific methods, such as [19]. Minimal path
methods allow finding the best path as the global optimum
of a cost function, while inherently enforcing strict linetopology, i.e., the result is always a sequence of coordinates
of points on the centerline. Also, small gaps on the path
can be completed automatically. However, minimal path
methods usually utilize hand-tuned image features, such as
differential measures [8, 13], to distinguish between tubular
structures and the background. Such features are efficient to
compute, but they are relatively weak and may lead to short
cuts for images containing challenging environments. With
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), stronger image features can be extracted automatically from images. Although
these features alone cannot ensure the topology of the centerlines, they can be used to better classifying the pixels and
thus improve the results of minimal path methods. How-

4514

