ETHSeg: An Amodel Instance Segmentation Network and a Real-world Dataset
for X-Ray Waste Inspection
Lingteng Qiu1,2,3

Zhangyang Xiong1,2

Guanying Chen1,2

Xuhao Wang2,3

Kenkun Liu2

Yihan Li2

Xiaoguang Han1,2 * Shuguang Cui1,2,3

1

2

The Future Network of Intelligence Institute, CUHK-Shenzhen
3
School of Science and Engineering, CUHK-Shenzhen
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data

Abstract
Waste inspection for packaged waste is an important step
in the pipeline of waste disposal. Previous methods either
rely on manual visual checking or RGB image-based inspection algorithm, requiring costly preparation procedures
(e.g., open the bag and spread the waste items). Moreover, occluded items are very likely to be left out. Inspired
by the fact that X-ray has a strong penetrating power to
see through the bag and overlapping objects, we propose
to perform waste inspection efficiently using X-ray images
without the need to open the bag. We introduce a novel
problem of instance-level waste segmentation in X-ray image for intelligent waste inspection, and contribute a real
dataset consisting of 5,038 X-ray images (totally 30,881
waste items) with high-quality annotations (i.e., waste categories, object boxes, and instance-level masks) as a benchmark for this problem. As existing segmentation methods
are mainly designed for natural images and cannot take advantage of the characteristics of X-ray waste images (e.g.,
heavy occlusions and penetration effect), we propose a new
instance segmentation method to explicitly take these image characteristics into account. Specifically, our method
adopts an easy-to-hard disassembling strategy to use high
confidence predictions to guide the segmentation of highly
overlapped objects, and a global structure guidance module
to better capture the complex contour information caused
by the penetration effect. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method. Our dataset
is released at WIXRayNet.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, people produce an increasing amount of
waste world-widely, which leads to great pressure for waste
* corresponding author, hanxiaoguang@cuhk.edu.cn

Figure 1. A closed waste bag is being scanned by an X-ray machine (left), producing the corresponding X-ray image (mid). The
contained waste items can be clearly seen from this image. The
figure at the right is the instance-level mask prediction of our
method for this X-ray image (best viewed in color)

disposal. Improper disposal could bring irreversible disasters to our ecosystem, including climate warming, soil
contamination, marine pollution, and so on. To reduce the
harmful impact caused by the increasing amount of waste,
it is urgent to develop an effective solution for proper waste
disposal. In the pipeline of waste disposal, inspection for
packaged garbage is a very important step as it can identify the categories and locations of waste items in the bag,
providing useful information for the following processes. In
the past, waste inspection is usually done by human workers
manually with low efficiency. And such close contact with
unknown waste increases the health risk to human workers.
To improve the efficiency and reduce human contact with
harmful waste, some researchers propose to use computer
vision methods (e.g., object detection) to identify misplaced
waste items using RGB images [11, 28, 34, 40]. However,
both the manual method and RGB image-based methods require garbage bags to be opened and waste items to be wellspread, bringing in costly preparation procedures. Also, it
is unlikely for these methods to identify heavily occluded
waste items.
Fortunately, we observed that X-rays have strong penetrating power that even completely occluded or buried ob12283

