DeltaCNN: End-to-End CNN Inference of Sparse Frame Differences in Videos
Mathias Parger1

Chengcheng Tang2 Christopher D. Twigg2 Cem Keskin2
Robert Wang2
Markus Steinberger1
1
Graz University of Technology, 2 Meta Reality Labs
1 {mathias.parger, steinberger}@icg.tugraz.at

2 {chengcheng.tang, cdtwigg, cemkeskin, rywang}@fb.com

Abstract
Convolutional neural network inference on video data
requires powerful hardware for real-time processing. Given
the inherent coherence across consecutive frames, large
parts of a video typically change little. By skipping identical image regions and truncating insignificant pixel updates,
computational redundancy can in theory be reduced significantly. However, these theoretical savings have been difficult
to translate into practice, as sparse updates hamper computational consistency and memory access coherence; which
are key for efficiency on real hardware. With DeltaCNN, we
present a sparse convolutional neural network framework
that enables sparse frame-by-frame updates to accelerate
video inference in practice. We provide sparse implementations for all typical CNN layers and propagate sparse feature updates end-to-end – without accumulating errors over
time. DeltaCNN is applicable to all convolutional neural
networks without retraining. To the best of our knowledge,
we are the first to significantly outperform the dense reference, cuDNN, in practical settings, achieving speedups of up
to 7x with only marginal differences in accuracy. Our CUDA
kernels and PyTorch extensions can be found at https:
//github.com/facebookresearch/DeltaCNN .

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNN) are the state-ofthe-art method for many image understanding tasks such as
object detection, segmentation and pose estimation. Compared to multi-layer perceptrons, they require fewer parameters by spatially sharing parameters and perform better on
image understanding tasks. However, to address the increasing complexity of datasets and tasks, CNNs have grown to
hundreds of convolutional layers requiring tens of billions
of floating point operations (FLOPs).
In the last few years, researchers have found many ways
to lower the cost of convolutional layers: Depth-wise separable convolutions [28], optimizing the ratio between pixels,

channels and layer count [30], quantization [14,20,22], pruning [13, 18] and specialized hardware [5, 6, 12], to name a
few. While these methods achieve a significant improvement
in general purpose inference, there still is strong interest to
further reduce the computational cost of CNNs, particularly
for real-time applications on mobile devices.
Recently, researchers started to exploit the temporal similarity commonly seen in surveillance cameras, license plate
recognition cameras or webcams [1, 3, 9, 11, 16, 19, 23, 24,
27, 33, 34]. These applications often use CNNs on video
input from fixed cameras, where high frame-to-frame similarity offers an orthogonal direction to reduce computational
complexity. State-of-the art frameworks for CNNs process
each frame individually and therefore are not able to exploit
frame-to-frame similarity. By reusing the results from previous frames in unchanged regions, the computational cost
can theoretically be reduced greatly [1, 3, 11, 24] without
reduction in accuracy. Furthermore, small and insignificant
updates can be truncated to retain a high level of sparsity
in activation throughout all layers of the CNN with only
marginal differences in the final output [11, 24].
While researchers have shown that truncating small
changes increases the sparsity and thereby reduces FLOPs
theoretically, leveraging data sparsity efficiently to speed up
inference with actual hardware remains an unsolved challenge. Since parallel SIMD devices, like GPUs, are typically
used for CNN inference due to the advantage in operations
per watt and memory bandwidth, it is necessary to evaluate
the real-word speedup of sparse neural networks on such
devices. Specialized inference hardware as well as GPUs
are less efficient for excessive conditional statements than
CPUs and suffer under less structured memory access, both
conditions that naturally arise when processing sparse activations in neural networks. Thus, previous research results on
sparse activation in CNNs do not translate to high speedup
numbers in practice.
In this paper, we present the first fully sparse CNN,
DeltaCNN, working on and optimized for GPUs. Our implementation translates potential savings of sparse activation

12497

