GridShift: A Faster Mode-seeking Algorithm for Image Segmentation and
Object Tracking
Abhishek Kumar1 , Oladayo S. Ajani1 , Swagatam Das2 , and Rammohan Mallipeddi1, *
Department of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 37224, South Korea
2
Electronics and Communication Sciences Unit, Indian Statistical Institute Kolkata 700108, India

1

abhishek.kumar.eee13@itbhu.ac.in, oladayosolomon@gmail.com,
swagatamdas19@yahoo.co.in, mallipeddi.ram@gmail.com

Abstract
In machine learning and computer vision, mean shift
(MS) qualiﬁes as one of the most popular mode-seeking algorithms used for clustering and image segmentation. It
iteratively moves each data point to the weighted mean of
its neighborhood data points. The computational cost required to ﬁnd the neighbors of each data point is quadratic
to the number of data points. Consequently, the vanilla
MS appears to be very slow for large-scale datasets. To
address this issue, we propose a mode-seeking algorithm
called GridShift, with signiﬁcant speedup and principally
based on MS. To accelerate, GridShift employs a grid-based
approach for neighbor search, which is linear in the number
of data points. In addition, GridShift moves the active grid
cells (grid cells associated with at least one data point) in
place of data points towards the higher density, a step that
provides more speedup. The runtime of GridShift is linear in
the number of active grid cells and exponential in the number of features. Therefore, it is ideal for large-scale lowdimensional applications such as object tracking and image
segmentation. Through extensive experiments, we showcase
the superior performance of GridShift compared to other
MS-based as well as state-of-the-art algorithms in terms
of accuracy and runtime on benchmark datasets for image
segmentation. Finally, we provide a new object-tracking algorithm based on GridShift and show promising results for
object tracking compared to CamShift and meanshift++.

1. Introduction
Mean Shift (MS) is a non-parametric, iterative modeseeking algorithm for cluster analysis. The well established
ability of MS to detect clusters effectively has placed it at
the center of several computer vision applications such as
unsupervised image and video segmentation [18, 19, 21, 22,
28], object tracking [7,15,17], and image processing [3,4].
* Corresponding Author

MS does not need the number of clusters to be speciﬁed beforehand. Moreover, it also makes no prior assumption on
the probability distribution of the data points. Because of
such attributes, MS is often preferred over other popular and
application-speciﬁc algorithms such as k-meanss [12, 27],
Spectral clustering [10], Felzenszwalb [8], and simple linear iterative clustering (SLIC) [1]. However, the iterative process in MS is computationally expensive since the
asymptotic or bounded behavior of each iteration is of the
O(n2 ) order. In other words, the computational complexity
required for ﬁnding neighborhood data points for each point
is quadratic to the number of data points. Despite its superior performance in image segmentation, this high computational cost limits the application of MS to high-resolution
image segmentation. To address this issue, we put forth an
extended variant of MS, named GridShift (GS), with a time
complexity that is linear to the number of data points and
exponential to the number of features (dimension of data
points).
A popular color-based object tracking algorithm,
CamShift (CS) [2, 5], was derived from the MS algorithm. Although it qualiﬁed as a popular unsupervised object tracking procedure, CS has a few major drawbacks
which limit its applicability to real-world tracking problems. The main disadvantage is that it only utilized the
peak of the back-projected probability distribution. Consequently, it cannot distinguish objects with similar colors
and it suffers from tracking failure caused by similar colored objects around the searching window [14]. The other
issue is that CS often utilizes only one reference histogram
due to computational burden. As a result, changing appearance or lighting conditions affect the tracking performance
of CS and it often fails to track the object. In this work, we
develop a new object-tracking algorithm based on the GS
algorithm by addressing these two issues.
In MS++ [14] and α-MS++ [20], the data space is partitioned into grids, where each data point is associated with

8131

