Correlation-Aware Deep Tracking
Fei Xie † *, Chunyu Wang ‡ , Guangting Wang ‡ , Yue Cao ‡ , Wankou Yang † ,Wenjun Zeng ‡
†
Southeast University, China
‡
Microsoft Research Asia
jaffe0319@gmail.com, chnuwa@microsoft.com, flylight@mail.ustc.edu.cn
yuecao@microsoft.com, wkyang@seu.edu.cn, wezeng@microsoft.com

Abstract

SBT-large

71

SBT-base

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking (VOT) is a long-standing topic in
computer vision. There are two fundamental yet competing
goals in VOT: on one hand, it needs to recognize the target
undergoing large appearance variations; on the other hand,
it needs to filter out the distractors in the background which
may be very similar to the target.
Most appearance-based approaches address this challenge in two perspectives: the first is to learn a more expressive feature embedding space by Siamese-like extraction
* Work performed when Fei Xie was an intern of MSRA

69

Average Overlap (%)

Robustness and discrimination power are two fundamental requirements in visual object tracking. In most tracking
paradigms, we find that the features extracted by the popular Siamese-like networks cannot fully discriminatively
model the tracked targets and distractor objects, hindering them from simultaneously meeting these two requirements. While most methods focus on designing robust correlation operations, we propose a novel target-dependent
feature network inspired by the self-/cross-attention scheme.
In contrast to the Siamese-like feature extraction, our network deeply embeds cross-image feature correlation in multiple layers of the feature network. By extensively matching
the features of the two images through multiple layers, it is
able to suppress non-target features, resulting in instancevarying feature extraction. The output features of the search
image can be directly used for predicting target locations
without extra correlation step. Moreover, our model can
be flexibly pre-trained on abundant unpaired images, leading to notably faster convergence than the existing methods.
Extensive experiments show our method achieves the stateof-the-art results while running at real-time. Our feature
networks also can be applied to existing tracking pipelines
seamlessly to raise the tracking performance.

STARK-CA
SBT-small

67

TransT

STARK-s50

DualTFR

DiMP-CA

SiamFCpp-CA

65

STARK-st101

PrDiMP-50

63

SBT-light
DiMP-50

61

SiamFCpp

Ocean

59
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Model parameter (M)

35

40

45

50

Figure 1. Comparison with the state-of-the-arts on GOT-10k [19].
We visualize the AO performance with respect to the model size.
All reported trackers follow the official GOT-10k test protocol.
Our SBT tracker achieves superior results while multiple trackers
(with suffix “CA”) can benefit from our correlation-aware features.

network [22,58]; the second is to develop a more robust correlation operation, such as Siamese cropping [23,58], online
filter learning [3, 18] and Transformer-based fusion [5, 50].
Since the modern backbones [17, 34] become the mainstream choice in deep era, most trackers devote to the correlation operation, hoping to discriminate targets from distractors given their features. Despite their great success, few
of these tracking paradigms notice that the two competing
goals may put the feature network into a target-distractor
dilemma, bringing much difficulties to the correlation step.
The underlying reasons are three folds: 1) The Siamese encoding process is unaware of the template and search images, which weakens the instance-level discrimination of
learned embeddings. 2) There is no explicit modelling for
the backbone to learn the decision boundary that separates
the two competing goals, leading to a sub-optimal embedding space. 3) Each training video only annotates one single object while arbitrary objects including distractors can
be tracked during inference. This gap is further enlarged by
2). Our key insight is that feature extraction should have dynamic instance-varying behaviors to generate “appropriate”

8751

