HINT: Hierarchical Neuron Concept Explainer
Andong Wang, Wei-Ning Lee, Xiaojuan Qi
The University of Hong Kong
wangad@connect.hku.hk, wnlee@eee.hku.hk, xjqi@eee.hku.hk

Abstract
To interpret deep networks, one main approach is to
associate neurons with human-understandable concepts.
However, existing methods often ignore the inherent connections of different concepts (e.g., dog and cat both belong
to animals), and thus lose the chance to explain neurons responsible for higher-level concepts (e.g., animal). In this
paper, we study hierarchical concepts inspired by the hierarchical cognition process of human beings. To this end, we
propose HIerarchical Neuron concepT explainer (HINT) to
effectively build bidirectional associations between neurons
and hierarchical concepts in a low-cost and scalable manner. HINT enables us to systematically and quantitatively
study whether and how the implicit hierarchical relationships of concepts are embedded into neurons. Specifically,
HINT identifies collaborative neurons responsible for one
concept and multimodal neurons pertinent to different concepts, at different semantic levels from concrete concepts
(e.g., dog) to more abstract ones (e.g., animal). Finally, we
verify the faithfulness of the associations using Weakly Supervised Object Localization, and demonstrate its applicability in various tasks, such as discovering saliency regions
and explaining adversarial attacks. Code is available on
https://github.com/AntonotnaWang/HINT.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have attained remarkable success
in many computer vision and machine learning tasks. However, it is still challenging to interpret the hidden neurons
in a human-understandable manner, which is of great significance in uncovering the reasoning process of deep networks and increasing the trustworthiness of deep learning
to humans [3, 31, 61].
Early research focuses on finding evidence from input data to explain deep model predictions [4, 10, 29, 33,
34, 48, 51, 52, 54–57, 64], where the neurons remain unexplained. More recent efforts have attempted to associate hidden neurons with human-understandable concepts
[7–9,11,23,44,45,67,68,71,72]. Although insightful inter-

pretations of neurons’ semantics have been demonstrated,
i.e., identification of the neurons controlling contents of
trees [8], existing methods define the concepts in an ad-hoc
manner which heavily relies on human annotations, such as
manual visual inspection [11, 44, 45, 72], manually labeled
classification categories [23], or hand-crafted guidance images [7–9, 71]. They thus suffer from heavy costs and scalability issues. Moreover, existing methods often ignore the
inherent connections among different concepts (e.g., dog
and cat both belong to mammal), and treat them independently, which therefore loses the chance to discover neurons
responsible for implicit higher-level concepts (e.g., canine,
mammal, and animal) and explore whether the network can
create abstractions of things like our humans do.
The above motivates us to rethink how concepts should
be defined to more faithfully reveal the roles of hidden neurons. We draw inspirations from the hierarchical cognition
process of human beings– human tend to organize things
from specific to general categories [37, 47, 60]– and propose to explore hierarchical concepts which can be harvested from WordNet [39] (a lexical database of semantic
relations between words). We investigate whether deep networks can automatically learn the hierarchical relationships
of categories that were not labeled in the training data. More
concretely, we aim to identify neurons for both low-level
concepts such as Malamute, Husky, and Persian cat, and
the implicit higher-level concepts such as dog and animal
as shown in Figure 1 (a). Note that we call less abstract
concepts low-level and more abstract concepts high-level.
To this end, we develop HIerarchical Neuron concepT
explainer (HINT), which builds a bidirectional association
between neurons and hierarchical concepts (see Figure 1).
First, we develop a saliency-guided approach to identify the
high dimensional representations associated with the hierarchical concepts on hidden layers (noted as responsible
regions in Figure 1 (b)), making HINT low-cost and scalable as no extra hand-crafted guidance is required. Then,
we train classifiers shown in Figure 1 (c) to separate different concepts’ responsible regions, where the weights represent the contribution of the corresponding neuron to the
classification. Based on the classifiers, we design a Shap-

10254

