Why Discard if You can Recycle?:
A Recycling Max Pooling Module for 3D Point Cloud Analysis
Jiajing Chen, Burak Kakillioglu, Huantao Ren, Senem Velipasalar
Syracuse University, Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Dept., Syracuse, NY, USA
{jchen152, bkakilli, hren11, svelipas}@syr.edu *

Point Feature Aggregation and Learning

Abstract
In recent years, most 3D point cloud analysis models
have focused on developing either new network architectures or more efficient modules for aggregating point features from a local neighborhood. Regardless of the network
architecture or the methodology used for improved feature
learning, these models share one thing, which is the use of
max-pooling in the end to obtain permutation invariant features. We first show that this traditional approach causes
only a fraction of 3D points contribute to the permutationinvariant features, and discards the rest of the points. In
order to address this issue and improve the performance of
any baseline 3D point classification or segmentation model,
we propose a new module, referred to as the Recycling MaxPooling (RMP) module, to recycle and utilize the features
of some of the discarded points. We incorporate a refinement loss that uses the recycled features to refine the prediction loss obtained from the features kept by traditional
max-pooling. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
work that explores recycling of still useful points that are
traditionally discarded by max-pooling. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed RMP module by incorporating it into several milestone baselines and state-of-the-art
networks for point cloud classification and indoor semantic
segmentation tasks. We show that RPM, without any bells
and whistles, consistently improves the performance of all
the tested networks by using the same base network implementation and hyper-parameters. The code is provided in
the supplementary material.

1. Introduction
3D point cloud data analysis has a wide range of application areas, including autonomous driving, robotics, and
* The information, data, or work presented herein was funded in part by
National Science Foundation under Grant 1816732 and by the Advanced
Research Projects Agency-Energy (ARPA-E), U.S. Department of Energy,
under Award Number DE-AR0000940. The views and opinions of authors expressed herein do not necessarily state or reflect those of the United
States Government or any agency thereof.

N Points
Layer 1
Segmentation

Layer 2

Permutation Invariant
Feature

Layer k
Utilized N1 Points Feature
Max Pooling

Point Feature Matrix
NxM

M

Classification

Ignored N2 Points Feature
Discarded

Utilized Feature

Missed Feature

Figure 1. Motivation. In most point-based models, after several
layers of neighbor feature aggregation and learning, an N × M
feature matrix is obtained, where N is the number of points and
M is each point’s dimension. Max-pooling is performed at the
end to obtain permutation-invariant features. Max-pooling keeps
features from only part of the points (red boxes), while discarding
some points’ features entirely (all purple rows).

simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM). With the
ever-increasing availability of 3D sensors, deep learningbased 3D point cloud processing has made significant
strides over the past few years. However, different from
2D structured image data, 3D point cloud data is a set of
unordered points, and has varying cardinality. Thus, traditional Convolution Neural Networks (CNNs) cannot be
readily applied to 3D point cloud data.
PointNet [12] is a pioneering 3D point cloud analysis work using end-to-end deep learning. It employs
max-pooling operation as a symmetric function to obtain
permutation-invariant features from 3D point clouds. Each
point is processed independently by a shared multilayer perceptron (MLP), which does not account for local relationship of neighboring points. To remedy this, later works proposed other network structures or improved point feature
aggregation approaches [13, 14, 22, 24, 27], while still employing the same max pooling operation. However, as the
point feature aggregation module becomes more complex,
the computational cost of the whole network increases,

559

N

