Fast and Unsupervised Action Boundary Detection for Action Segmentation
Zexing Du, Xue Wang, Guoqing Zhou, Qing Wang
School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, China
peel_cucumbe

Abstract

1. Introduction
There are tera-bytes of videos uploaded to cloud or edge
storage to be processed every day. Efficiently analyzing
the contents of these untrimmed videos is a nontrivial step
towards real-world deployment, which has a great range
of applications from video retrieval to surveillance analysis [9, 27, 33, 46]. Tremendous progress has recently been
made on supervised action segmentation due to the introduction of large-scale datasets and the development of deep
neural networks [12, 21, 26, 43]. However, building fully
supervised learning models requires manual data labeling,
which is slow, expensive and error-prone. Thus unsupervised action segmentation has gained great popularity.
Due to the temporal coherence of videos, when segmenting actions from a long, untrimmed video, human beings
would pay primary attention to detecting action boundaries,

cut_tomato

Similarity of 𝒈𝒈𝑡𝑡 and 𝒈𝒈𝑡𝑡+1

Similarity

To deal with the great number of untrimmed videos produced every day, we propose an efficient unsupervised action segmentation method by detecting boundaries, named
action boundary detection (ABD). In particular, the proposed method has the following advantages: no training
stage and low-latency inference. To detect action boundaries, we estimate the similarities across smoothed frames,
which inherently have the properties of internal consistency
within actions and external discrepancy across actions. Under this circumstance, we successfully transfer the boundary detection task into the change point detection based on
the similarity. Then, non-maximum suppression (NMS) is
conducted in local windows to select the smallest points as
candidate boundaries. In addition, a clustering algorithm is
followed to refine the initial proposals. Moreover, we also
extend ABD to the online setting, which enables real-time
action segmentation in long untrimmed videos. By evaluating on four challenging datasets, our method achieves stateof-the-art performance. Moreover, thanks to the efficiency
of ABD, we achieve the best trade-off between the accuracy
and the inference time compared with existing unsupervised
approaches.

cut_cucumber

Change point
𝑏𝑏1

𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎1

𝑏𝑏2

𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎2

𝑏𝑏3

𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎3

𝑏𝑏4

Figure 1. The overview of our method. gt represents the smoothed
feature for the t-th frame, and bi the i-th detected boundary. We
observe that the calculated frame-wise similarities based on the
smoothed frame features for individual action instance take a “⊓”shaped curve. Action boundaries can be directly pinpointed by
detecting change points along the similarity curve.

and take the frames between adjacent temporal boundaries
as an action instance. Building on this insight, we propose an efficient and effective unsupervised action segmentation method by detecting action boundaries, dubbed action boundary detection (ABD). The overview of the proposed method is illustrated in Figure 1.
Motivated by the Canny detector [6] in image processing
and the segmentation method [18] in time series, we propose a bottom-up action segmentation method. For action
segmentation, the ideal features should be consistent within
an action and inconsistent across different actions. However, due to the occlusion, changing viewpoint or lighting,
the features within an action may fail to maintain strictly
consistent as expected. Therefore, we first utilize a smoothing filter on original features to dilute the effect of noise.
Moreover, different from the Canny detector that finds intensity gradients of images, we pinpoint temporal action
boundary proposals based on the similarity between adjacent frames. Then, we adopt non-maximum suppression
(NMS) inside local windows and select smallest points as
initial candidate action boundaries. In addition, we introduce a bottom-up method to refine initial segmentation results based on semantic segment-wise similarity.
There have been several attempts to detect action boundaries by stacking complicated neural networks or generating
less-relevant pseudo labels [11,17,32,48]. Directly depend-

3323

