LMGP: Lifted Multicut Meets Geometry Projections for Multi-Camera
Multi-Object Tracking
Duy M. H. Nguyen1,4 , Roberto Henschel2 , Bodo Rosenhahn2 , Daniel Sonntag3,4 , Paul Swoboda 1
1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, 2 Institute for Information Processing, Leibniz University Hannover
3

Oldenburg University 4 German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence, Saarbrücken

Abstract
Multi-Camera Multi-Object Tracking is currently drawing attention in the computer vision field due to its superior performance in real-world applications such as video
surveillance with crowded scenes or in wide spaces. In this
work, we propose a mathematically elegant multi-camera
multiple object tracking approach based on a spatialtemporal lifted multicut formulation. Our model utilizes
state-of-the-art tracklets produced by single-camera trackers as proposals. As these tracklets may contain ID-Switch
errors, we refine them through a novel pre-clustering obtained from 3D geometry projections. As a result, we
derive a better tracking graph without ID switches and
more precise affinity costs for the data association phase.
Tracklets are then matched to multi-camera trajectories by
solving a global lifted multicut formulation that incorporates short and long-range temporal interactions on tracklets located in the same camera as well as inter-camera
ones. Experimental results on the WildTrack dataset yield
near-perfect performance, outperforming state-of-the-art
trackers on Campus while being on par on the PETS-09
dataset. We will release our implementations at this link
https://github.com/nhmduy/LMGP.

1. Introduction
Multiple object tracking (MOT), i.e., extracting motions
of objects moving through a scene, is a fundamental primitive for high-level understanding information in videos.
The most common approach to MOT is the tracking-byassignment paradigm, in which first detection boxes are
computed for the objects of interest in each timeframe, and
second, a data association is performed by linking detections of the same objects to each other. In the most popular
setting, a single camera faces a scene and the data association links detections in different timeframes to each other
[1, 3, 9, 43]. However, even though a large body of research
has been devoted to MOT with a single camera, large and

Figure 1. Multi-camera tracking with four overlapping cameras.
A target object (red rectangle) is occluded at Cam 3 but is still observed at Cam 1, Cam 2, and Cam 4. Taking this correspondence
into account (red arrow), we can recover a missing bounding box
at Cam 3 (red dashed arrow).

crowded scenes still cannot be tracked faithfully, and errors
occur mainly in the data association step. These errors most
often are caused by partial visibility (or even occlusion) and
indistinguishability of objects.
One possibility of improving performance has been to
use multiple cameras facing the same scene but from different angles (Figure 1). In this setting, partial visibility
and indistinguishability are less severe since an object may
be occluded in a single camera but may still be fully observed by another camera. Leveraging this property, recent
papers have pursued two principal approaches: single viewbased and centralized representation methods. In the first
strategy [16, 28, 33, 45], a two-step procedure is followed:
1) generating local tracklets of all the targets within each
camera; 2) matching local tracklets that belong to the same
target across cameras through computing affinity costs and
using a global optimization framework. While this framework brings benefits via a reduced hypothesis space and allows to design motion-based features, its main drawbacks
lie in ID-Switch errors contained inside local tracklets, i.e.,
detections of distinct objects are grouped into the same trajectory (Figure 3a). As a result, these errors will propagate throughout the tracking graph, affecting the total performance. The centralized representation approach [47, 49]

8866

