Semantic Segmentation by Early Region Proxy
Yifan Zhang Bo Pang Cewu Lu*
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{zhangyf_sjtu, pangbo, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Semantic segmentation is one of the fundamental tasks in
computer vision, and has been carried out using CNNs since
the beginning of the deep learning era [10,17,21,27]. However, CNN is not the out-of-the-box solution for semantic
segmentation considering two of its natures: 1) Limited context. CNN lacks of abilities to capture long range dependencies for context modeling, which is essential for semantic
segmentation. 2) Coarse prediction. Due to its hierarchical nature, CNN outputs coarse feature which is inadequate
for dense labeling. Fundamentally, the majority of semantic
* Cewu Lu is corresponding author, member of Qing Yuan Research
Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, China and Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute.

pixel-wise features

regions

...

1. Introduction

...

Typical vision backbones manipulate structured features. As a compromise, semantic segmentation has long
been modeled as per-point prediction on dense regular
grids. In this work, we present a novel and efficient modeling that starts from interpreting the image as a tessellation
of learnable regions, each of which has flexible geometrics
and carries homogeneous semantics. To model region-wise
context, we exploit Transformer to encode regions in a
sequence-to-sequence manner by applying multi-layer
self-attention on the region embeddings, which serve as
proxies of specific regions. Semantic segmentation is now
carried out as per-region prediction on top of the encoded
region embeddings using a single linear classifier, where
a decoder is no longer needed. The proposed RegProxy
model discards the common Cartesian feature layout and
operates purely at region level. Hence, it exhibits the most
competitive performance-efficiency trade-off compared
with the conventional dense prediction methods. For
example, on ADE20K, the small-sized RegProxy-S/16 outperforms the best CNN model using 25% parameters and
4% computation, while the largest RegProxy-L/16 achieves
52.9 mIoU which outperforms the state-of-the-art by 2.1%
with fewer resources. Codes and models are available at
https://github.com/YiF-Zhang/RegionProxy.

region-wise correspondence

Transformer

dense correspondence

Abstract

tokens

Figure 1. Illustration of two different schemes for semantic segmentation. (Left) Conventional encoder-decoder models establish dense correspondence between input and output on structured
pixel-level grid, and segment image in a per-pixel prediction fashion. (Right) We propose to interpret the image as a tessellation
of learnable regions and represent it by region-level embeddings
(i.e., proxies) at an early stage, and segment image by per-region
prediction using sequence-to-sequence Transformer [11, 41].

segmentation researches since FCN [27] have been centring
on resolving these two issues. A great number of works
have been proposed for better context modeling [19, 50–52]
and fine-grained feature prediction [6, 34, 43], which significantly advance the semantic segmentation research.
Currently, the Transformer architecture [41] from natural
language processing is introduced to the the vision community and has gained significant research interest. The Vision Transformer (ViT) [11] partitions image into square
patches and encodes their embeddings (i.e., tokens) in a
sequence-to-sequence manner using stacked self-attention
layers. Some of its variants [26, 44] adopt a hierarchical
structure and restrict self-attention in local area for better scalability. Recently, several semantic segmentation
works [38, 48, 53] adopt vision Transformers as backbone
and achieve impressive performances. They learn better
context with the help of the inherent advantages of vision
Transformers, namely the attention mechanism. However,
in these models, the vision Transformer serves transparently
as feature extractor which extracts 2D coarse features exactly as its convolutional counterpart does, while its main
character, a sequence-to-sequence encoder, is not touched.
We revisit the aforementioned two issues: limited context and coarse prediction. While the former is a corollary

1258

