Bayesian Invariant Risk Minimization
Hao Wang2
Hanze Dong1 *
Yong Lin1 *
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{ylindf,hdongaj}@ust.hk

Abstract
Generalization under distributional shift is an open challenge for machine learning. Invariant Risk Minimization
(IRM) is a promising framework to tackle this issue by extracting invariant features. However, despite the potential
and popularity of IRM, recent works have reported negative results of it on deep models. We argue that the failure can be primarily attributed to deep models’ tendency
to overfit the data. Specifically, our theoretical analysis
shows that IRM degenerates to empirical risk minimization
(ERM) when overfitting occurs. Our empirical evidence
also provides supports: IRM methods that work well in typical settings significantly deteriorate even if we slightly enlarge the model size or lessen the training data. To alleviate this issue, we propose Bayesian Invariant Risk Minimization (BIRM) by introducing Bayesian inference into
the IRM. The key motivation is to estimate the penalty of
IRM based on the posterior distribution of classifiers (as
opposed to a single classifier), which is much less prone to
overfitting. Extensive experimental results on four datasets
demonstrate that BIRM consistently outperforms the existing IRM baselines significantly.

1. Introduction
The past decade has witnessed a great success of machine learning technology, boosting the development in
computer vision [25, 30], speech recognition [23] and many
other areas [6, 19, 35, 55, 56]. However, more in-depth studies have recently revealed the failure of these models due to
the existence of spurious features or shortcuts [7,14,20,53];
[7] raised an example: models could rely on the background
(pastures or deserts) to distinguish cows and camels. In this
case, background, a spurious feature, is non-invariant and
can change arbitrarily in different domains.
The common foundation of machine learning based on
the i.i.d (independent and identically distributed) assumption does not always hold. The Empirical Risk Minimiza* Equal contribution. This work is supported by GRF 16201320.
† Jointly with Google Research

Tong Zhang1†
2
Rutgers University

hw488@cs.rutgers.edu

tion (ERM) based models can deteriorate dramatically if the
testing distribution is different from the training one. This
is also known as the out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization problem. To relax the i.i.d. assumption, [39] propose
to exploit the “invariance principle” to obtain a better OOD
generalization ability. The invariance principle aims to utilize invariant features that are stable even in the case of distributional shifts. In the aforementioned cow and camel example [7], the shape of the animal is an invariant feature.
Invariant Risk Minimization (IRM) [4] extends the invariance principle to neural networks. Specifically, IRM
considers that training data is collected from multiple environments (domains) and the correlation of spurious features
with the labels differs in different environments while the
correlation of invariant ones remain stable. IRM regularizes neural networks to extract invariant features and discard
spurious features. Hopefully, the model relying on invariant
features only can generalize to unseen environments well.
IRM has gained its popularity for its potential and inspires a line of excellent works [1–3,11,31,40,49,54]. IRM
is guaranteed to identify the invariant features given enough
environments with linear model [4, 40]. However, recent
empirical findings in [24, 33] indicate the ineffectiveness of
IRM methods on deep models. We argue that this failure
can be mainly attributed to deep models’ tendency to overfit data. From a theoretical perspective, we show that IRM
can ultimately degenerate to ERM when overfitting occurs.
The theoretical findings are verified by extensive empirical
evidence: (1) the model trained by ERM can also minimize
IRM penalty (Section 3.3); (2) IRM-trained model can still
contain spurious features while the IRM penalty vanishes
(Section 5); (3) the IRM methods deteriorate quickly with
an enlarged model or lessened data (Section 5).
Motivated by both the theoretical and empirical findings,
we propose Bayesian Invariant Risk Minimization (BIRM)
as a Bayesian treatment [8] of IRM to substantially alleviate
overfitting, making IRM practical in deep models. Suppose
the prediction model consists of a feature extractor and a
classifier [16, 17]. Given the learned feature representation,
BIRM estimates the posterior distribution of the classifier
(as opposed to a single classifier) for each environment. If

16021

