Cross-modal Clinical Graph Transformer for Ophthalmic Report Generation
Mingjie Li1,5

Wenjia Cai2
Karin Verspoor3
Shirui Pan1
Xiaodan Liang4
Xiaojun Chang5 *
1
Department of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, Monash University
2
State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-Sen University
3
School of Computing Technologies, RMIT University
4
School of ISE, Sun Yat-Sen University, Peng Cheng National Lab
5
ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney

Abstract
Automatic generation of ophthalmic reports using datadriven neural networks has great potential in clinical practice. When writing a report, ophthalmologists make inferences with prior clinical knowledge. This knowledge has
been neglected in prior medical report generation methods. To endow models with the capability of incorporating expert knowledge, we propose a Cross-modal clinical
Graph Transformer (CGT) for ophthalmic report generation (ORG), in which clinical relation triples are injected
into the visual features as prior knowledge to drive the decoding procedure. However, two major common Knowledge Noise (KN) issues may affect models’ effectiveness.
1) Existing general biomedical knowledge bases such as the
UMLS may not align meaningfully to the specific context
and language of the report, limiting their utility for knowledge injection. 2) Incorporating too much knowledge may
divert the visual features from their correct meaning. To
overcome these limitations, we design an automatic information extraction scheme based on natural language processing to obtain clinical entities and relations directly from
in-domain training reports. Given a set of ophthalmic images, our CGT first restores a sub-graph from the clinical graph and injects the restored triples into visual features. Then visible matrix is employed during the encoding procedure to limit the impact of knowledge. Finally,
reports are predicted by the encoded cross-modal features
via a Transformer decoder. Extensive experiments on the
large-scale FFA-IR benchmark demonstrate that the proposed CGT is able to outperform previous benchmark methods and achieve state-of-the-art performances.

1. Introduction
Fundus Fluorescein Angiography (FFA) is one of the essential ophthalmic imaging examinations in clinical prac* Corresponding author.

tice. However, writing reports to summarize findings from
dozens of ophthalmic images during an examination is
time-consuming and error-prone, especially for inexperienced ophthalmologists. With the success of data-driven
neural networks [11, 19, 22, 25, 42] in many real-life scenarios, researchers and ophthalmologists start to investigate
how to apply artificial intelligent (AI) models in clinical
ophthalmic practice and acquire significant achievements
[3]. Automatic generation of ophthalmic reports offers the
possibility of reducing the heavy workloads of ophthalmologists. Furthermore, the predicted reports can highlight abnormalities for the ophthalmologists and provide a rationale for disease diagnosis; hence, automatic ophthalmic report generation has attracted increasing research interest for
AI-based clinical decision support, as well as presenting a
meaningful opportunity to explore the integration of vision
and language modalities in neural network models.
Despite significant progress in generic image captioning models [2, 8], when transferring them into medical
knowledge-driven tasks, they fail to achieve promising and
competitive performance due to a lack of prior medical
knowledge. When describing ophthalmic images, ordinary
people can only recognize the common visual information,
such as the shape and color, while ophthalmologists make
inferences with their prior clinical knowledge. For models
to achieve this capability, recent work explores the incorporation of medical knowledge to enhance diagnostic models [20, 23, 26, 41].
On the one hand, researchers [20, 23] have explored
graph structure weights as posterior knowledge to alleviate the textual bias. In each graph, the nodes are observed
abnormalities selected from prior knowledge, such as external medical corpus, and the edges are the predicted weights
correlating each pair abnormalities. However, the weight
graph limits the effectiveness of the knowledge graph from
two aspects. Firstly, some entities are extracted from the
external medical corpus or knowledge graph database separated from the training corpus. These entities will bring in a

20656

