A Differentiable Two-stage Alignment Scheme for Burst Image
Reconstruction with Large Shift

1

Shi Guo1 Xi Yang1 Jianqi Ma1 Gaofeng Ren2 Lei Zhang1
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University; 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
{shiguo.guo,xxxxi.yang,jianqi.ma}@connect.polyu.hk,
gaof.ren@gmail.com, cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Denoising and demosaicking are two essential steps to
reconstruct a clean full-color image from the raw data. Recently, joint denoising and demosaicking (JDD) for burst
images, namely JDD-B, has attracted much attention by using multiple raw images captured in a short time to reconstruct a single high-quality image. One key challenge of
JDD-B lies in the robust alignment of image frames. Stateof-the-art alignment methods in feature domain cannot effectively utilize the temporal information of burst images,
where large shifts commonly exist due to camera and object motion. In addition, the higher resolution (e.g., 4K)
of modern imaging devices results in larger displacement
between frames. To address these challenges, we design a
differentiable two-stage alignment scheme sequentially in
patch and pixel level for effective JDD-B. The input burst
images are firstly aligned in the patch level by using a differentiable progressive block matching method, which can
estimate the offset between distant frames with small computational cost. Then we perform implicit pixel-wise alignment in full-resolution feature domain to refine the alignment results. The two stages are jointly trained in an end-toend manner. Extensive experiments demonstrate the significant improvement of our method over existing JDD-B methods. Codes are available at https://github.com/
GuoShi28/2StageAlign.

1. Introduction
Color demosaicking and denoising are two essential
steps in digital camera imaging pipeline to reconstruct a
high quality full-color image from the sensor raw data.
Color demosaicking [9, 20, 29, 45, 46] recovers the missing color components from the color-filter-array (CFA) data
collected by the single-chip CCD/CMOS sensor, while denoising [21, 31, 48, 49] removes the noise in image data
caused by the photon arrival statistics and the imprecision

in readout circuitry. Since the two tasks are actually correlated and can be performed jointly, many joint denoising and demosaicking (JDD) algorithms have been developed [5, 11, 14, 15, 23, 28], which are however focused on
single image restoration. With the prevalent use of smartphone cameras [1], it becomes crucial to restore images
from data with low signal-to-noise ratio due to the small
sensor and lens of smartphone cameras. To this end, performing JDD with burst images (JDD-B) has become increasingly popular and important in recent years [13].
Burst image processing refers to shooting a sequence of
low quality frames in a short time and computationally fusing them to produce a higher-quality photograph [2, 41].
Compared with single image restoration, the key challenge
of burst image restoration lies in the compensation for shift
between frames. Previous studies often perform frame
alignment by estimating optical flow [8, 44] and applying
spatially variant kernels [32, 33, 42, 43] in the image domain. However, affected by noise, accurately estimating
optical flow and kernels is difficult. Recently, implicit alignment in the feature domain has achieved state-of-the-art performance on video super-resolution [4, 40], video denoising [47], as well as JDD-B [13]. However, it is found that
feature alignment is not very effective when handling image sequences with large shift. For example, for the pyramid feature alignment module in [40], the receptive field
of offset estimation is about 28 (3 conv layers with 3 × 3
kernels on 1/4 scale), i.e., 14 pixels along one direction.
Such a search range is too small for burst images with large
shift. Whereas, large shifts commonly exist in videos due
to the camera and object motion. On the other hand, modern image/video recorders can easily capture videos of 4K
(4096 × 2160) or UHD (3840 × 2160) resolution. As a
result, the pixel displacements between frames further increase. Even some small motion of foreground objects in
4K video can cause a large value of shift.
However, precise pixel-wise alignment on full size images with large motion is very difficult and expensive. With
a naive implementation, for each pixel, we assume the off-

17472

