Domain Generalization via Shuffled Style Assembly for Face Anti-Spoofing
Zhuo Wang1 Zezheng Wang2 * Zitong Yu3 Weihong Deng1 *
Jiahong Li2 Tingting Gao2 Zhongyuan Wang2
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications

2

Kuaishou Technology

{wz2019, whdeng}@bupt.edu.cn

1. Introduction
As the most successful computer vision technology, face
recognition (FR) [11, 51] has been widely employed in different application scenarios, such as mobile access control
and electronic payments. Despite great success, FR systems
may still suffer from presentation attacks (PAs), including
print attacks, video replay, and 3D masks. To tackle these
issues, a series of face anti-spoofing (FAS) methods have
been proposed, from hand-craft descriptors based methods
[9, 38] to deep representation based ones [52, 55, 57, 59, 61].
* denotes the corresponding author.

tinagao2019@gmail.com

Live

Spoof

Encoder

With diverse presentation attacks emerging continually,
generalizable face anti-spoofing (FAS) has drawn growing
attention. Most existing methods implement domain generalization (DG) on the complete representations. However,
different image statistics may have unique properties for the
FAS tasks. In this work, we separate the complete representation into content and style ones. A novel Shuffled Style
Assembly Network (SSAN) is proposed to extract and reassemble different content and style features for a stylized
feature space. Then, to obtain a generalized representation, a contrastive learning strategy is developed to emphasize liveness-related style information while suppress the
domain-specific one. Finally, the representations of the correct assemblies are used to distinguish between living and
spoofing during the inferring. On the other hand, despite
the decent performance, there still exists a gap between
academia and industry, due to the difference in data quantity and distribution. Thus, a new large-scale benchmark
for FAS is built up to further evaluate the performance of
algorithms in reality. Both qualitative and quantitative results on existing and proposed benchmarks demonstrate the
effectiveness of our methods. The codes will be available at
https://github.com/wangzhuo2019/SSAN.

CMVS, University of Oulu

zitong.yu@oulu.fi

{wangzezheng, lijiahong, wangzhongyuan}@kuaishou.com

Abstract

3

AdaIN

Stylized (Spoof)

Decoder

1

Figure 1. The illustration of style transfer using the method of [18]
when live face as content input and spoof face as style input.

The previous FAS methods have achieved promising performance in intra-domain scenarios, but may encounter dramatic degradation under the cross-domain settings. The
major reason behind this lies in the conflict between the
limitations of training data and the capability of networks
[17, 32, 58], which makes the models trapped in dataset
bias [43] and leads to poor generalization toward new domains. To address this problem, domain adaptation (DA)
techniques [23, 49] are used to alleviate the discrepancy between source and target domains by using unlabeled target
data. However, in most real-world FAS scenarios, it is inefficient to collect sufficient unlabeled target data for training.
Thus, domain generalization (DG) methods are proposed
to generalize well on the unseen target domain, which can
be coarsely classified into three categories: learning a common feature space [21, 41], learning for disentangled representations [48], and learning to learn [40, 42]. These methods almost implement DG on the complete representations
from common modules (i.e., CNN-BN-ReLU), but ignore
fully taking advantage of subtle properties of global and local image statistics in FAS. Specifically, different normalization approaches lay stress on different statistics information in FAS. For example, Batch Normalization (BN) [19]
based structures are usually used to summarize global image statistics, such as semantic features and physical at-

4123

