Graph-context Attention Networks for Size-varied Deep Graph Matching
Zheheng Jiang, Hossein Rahmani, Plamen Angelov, Sue Black, Bryan M. Williams
Lancaster University
Bailrigg, Lancaster, LA1 4WA, United Kingdom
[z.jiang11,h.rahmani,p.angelov,sue.black,b.williams6]@lancaster.ac.uk

Abstract
Deep learning for graph matching has received growing
interest and developed rapidly in the past decade. Although
recent deep graph matching methods have shown excellent
performance on matching between graphs of equal size in
the computer vision area, the size-varied graph matching
problem, where the number of keypoints in the images of the
same category may vary due to occlusion, is still an open
and challenging problem. To tackle this, we firstly propose
to formulate the combinatorial problem of graph matching
as an Integer Linear Programming (ILP) problem, which
is more flexible and efficient to facilitate comparing graphs
of varied sizes. A novel Graph-context Attention Network
(GCAN), which jointly capture intrinsic graph structure and
cross-graph information for improving the discrimination
of node features, is then proposed and trained to resolve
this ILP problem with node correspondence supervision.
We further show that the proposed GCAN model is efficient
to resolve the graph-level matching problem and is able to
automatically learn node-to-node similarity via graph-level
matching. The proposed approach is evaluated on three
public keypoint-matching datasets and one graph-matching
dataset for blood vessel patterns, with experimental results
showing its superior performance over existing state-of-theart algorithms for keypoint and graph-level matching.

1. Introduction
Graph matching, which involves establishing correspondences of nodes between graph-structured data, has a wide
range of real-world applications, such as objective keypoint
matching [1], vein pattern matching [2] and 2D/3D shape
matching [3]. Graph matching is a well-known general NPhard problem, and is often formulated as a quadratic assignment problem (QAP) [4].
Recently, deep learning based graph matching methods have demonstrated superior performance over traditional methods. Research in deep graph matching typically focuses on two parts: developing graph embedding

networks and resolving combinatorial problems. Generally,
approaches to deep graph matching firstly involve extracting node features from a deep convolutional neural network
(CNN). Since nodes with similar deep CNN features are difficult to distinguish, a graph embedding network is designed
to model and refine node features, which is expected to capture intrinsic graph structure and cross-graph information
for improving node differentiation. Driven by the popular
graph convolutional neural networks (GCN) [5], GCNs and
their variants are widely used as graph embedding methods
[6–9]. In recent years, transformer based model [10–13],
which use the attention mechanism to capture the relationships between different words or between different image
portions, has received more attention due to their superior
performance over traditional CNN models. Inspired by this,
we propose a novel Graph-context Attention Network to
jointly capture the relationships of nodes inside a graph
and node-to-node relationships between graphs. In terms
of the combinatorial problem, recent works formulate it as
Lawler’s quadratic assignment programming (QAP) problem [7, 14] or Koopmans-Beckmann’s QAP problem [6, 9].
These approaches regard the node-to-node correspondence
problem as a binary classification task. The combinatorial problem is typically tackled by performing the Hungarian algorithm on a square matrix of predicted classification
scores. However these methods assume that the nodes V2 in
graph G2 include all nodes V1 in graph G1 , i.e. V1 ⊆ V2 .
If V2 contain some outliers that are invisible in V1 , [7, 14]
suggest adding dummy nodes to allow these outliers can
be assigned in the Hungarian Algorithm. However, in a
more general case, matching graphs may contain different numbers of nodes and the number of outliers in both
graphs are unknown during testing. We observe that the
Hungarian algorithm has difficulty in handling such sizevaried graphs matching problem. Furthermore, the above
mentioned methods require node correspondence supervision, in this paper we also explore graph matching without
node-level labeling.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
1. To handle more general and more challenging graph

2343

