ADAPT: Vision-Language Navigation with Modality-Aligned Action Prompts
Bingqian Lin1 ,* Yi Zhu2 , Zicong Chen1 , Xiwen Liang1 , Jianzhuang Liu2 , Xiaodan Liang1†
1
Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{linbq6@mail2,chenzc7@mail2,liangxw29@mail2, liangxd9@mail}.sysu.edu.cn,
{zhuyi36, liu.jianzhuang}@huawei.com

Abstract

Observation

Instruction

Walk to the staircase and walk

Vision-Language Navigation (VLN) is a challenging task
that requires an embodied agent to perform action-level
modality alignment, i.e., make instruction-asked actions sequentially in complex visual environments. Most existing
VLN agents learn the instruction-path data directly and
cannot sufficiently explore action-level alignment knowledge inside the multi-modal inputs. In this paper, we propose modAlity-aligneD Action PrompTs (ADAPT), which
provides the VLN agent with action prompts to enable the
explicit learning of action-level modality alignment to pursue successful navigation. Specifically, an action prompt is
defined as a modality-aligned pair of an image sub-prompt
and a text sub-prompt, where the former is a single-view
observation and the latter is a phrase like “walk past the
chair”. When starting navigation, the instruction-related
action prompt set is retrieved from a pre-built action prompt
base and passed through a prompt encoder to obtain the
prompt feature. Then the prompt feature is concatenated
with the original instruction feature and fed to a multi-layer
transformer for action prediction. To collect high-quality
action prompts into the prompt base, we use the Contrastive
Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) model which has powerful cross-modality alignment ability. A modality alignment loss and a sequential consistency loss are further introduced to enhance the alignment of the action prompt and
enforce the agent to focus on the related prompt sequentially. Experimental results on both R2R and RxR show the
superiority of ADAPT over state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
In the Vision-Language Navigation (VLN) task [1,4], an
embodied agent is required to navigate through complex
scenes following a given language instruction. To accomplish successful navigation, the agent needs to implement
* Part of this work was done during an internship in Huawei Noah’s Ark

Lab.
† Corresponding Author

...

up, turn right and go down
stairs and wait at the bottom.

action
Baseline

Action
Prompt

go to the
staircase

,

ADAPT

walk towards the
staircase

...

walk to the
staircase

Figure 1. The action decision comparison between a baseline [14]
and our ADAPT. With the help of action prompts related to “walk
to the staircase” in the instruction, our ADAPT successfully makes
correct action from the current observation.

both object-level and action-level modality alignment accurately given the instruction and visual observations. For
example, given an instruction of “exit the bedroom”, the
agent should not only locate the “bedroom” in its observation but also find the door of the bedroom to make the action
of “exit”. With great potential in the applications such as
in-home robots and personal assistants, VLN has received
wide spread attention in the robotic visual applications.
Early VLN approaches explore diverse data augmentation strategies [8,9,27,38], efficient learning paradigms [15,
24, 40, 46, 47] and useful model architecture [7, 13, 29, 40]
to improve the agent performance. Motivated by the significant progress made by large-scale cross-modal pre-trained
models in vision-language tasks [6,21,23,25,37], more and
more works attempt to introduce the pretraining paradigms
and models into the VLN task. PREVALENT [11] pretrains
the model on a large amount of image-text-action triplets in
a self-supervised learning manner. VLN⟳BERT [14] introduces a recurrent function into the pretrained models to
make the VLN agent time-aware. Although the object-level
alignment ability may be significantly enhanced through the

15396

