Incorporating Semi-Supervised and Positive-Unlabeled Learning for Boosting
Full Reference Image Quality Assessment
Yue Cao1 , Zhaolin Wan2 , Dongwei Ren1(

)

, Zifei Yan1 , Wangmeng Zuo1,3

1

2

School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
College of Artificial Intelligence, Dalian Maritime University, China 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory, China

cscaoyue@gmail.com, zlwan@dlmu.edu.cn, rendongweihit@gmail.com, {yanzifei, wmzuo}@hit.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
The goal of image quality assessment is to provide computational models that can automatically predict the percep-

Positive

Prediction Score

IQA Model

Positive
Unlabeled Data

Semi-supervised Learning
Positive-unlabeled Learning
Binary
Classifier

Negative

Full-reference (FR) image quality assessment (IQA)
evaluates the visual quality of a distorted image by measuring its perceptual difference with pristine-quality reference, and has been widely used in low-level vision tasks.
Pairwise labeled data with mean opinion score (MOS) are
required in training FR-IQA model, but is time-consuming
and cumbersome to collect. In contrast, unlabeled data can
be easily collected from an image degradation or restoration process, making it encouraging to exploit unlabeled
training data to boost FR-IQA performance. Moreover, due
to the distribution inconsistency between labeled and unlabeled data, outliers may occur in unlabeled data, further increasing the training difficulty. In this paper, we suggest to
incorporate semi-supervised and positive-unlabeled (PU)
learning for exploiting unlabeled data while mitigating the
adverse effect of outliers. Particularly, by treating all labeled data as positive samples, PU learning is leveraged
to identify negative samples (i.e., outliers) from unlabeled
data. Semi-supervised learning (SSL) is further deployed
to exploit positive unlabeled data by dynamically generating pseudo-MOS. We adopt a dual-branch network including reference and distortion branches. Furthermore, spatial
attention is introduced in the reference branch to concentrate more on the informative regions, and sliced Wasserstein distance is used for robust difference map computation
to address the misalignment issues caused by images recovered by GAN models. Extensive experiments show that our
method performs favorably against state-of-the-arts on the
benchmark datasets PIPAL, KADID-10k, TID2013, LIVE
and CSIQ. The source code and model are available at
https://github.com/happycaoyue/JSPL.

Positive
Labeled Data

Unlabeled Data

Inference
Positive
Labeled Data

Unlabeled Data

Training

Figure 1. Illustration of joint semi-supervised and PU learning
(JSPL) method, which mitigates the adverse effect of outliers in
unlabeled data for boosting the performance of IQA model.

tual image quality consistent with human subjective perception. Over the past few decades, significant progress has
been made in developing full reference (FR) image quality
assessment (IQA) metrics, including peak signal-to-noise
ratio (PSNR) and structural similarity index (SSIM) [58],
which have been widely used in various image processing
fields. Recently, CNN-based FR-IQA models have attracted
more attention, which usually learn a mapping from distorted and pristine images to mean opinion score.
Most existing CNN-based FR-IQA models are trained
using pairwise labeled data with mean opinion score
(MOS), thus requiring extensive human judgements. To reduce the cost of collecting a large amount of labeled data, a
potential alternative is semi-supervised learning for exploiting unlabeled samples which are almost free. Recently, considerable attention has been given to semi-supervised IQA
algorithms [38,39,55,59,63] which show promising performance using both labeled and unlabeled data. However, unlabeled data can be collected in various unconstrained ways
and may have a much different distribution from labeled

5851

