Human Trajectory Prediction with Momentary Observation
Jianhua Sun, Yuxuan Li, Liang Chai, Hao-Shu Fang, Yong-Lu Li, Cewu Lu§
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{gothic,yuxuan li,chailiang1234,yonglu li,lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn,fhaoshu@gmail.com

Abstract
Human trajectory prediction task aims to analyze human
future movements given their past status, which is a crucial
step for many autonomous systems such as self-driving cars
and social robots. In real-world scenarios, it is unlikely to
obtain sufficiently long observations at all times for prediction, considering inevitable factors such as tracking losses
and sudden events. However, the problem of trajectory prediction with limited observations has not drawn much attention in previous work. In this paper, we study a task
named momentary trajectory prediction, which reduces the
observed history from a long time sequence to an extreme
situation of two frames, one frame for social and scene contexts and both frames for the velocity of agents. We perform
a rigorous study of existing state-of-the-art approaches in
this challenging setting on two widely used benchmarks.
We further propose a unified feature extractor, along with
a novel pre-training mechanism, to capture effective information within the momentary observation. Our extractor
can be adopted in existing prediction models and substantially boost their performance of momentary trajectory prediction. We hope our work will pave the way for more responsive, precise and robust prediction approaches, an important step toward real-world autonomous systems.

1. Introduction
Human trajectory prediction [2,9,15] plays an important
role in the area of human behavior understanding [17, 18,
28, 40] and autonomous driving systems [3, 15, 31] by investigating future movements of traffic agents given their
past status observed from a video. Despite the good performance achieved by existing methods, these approaches
are developed on historical observations over several seconds. However, accurate tracking over long periods of
time is quite difficult, especially in congested traffic scenarios [11, 16, 21, 25, 29]. Further, responsive and precise
§ Cewu Lu is corresponding author, member of Qing Yuan Research
Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, China and Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute

turn
forward

wait

forward

wait

Figure 1. The necessity of momentary prediction in emergency
situations. The figures illustrate some sudden events, often occurring in highly occluded areas such as underground parking lots and
congested roads. The pedestrian’s trajectory have to be precisely
and immediately predicted to avoid the potential collision in a very
short time.

predictions are important and necessary for safety purposes
when emergency situations suddenly come into view (see
Fig. 1). Therefore, a prediction task with momentary observation is essential to be studied.
In this paper, we focus on the most extreme case that
only two frames are available for observation, one frame
for social and scene context and both frames for the velocity of agents. We refer to the task as Momentary Trajectory Prediction. Note that we exclude the case of singleshot (one-frame observation) where the basic information,
velocity magnitude, is missing. After reducing the observation horizon in previous approaches, we observe obvious
degradation of their performance (see Fig. 2).
Despite the lack of temporal features, three common
types of information still widely exist between two adjacent
frames and provide a large number of leads for trajectory
prediction: i) velocity of agents, ii) social contexts, and iii)
scene contexts. The velocity provides motion basis of human short-term behavior, while context information implies
enough clues to predict long-term trends and disturbances
of movements. A fundamental aspect of momentary trajectory prediction is how to explore and integrate these potential information implicit in the limited observations. In this
paper, we raise a unified input formulation to join the three
types of information as a whole (see Fig. 4), integrating all
information at data level. The major insight of this input
formulation is to consider scene restrictions as static interactive objects while surrounding traffic agents as dynamic
interactive objects with corresponding velocities. Then Momentary Observation feature Extractor (MOE) (see Fig. 5)

6467

