ST-MFNet: A Spatio-Temporal Multi-Flow Network for Frame Interpolation
Duolikun Danier

Fan Zhang
University of Bristol

David Bull

{duolikun.danier, fan.zhang, dave.bull}@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract

1. Introduction
Video frame interpolation (VFI) has been extensively
employed to deliver an improved user experience across a
wide range of important applications. VFI increases the
temporal resolution (frame rate) of a video through synthesizing intermediate frames between every two consecutive
original frames. It can mitigate the need for costly high
frame rate acquisition processes [27], enhance the rendering
of slow-motion content [26], support view synthesis [16]
and improve rate-quality trade-offs in video coding [56].

BLFNet

Stage I

concat

Multi-Scale Fusion

warp
warp

MIFNet

Bidirectional Flow

Stage II

Video frame interpolation (VFI) is currently a very active research topic, with applications spanning computer
vision, post production and video encoding. VFI can be
extremely challenging, particularly in sequences containing large motions, occlusions or dynamic textures, where
existing approaches fail to offer perceptually robust interpolation performance. In this context, we present a novel
deep learning based VFI method, ST-MFNet, based on a
Spatio-Temporal Multi-Flow architecture. ST-MFNet employs a new multi-scale multi-flow predictor to estimate
many-to-one intermediate flows, which are combined with
conventional one-to-one optical flows to capture both large
and complex motions. In order to enhance interpolation
performance for various textures, a 3D CNN is also employed to model the content dynamics over an extended
temporal window. Moreover, ST-MFNet has been trained
within an ST-GAN framework, which was originally developed for texture synthesis, with the aim of further improving
perceptual interpolation quality. Our approach has been
comprehensively evaluated – compared with fourteen stateof-the-art VFI algorithms – clearly demonstrating that STMFNet consistently outperforms these benchmarks on varied and representative test datasets, with significant gains
up to 1.09dB in PSNR for cases including large motions
and dynamic textures. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/danielism97/ST-MFNet.

Multi-InterFlow

TENet

Figure 1. High-level architecture of ST-MFNet, which employs a
two-stage workflow to interpolate an intermediate frame.

In recent years, deep learning has empowered a variety
of VFI algorithms. These methods can be categorized as
flow-based [26, 59] or kernel-based [30, 41]. While flowbased methods use the estimated optical flow maps to warp
input frames, kernel-based methods learn local or shared
convolution kernels for synthesizing the output. To handle challenging scenarios encountered in VFI applications,
various techniques have been employed to enhance these
methods, including non-linear motion models [43, 48, 59],
coarse-to-fine architectures [9, 42, 48, 64], attention mechanisms [11, 27], and deformable convolutions [20, 30].
Although these methods have significantly improved
performance compared with conventional VFI approaches [3], their performance can still be inconsistent,
especially for content exhibiting large motions, occlusions
and dynamic textures. Large motion typically means
large pixel displacements, which are difficult to capture
using Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) with limited
receptive fields [40, 41]. In the case of occlusion, pixels
relating to occluded objects will not appear in all input
frames, thus preventing interpolation algorithms from
accurately estimating the intermediate locations of those

3521

