General Facial Representation Learning in a Visual-Linguistic Manner
Yinglin Zheng1 * Hao Yang2 * Ting Zhang2 Jianmin Bao2 Dongdong Chen3
Yangyu Huang2 Lu Yuan3 Dong Chen2 Ming Zeng1² Fang Wen2
1
School of Informatics, Xiamen Unversity
2
Microsoft Research Asia 3 Microsoft Cloud+AI
{zhengyinglin@stu., zengming@}xmu.edu.cn, cddlyf@gmail.com,
{haya, tinzhan, jianbao, yangyu.huang, luyuan, doch, fangwen}@microsoft.com
https://github.com/faceperceiver/farl

Abstract
How to learn a universal facial representation that
boosts all face analysis tasks? This paper takes one step
toward this goal. In this paper, we study the transfer performance of pre-trained models on face analysis tasks and introduce a framework, called FaRL, for general facial representation learning. On one hand, the framework involves a
contrastive loss to learn high-level semantic meaning from
image-text pairs. On the other hand, we propose exploring
low-level information simultaneously to further enhance the
face representation by adding a masked image modeling.
We perform pre-training on LAION-FACE, a dataset containing a large amount of face image-text pairs, and evaluate the representation capability on multiple downstream
tasks. We show that FaRL achieves better transfer performance compared with previous pre-trained models. We also
verify its superiority in the low-data regime. More importantly, our model surpasses the state-of-the-art methods on
face analysis tasks including face parsing and face alignment.

1. Introduction
Face analysis tasks are of crucial importance to social
interactions and have received extensive attention over the
past decades. Many existing state-of-the-art results [7, 50,
92] come from deep neural networks with supervised learning. However, such supervised models, in order to learn
appropriate feature representations for each given task, are
studied separately with large-scale manually annotated data
which is expensive and difficult to acquire, especially for
some face tasks such as face parsing and face alignment.
Recently, visual representation learning in computer vi* Equal contribution.
² Corresponding author.

sion appears to be paved by a popular learning paradigm,
pre-training, due to the remarkable success of the groundbreaking models in Natural Language Processing such as
BERT [24] and GPT-series [5, 74, 75], followed by a wide
variety of multiple techniques [25, 45, 52, 71, 76]. Thereafter in vision, many attempts [13, 33, 36] along this path
have been proposed, showing promising results using approaches related to contrastive loss [2, 10, 29, 35, 69].
Meanwhile in the area of vision-language tasks involving
multi-modality, there are studies [44, 53, 54, 62, 73, 87] exploring learning directly from large, freely available imagetext pairs up to hundreds of millions. Their results show that
natural language supervision is beneficial for visual representation learning, bringing superior performance to most
tasks on general images. Such pre-training has several advantages: 1) showing promising few-shot transfer performance, alleviating the hard-acquired labeled data issue; 2)
enabling convenient deployment by extracting general feature representation once and then applying to diverse downstream tasks. Yet when it comes to the face domain, one of
the most important domains in computer vision, the effectiveness of pre-training is relatively unexplored.
In this paper, we study the behaviors of transfer performance of pre-trained models on face analysis tasks and introduce a framework, FaRL, to learn general facial representation in a visual-linguistic manner. Instead of crawling
images and texts from the Web by manually designed facerelated queries, we create a dataset by filtering out from a
large openly available image-text-pair dataset [82], resulting in a subdataset containing 20 million face images, denoted as LAION-FACE.
We adopt the widely used contrastive loss to pull the embeddings of matched image-text pair together while pushing those of non-matched image-text pairs apart, which provides high-level semantic meaning. We propose exploring
supplementary low-level information simultaneously to further enhance the face representation, by adding a masked

18697

