Exploring and Evaluating Image Restoration Potential in Dynamic Scenes
Cheng Zhang†,1 , Shaolin Su†,1 , Yu Zhu‡,1 , Qingsen Yan2 , Jinqiu Sun1 , Yanning Zhang1 *
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
2
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, The University of Adelaide, Australia
https://github.com/Justones/IRP

Abstract
In dynamic scenes, images often suffer from dynamic
blur due to superposition of motions or low signal-noise
ratio resulted from quick shutter speed when avoiding motions. Recovering sharp and clean results from the captured images heavily depends on the ability of restoration
methods and the quality of the input. Although existing research on image restoration focuses on developing models
for obtaining better restored results, fewer have studied to
evaluate how and which input image leads to superior restored quality. In this paper, to better study an image’s potential value that can be explored for restoration, we propose a novel concept, referring to image restoration potential (IRP). Specifically, We first establish a dynamic scene
imaging dataset containing composite distortions and applied image restoration processes to validate the rationality
of the existence to IRP. Based on this dataset, we investigate
several properties of IRP and propose a novel deep model
to accurately predict IRP values. By gradually distilling
and selective fusing the degradation features, the proposed
model shows its superiority in IRP prediction. Thanks to the
proposed model, we are then able to validate how various
image restoration related applications are benefited from
IRP prediction. We show the potential usages of IRP as
a filtering principle to select valuable frames, an auxiliary
guidance to improve restoration models, and also an indicator to optimize camera settings for capturing better images
under dynamic scenarios.

1. Introduction
In real world imaging scenarios with dynamic motions,
degradation is a common factor due to moving objects
or shaking devices. To avoid blur, the photographer can
* † denotes equal contribution. This work is supported by National Science Foundation of China under Grant No. U19B2037, 61901384, Natural
Science Basic Research Program of Shaanxi No. 2021JCW-03 and National Engineering Laboratory for Integrated Aero-Space-Ground-Ocean
Big Data Application Technology. ‡ Corresponding author: Yu Zhu.

NIQE=53.19

NIQE=61.70

NIQE=74.83

PSNR=30.29

PSNR=32.47

PSNR=36.49

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. We show how the proposed concept IRP differs from
the traditional image metric visual quality. Given a sequence of
images captured under varying exposures in dynamic scenes (first
row), both IQA metric NIQE [23] and human observers favorite
either (a) or (b) as relatively good shots, but they do not necessarily lead to better restored results (second row). As a comparison, a perceptually poor image (c) leads to the best restored image
quality. The result indicates the necessity of developing the IRP
metric which predicts if the restored image quality will be good
even before it is processed. All images are processed by the same
restoration model MPR [40] to ensure fairness.

shorten the exposure time, but result in low illumination regions and notorious noises [5, 6, 32]. With varying camera
settings, the type of distortion may change, but hardly diminishes. To alleviate the annoying distortions, different
image restoration algorithms are required: one can apply
either deblurring approaches to remove motion blur in the
image captured from adequate exposure, or denoising methods to alleviate noise artifacts due to shortened exposure.
However, among the noise-blur trade-off, different kinds of
distorted input lead to different restored results. Naturally,
a question comes up that under the trade-off, which kind
of image leads to better restored results? The question is
fundamental, yet has not been well investigated in the literature. As far as we know, in order to obtain better restored
results, most researches focus on developing restoration al-

2067

