Opening up Open World Tracking
Yang Liu1, * Idil Esen Zulfikar2, * Jonathon Luiten2,3, * Achal Dave3, *
Deva Ramanan3 Bastian Leibe2 Aljos̆a Os̆ep1,3 Laura Leal-Taixé1
1

Technical University of Munich, Germany
1 {yang14.liu,

2

RWTH Aachen University, Germany

aljosa.osep, leal.taixe}@tum.de
2 {zulfikar,

3

Carnegie Mellon University, USA

3 {achald,

deva}@cs.cmu.edu

luiten, leibe}@vision.rwth-aachen.de

openworldtracking.github.io

Figure 1. Each pair left: The standard approach to multi-object tracking is to detect, track and possibly segment objects that correspond
to specific, pre-defined semantic classes, such as cars and pedestrians [78]. Each pair right: The output of our tracking baseline, that can
track objects, such as child stroller, that was not labeled in the model training set. The significant contribution of this paper is the first
benchmark, designed for studying the performance of object trackers in such open world conditions, in which trackers are only given a
partial knowledge about the visual world, embracing the fact that one could never train object detectors for every possible semantic class.

1. Introduction
Abstract
Tracking and detecting any object, including ones neverseen-before during model training, is a crucial but elusive
capability of autonomous systems. An autonomous agent
that is blind to never-seen-before objects poses a safety hazard when operating in the real world – and yet this is how
almost all current systems work. One of the main obstacles
towards advancing tracking any object is that this task is notoriously difficult to evaluate. A benchmark that would allow us to perform an apples-to-apples comparison of existing efforts is a crucial first step towards advancing this important research field. This paper addresses this evaluation
deficit and lays out the landscape and evaluation methodology for detecting and tracking both known and unknown
objects in the open-world setting. We propose a new benchmark, TAO-OW: Tracking Any Object in an Open World,
analyze existing efforts in multi-object tracking, and construct a baseline for this task while highlighting future challenges. We hope to open a new front in multi-object tracking
research that will hopefully bring us a step closer to intelligent systems that can operate safely in the real world.
* These authors contributed equally to this work.

Understanding common scenarios is easy. Vision systems,
trained on millions of examples of cars and pedestrians,
work pretty well at detecting these objects, determining
what and where they are, and tracking them through a
scene. Understanding never-seen-before scenarios is extremely hard. What happens when a plane lands on the road
in front an autonomous vehicle? Or a new children’s toy is
thrown onto the road? How will current vision systems be
able to handle these previously unseen and unknown situations? Will a system designed to detect and track potentially
hazardous objects pick up on these at all? Or will they be
completely ignored with disastrous consequences (such as
a vehicle hitting the child stroller in Fig. 1, bottom-left)?
Tracking and detection methods work reasonably well
for objects that have a huge amount of data collected on
them. But without building systems that can deal with
never-seen-before objects, vision systems will never be safe
enough to work in the real world and collecting more data
can never scale up to address the infinite variety of possible
unknown things that can happen. Many anecdotal examples indicate that current vision systems perform poorly in
previously unseen scenarios [60], but we cannot quantitatively measure this phenomenon, or even evaluate progress,
because there are no benchmarks on which to evaluate.

19045

