Balanced Contrastive Learning for Long-Tailed Visual Recognition
Jianggang Zhu1,2 ,* Zheng Wang1,2 ,* Jingjing Chen1,2†, Yi-Ping Phoebe Chen3 and Yu-Gang Jiang1,2
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center on Intelligent Visual Computing
3
Department of Computer Science and Information Technology, La Trobe University
{jgzhu20,zhengwang17,chengjingjing,ygj}@fudan.edu.cn, phoebe.chen@latrobe.edu.au

Abstract
Real-world data typically follow a long-tailed distribution, where a few majority categories occupy most of the
data while most minority categories contain a limited number of samples. Classification models minimizing crossentropy struggle to represent and classify the tail classes.
Although the problem of learning unbiased classifiers has
been well studied, methods for representing imbalanced
data are under-explored. In this paper, we focus on representation learning for imbalanced data. Recently, supervised contrastive learning has shown promising performance on balanced data recently. However, through our
theoretical analysis, we find that for long-tailed data, it
fails to form a regular simplex which is an ideal geometric configuration for representation learning. To correct the
optimization behavior of SCL and further improve the performance of long-tailed visual recognition, we propose a
novel loss for balanced contrastive learning (BCL). Compared with SCL, we have two improvements in BCL: classaveraging, which balances the gradient contribution of negative classes; class-complement, which allows all classes
to appear in every mini-batch. The proposed balanced
contrastive learning (BCL) method satisfies the condition
of forming a regular simplex and assists the optimization
of cross-entropy. Equipped with BCL, the proposed twobranch framework can obtain a stronger feature representation and achieve competitive performance on long-tailed
benchmark datasets such as CIFAR-10-LT, CIFAR-100-LT,
ImageNet-LT, and iNaturalist2018.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved remarkable success
in a series of computer vision tasks, such as image recognition [4,12,25], video analysis [37,49], object detection [35],
* Indicates equal contribution.
† Jingjing-Chen is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. Illustration of Balanced Contrastive Learning. Head
classes dominant the training procedure of SCL and compress the
representation space of tail classes on the hypersphere (denoted by
⋆). BCL learns an embedding space that treats all classes equally
and forms a regular simplex (denoted by •).

etc. These achievements are owing largely to the availability of large-scale dataset such as ImageNet [11], where each
class has sufficient and equal amount of training samples.
However, real-world datasets are often imbalanced, where
many classes have only a few samples and few classes have
a great number of samples. Deep models trained with such
unbalanced data usually generalize badly on balanced testing data, especially for rare classes. Improving recognition
performance with unbalanced data poses a huge challenge
to modern deep learning methods.
To tackle the problem of learning with imbalanced data,
early methods mainly focus on re-sampling the training data
[1, 2, 14, 33] or re-weighting the loss functions [9, 21, 45]
to pay more attention to rare classes. Recently, diverse
methods have emerged. For example, Logit compensation methods [3, 31, 38] calibrate distribution between the
training data and the test data. Decoupling [23] adopts
a two-stage training scheme where the classifier is re-

6908

