EASE: Unsupervised Discriminant Subspace Learning for Transductive
Few-Shot Learning
Hao Zhu†,§ , Piotr Koniusz*,§,†
The Australian National University § Data61/CSIRO
allenhaozhu@gmail.com, firstname.lastname@anu.edu.au
†

Abstract
Few-shot learning (FSL) has received a lot of attention
due to its remarkable ability to adapt to novel classes. Although many techniques have been proposed for FSL, they
mostly focus on improving FSL backbones. Some works
also focus on learning on top of the features generated
by these backbones to adapt them to novel classes. We
present an unsupErvised discriminAnt Subspace lEarning
(EASE) that improves transductive few-shot learning performance by learning a linear projection onto a subspace
built from features of the support set and the unlabeled
query set in the test time. Specifically, based on the support
set and the unlabeled query set, we generate the similarity matrix and the dissimilarity matrix based on the structure prior for the proposed EASE method, which is efficiently solved with SVD. We also introduce conStraIned
wAsserstein MEan Shift clustEring (SIAMESE) which extends Sinkhorn K-means by incorporating labeled support
samples. SIAMESE works on the features obtained from
EASE to estimate class centers and query predictions. On
the mini-ImageNet, tiered-ImageNet, CIFAR-FS, CUB and
OpenMIC benchmarks, both steps significantly boost the
performance in transductive FSL and semi-supervised FSL.

1. Introduction
Supervised end-to-end learning has been extremely successful in computer vision, speech, and machine translation
tasks due to larger datasets and the rapid development of
deep convolutional architectures. However, with the current learning paradigm, limited data is an obstacle in training a sufficiently good model for inference. In many tasks,
annotation is likely to be scarce or costly to obtain, as the
annotation process may require expert knowledge (e.g., association of medical images with diseases).
* The corresponding author.
allenhaozhu/EASE

Code: https : / / github . com /

In contrast to the requirement of big data in deep learning, humans learn new objects from a few examples. Inspired by the ability of biological vision, researchers proposed few-shot learning (FSL) [5]. FSL algorithms can
be broadly classified into three categories: metric learning,
meta-learning, and transfer learning. The goal of metricbased learning approaches is to learn a mapping from images to an embedding space in which images of the same
class are closer to each other, whereas images of different classes are separated apart. We expect this property
to apply to classes that have not been seen before. Metalearning is tasked with resolving an individual task-specific
optimization that can be easily adapted to new tasks without
overfitting. Transfer learning includes pre-training a feature
extractor in the first stage and then learning to reuse this
knowledge to obtain a classifier on new samples.
Several recent studies [4, 9,10, 15, 26,31] explored transductive inference for few-shot tasks. At the test time, transductive few-shot methods perform the class label inference
jointly for all the unlabeled query samples of the task, rather
than one sample at a time, as in the case of inductive inference [17, 25, 38, 40, 52–55]. Therefore, transductive fewshot methods typically perform better than their inductive
counterparts. The core idea of transductive FSL methods is to connect the query set and the support set with a
pseudo-label or via a similarity measure e.g., the Gaussian
kernel. However, such methods ignore the potential structure among the data points in the support set and the query
set. In this paper, we argue that features in the inference
step can be approximately drawn from a union of multiple
subspaces, and thus the sample affinity matrix follows the
block-diagonal prior. Based on this prior, we generate the
similarity matrix for all samples in each task based on subspace clustering with a low-rank representation, instead of
measuring the Euclidean distance between samples in the
support or query set. By constructing a dissimilarity matrix
with a simple assumption, we learn a linear projection for
maximizing the similarity and minimizing the dissimilarity
via a closed-form solution. Furthermore, we improve the final performance by refining each class mean with unlabeled

9078

