DeepCurrents: Learning Implicit Representations of Shapes with Boundaries
David Palmer⇤1

Dmitriy Smirnov⇤1 Stephanie Wang2
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Abstract

Recent techniques have been successful in reconstructing
surfaces as level sets of learned functions (such as signed distance fields) parameterized by deep neural networks. Many
of these methods, however, learn only closed surfaces and
are unable to reconstruct shapes with boundary curves. We
propose a hybrid shape representation that combines explicit
boundary curves with implicit learned interiors. Using machinery from geometric measure theory, we parameterize
currents using deep networks and use stochastic gradient
descent to solve a minimal surface problem. By modifying
the metric according to target geometry coming, e.g., from
a mesh or point cloud, we can use this approach to represent arbitrary surfaces, learning implicitly defined shapes
with explicitly defined boundary curves. We further demonstrate learning families of shapes jointly parameterized by
boundary curves and latent codes.

1. Introduction
Shape representation is a crucial component of geometry
processing and learning algorithms. Depending on the target
application, different representations have varying tradeoffs.
Broadly, shape representations fall naturally into two classes:
Lagrangian or explicit; Eulerian or implicit. In this work,
we show how to use the theory of currents from geometric
measure theory to design a flexible neural representation that
combines favorable aspects from each category, representing the interiors of surfaces implicitly while maintaining an
explicit representation of their boundaries.
Lagrangian representations encode a shape by giving coordinates of points or parameterizing regions of the shape.
To represent a curve in a Lagrangian way, one might give coordinates of successive points along the curve. Analogously,
to represent a surface in 3D, one might use a mesh, which
assembles the surface out of simple patches. Lagrangian representations afford great precision but require predetermined
combinatorial structures, making it difficult to represent families of shapes with varying topology.
* Authors contributed equally to this work.

Albert Chern2 Justin Solomon1
2
UC San Diego

In contrast, Eulerian representations encode a shape via
a function on some background domain. For example, a
surface might be encoded as the level set of a scalar function
sampled on a regular grid. Level sets of signed distance
fields (SDFs) form one popular implicit representation. Implicit functions naturally capture topological variation, but
traditional implicit shape representations, in which the background geometry must be discretized with a fixed grid or
mesh, waste resolution on regions far away from the level set
of interest. Recent neural implicit representations alleviate
this problem [7, 38, 46]. The universal approximation and
differentiability properties of neural networks make them an
appealing alternative to regular grid discretizations.
Neural implicit representations come with their own limitations. Like other implicit representations based on level
sets, most neural implicit representations can only encode
closed surfaces, which lack boundary curves. Boundaries are
desirable as they can provide manipulation handles for controllable deformation, and common boundaries can be used
to stitch together surfaces into a larger articulated surface.
In this paper, we describe a new way to encode neural
implicit surfaces with boundaries, which can then be combined into more complex hybrid surfaces. The key to our
representation is the theory of currents from geometric measure theory. In this theory, k-dimensional submanifolds
are defined by their integration against differential k-forms,
generalizing how distributions (0-currents) are defined by
integration against smooth functions. Current spaces are
complete normed linear spaces that make optimization over
surfaces convenient, and the boundary operator also becomes
linear on these spaces. Classically, currents were the key to
solving Plateau’s minimal surface problem by transforming
it into mass norm minimization. We adopt the mass norm as
the primary loss function encouraging our neural currents to
converge to smooth surfaces.
We demonstrate our representation with three applications. We first demonstrate how it enables computing minimal surfaces efficiently through stochastic gradient descent.
Then, by modifying the background metric used to define the
mass norm, we reconstruct arbitrary surfaces from data. Finally, we demonstrate the flexibility of our representation by
encoding families of surfaces with explicit boundary control.

18665

