Domain-Agnostic Prior for Transfer Semantic Segmentation
Xinyue Huo1,2 Lingxi Xie2 Hengtong Hu2,3 Wengang Zhou1 Houqiang Li1 Qi Tian2
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Huawei Inc. 3 Hefei University of Technology
xinyueh@mail.ustc.edu.cn

198808xc@gmail.com

{zhwg,lihq}@ustc.edu.cn

huhengtong.hfut@gmail.com

tian.qi1@huawei.com

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) is an important topic in the computer vision community. The key difficulty lies in defining a common property between the source
and target domains so that the source-domain features can
align with the target-domain semantics. In this paper,
we present a simple and effective mechanism that regularizes cross-domain representation learning with a domainagnostic prior (DAP) that constrains the features extracted
from source and target domains to align with a domainagnostic space. In practice, this is easily implemented as an
extra loss term that requires a little extra costs. In the standard evaluation protocol of transferring synthesized data to
real data, we validate the effectiveness of different types of
DAP, especially that borrowed from a text embedding model
that shows favorable performance beyond the state-of-theart UDA approaches in terms of segmentation accuracy.
Our research reveals that UDA benefits much from better
proxies, possibly from other data modalities.

1. Introduction
In the deep learning era, the most powerful approach
for visual recognition is to train deep neural networks with
abundant, labeled data. Such a data-driven methodology
suffers the difficulty of transferring across domains, which
raises an important research field named domain adaptation.
This paper focuses on the setting of unsupervised domain
adaptation (UDA), which assumes that the source domain
offers full supervision but the target domain has no annotations available. In particular, we investigate semantic segmentation – provided the increasing amount of unlabeled
data and the expensiveness of annotation, it becomes increasingly important to gain the ability of transferring models from a known domain (e.g., labeled or synthesized data).
The goal of semantic segmentation is to assign each pixel
with a class label. In the scenarios that annotations are absent, this is even more challenging than image-level prediction (e.g., classification) because the subtle differences

？
(a) Source

(b) without DAP supervision

→ Target

(c) with DAP supervision

Figure 1. Top: The goal is to transfer a segmentation model trained
in the source domain to the target domain, but some semantically
similar classes (see the left of (a) for examples of bike and motorbike) are difficult to distinguish due to domain shift. Bottom:
segmentation results of the upper-right image without and with
DAP, where (b) shows incorrect segmentation (bike→motorbike
and sidewalk→road) of the baseline (DACS [49]), and (c) shows
how DAP improves segmentation.

at the pixel level can be easily affected by the change of
data distribution. Note that this factor can bring in the
risk that pseudo labels are inaccurate and thus deteriorate
transfer performance, and the risk becomes even higher
when the target domain lacks sufficient data for specific
classes or class pairs. Fig 1 shows an example that such approaches [64, 49] are difficult in distinguishing semantically
similar classes (e.g., motorbike vs. bike, road vs. sidewalk)
from each other.
To alleviate the above issue, we first offer a hypothesis
about the confusion – the proportion of similar categories in
17075

