3D Common Corruptions and Data Augmentation
Oğuzhan Fatih Kar
Teresa Yeo
Andrei Atanov
Amir Zamir
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (EPFL)
https://3dcommoncorruptions.epfl.ch/

Abstract
We introduce a set of image transformations that can be
used as corruptions to evaluate the robustness of models as
well as data augmentation mechanisms for training neural
networks. The primary distinction of the proposed transformations is that, unlike existing approaches such as Common
Corruptions [27], the geometry of the scene is incorporated
in the transformations – thus leading to corruptions that are
more likely to occur in the real world. We also introduce a
set of semantic corruptions (e.g. natural object occlusions.
See Fig. 1).
We show these transformations are ‘efficient’ (can be
computed on-the-fly), ‘extendable’ (can be applied on most
image datasets), expose vulnerability of existing models,
and can effectively make models more robust when employed as ‘3D data augmentation’ mechanisms. The evaluations on several tasks and datasets suggest incorporating
3D information into benchmarking and training opens up a
promising direction for robustness research.

1. Introduction
Computer vision models deployed in the real world will
encounter naturally occurring distribution shifts from their
training data. These shifts range from lower-level distortions, such as motion blur and illumination changes, to
semantic ones, like object occlusion. Each of them represents a possible failure mode of a model and has been
frequently shown to result in profoundly unreliable predictions [15, 23, 27, 31, 66]. Thus, a systematic testing of vulnerabilities to these shifts is critical before deploying these
models in the real world.
This work presents a set of distribution shifts in order to
test models’ robustness. In contrast to previously proposed
shifts which perform uniform 2D modifications over the image, such as Common Corruptions (2DCC) [27], our shifts
incorporate 3D information to generate corruptions that are
consistent with the scene geometry. This leads to shifts that
are more likely to occur in the real world (See Fig. 1). The
resulting set includes 20 corruptions, each representing a

Figure 1. Using 3D information to generate real-world corruptions.
The top row shows sample 2D corruptions applied uniformly over the image, e.g. as in Common Corruptions [27], disregarding 3D information.
This leads to corruptions that are unlikely to happen in the real world, e.g.
having the same motion blur over the entire image irrespective of the distance to camera (top left). Middle row shows their 3D counterparts from
3D Common Corruptions (3DCC). The circled regions highlight the effect
of incorporating 3D information. More specifically, in 3DCC, 1. motion
blur has a motion parallax effect where objects further away from the camera seem to move less, 2. defocus blur has a depth of field effect, akin to
a large aperture effect in real cameras, where certain regions of the image can be selected to be in focus, 3. lighting takes the scene geometry
into account when illuminating the scene and casts shadows on objects,
4. fog gets denser further away from the camera, 5. occlusions of a target object, e.g. fridge (blue mask), are created by changing the camera’s
viewpoint and having its view naturally obscured by another object, e.g.
the plant (red mask). This is in contrast to its 2D counterpart that randomly
discards patches [13]. See the project page for a video version of the figure.

distribution shift from training data, which we denote as 3D
Common Corruptions (3DCC). 3DCC addresses several aspects of the real world, such as camera motion, weather,
occlusions, depth of field, and lighting. Figure 2 provides
an overview of all corruptions. As shown in Fig. 1, the corruptions in 3DCC are more diverse and realistic compared
to 2D-only approaches.
We show in Sec. 5 that the performance of the methods aiming to improve robustness, including those with diverse data augmentation, reduce drastically under 3DCC.
Furthermore, we observe that the robustness issues exposed
by 3DCC well correlate with corruptions generated via photorealistic synthesis. Thus, 3DCC can serve as a challeng-

18963

