Hierarchical Nearest Neighbor Graph Embedding for Efficient Dimensionality
Reduction
M. Saquib Sarfraz ∗1,2 , Marios Koulakis ∗1 , Constantin Seibold1 , Rainer Stiefelhagen1
1

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 2 Mercedes-Benz Tech Innovation
∗

Equal contribution

Abstract
Dimensionality reduction is crucial both for visualization and preprocessing high dimensional data for machine
learning. We introduce a novel method based on a hierarchy built on 1-nearest neighbor graphs in the original space
which is used to preserve the grouping properties of the data
distribution on multiple levels. The core of the proposal is
an optimization-free projection that is competitive with the
latest versions of t-SNE and UMAP in performance and visualization quality while being an order of magnitude faster
at run-time. Furthermore, its interpretable mechanics, the
ability to project new data, and the natural separation of
data clusters in visualizations make it a general purpose
unsupervised dimension reduction technique. In the paper,
we argue about the soundness of the proposed method and
evaluate it on a diverse collection of datasets with sizes
varying from 1K to 11M samples and dimensions from 28
to 16K. We perform comparisons with other state-of-the-art
methods on multiple metrics and target dimensions highlighting its efficiency and performance. Code is available
at https://github.com/koulakis/h-nne
Figure 1. Visualization of the entire ImageNet dataset. Speed and
embedding quality of dimension reduction methods.

1. Introduction
Dimensionality reduction techniques are now increasingly used in many fields of science and have to cope with
an ever increasing size of real-world datasets. It plays an
important role both for visualization and processing of high
dimensional data. Much of current research is focused on
finding unsupervised algorithms that are both scalable to
massive data and are able to preserve the structure of data
in less dimensions. Most of them attempt to retain the local or global structure of the data by optimizing over pairwise distances in the target space. Two main directions
for the current dimension reduction techniques can be identified with respect to how such local or global neighborhood is preserved in terms of the distances. Methods such
as PCA [15], MDS [18] and Sammom mapping [31] try

to preserve the global distances among all samples in the
data. Whereas more recent popular methods such as tSNE [35,36], LargeVis [33], and UMAP [26,30] seek to additionally preserve the local structure e.g. by preserving the
distance relations in the k-neighborhood of each data sample. To retain such relations, these methods generally have
to solve an optimization problem with the goal of matching
the distribution of distances in the target space with their
distribution in the original space. For instance, t-SNE minimizes the Kullback-Leibler divergence between distributions of k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) distances fitted in the
high and low-dimensional space. Similarly, the more recent
method UMAP optimizes the embedding in the target space
with the goal of preserving the 1-skeleton of fuzzy simplicial sets constructed in the original space. Such optimizations are computationally expensive in nature and account

336

