Neural RGB-D Surface Reconstruction
Dejan Azinović1
1

Ricardo Martin-Brualla2 Dan B Goldman2 Matthias Nießner1

Technical University of Munich

2

Google Research

3

Justus Thies1,3

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems

Figure 1. Our method obtains a high-quality 3D reconstruction from an RGB-D input sequence by training a multi-layer perceptron. The
core idea is to reformulate the neural radiance field definition in NeRF [48], and replace it with a differentiable rendering formulation based
on signed distance fields which is specifically tailored to geometry reconstruction.

Abstract
Obtaining high-quality 3D reconstructions of roomscale scenes is of paramount importance for upcoming applications in AR or VR. These range from mixed reality
applications for teleconferencing, virtual measuring, virtual room planing, to robotic applications. While current
volume-based view synthesis methods that use neural radiance fields (NeRFs) show promising results in reproducing
the appearance of an object or scene, they do not reconstruct an actual surface. The volumetric representation of
the surface based on densities leads to artifacts when a surface is extracted using Marching Cubes, since during optimization, densities are accumulated along the ray and are
not used at a single sample point in isolation. Instead of
this volumetric representation of the surface, we propose to
represent the surface using an implicit function (truncated
signed distance function). We show how to incorporate this
representation in the NeRF framework, and extend it to use
depth measurements from a commodity RGB-D sensor, such
as a Kinect. In addition, we propose a pose and camera refinement technique which improves the overall reconstruc-

tion quality. In contrast to concurrent work on integrating depth priors in NeRF which concentrates on novel view
synthesis, our approach is able to reconstruct high-quality,
metrical 3D reconstructions.

1. Introduction
Research on neural networks for scene representations
and image synthesis has made impressive progress in recent years [73]. Methods that learn volumetric representations [42, 48] from color images captured by a smartphone camera can be employed to synthesize near photorealistic images from novel viewpoints. While the focus
of these methods lies on the reproduction of color images,
they are not able to reconstruct metric and clean (noisefree) meshes. To overcome these limitations, we show that
there is a significant advantage in taking additional range
measurements from consumer-level depth cameras into account. Inexpensive depth cameras are broadly accessible
and are also built into modern smartphones. While classical
reconstruction methods [9, 33, 53] that purely rely on depth
measurements struggle with the limitations of physical sen-

6290

