MonoScene: Monocular 3D Semantic Scene Completion
Anh-Quan Cao
Inria

Raoul de Charette
Inria

anh-quan.cao@inria.fr

raoul.de-charette@inria.fr

Abstract
MonoScene proposes a 3D Semantic Scene Completion
(SSC) framework, where the dense geometry and semantics
of a scene are inferred from a single monocular RGB image.
Different from the SSC literature, relying on 2.5 or 3D input,
we solve the complex problem of 2D to 3D scene reconstruction while jointly inferring its semantics. Our framework relies on successive 2D and 3D UNets, bridged by a novel 2D3D features projection inspired by optics, and introduces a
3D context relation prior to enforce spatio-semantic consistency. Along with architectural contributions, we introduce novel global scene and local frustums losses. Experiments show we outperform the literature on all metrics and
datasets while hallucinating plausible scenery even beyond
the camera field of view. Our code and trained models are
available at https://github.com/cv-rits/MonoScene.

1. Introduction
Estimating 3D from an image is a problem that goes back
to the roots of computer vision [54]. While we, humans,
naturally understand a scene from a single image, reasoning
all at once about geometry and semantics, this was shown
remarkably complex by decades of research [57, 75, 80].
Subsequently, many algorithms use dedicated depth sensors such as Lidar [36, 50, 62] or depth cameras [2, 15, 19],
easing the 3D estimation problem. These sensors are often
more expensive, less compact and more intrusive than cameras which are widely spread and shipped in smartphones,
drones, cars, etc. Thus, being able to estimate a 3D scene
from an image would pave the way for new applications.
3D Semantic Scene Completion (SSC) addresses scene
understanding as it seeks to jointly infer its geometry and
semantics. While the task gained popularity recently [56],
the existing methods still rely on depth data (i.e. occupancy
grids, point cloud, depth maps, etc.) and are custom designed for either indoor or outdoor scenes.
Here, we present MonoScene which – unlike the literature – relies on a single RGB image to infer the dense 3D
voxelized semantic scene working indifferently for indoor

Outside
FOV

Input

Indoor (NYUv2 [58])

Inpu

t

Outdoor (SemanticKITTI [3])

Figure 1. RGB Semantic Scene Completion with MonoScene.
Our framework infers dense semantic scenes, hallucinating
scenery outside the field of view of the image (dark voxels, right).

and outdoor scenes. To solve this challenging problem, we
project 2D features along their line of sight, inspired by
optics, bridging 2D and 3D networks while letting the 3D
network self-discover relevant 2D features. The SSC literature mainly relies on cross-entropy loss which considers
each voxel independently, lacking context awareness. We
instead propose novel SSC losses that optimize the semantic distribution of group of voxels, both globally and in local
frustums. Finally, to further boost context understanding,
we design a 3D context layer to provide the network with a
global receptive field and insights about the voxels semantic relations. We extensively tested MonoScene on indoor
and outdoor, see Fig. 1, where it outperformed all comparable baselines and even some 3D input baselines. Our main
contributions are summarized as follows.
• MonoScene: the first SSC method tackling both outdoor and indoor scenes from a single RGB image.
• A mechanism for 2D Features Line of Sight Projection
bridging 2D and 3D networks (FLoSP, Sec. 3.1).
• A 3D Context Relation Prior (3D CRP, Sec. 3.2) layer
that boosts context awareness in the network.
• New SSC losses to optimize scene-class affinity
(Sec. 3.3.1) and local frustum proportions (Sec. 3.3.2).

2. Related works
3D from a single image. Despite early researches [31,57,
80], in the deep learning era the first works focused on single 3D object reconstruction with explicit [1, 11, 16, 23, 26,

3991

