Canonical Voting: Towards Robust Oriented Bounding Box Detection
in 3D Scenes
Yang You, Zelin Ye, Yujing Lou, Chengkun Li, Yong-Lu Li, Lizhuang Ma, Weiming Wang*, Cewu Lu*
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{qq456cvb, h e r o, louyujing, sjtulck, yonglu li, ma-lz, wangweiming, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
3D object detection has attracted much attention thanks to
the advances in sensors and deep learning methods for point
clouds. Current state-of-the-art methods like VoteNet regress
direct offset towards object centers and box orientations with
an additional Multi-Layer-Perceptron network. Both their
offset and orientation predictions are not accurate due to
the fundamental difficulty in rotation classification. In the
work, we disentangle the direct offset into Local Canonical
Coordinates (LCC), box scales and box orientations. Only
LCC and box scales are regressed, while box orientations
are generated by a canonical voting scheme. Finally, an
LCC-aware back-projection checking algorithm iteratively
cuts out bounding boxes from the generated vote maps, with
the elimination of false positives. Our model achieves stateof-the-art performance on three standard real-world benchmarks: ScanNet, SceneNN and SUN RGB-D. Our code is
available on https://github.com/qq456cvb/CanonicalVoting.

1. Introduction
With the use of depth cameras and Lidar sensors, 3D object detection is becoming more and more important for realworld scene understanding. Recently, with advances in deep
networks for point clouds, several methods [16, 20, 22, 26]
have shown state-of-the-art 3D detection results. Among
them, the recently proposed VoteNet [16] showed remarkable improvement over previous methods on 3D oriented
bounding box detection (rotation around gravity axis).
VoteNet passes the input point cloud through a backbone network and then samples a set of seed points, which
generate center votes. These votes are offset, targeted to
reach object centers. After that, vote clusters are aggregated
through a learned module to generate box orientations and
* Cewu Lu and Weiming Wang are the corresponding authors. Cewu Lu
is member of Qing Yuan Research Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China and
Shanghai Qi Zhi institute.

Figure 1. We present a method that regresses Local Canonical Coordinates disentangled from orientations. We leverage a
canonical voting module to find possible orientations and object
centers. Back projection validation is utilized to further eliminate
false positives.

scales. VoteNet resembles with traditional Hough voting in
that bounding box centers are proposed in those peaks of
votes. However, we find that neither box orientations nor
offsets towards object centers are accurately predicted for
most points, even with modern 3D sparse convolution techniques [3]. The absolute error of point-wise predicted offsets
and box orientations is not even better than random guess in
many cases, as shown in Table 1. Though VoteNet proposes
a two-stage pipeline and refines the center and orientation in
the later stage, the accumulated error cannot be eliminated.
To handle this problem, we disentangle direct offset towards object centers into the following three parts: Local
Canonical Coordinates (LCC), box scales and box orientations. First, we estimate Local Canonical Coordinates
(LCC) and box scales instead of regressing orientations.

1193

