Voxel Set Transformer: A Set-to-Set Approach to
3D Object Detection from Point Clouds
Chenhang He, Ruihuang Li, Shuai Li, Lei Zhang*
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{csche, csrhli, csshuaili, cshzeng}@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Transformer has demonstrated promising performance
in many 2D vision tasks. However, it is cumbersome to
compute the self-attention on large-scale point cloud data
because point cloud is a long sequence and unevenly distributed in 3D space. To solve this issue, existing methods usually compute self-attention locally by grouping the
points into clusters of the same size, or perform convolutional self-attention on a discretized representation. However, the former results in stochastic point dropout, while
the latter typically has narrow attention fields. In this paper, we propose a novel voxel-based architecture, namely
Voxel Set Transformer (VoxSeT), to detect 3D objects from
point clouds by means of set-to-set translation. VoxSeT
is built upon a voxel-based set attention (VSA) module,
which reduces the self-attention in each voxel by two crossattentions and models features in a hidden space induced
by a group of latent codes. With the VSA module, VoxSeT
can manage voxelized point clusters with arbitrary size
in a wide range, and process them in parallel with linear complexity. The proposed VoxSeT integrates the high
performance of transformer with the efficiency of voxelbased model, which can be used as a good alternative
to the convolutional and point-based backbones. VoxSeT
reports competitive results on the KITTI and Waymo detection benchmarks. The source codes can be found at
https://github.com/skyhehe123/VoxSeT.

1. Introduction
Object detection from 3D point cloud has been receiving
extensive attention as it empowers many applications like
autonomous driving, robotics and virtual reality. Unlike 2D
images, 3D point clouds are naturally sparse and unevenly
distributed in continuous space, impeding the CNN layers
from being directly applied. To resolve this issue, some approaches [5, 10, 42, 49, 51] first transform the point cloud
* Corresponding author.

Drop

Pad

Voxelization

Dummy
point

Cross-attention
ConvFFN

Self-attention

Sparse-conv

Cross-attention

⋯
Self-attention
(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1.
The illustrations of (a) grouping-based, (b)
convolutional-based and (c) our proposed induced set-based attention mechanisms.

into a discrete representation and then apply CNN models
to extract high dimensional features. Another class of approaches [27, 33, 41, 44, 45] model the point cloud in continuous space, where the multi-scale features are extracted
through interleaved grouping and aggregation steps.
Beyond the above two schemes, transformer-based models [9, 21–23, 31, 47] have recently attracted great interest
in processing point cloud data as the self-attention used in
transformers is invariant to permutation and cardinality of
the input components, which makes transformer an appropriate choice for point cloud processing. The main limitation of transformer models, however, lies in that the selfattention computation is quadratic. Each token has to be
updated by using all the other tokens from previous layers,
making self-attention intractable for long sequence point
clouds. Point Transformer [47] builds transformers upon a
PointNet [28] architecture, which hierarchically groups the
point cloud data into different clusters and computes selfattention in each cluster. CT3D [31] presents a two-stage
point cloud detector, where 3D RoIs are extracted to group
the raw points in the first stage and transformers are applied
to the grouped points in the second stage.
However, since the distribution of point clouds is extremely uneven, the number of points in each cluster varies
a lot. To enable the self-attention to run in parallel, cur-

8417

