Stand-Alone Inter-Frame Attention in Video Models
Fuchen Long† , Zhaofan Qiu† , Yingwei Pan† , Ting Yao† , Jiebo Luo§ and Tao Mei†
†
JD Explore Academy, Beijing, China
§
University of Rochester, Rochester, NY USA
{longfc.ustc, zhaofanqiu, panyw.ustc, tingyao.ustc}@gmail.com
jluo@cs.rochester.edu; tmei@jd.com
Frame t-1

Frame t

Frame t+1

Abstract
Motion, as the uniqueness of a video, has been critical
to the development of video understanding models. Modern deep learning models leverage motion by either executing spatio-temporal 3D convolutions, factorizing 3D
convolutions into spatial and temporal convolutions separately, or computing self-attention along temporal dimension. The implicit assumption behind such successes is
that the feature maps across consecutive frames can be
nicely aggregated. Nevertheless, the assumption may not
always hold especially for the regions with large deformation. In this paper, we present a new recipe of interframe attention block, namely Stand-alone Inter-Frame Attention (SIFA), that novelly delves into the deformation
across frames to estimate local self-attention on each spatial location. Technically, SIFA remoulds the deformable
design via re-scaling the offset predictions by the difference
between two frames. Taking each spatial location in the current frame as the query, the locally deformable neighbors
in the next frame are regarded as the keys/values. Then,
SIFA measures the similarity between query and keys as
stand-alone attention to weighted average the values for
temporal aggregation. We further plug SIFA block into ConvNets and Vision Transformer, respectively, to devise SIFANet and SIFA-Transformer. Extensive experiments conducted on four video datasets demonstrate the superiority
of SIFA-Net and SIFA-Transformer as stronger backbones.
More remarkably, SIFA-Transformer achieves an accuracy
of 83.1% on Kinetics-400 dataset. Source code is available
at https://github.com/FuchenUSTC/SIFA.

1. Introduction
Video is an electronic representation of moving visual
images and naturally forms the motion, which signifies a
continuous change in position of objects or persons with
time. Modeling such temporal dynamics is essential to the

kernel weights

(a) temporal convolution

query

keys/values

attention

(b) self-attention along temporal dimension

query
aggregation

keys/values

attention

(c) inter-frame attention

Figure 1. Illustration of (a) temporal convolution, (b) self-attention
along temporal dimension, and (c) our inter-frame attention.

extension from understanding still images to videos. The
recent advances generally suggest to leverage motion along
two directions. One involves utilization of temporal convolutions by being integrated into space-time 3D convolutions [18, 50] or explicitly co-working with spatial convolutions [3, 52, 62]. The other measures self-attention of each
location over the temporal neighbors at the same spatial position across frames. Figure 1(a) and (b) conceptually depict the implementation of temporal convolution and selfattention along temporal dimension, respectively. The underlying spirit behind these operations originates from the
foundation that the feature maps across frames should be
well aligned. This assumption nevertheless may not always
be valid in practice. Taking the three consecutive frames in
Figure 1 as an example, the same positions across frames
highlighted in the circles correspond to different objects
(person and track in the case) due to the motion of the athlete in pole vault. As such, performing temporal convolution or computing attention over these positions might be
suboptimal for temporal feature aggregation.
To alleviate this issue, we propose to take the changes

3192

