Patch Slimming for Efficient Vision Transformers
Yehui Tang1,2 , Kai Han2 , Yunhe Wang2∗, Chang Xu3 ,
Jianyuan Guo2,3 , Chao Xu1 , Dacheng Tao4 ,
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Peking University. 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.
3
School of Computer Science, University of Sydney. 4 JD Explore Academy, China.
yhtang@pku.edu.cn, {kai.han, yunhe.wang}@huawei.com, dacheng.tao@gmail.com.

Abstract
This paper studies the efficiency problem for visual
transformers by excavating redundant calculation in given
networks. The recent transformer architecture has demonstrated its effectiveness for achieving excellent performance
on a series of computer vision tasks. However, similar
to that of convolutional neural networks, the huge computational cost of vision transformers is still a severe issue. Considering that the attention mechanism aggregates
different patches layer-by-layer, we present a novel patch
slimming approach that discards useless patches in a topdown paradigm. We first identify the effective patches in
the last layer and then use them to guide the patch selection process of previous layers. For each layer, the impact
of a patch on the final output feature is approximated and
patches with less impacts will be removed. Experimental results on benchmark datasets demonstrate that the proposed
method can significantly reduce the computational costs of
vision transformers without affecting their performances.
For example, over 45% FLOPs of the ViT-Ti model can be
reduced with only 0.2% top-1 accuracy drop on the ImageNet dataset.

1. Introduction
Recently, transformer models have been introduced into
the field of computer vision and achieved high performance
in many tasks such as object recognition [6], image process [2], and video analysis [21]. Compared with the convolutional neural networks (CNNs), the transformer architecture introduces less inductive biases and hence has larger
potential to absorb more training data and generalize well
on more diverse tasks [6, 11, 27, 35, 38, 43]. However, similar to CNNs, vision transformers also suffer high computational cost, which blocks their deployment on resourcelimited devices such as mobile phones and various IoT de∗ Corresponding author.

vices. To apply a deep neural network in such real scenarios, massive model compression algorithms have been proposed to reduce the required computational cost [24, 42].
For example, quantization algorithms approximate weights
and intermediate features maps in neural networks with
low-bit data [3, 32]. Knowledge distillation improves the
performance of a compact network by transferring knowledge from giant models [17, 22].
In addition, network pruning is widely explored and used
to reduce the neural architecture by directly removing useless components in the pre-defined network [13, 14, 25, 28].
Structured pruning discards whole contiguous components
of a pre-trained model, which has attracted much attention
in recent years, as it can realize acceleration without specific
hardware design. In CNNs, removing a whole filter for improving the network efficiency is a representative paradigm,
named channel pruning (or filter pruning) [16, 25]. For example, Liu et al. [25] introduce scaling factors to control the
information flow in the neural network and filters with small
factors will be removed. Although the aforementioned network compression methods have made tremendous efforts
for deploying compact convolutional neural networks, there
are only few works discussing how to accelerate vision
transformers.
Different from the paradigm in conventional CNNs,
the vision transformer splits the input image into multiple
patches and calculates the features of all these patches in
parallel. The attention mechanism will further aggregate
all patch embeddings into visual features as the output. Elements in the attention map reflect the relationship or similarity between any two patches, and the largest attention value
for constructing the feature of an arbitrary patch is usually
calculated from itself. Thus, we have to preserve this information flow in the pruned vision transformers for retaining the model performance, which cannot be guaranteed in
the conventional CNN channel pruning methods. Moreover,
not all the manually divided patches are informative enough
and deserve to be preserved in all layers, e.g., some patches
are redundant with others. Hence we consider developing

12165

