Imposing Consistency for Optical Flow Estimation
Jisoo Jeong1 Jamie Menjay Lin2,† Fatih Porikli1 Nojun Kwak3,‡
1
Qualcomm AI Research∗ 2 Google Research 3 Seoul National University
{jisojeon,fporikli}@qti.qualcomm.com

jmlin@google.com

nojunk@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Imposing consistency through proxy tasks has been
shown to enhance data-driven learning and enable selfsupervision in various tasks. This paper introduces novel
and effective consistency strategies for optical flow estimation, a problem where labels from real-world data are
very challenging to derive. More specifically, we propose
occlusion consistency and zero forcing in the forms of selfsupervised learning and transformation consistency in the
form of semi-supervised learning. We apply these consistency techniques in a way that the network model learns to
describe pixel-level motions better while requiring no additional annotations. We demonstrate that our consistency
strategies applied to a strong baseline network model using
the original datasets and labels provide further improvements, attaining the state-of-the-art results on the KITTI2015 scene flow benchmark in the non-stereo category. Our
method achieves the best foreground accuracy (4.33% in
Fl-all) over both the stereo and non-stereo categories, even
though using only monocular image inputs.

1. Introduction
Optical flow characterizes dense displacements between
corresponding pixels across images, e.g. between two consecutive frames in a video [9, 19, 40, 43]. It is widely employed in video analysis applications including video compression [32, 46], action recognition [6, 29], video denoising [3, 8], and object tracking [25, 52], to point out a few.
As important as its, optical flow estimation comes with
significant challenges. Occlusions due to camera and object motions present one inherent difficulty, where a part
of the scene is visible in one but not in the other image of
the pair. Several methods addressed this problem by explicitly estimating regions to be excluded [34, 51], by applying
* Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.
† This work was done while at Qualcomm AI Research.
‡ Nojun Kwak was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (2021R1A2C3006659).

Figure 1. During training, we enforce occlusion consistency with
self-supervision by applying random occlusion patterns and imposing the network to detect the regions under occlusion between consecutive images (It , It+1 ). We also employ transformation consistency (equivariance to geometric transformations) in a
semi-supervised manner for an image pair (It , It+k ) and the transformed pair (T (It ), T (It+k )) with k ≥ 1.

self-supervision [31], or by incorporating contextual information [43]. These methods, however, had limited reception
since they rely on multiple forward-backward iterations for
predicting occlusion areas [34, 41] or fail for larger occlusions.
Obtaining precise annotations for optical flow is another
challenge that directly impacts the learning performance.
Since pixel-level motion annotation requires specialized
and costly data acquisition systems, and in many cases, such
annotations do not support high precision and spatial resolution, optical flow datasets are limited in number, variety,
and degree of realism [9, 19]. The need for large-scale realworld datasets, therefore, becomes a bottleneck.
To mitigate the annotation issues, unsupervised learning [20, 24, 34, 45] and semi-supervised learning [27, 47]
methods have been proposed in the past. Unsupervised
learning schemes, however, typically result in degraded
performance, lagging behind fully supervised learning

3181

