Multi-Source Uncertainty Mining for Deep Unsupervised Saliency Detection
Yifan Wang1 , Wenbo Zhang1 , Lijun Wang1 ,* Ting Liu3 , Huchuan Lu1,2
1
Dalian University of Technology, 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, 3 Alibaba Group

Abstract
Deep learning-based image salient object detection
(SOD) heavily relies on large-scale training data with pixelwise labeling. High-quality labels involve intensive labor
and are expensive to acquire. In this paper, we propose a
novel multi-source uncertainty mining method to facilitate
unsupervised deep learning from multiple noisy labels generated by traditional handcrafted SOD methods. We design
an Uncertainty Mining Network (UMNet) which consists of
multiple Merge-and-Split (MS) modules to recursively analyze the commonality and difference among multiple noisy
labels and infer pixel-wise uncertainty map for each label.
Meanwhile, we model the noisy labels using Gibbs distribution and propose a weighted uncertainty loss to jointly
train the UMNet with the SOD network. As a consequence,
our UMNet can adaptively select reliable labels for SOD
network learning. Extensive experiments on benchmark
datasets demonstrate that our method not only outperforms
existing unsupervised methods, but also is on par with fullysupervised state-of-the-art models.

1. Introduction
Image salient object detection (SOD) aims at identifying
and segmenting the most prominent object in a scene. Existing SOD methods can be mainly divided into two categories, i.e., convolutional neural network (CNN) based and
traditional handcrafted methods. Both of them have their
unique pros and cons. On the one hand, driven by the strong
model capacity of deep networks, CNN based SOD methods have achieved remarkable success. However, they heavily rely on large amounts of training data with pixel-wise
annotations, which are labor-intensive and expensive to acquire. On the other hand, handcrafted SOD methods are
more flexible to the data annotations, but they are fragile in
practice due to the limitations of manually designed image
features and priors.
With the above concern, one research topic termed deep
unsupervised SOD [20,38,40,43] has been activated, which
focuses on training the deep SOD networks using the noisy
* Corresponding author: Lijun Wang, ljwang@dlut.edu.cn

(a) Image

(b) Four pseudo labels generated by traditional methods

(c) Saliency GT

(d) Uncertainty GTs of the above four pseudo labels

(e) Saliency prediction

(f) Our predicted uncertainty maps

Figure 1. Motivation. Given an input image (a) and its corresponding four pseudo labels generated by the traditional SOD methods
(b), our UMNet predicts the uncertainty maps (f) of the pseudo
labels, according to which our SODNet is learned under the supervision of the reliable labeling samples and generates promising
saliency result (e). The ground truths of uncertainty maps (d) are
obtained by the computing the difference between each pseudo label in (b) with the saliency ground truth (c), which are not available
under the unsupervised learning setting.

pseudo labels generated by traditional handcrafted SOD
methods. Directly training networks using the noisy labels is not a wise choice since the deep network can easily fit to the corrupted labels [37]. One straightforward solution is first performing label refinement and then using
the refined labels for network training [20]. Another popular line [38, 40, 43] devotes to modeling the noise of the
pseudo labels. For instance, the work of [43] assumes that
the label noise obeys a Gaussian distribution and builds a
noise modeling module to fit such distribution. Zhang et
al. [40] compute a dense confidence map based on the variance of network predictions among different training iterations. While promising results have been delivered, it is
still an open problem to model the noisy labels and find the
reliable ones in an unsupervised learning manner.
In this paper, we establish a novel deep unsupervised
SOD framework for effectively mining the reliable pixel-

11727

