FocusCut: Diving into a Focus View in Interactive Segmentation
Zheng Lin1 Zheng-Peng Duan1 Zhao Zhang1,2 Chun-Le Guo1 * Ming-Ming Cheng1
1
TMCC, College of Computer Science, Nankai University 2 SenseTime Research
http://mmcheng.net/focuscut/

Global View

Abstract
Interactive image segmentation is an essential tool in
pixel-level annotation and image editing. To obtain a highprecision binary segmentation mask, users tend to add interaction clicks around the object details, such as edges and
holes, for efficient refinement. Current methods regard these
repair clicks as the guidance to jointly determine the global
prediction. However, the global view makes the model lose
focus from later clicks, and is not in line with user intentions. In this paper, we dive into the view of clicks’ eyes to
endow them with the decisive role in object details again.
To verify the necessity of focus view, we design a simple
yet effective pipeline, named FocusCut, which integrates the
functions of object segmentation and local refinement. After obtaining the global prediction, it crops click-centered
patches from the original image with adaptive scopes to refine the local predictions progressively. Without user perception and parameters increase, our method has achieved
state-of-the-art results. Extensive experiments and visualized results demonstrate that FocusCut makes hyper-fine
segmentation possible for interactive image segmentation.

1. Introduction
Interactive image segmentation aims to obtain an accurate binary mask of the target object with the least interaction cost. It has developed into an indispensable tool
in serving pixel-level data annotation and image editing.
The research mainly focuses on two aspects. One is a
more efficient mode of user interaction, and the other is
to make more efficient use of the interaction provided by
users. For the former, the interactive modes are widely
explored and mainly based on the bounding box [50], the
polygon [1, 6, 32], clicks [2, 29, 36], scribbles [3, 48], and
some combinations [34, 52]. Among them, the click-based
method has become the mainstream because of its simplicity. For the latter, researchers have explored the interaction
ambiguity [9, 26, 30], input information [31, 35], backpropagating [20,41], etc. These methods provide better segmentation results without changing the user input.
* C.L. Guo is the corresponding author.

Focus View

Figure 1. Visual display of FocusCut. The details of the eagle claw
are refined with an additional focus view. The red and green clicks
are provided by users to indicate the foreground and background
in interactive segmentation. The yellow mask is the prediction.

In recent years, with the increase of large screen equipments and the improvement of aesthetic, both image annotation and image editing need more delicate segmentation
masks. In high-precision interactive segmentation, the refinement of object details, such as edges and holes, often
requires more interactive clicks and time. When users click
in mislabeled regions, they tend to focus on the detail region
for efficient repairing. However, current methods consider
previous clicks together to determine the global prediction.
In a new round of interaction, a join predicting process may
weaken the decisive effect of the newly-input click on its
surrounding details and feed back disagreeable results.
For more effective refinement, we dive into the view of
a click to consider its surrounding information, which is
called the focus view. In the paper, we design a concise
pipeline, FocusCut, to verify the importance of the focus
view. The original function of the interactive segmentation
network has been changed, and instead, we endow it with
a new role, allowing it to not only segment the target object but also repair local details. Specifically, after global
segmentation, which is called the global view in our paper,
it crops a local patch from original images centered by the
newly-clicked point as the focus view to further refine object details using the same network. The progressive crop-

2637

