Learning Optimal K-space Acquisition and Reconstruction using
Physics-Informed Neural Networks

1

Wei Peng1,3 Li Feng2 Guoying Zhao1, * Fang Liu3,∗
CMVS, University of Oulu 2 Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai 3 Harvard Medical School

Abstract
The inherent slow imaging speed of Magnetic Resonance
Image (MRI) has spurred the development of various acceleration methods, typically through heuristically undersampling the MRI measurement domain known as k-space.
Recently, deep neural networks have been applied to reconstruct undersampled k-space data and have shown improved reconstruction performance. While most of these
methods focus on designing novel reconstruction networks
or new training strategies for a given undersampling pattern, e.g., Cartesian undersampling or Non-Cartesian sampling, to date, there is limited research aiming to learn and
optimize k-space sampling strategies using deep neural networks. This work proposes a novel optimization framework
to learn k-space sampling trajectories by considering it as
an Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) problem that can
be solved using neural ODE. In particular, the sampling of
k-space data is framed as a dynamic system, in which neural ODE is formulated to approximate the system with additional constraints on MRI physics. In addition, we have
also demonstrated that trajectory optimization and image
reconstruction can be learned collaboratively for improved
imaging efficiency and reconstruction performance. Experiments were conducted on different in-vivo datasets (e.g.,
brain and knee images) acquired with different sequences.
Initial results have shown that our proposed method can
generate better image quality in accelerated MRI than conventional undersampling schemes in Cartesian and NonCartesian acquisitions.

1. Introduction
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is a powerful clinical tool for disease diagnosis [23]. MRI is non-invasive,
radiation-free, and can provide excellent soft-tissue contrast, making it an ideal imaging modality for various neurological, oncological, and musculoskeletal applications [7].
Standard MRI acquisition sequentially collects the k-space
* Corresponding Author.

data using segmented sampling patterns composed of multiple shots (e.g., spokes, or interleaves) [5, 7]. However,
this acquisition scheme typically requires a long scan time,
which is challenging for subjects who cannot tolerate long
scans due to injuries, pain, discomfort, or claustrophobia.
Notably, the long scan also makes data acquisition sensitive to different types of motion, which can cause image
degradation reflected as motion artifact [51]. Therefore, accelerated MRI techniques have played an essential role in
reducing MRI acquisition time.
Parallel imaging [14,36,44] and compressed sensing [26,
27, 32] have been extensively investigated for accelerating
MRI over the past decades. Parallel imaging uses multicoil information to estimate the missing k-space data; compressed sensing leverages image sparsity to reconstruct undersampled k-space data using a constrained nonlinear image reconstruction framework. Both techniques can increase imaging efficiency in MRI. Recently, deep learning
methods using neural networks have been investigated to reconstruct undersampled k-space data through learning multilevel image representation to remove image artifacts and
noises. Various techniques have been proposed using unroll
network [6, 16, 42], end-to-end mapping [10, 17, 48], domain transfer learning [2, 55], adversarial learning [28, 37],
and unsupervised learning [24]. However, while those
methods focus on developing novel reconstruction networks
or improving network training strategies, very few studies
have investigated the optimization of k-space acquisition for
learning-based reconstruction. The k-space undersampling
patterns are usually kept the same as those previously used
in parallel imaging and compressed sensing.
This study will investigate accelerating MRI by learning
k-space sampling to maximize image acquisition efficiency
for deep learning-based image reconstruction. The k-space
acquisition is formulated as a dynamic optimization process
and is solved using a neural Ordinary Differential Equation
(ODE) [9]. This ODE system is first initialized with regular Cartesian and Non-Cartesian k-space trajectories, and
the trajectories are then dynamically adjusted towards an
optimal pattern that provides the best acquisition efficiency.
Furthermore, a joint training strategy to optimize both the

20794

