Drop the GAN1:
In Defense of Patches Nearest Neighbors as Single Image Generative Models
Niv Granot∗
∗

Ben Feinstein∗

Assaf Shocher∗

Shai Bagon†

Michal Irani∗

†

Dept. of Computer Science and Applied Math, The Weizmann Institute of Science
Weizmann Artificial Intelligence Center (WAIC)
Project Website: http://www.wisdom.weizmann.ac.il/˜vision/gpnn/

Figure 1. Our simple unified framework covers a broad spectrum of single-image generative tasks, that usually require hours of training per
image for GANs. Using patch nearest neighbors and a single source image, we can perform these tasks in a few seconds and with higher
quality. We show here results obtained with our method for pivotal examples shown in SinGAN [27], InGAN [28], Structural analogies [3]
and Bidirectional Similarity [30]. Additionally, we introduce novel applications such as Conditional-Inpainting. Input images marked in red.

Abstract
Image manipulation dates back long before the deep
learning era. The classical prevailing approaches were
based on maximizing patch similarity between the input
and generated output. Recently, single-image GANs were
introduced as a superior and more sophisticated solution
to image manipulation tasks. Moreover, they offered the
opportunity not only to manipulate a given image, but also
to generate a large and diverse set of different outputs from
a single natural image. This gave rise to new tasks, which
are considered “GAN-only”. However, despite their impressiveness, single-image GANs require long training time
(usually hours) for each image and each task and often suffer
from visual artifacts. In this paper we revisit the classical
patch-based methods, and show that – unlike previously believed – classical methods can be adapted to tackle these
novel “GAN-only” tasks. Moreover, they do so better and
faster than single-image GAN-based methods. More specifically, we show that: (i) by introducing slight modifications,
classical patch-based methods are able to unconditionally
generate diverse images based on a single natural image;
1 While we could not resist this wordplay, we do acknowledge that singleimage GANs have a few capabilities which cannot be realized by simple
patch nearest-neighbors. We discuss these pros (and cons) in detail in Sec. 5.
No GANs were harmed in the preparation of this paper... ,.

(ii) the generated output visual quality exceeds that of singleimage GANs by a large margin (confirmed both quantitatively and qualitatively); (iii) they are orders of magnitude
faster (runtime reduced from hours to seconds).2

1. Introduction
Single-image generative models perform image synthesis
and manipulation by capturing the patch distribution of a
single image. Prior to the Deep-Learning revolution, the
classical prevailing methods were based on optimizing the
similarity of small patches between the input image and the
generated output image. These unsupervised patch-based
methods (e.g., [2, 6, 7, 25, 26, 30, 35]) gave rise to a wide variety of remarkable image synthesis and manipulation tasks, including image completion, texture synthesis, image summarization/retargeting, collages, image reshuffling, and more.
Specifically, the Bidirectional similarity approach [2, 30]
encourages the output image to contain only patches from
the input image (“Visual Coherence”), and vice versa, the
input should contain only patches from the output (“Visual
Completeness”). Hence, no new artifacts are introduced in
the output image and no critical information is lost either.
2 This project received funding from the European Research Council
(ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation
programme (grant agreement No 788535), and the Carolito Stiftung. Dr
Bagon is a Robin Chemers Neustein AI Fellow.

13460

