Category-Aware Transformer Network for Better Human-Object Interaction
Detection
Leizhen Dong, Zhimin Li, Kunlun Xu, Zhijun Zhang, Luxin Yan, Sheng Zhong, Xu Zou*
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Multispectral Information Processing,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
{dongleizhen36, lizm, xukunlun, zoux}@hust.edu.cn
𝑸𝑸out

Abstract
Human-Object Interactions (HOI) detection, which aims
to localize a human and a relevant object while recognizing their interaction, is crucial for understanding a still image. Recently, tranformer-based models have significantly
advanced the progress of HOI detection. However, the capability of these models has not been fully explored since
the Object Query of the model is always simply initialized
as just zeros, which would affect the performance. In this
paper, we try to study the issue of promoting transformerbased HOI detectors by initializing the Object Query with
category-aware semantic information. To this end, we innovatively propose the Category-Aware Transformer Network (CATN). Specifically, the Object Query would be initialized via category priors represented by an external object detection model to yield a better performance. Moreover, such category priors can be further used for enhancing the representation ability of features via the attention
mechanism. We have firstly verified our idea via the Oracle experiment by initializing the Object Query with the
groundtruth category information. And then extensive experiments have been conducted to show that a HOI detection model equipped with our idea outperforms the baseline
by a large margin to achieve a new state-of-the-art result.

1. Introduction
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection, serving as a
fundamental task for high-level computer vision tasks, e.g.
image captioning, visual grounding, visual question answer,
etc., has attracted enormous attention in recent years. Given
an image, HOI detection aims to localize the pair of human
and object instances and recognize the interaction between
them. A human-object interaction could be defined as the
<human, object, verb> triplet.
Many two- or one-stage methods [2, 6, 7, 12, 13, 17, 18,
20, 26, 34, 35, 38] have significantly advanced the process
* Corresponding author.

Decoder

Subsequent Layers
𝑸𝑸′ 𝒐𝒐𝒐𝒐𝒐𝒐

First Layer
Category
Aware
Query

Zeros
Query

Priors

Zeros
Object Query

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Black-Dotted-Box in (a) and Black-Curve in (b): The
Object Query of the first decoder layer is simply initialized as
just zeros in all previous transformer-based HOI detection methods. Red-Box in (a) and Red-Curve in (b): Our idea is to take
the category-aware information as the Object Query initialization,
where the training curve indicates that our method significantly
promotes mAP from 29.07 to 31.03 on the HICO-DET dataset.

of HOI detection, while transformer-based methods [3, 14,
19, 30, 36, 39] have been remarkably proposed recently and
achieved the new state-of-the-art result.
Thanks to the self-attention and cross-attention mechanisms, Transformer [32] has a better capability of capturing
long-range dependence between different instances, which
is especially suitable for the HOI detection. HOTR [14] and
AS-Net [3] utilize two parallel branches with transformerdecoders for performing instance detection and interaction
classification respectively. Motivated by DETR [1], HOITransformer [39] and QPIC [30] adopt one transformerdecoder with several sequential layers and automatically
group the different types of predictions from one query into
an HOI triplet in an end-to-end manner.

19538

