Point-BERT: Pre-training 3D Point Cloud Transformers with
Masked Point Modeling
Xumin Yu*,1 , Lulu Tang∗,1,2 , Yongming Rao∗,1 , Tiejun Huang2,3 , Jie Zhou1 , Jiwen Lu†,1,2
1
Tsinghua University 2 BAAI 3 Peking University

Abstract
Point Embs. Tokenizer

We present Point-BERT, a new paradigm for learning
Transformers to generalize the concept of BERT [8] to 3D
point cloud. Inspired by BERT, we devise a Masked Point
Modeling (MPM) task to pre-train point cloud Transformers. Specifically, we first divide a point cloud into several
local point patches, and a point cloud Tokenizer with a discrete Variational AutoEncoder (dVAE) is designed to generate discrete point tokens containing meaningful local information. Then, we randomly mask out some patches of
input point clouds and feed them into the backbone Transformers. The pre-training objective is to recover the original point tokens at the masked locations under the supervision of point tokens obtained by the Tokenizer. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that the proposed BERT-style pretraining strategy significantly improves the performance of
standard point cloud Transformers. Equipped with our pretraining strategy, we show that a pure Transformer architecture attains 93.8% accuracy on ModelNet40 and 83.1%
accuracy on the hardest setting of ScanObjectNN, surpassing carefully designed point cloud models with much fewer
hand-made designs. We also demonstrate that the representations learned by Point-BERT transfer well to new
tasks and domains, where our models largely advance the
state-of-the-art of few-shot point cloud classification task.
The code and pre-trained models are available at https:
//github.com/lulutang0608/Point-BERT.

1. Introduction
Compared to conventional hand-crafted feature extraction methods, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) [20]
is dependent on much less prior knowledge. Transformers [49] have pushed this trend further as a step towards no
inductive bias with minimal man-made assumptions, such
as translation equivalence or locality in CNNs. Recently,
the structural superiority and versatility of standard Transformers are proved in both language [3, 8, 18, 25, 34] and
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

Discrete Tokens
5, 26, 1967,
269, 516, 49

Decoder
Reconstructed
Point Cloud

Transformer
Encoder
Point Cloud

5, 1967, 49
Predicted Tokens

Masked Point Embs.

Figure 1. Illustration of our main idea. Point-BERT is designed
for pre-training of standard point cloud Transformers. By training
a dVAE via point cloud reconstruction, we can convert a point
cloud into a sequence of discrete point tokens. Then we are able
to pre-train the Transformers with a Mask Point Modeling (MPM)
task by predicting the masked tokens.

image tasks [2, 6, 9, 45, 55, 66], and the capability of diminishing the inductive biases is also justified by enabling more
parameters, more data [9], and longer training schedules.
While Transformers produce astounding results in Natural
Language Processing (NLP) and image processing, it is not
well studied in the 3D community. Existing Transformerbased point cloud models [11,63] bring in certain inevitable
inductive biases from local feature aggregation [63] and
neighbor embedding [11], making them deviate from the
mainstream of standard Transformers. To this end, we aim
to apply standard Transformers on point cloud directly with
minimal inductive bias, as a stepping stone to a neat and
unified model for 3D representation learning.
Apparently, the straightforward adoption of Transformers does not achieve satisfactory performance on point
cloud tasks (see Figure 5). This discouraging result is partially attributed to the limited annotated 3D data since pure
Transformers with no inductive bias need massive training
data. For example, ViT [9] uses ImageNet [20] (14M images) and JFT [41] (303M images) to train vision Transformers. In contrast, accurate annotated point clouds are
relatively insufficient. Despite the 3D data acquisition is
getting easy with the recent proliferation of modern scanning devices, labeling point clouds is still time-consuming,
error-prone, and even infeasible in some extreme real-world
scenarios. The difficulty motivates a flux of research into
learning from unlabelled 3D data. Self-supervised pre-

19313

