GrainSpace: A Large-scale Dataset for Fine-grained and Domain-adaptive
Recognition of Cereal Grains
Lei Fan1,2 ∗† Yiwen Ding1 ∗

Dongdong Fan1

lei.fan1@unsw.edu.au
didonglin@baidu.com
1

Gaozhe Technology

Donglin Di3

Yang Song2

{dingyiwen,fandongdong}@gaozhe.com.cn

morri@cse.unsw.edu.au
2

Maurice Pagnucco2

yang.song1@unsw.edu.au

The University of New South Wales

3

Baidu

Abstract
Cereal grains are a vital part of human diets and are
important commodities for people’s livelihood and international trade. Grain Appearance Inspection (GAI) serves as
one of the crucial steps for the determination of grain quality and grain stratification for proper circulation, storage
and food processing, etc. GAI is routinely performed manually by qualified inspectors with the aid of some hand tools.
Automated GAI has the benefit of greatly assisting inspectors with their jobs but has been limited due to the lack of
datasets and clear definitions of the tasks.
In this paper we formulate GAI as three ubiquitous computer vision tasks: fine-grained recognition, domain adaptation and out-of-distribution recognition. We present a
large-scale and publicly available cereal grains dataset
called GrainSpace. Specifically, we construct three types
of device prototypes for data acquisition, and a total of
5.25 million images determined by professional inspectors.
The grain samples including wheat, maize and rice are
collected from five countries and more than 30 regions.
We also develop a comprehensive benchmark based on
semi-supervised learning and self-supervised learning techniques. To the best of our knowledge, GrainSpace is the
first publicly released dataset for cereal grain inspection,
https://github.com/hellodfan/GrainSpace.

1. Introduction
Cereal grains are the foundation of human civilization
and are inextricably linked to our daily life. According to
the data from the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations in 2020 [1], the three types of cereal grains:
wheat, maize and rice (see Figure 1), represent nearly 90%
of the worldwide produce of cereal grains.
Grain determination is a crucial part in quality inspection
∗ Equal contribution.
† Work done when interning at Gaozhe technology.

Figure 1. Examples of wheat, maize and rice grain kernels.

and grade stratification, which provides guides and measures for grain circulation, storage, process and international trade. The majority of work for grain determination
consists of chemical analysis and Grain Appearance Inspection (GAI). Chemical analysis is usually conducted by using
various apparatus, but GAI still requires manual inspection
with the aid of some hand tools ranging from sieves, dividers, to balances. In GAI, a batch of test samples are superficially inspected by professional inspectors in a kernelby-kernel way. GAI can determine multiple metrics, such
as impurities, damaged grains and cultivated varieties [21].
Taking GAI of wheat grains as an example, 60 grams (about
1600 grain kernels) are inspected and then divided into predefined groups manually, which requires 25 to 30 minutes
for an inspector with 3 to 5 years’ experience. It is thus
highly desirable to develop an automated GAI.
Over the past few years, deep learning techniques have
achieved remarkable success in many computer vision applications, such as recognition (ImageNet [37]), detection (MS-COCO [26]), segmentation (Cityscapes [9]) and
video understanding (YouTube-8M [2]). There are however two main challenges to apply deep learning models
to GAI. First, in-depth domain knowledge of GAI is required in order to formulate the grain determination problem into proper computer vision tasks. Second, developing deep learning-based methods for GAI requires highquality datasets covering a comprehensive representation of

21116

