DiGS : Divergence guided shape implicit neural representation for unoriented
point clouds
Yizhak Ben-Shabat1,2,3 *
1

Chamin Hewa Koneputugodage2,3 *

Stephen Gould2,3

Technion Israel Institute of Technology 2 The Australian National University
3
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision
{yizhak.benshabat, chamin.hewa, stephen.gould}@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Shape implicit neural representations (INRs) have recently shown to be effective in shape analysis and reconstruction tasks. Existing INRs require point coordinates to
learn the implicit level sets of the shape. When a normal
vector is available for each point, a higher fidelity representation can be learned, however normal vectors are often not
provided as raw data. Furthermore, the method’s initialization has been shown to play a crucial role for surface reconstruction. In this paper, we propose a divergence guided
shape representation learning approach that does not require normal vectors as input. We show that incorporating
a soft constraint on the divergence of the distance function
favours smooth solutions that reliably orients gradients to
match the unknown normal at each point, in some cases
even better than approaches that use ground truth normal
vectors directly. Additionally, we introduce a novel geometric initialization method for sinusoidal INRs that further improves convergence to the desired solution. We evaluate the
effectiveness of our approach on the task of surface reconstruction and shape space learning and show SOTA performance compared to other unoriented methods.
Code and model parameters available at our project page
https://chumbyte.github.io/DiGS-Site/.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing surfaces from 3D point samples is a well
studied problem in computer vision and computer graphics.
Recently, neural networks have been used to learn an implicit neural representation (INR) that can be used to reconstruct the underlying surface [2, 3, 16, 17, 29, 34, 36, 37, 42],
which we refer to as a shape INR. These methods are often
supervised using estimated or known volumetric implicit
representations in a regression setting [16, 29, 34] or using
* Equal contribution

Figure 1. Toy 2D example. Given an unoriented input point cloud
sampled on a shape, we train a shape implicit neural representation using a geometric initialization and a divergence penalty loss
which arises from the observation that in most locations the divergence of the signed distance function should be low.

surface 3D points with or without extra 3D supervision (e.g.
normal data) [2, 3, 17, 37] to regress the function directly.
Due to the difficulty of optimizing a regression model to fit
high fidelity surfaces, most methods use normal data. However, raw 3D point clouds from scans are typically unoriented, and thus do not have normal vectors, therefore a preprocessing estimation stage is required. While while some
methods allow normal supervision to be absent [17, 37], we
show that without it their performance drops significantly.
While there have been significant advances in normal estimation algorithms [5, 6, 19, 25], all yield unoriented and
noisy predictions. This poses a great challenge for existing
normal-based shape INR learning approaches.
In this work, we introduce a divergence guided shape implicit neural representation learning approach (DiGS INR),
which uses raw 3D point data for supervision without any
pre-processing stages. Our approach is motivated by the
observation, illustrated in Figure 1, that the gradient vector field of the signed distance function (produced by the
network) has low divergence nearly everywhere. We incorporate this geometric prior as a soft constraint in the loss
function and anneal it as training progresses. This requires
a network architecture that has continuous second derivatives, such as SIRENs [37] (which we use), in contrast to

19323

