Boosting Crowd Counting via Multifaceted Attention
Hui LIN1 , Zhiheng MA2 , Rongrong JI3 , Yaowei WANG4 , Xiaopeng HONG1,4,5 *
1
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Science
3
Xiamen University, 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory, 5 Harbin Institute of Technology
linhuixjtu@gmail.com; zh.ma@siat.ac.cn; rrji@xmu.edu.cn;
wangyw@pcl.ac.cn; hongxiaopeng@ieee.org

Abstract
This paper focuses on the challenging crowd counting
task. As large-scale variations often exist within crowd
images, neither fixed-size convolution kernel of CNN nor
fixed-size attention of recent vision transformers can well
handle this kind of variations. To address this problem,
we propose a Multifaceted Attention Network (MAN) to
improve transformer models in local spatial relation encoding. MAN incorporates global attention from vanilla
transformer, learnable local attention, and instance attention into a counting model. Firstly, the local Learnable Region Attention (LRA) is proposed to assign attention exclusive for each feature location dynamically. Secondly, we design the Local Attention Regularization to
supervise the training of LRA by minimizing the deviation among the attention for different feature locations.
Finally, we provide an Instance Attention mechanism to
focus on the most important instances dynamically during training. Extensive experiments on four challenging crowd counting datasets namely ShanghaiTech, UCFQNRF, JHU++, and NWPU have validated the proposed
method. Code: https://github.com/LoraLinH/BoostingCrowd-Counting-via-Multifaceted-Attention.

1. Introduction
Crowd counting plays an essential role in congestion estimation, video surveillance, and crowd management. Especially after the outbreak of coronavirus disease (COVID19), real-time crowd detection and counting attract more
and more attention.
In recent years, typical counting methods [20, 21, 41, 50]
utilize the Convolution Neural Network (CNN) as backbone
and regress density map to predict the total crowd count.
However, due to the wide viewing angle of cameras and
* Corresponding author.

the 2D perspective projection, large-scale variations often
exist in crowd images. Traditional CNNs with fixed-size
convolution kernel are difficult to deal with these variations
and the counting performance is severely limited. To alleviate this issue, multi-scale mechanism is designed, such as
multi-scale blobs [48], pyramid networks [22], and multicolumn networks. These methods introduce an intuitive
local-structure inductive bias [43], suggesting that the respective field should be adaptive to the size of objects.
Lately, the blossom of Transformer models, which adopt
the global self-attention mechanism, has significantly improved the performances of various natural language processing tasks. Nonetheless, it is not until ViT [10] introduces patch-dividing as a local-structure inductive bias
that transformer models can compete with and even surpass
CNN models in vision tasks. The development of vision
transformer suggests that both global self-attention mechanism and local inductive bias are important for vision tasks.
The study about transformer based crowd counting is just
in its preliminary stage [19, 49] and undergoes major challenges in introducing the local inductive bias to transformer
models in crowded scenes. These models usually use fixedsize attention as ViT, which is limited in encoding the 2D
local structure as pointed out by [10] and clearly inadequate
to handle large-scale variations of crowd images. To solve
this problem, in this paper, we improve both the structure
and training scheme of vision transformers for crowd counting from the following three perspectives.
Firstly, in response to such limitations in local region encoding, we propose the learnable region attention (LRA) to
emphasize the local context. Different from previous vision
transformers that adopt fixed patch division schemes, LRA
can flexibly determine which local region it should pay attention to for each feature location. As a result, the local
attention module provides an efficient way of extracting the
most relevant local information against the scale changes.
Moreover, it further disengages from the dependence on the
position embedding module of ViT, which has been proven

19628

