On the Integration of Self-Attention and Convolution
Xuran Pan1 Chunjiang Ge1 Rui Lu1 Shiji Song1 Guanfu Chen2 Zeyi Huang2 Gao Huang1,3 *
1
Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Huawei Technologies Ltd., China
3
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing, China
{pxr18, gecj20, r-lu21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{chenguanfu1, huangzeyi2}@huawei.com, {shijis, gaohuang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Convolution and self-attention are two powerful techniques for representation learning, and they are usually
considered as two peer approaches that are distinct from
each other. In this paper, we show that there exists a strong
underlying relation between them, in the sense that the
bulk of computations of these two paradigms are in fact
done with the same operation. Specifically, we first show
that a traditional convolution with kernel size k × k can
be decomposed into k 2 individual 1 × 1 convolutions, followed by shift and summation operations. Then, we interpret the projections of queries, keys, and values in selfattention module as multiple 1 × 1 convolutions, followed
by the computation of attention weights and aggregation
of the values. Therefore, the first stage of both two modules comprises the similar operation. More importantly,
the first stage contributes a dominant computation complexity (square of the channel size) comparing to the second
stage. This observation naturally leads to an elegant integration of these two seemingly distinct paradigms, i.e., a
mixed model that enjoys the benefit of both self-Attention
and Convolution (ACmix), while having minimum computational overhead compared to the pure convolution or selfattention counterpart. Extensive experiments show that
our model achieves consistently improved results over competitive baselines on image recognition and downstream
tasks. Code and pre-trained models will be released at
https://github.com/LeapLabTHU/ACmix and
https://gitee.com/mindspore/models.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the vast development of
convolution and self-attention in computer vision. Convolution neural networks (CNNs) are widely adopted on image
* Corresponding author.

(a) Convolution

(b) Self-Attention

(c) Ours - ACmix

Figure 1. A sketch of ACmix. We explore a closer relationship
between convolution and self-attention in the sense of sharing the
same computation overhead (1 × 1 convolutions), and combining
with the remaining lightweight aggregation operations. We show
the computation complexity of each block w.r.t the feature channel.

recognition [19, 23], semantic segmentation [9] and object
detection [38], and achieve state-of-the-art performances on
various benchmarks. On the other hand, self-attention is
first introduced in natural language processing [1, 42], and
also shows great potential in the fields of image generation
and super-resolution [10, 34]. More recently, with the advent of vision transformers [7,15,37], attention-based modules have achieved comparable or even better performances
than their CNN counterparts on many vision tasks.
Despite the great success that both approaches have
achieved, convolution and self-attention modules usually
follow different design paradigms. Traditional convolution
leverages an aggregation function over a localized receptive
field according to the convolution filter weights, which are
shared in the whole feature map. The intrinsic characteristics impose crucial inductive biases for image processing.
Comparably, the self-attention module applies a weighted
average operation based on the context of input features,
where the attention weights are computed dynamically via
a similarity function between related pixel pairs. The flexibility enables the attention module to focus on different regions adaptively and capture more informative features.
Considering the different and complementary properties
of convolution and self-attention, there exists a potential

815

