KG-SP: Knowledge Guided Simple Primitives
for Open World Compositional Zero-Shot Learning
Shyamgopal Karthik1
1

Massimiliano Mancini1

University of Tübingen

2

Zeynep Akata1,2

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems

Abstract
The goal of open-world compositional zero-shot learning (OW-CZSL) is to recognize compositions of state and
objects in images, given only a subset of them during training and no prior on the unseen compositions. In this setting, models operate on a huge output space, containing all
possible state-object compositions. While previous works
tackle the problem by learning embeddings for the compositions jointly, here we revisit a simple CZSL baseline
and predict the primitives, i.e. states and objects, independently. To ensure that the model develops primitive-specific
features, we equip the state and object classifiers with separate, non-linear feature extractors. Moreover, we estimate
the feasibility of each composition through external knowledge, using this prior to remove unfeasible compositions
from the output space. Finally, we propose a new setting,
i.e. CZSL under partial supervision (pCZSL), where either
only objects or state labels are available during training,
and we can use our prior to estimate the missing labels.
Our model, Knowledge-Guided Simple Primitives (KG-SP),
achieves state of the art in both OW-CZSL and pCZSL, surpassing most recent competitors even when coupled with
semi-supervised learning techniques. Code available at:
https:// github.com/ ExplainableML/ KG-SP.

1. Introduction
As humans, we interact with objects depending on their
state. For instance, we use ripe lemons rather than moldy
ones to prepare a lemonade, and we clean dirty dishes after
using them. Algorithms that can recognize objects together
with their state are crucial for autonomous agents to show
the same high-level interactions capabilities we have. In the
literature, this problem is studied under the name of Compositional Zero-shot Learning (CZSL). In CZSL, we are
given a training set with images of objects in a subset of their
possible states and, at test time, the goal is to recognize compositions of the same set of objects and states, even unseen
during training. Since an object has a different appearance
depending on its state (e.g. dry dog vs wet dog) and a state

Training OW-CZSL

dry dog
cat apple

Knowledge-guided
inference
(test)

dry wet ripe

Knowledge-aided
pseudo-labeling
(training)

dog

dry dog

ripe apple

wet cat

dry apple

dry

Training pCZSL

dog

ripe

dry

apple

dog
dry, wet, ripe

External
Knowledge

Figure 1. We consider the problems of open-world CZSL (OWCZSL), where we lack priors on unseen compositions at test time,
and CZSL under partial supervision (pCZSL) where we also lack
compositional labels during training (left). We tackle them by
independently predicting object (red) and state (blue) labels and
by using external knowledge (bottom) to estimate the feasibility
of compositions, reducing the search space during inference and
improving pseudo-labeling during training in pCZSL.

modifies objects in different ways (e.g. wet dog vs wet car),
the challenge of CZSL is modeling how states and objects
interact with each other, extrapolating this knowledge from
seen to unseen compositions. Under this perspective, multiple works modeled the interactions of objects and states,
either through compositional classifiers [26, 31], or a shared
embedding space [23, 28, 29].
Despite their effectiveness, [24] showed how the performance of CZSL methods degrade in the open-world setting
(OW-CZSL). In OW-CZSL, there are no priors on the unseen
compositions, and models must consider all possible compositions at test time. Due to the large cardinality of the output
space, it is difficult to produce discriminative embeddings
for the unseen compositions [24]. Inspired by the findings
of [24], in this work we explore a completely different direction. Specifically, we design an architecture that disregards
the compositional nature of the problem and produces the
initial predictions independently for objects and states. The
idea is that while discriminating between compositions is
hard in OW-CZSL due to the large search space, recognizing
primitives (i.e. objects and states) in isolation is easier since

9336

