Cross-Domain Correlation Distillation for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation in
Nighttime Semantic Segmentation

1

Huan Gao1 Jichang Guo1 * Guoli Wang2 Qian Zhang2
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University.
2
Horizon Robotics.

{gh99, jcguo}@tju.edu.cn, {guoli.wang, qian01.zhang}@horizon.ai

Abstract
The performance of nighttime semantic segmentation is
restricted by the poor illumination and a lack of pixelwise annotation, which severely limit its application in autonomous driving. Existing works, e.g., using the twilight
as the intermediate target domain to perform the adaptation from daytime to nighttime, may fail to cope with the
inherent difference between datasets caused by the camera
equipment and the urban style. Faced with these two types
of domain shifts, i.e., the illumination and the inherent difference of the datasets, we propose a novel domain adaptation framework via cross-domain correlation distillation,
called CCDistill. The invariance of illumination or inherent difference between two images is fully explored so as to
make up for the lack of labels for nighttime images. Specifically, we extract the content and style knowledge contained
in features, calculate the degree of inherent or illumination
difference between two images. The domain adaptation is
achieved using the invariance of the same kind of difference.
Extensive experiments on Dark Zurich and ACDC demonstrate that CCDistill achieves the state-of-the-art performance for nighttime semantic segmentation. Notably, our
method is a one-stage domain adaptation network which
can avoid affecting the inference time. Our implementation is available at https://github.com/ghuan99/
CCDistill.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation as one of the fundamental topics in computer vision, has been widely used in many critical downstream tasks [4, 12]. While a large variety of
approaches have been proposed [2, 30], they are predominantly designed to train on daytime images with favorable
illumination. However, outdoor applications require satisfactory performance in more challenging scenes, such as
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Every two embeddings connected by the dotted line
come from two domains, and they only have one difference in illuminance (i.e., each column) or dataset (i.e., each row). The crossdomain correlation reflects the similarity of the two domains, and
can also be considered as a concrete representation of the domain
shift. Here we only illustrate the cross-domain style distillation.
Our main idea is to make the different cross-domain correlations
under the same domain shift consistent.

nighttime. In this work, we focus on semantic segmentation
at nighttime, which is primarily limited by the low exposure
of the captured images and the lack of ground truth.
To handle this problem, many domain adaptation methods have been proposed to adapt the daytime-trained model
to nighttime without requiring ground-truth labels in the
nighttime domain. In [34–36, 38, 48], they apply an image transfer network to stylize daytime or nighttime images
and generate synthetic datasets. However, the style transfer network cannot fully utilize the semantic embedding of
the segmentation task and also increases the inference time.
Some works [7, 35, 36] utilize the twilight as the intermediate target domain. These methods require additional training data and the training process is complex. Most importantly, all these methods ignore inherent difference between
datasets, treating daytime images from different datasets as
the same style. Prior work [13] points out that appearance
discrepancy has a significant impact on the effect of adaptation. Ignoring the inherent difference can adversely affect

9913

