Cross-Modal Perceptionist: Can Face Geometry be Gleaned from Voices?
Cho-Ying Wu, Chin-Cheng Hsu, Ulrich Neumann
University of Southern California
{choyingw, chincheh, uneumann}@usc.edu

Abstract
This work digs into a root question in human perception: can face geometry be gleaned from one’s voices? Previous works that study this question only adopt developments in image synthesis and convert voices into face images to show correlations, but working on the image domain unavoidably involves predicting attributes that voices
cannot hint, including facial textures, hairstyles, and backgrounds. We instead investigate the ability to reconstruct
3D faces to concentrate on only geometry, which is much
more physiologically grounded. We propose our analysis framework, Cross-Modal Perceptionist, under both supervised and unsupervised learning. First, we construct a
dataset, Voxceleb-3D, which extends Voxceleb and includes
paired voices and face meshes, making supervised learning
possible. Second, we use a knowledge distillation mechanism to study whether face geometry can still be gleaned
from voices without paired voices and 3D face data under
limited availability of 3D face scans. We break down the
core question into four parts and perform visual and numerical analyses as responses to the core question. Our
findings echo those in physiology and neuroscience about
the correlation between voices and facial structures. The
work provides future human-centric cross-modal learning
with explainable foundations. See our project page.

1. Introduction
This work studies to what extent voice can hint face geometry motivated by recent studies on voice-face matching
and cross-modal learning [29, 53, 60]. Many physiological attributes are embedded in voices. For example, speech
is produced by articulatory structures, such as vocal folds,
facial muscles, and facial skeletons, which are all densely
connected. Such a fact intuitively indicates potential correlations between voices and face shapes [19]. Experiments
in cognitive science point out that audio cues are associated
with visual cues in human perception– especially in recognizing a person’s identity [4]. Recent neuroscience research
further shows that two parallel processing of low-level audi-

Face Geometry

Speech

A possible task?
Supervised Learning:
Learn from paired Voice and 3D face

Unsupervised Learning:
Transfer knacks from experts of
Image-to-2D and 2D-to-3D

Figure 1. Cross-Modal Perceptionist. We study the correlations
between voices and face geometry under both supervised and unsupervised learning settings. This work targets at more explainable
human-centric cross-modal learning for biometric applications.

tory and visual cues are integrated in the cortex, where voice
processing affects facial structural analysis for the perception purpose [58].
Traditional research in the voice domain focuses on utilizing voice inputs for predicting more conspicuous attributes which include speaker identity [6, 28, 42], age
[15, 41, 47], gender [27], and emotion [52, 59]. A novel direction in recent development goes beyond predicting these
attributes and tries to reconstruct 2D face images from voice
[8,35,54]. Their research is built on an observation that one
can approximately envision how an unknown speaker looks
when listening to the speaker’s voice. Attempts towards validating this assumptive observation include the work [35]
for image reconstruction and works [8, 54] using generative
adversarial networks (GANs). They aim to output face images from only a speaker’s voice.
However, face images from voices are inherently illposed: the task involves predicting extraneous attributes
that voices cannot hint, including image backgrounds,
hairstyles, headgears, or beards. These attributes are apparently that one can choose without changing voices. Similar concerns arise regarding the correlations between voices
and facial textures or ethnicity. [35] demonstrates a t-SNE
plot in which ethnicity is scattered across all samples, indicating its low correlations to voices. As a result, quantifying the differences between an output face image and a

10452

