Bridging the Gap Between Learning in Discrete and Continuous
Environments for Vision-and-Language Navigation
Yicong Hong1˚ Zun Wang1˚ Qi Wu2 Stephen Gould1
The Australian National University, 2 University of Adelaide

1

{yicong.hong, zun.wang, stephen.gould}@anu.edu.au
qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au
Project URL: https://github.com/YicongHong/Discrete-Continuous-VLN

RGBD Observations

?
Forward 0.25m
Waypoints Predictor

(a) Discrete Environment

(b) Continuous Environment

(c) Candidate Waypoints

(d) Waypoints Prediction

Figure 1. Vision-and-language navigation in discrete versus in continuous environments. (a) Agents in discrete environments rely on the
connectivity graph to navigate with panoramic high-level actions, (b) but they need to perform low-level controls to move in continuous
spaces. (c,d) We propose a candidate waypoints predictor to predict accessible positions in continuous environments, to bridge the discreteto-continuous gap.

Abstract

œ

Most existing works in vision-and-language navigation (VLN) focus on either discrete or continuous environments, training agents that cannot generalize across the
two. Although learning to navigate in continuous spaces
is closer to the real-world, training such an agent is significantly more difficult than training an agent in discrete
spaces. However, recent advances in discrete VLN are challenging to translate to continuous VLN due to the domain
gap. The fundamental difference between the two setups
is that discrete navigation assumes prior knowledge of the
connectivity graph of the environment, so that the agent can
effectively transfer the problem of navigation with low-level
controls to jumping from node to node with high-level actions by grounding to an image of a navigable direction.
To bridge the discrete-to-continuous gap, we propose a
predictor to generate a set of candidate waypoints during
navigation, so that agents designed with high-level actions
can be transferred to and trained in continuous environ-

ments. We refine the connectivity graph of Matterport3D
to fit the continuous Habitat-Matterport3D, and train the
waypoints predictor with the refined graphs to produce accessible waypoints at each time step. Moreover, we demonstrate that the predicted waypoints can be augmented during training to diversify the views and paths, and therefore
enhance agent’s generalization ability.
Through extensive experiments we show that agents navigating in continuous environments with predicted waypoints perform significantly better than agents using lowlevel actions, which reduces the absolute discrete-tocontinuous gap by 11.76% Success Weighted by Path
Length (SPL) for the Cross-Modal Matching Agent and
18.24% SPL for the VLN BERT. Our agents, trained with
a simple imitation learning objective, outperform previous
methods by a large margin, achieving new state-of-the-art
results on the testing environments of the R2R-CE and the
RxR-CE datasets.
* Authors contributed equally

15439

