Multimodal Colored Point Cloud to Image Alignment
Noam Rotstein
Amit Bracha
Ron Kimmel
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
{snoamr, amit.bracha, ron}@cs.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Reconstruction of geometric structures from images
using supervised learning suffers from limited available
amount of accurate data. One type of such data is accurate real-world RGB-D images. A major challenge in acquiring such ground truth data is the accurate alignment
between RGB images and the point cloud measured by a
depth scanner. To overcome this difficulty, we consider a
differential optimization method that aligns a colored point
cloud with a given color image through iterative geometric and color matching. In the proposed framework, the
optimization minimizes the photometric difference between
the colors of the point cloud and the corresponding colors
of the image pixels. Unlike other methods that try to reduce this photometric error, we analyze the computation of
the gradient on the image plane and propose a different direct scheme. We assume that the colors produced by the
geometric scanner camera and the color camera sensor are
different and therefore characterized by different chromatic
acquisition properties. Under these multimodal conditions,
we find the transformation between the camera image and
the point cloud colors. We alternately optimize for aligning the position of the point cloud and matching the different color spaces. The alignments produced by the proposed
method are demonstrated on both synthetic data with quantitative evaluation and real scenes with qualitative results.

1. Introduction
In recent years, research in 3D shape reconstruction
has made tremendous progress. Much of the research
in the field focused on shape reconstruction from IR or
RGB images. Multiple approaches have been proposed including amongst others, shape from stereo and monocular
depth estimation. More recently, the focus of the community shifted towards supervised deep learning methods
[9, 12, 13, 19, 31, 44, 48, 59, 60]. Deep Learning relies heavily on large and accurate datasets. Since such datasets are
difficult to obtain, most works use synthetic datasets to train

and validate their models. However, these datasets are limited since they do not capture real-world properties such as
distortions and noise. In addition, the use of deep learning
methods may require specific training data for each camera
model, as the shape reconstruction algorithms are sensitive
to model properties and artifacts.
One solution to acquire accurate ground-truth depth is to
use precise, yet, often slow, depth measuring devices such
as 3D laser scanners. Using such a device to acquire exact depth values for a desired camera model requires registering the device pose relative to the camera one. Placing
the device at a fixed and calibrated position relative to the
camera is often unsuitable for this task. Such a setup suffers from technical difficulties and requires constant maintenance [20]. Accurate laser scanners usually require a long
scanning time for a given scene. Consequently, in order to
create a large-scale dataset, multiple images should be acquired for each depth scan. This means that a 3D Euclidean
transformation must be found between each image coordinate system and the scanner coordinate system.
The geometric information and color texture provided by
some of these devices can be combined to produce a colored point cloud that can be used for registration. However, such registration faces the challenge of multimodality.
More specifically, with the comparison of two images taken
with different devices - one with the scanner and one with
the camera. Different devices have different color properties, often referred to as color gamut. When two devices
capture the same scene, the captured color space of each
device is different. This defines the problem that our work
attempts to solve. How to accurately align a colored point
cloud with a colored image under multimodal conditions.
The multimodal alignment task, which is critical to produce accurate and reliable geometric data, has not yet been
directly explored. While a rough alignment can be easily
found, a precise alignment is required for a proper geometric dataset construction. Therefore, in this paper, we focus on refining such an alignment. Direct visual odometry methods can be modified to be used for our task. Such
methods have been mainly used in SLAM, Optical Flow
and Color Mapping. These approaches attempt to minimize

6656

