OcclusionFusion: Occlusion-aware Motion Estimation
for Real-time Dynamic 3D Reconstruction
Wenbin Lin

Chengwei Zheng
Jun-Hai Yong*
School of Software and BNRist, Tsinghua University

Feng Xu*

lwb20@mails.tisnghua.edu.cn, {zhengcw18, xufeng2003}@gmail.com, yongjh@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
RGBD-based real-time dynamic 3D reconstruction suffers from inaccurate inter-frame motion estimation as errors may accumulate with online tracking. This problem
is even more severe for single-view-based systems due to
strong occlusions. Based on these observations, we propose
OcclusionFusion, a novel method to calculate occlusionaware 3D motion to guide the reconstruction. In our technique, the motion of visible regions is first estimated and
combined with temporal information to infer the motion of
the occluded regions through an LSTM-involved graph neural network. Furthermore, our method computes the confidence of the estimated motion by modeling the network
output with a probabilistic model, which alleviates untrustworthy motions and enables robust tracking. Experimental
results on public datasets and our own recorded data show
that our technique outperforms existing single-view-based
real-time methods by a large margin. With the reduction of
the motion errors, the proposed technique can handle long
and challenging motion sequences. Please check out the
project page for sequence results: https://wenbinlin.github.io/OcclusionFusion.

1. Introduction
Dynamic 3D reconstruction has been attracting more and
more attention with the development of sensing and computing techniques. It aims to reconstruct the shape, motion,
and appearance of the recorded objects, and thus enables
users to record, edit, animate, and play with real 3D targets
for various applications, including 3D design, video games,
telecommunications, virtual reality, and augmented reality.
In dynamic 3D reconstruction with RGB-D sensors,
* This work was supported by Beijing Natural Science Foundation
(JQ19015), the NSFC (No.61727808, 62021002), the National Key
R&D Program of China (2018YFA0704000, 2019YFB1405703) and
TC190A4DA/3. This work was supported by THUIBCS, Tsinghua University and BLBCI, Beijing Municipal Education Commission. Jun-Hai
Yong and Feng Xu are corresponding authors.

Figure 1. Our method can reconstruct dynamic objects in real time.

fusion-based works [5, 6, 15, 18, 29] have achieved impressive results in recent years and have become a new technological trend with several important features. Firstly, these
techniques do not require geometry templates of the target
objects but fuse the geometries online with the recording.
Therefore, they can handle various targets, including humans, objects, and even 3D scenes [8, 42]. Secondly, they
can handle both rigid and nonrigid motions without requiring class-specific motion priors. This is also important to
increase the generalization capability of 3D reconstruction.
Thirdly, they can be achieved in real time and with a single
consumer sensor, which makes these techniques be easily
used by end-users.
In single view-based solutions, there is a significant quality gap between online and offline methods. On the online
side, existing methods use iterative geometry fitting [29],
sparse image feature matching [18], or photometric constrains [15] to estimate object motions. However, these
real-time techniques cannot give very reliable temporal correspondences, and thus the accuracy of motion estimation
is limited. With the error accumulation, these techniques
tend to fail to track long sequences or challenging motions.
On the other hand, offline methods can build much more
accurate temporal correspondences without considering the
computation complexity [5, 6], which leads to much better

1736

