Mining Multi-View Information: A Strong Self-Supervised Framework for
Depth-based 3D Hand Pose and Mesh Estimation
Pengfei Ren, Haifeng Sun, Jiachang Hao, Jingyu Wang*, Qi Qi, Jianxin Liao
State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
rpf, hfsun, haojc, wangjingyu, qiqi8266@bupt.edu.cn; jxlbupt@gmail.com

Abstract
In this work, we study the cross-view information fusion
problem in the task of self-supervised 3D hand pose estimation from the depth image. Previous methods usually adopt
a hand-crafted rule to generate pseudo labels from multiview estimations in order to supervise the network training
in each view. However, these methods ignore the rich semantic information in each view and ignore the complex dependencies between different regions of different views. To
solve these problems, we propose a cross-view fusion network to fully exploit and adaptively aggregate multi-view
information. We encode diverse semantic information in
each view into multiple compact nodes. Then, we introduce
the graph convolution to model the complex dependencies
between nodes and perform cross-view information interaction. Based on the cross-view fusion network, we propose
a strong self-supervised framework for 3D hand pose and
hand mesh estimation. Furthermore, we propose a pseudo
multi-view training strategy to extend our framework to a
more general scenario in which only single-view training
data is used. Results on NYU dataset demonstrate that our
method outperforms the previous self-supervised methods
by 17.5% and 30.3% in multi-view and single-view scenarios. Meanwhile, our framework achieves comparable results to several strongly supervised methods.

1. Introduction
3D hand pose estimation plays an essential role in
human-computer interaction, virtual reality, and augmented
reality. With the development of deep learning and the increase of the amount of labeled data, depth-based 3D hand
pose estimation has made significant progress [3, 12, 13,
20, 31, 32, 49, 54, 59]. However, acquiring large-scale hand
datasets with 3D hand pose and mesh annotations is timeconsuming and labor-consuming. Meanwhile, even after
* Corresponding author

careful design and manual correction, the annotation quality of the existing automatic or semi-automatic annotation
algorithms is difficult to guarantee [33, 57, 64].
Recently, some methods [8, 53, 55] achieve accurate
3D hand pose estimation through self-supervised learning.
These methods introduce a 3D hand model into the neural
network and optimize the network by penalizing the differences between the hand model and the input depth image. As mentioned in [53, 55], adopting multi-view information during training is the key to the success of the
self-supervised methods. Complementary multi-view information can alleviate the uncertainty of estimation caused
by self-occlusion or holes. The previous methods adopt a
hand-crafted rule, e.g., taking median value, to aggregate
the estimated poses from multiple views as pseudo labels in
order to supervise the network training in each view.
However, the hand-crafted rule only considers the coordinate information of the joint itself in multiple views.
This method ignores the rich semantic information in visual features in each view and ignores the complex dependencies between different hand regions in different views.
Thus, this method is susceptible to interference from the
low-quality estimations that frequently occurs in a selfsupervised framework. To better exploit multi-view information, some multi-view human pose estimation methods propose to perform pixel-wise cross-view interaction in
2D feature space by establishing point-to-point correspondence [19, 29, 38, 58, 67]. However, performing pixel-bypixel matching based on feature similarity is computationally expensive and redundant. Meanwhile, these methods
are sensitive to self-occlusion and holes [19]. For example, when some hand regions in one view are occluded or
missing, the local features of these regions are difficult to
be detected and matched robustly in other views.
To solve these problems, we propose a cross-view fusion
network to fully exploit multi-view information to generate
more accurate and robust pseudo labels. Specifically, we
first encode high-dimensional visual features and the estimated hand pose in each view into multiple semantic nodes.

20555

