HyperTransformer: A Textural and Spectral Feature Fusion Transformer for
Pansharpening
Wele Gedara Chaminda Bandara, Vishal M. Patel
Johns Hopkins University
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
{wbandar1, vpatel36}@jhu.edu

Abstract
Pansharpening aims to fuse a registered high-resolution
panchromatic image (PAN) with a low-resolution hyperspectral image (LR-HSI) to generate an enhanced HSI with
high spectral and spatial resolution. Existing pansharpening approaches neglect using an attention mechanism
to transfer HR texture features from PAN to LR-HSI features, resulting in spatial and spectral distortions. In this
paper, we present a novel attention mechanism for pansharpening called HyperTransformer, in which features of
LR-HSI and PAN are formulated as queries and keys in
a transformer, respectively. HyperTransformer consists of
three main modules, namely two separate feature extractors for PAN and HSI, a multi-head feature soft-attention
module, and a spatial-spectral feature fusion module. Such
a network improves both spatial and spectral quality measures of the pansharpened HSI by learning cross-feature
space dependencies and long-range details of PAN and
LR-HSI. Furthermore, HyperTransformer can be utilized
across multiple spatial scales at the backbone for obtaining improved performance. Extensive experiments conducted on three widely used datasets demonstrate that HyperTransformer achieves significant improvement over the
state-of-the-art methods on both spatial and spectral quality measures. Implementation code and pre-trained weights
can be accessed at https://github.com/wgcban/
HyperTransformer.

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral (HS) pansharpening aims to spatially enhance Low-Resolution Hyperspectral Images (LR-HSIs) by
transferring textural (spatial) details from better spatial resolution panchromatic (PAN) images, while preserving the
spectral characteristics of LR-HSIs [28, 48]. The recent
advancements in HS pansharpening greatly improve the
amount of spectral and textural details in HSIs, which is indeed a crucial pre-processing for many remote sensing ap-

Figure 1: How our HyperTransformer differs from existing pansharpening architectures. Traditional pansharpening
methods simply concatenate PAN (p) and LR-HSI (y) in (a)
image domain [58, 22] or (b) feature domain [14, 41, 45]
to learn the mapping function from LR-HSI to pansharpened HSI (x). In contrast, (c) our HyperTransformer utilizes feature representations of LR-HSI, PAN↓↑, and PAN
as Queries (Q), Keys (K), and Values (V) in an attention
mechanism to transfer most relevant HR textural features to
spectral features of LR-HSI from a backbone network. The
output of HyperTransformer is an enhanced version of the
feature representation of y. ↑ and ↓ denote bicubic upsampling and down-sampling, respectively.
plications to accurately and rapidly identify the underlying
phenomena that would otherwise be difficult to see from
LR-HSIs. HS pansharpening can be beneficial in a broad
range of remote sensing tasks such as unmixing [8], change
detection [37, 5], object recognition [31], scene interpretation [21], and classification [26, 6].
The early research on HS pansharpening employed component substitution (CS) [10, 17, 19], multi-resolution anal-

1767

