Self-Supervised Dense Consistency Regularization
for Image-to-Image Translation
Minsu Ko1 * Eunju Cha1 * Sungjoo Suh1 Huijin Lee1 Jae-Joon Han1
Jinwoo Shin2
Bohyung Han3
1
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT), South Korea
2
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), South Korea
3
Seoul National University (SNU), South Korea

Abstract
Unsupervised image-to-image translation has gained
considerable attention due to recent impressive advances
in generative adversarial networks (GANs). This paper
presents a simple but effective regularization technique for
improving GAN-based image-to-image translation. To generate images with realistic local semantics and structures,
we propose an auxiliary self-supervision loss that enforces
point-wise consistency of the overlapping region between
a pair of patches cropped from a single real image during training the discriminator of a GAN. Our experiment
shows that the proposed dense consistency regularization
improves performance substantially on various image-toimage translation scenarios. It also leads to extra performance gains through the combination with instance-level
regularization methods. Furthermore, we verify that the
proposed model captures domain-specific characteristics
more effectively with only a small fraction of training data.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial network (GAN) [8] is an innovative framework for generative modeling, i.e., generating
images that follow the same distribution as training data.
The performance of the state-of-the-art GAN models depends highly on the quality of discriminators, which distinguish real images from fake ones while maintaining the
balance with matching generators for the joint optimization.
Since discriminators are prone to overfit the training dataset
and often lead to the mode collapse of generated outputs,
learning robust discriminators is critical to accomplish highperformance generators.
To this end, self-supervised learning methods have been
actively used for regularizing discriminators in the GAN
* These authors contributed equally.

Input

CUT

CUT+CR-GAN

CUT+DCR

Figure 1. Qualitative comparison of output feature maps given by
three different variation of the baseline mode, CUT [26], for an
example in the Horse → Zebra dataset. The activations from DCR
highlight foreground accurately while suppressing background effectively, which helps the image-to-image translation task focused
more on target objects.

framework [15, 16, 32, 34]. The goal of the regularization is to obtain robust representations of images for better
discrimination of real and fake images [17]. The existing
methods often rely on contrastive learning in an instancelevel [3, 15, 16, 32], where a pair of augmented instances
from an image are encouraged to have consistent features
with respect to predefined global transforms while negative
images are optionally considered to achieve better representation learning in discriminators. However, the regularization based only on such global representations may be
limited to imposing loose constraints on discriminators and
may allow generators to deceive the discriminator despite
local structural or semantic inconsistency in output images.
To alleviate the drawback, we propose a dense consistency regularization (DCR) approach applicable to the discriminator of a GAN. DCR provides stronger constraints to
the learned representations given by discriminators through
their point-wise consistency between a pair of patches
cropped from the same image. Our work is motivated by the
hypothesis that image generation requires pixel-level prediction [14] and a dense regularization of representations
is an effective way to improve the supervision quality of a
discriminator. The goal of the proposed dense consistency
regularization is to generate images with both semantic con-

18301

