GCR: Gradient Coreset based Replay Buffer Selection for Continual Learning
Rishabh Tiwari 1,3 , Krishnateja Killamsetty 2 , Rishabh Iyer 2 , Pradeep Shenoy 3
1

Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology (ISM) - Dhanbad
2

Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at Dallas
3

Google Research, India

{rishabhtiwari,shenoypradeep}@google.com, {krishnateja.killamsetty,rishabh.iyer}@utdallas.edu

Abstract
Continual learning (CL) aims to develop techniques by
which a single model adapts to an increasing number of
tasks encountered sequentially, thereby potentially leveraging learnings across tasks in a resource-efficient manner.
A major challenge for CL systems is catastrophic forgetting, where earlier tasks are forgotten while learning a new
task. To address this, replay-based CL approaches maintain
and repeatedly retrain on a small buffer of data selected
across encountered tasks. We propose Gradient Coreset
Replay (GCR), a novel strategy for replay buffer selection
and update using a carefully designed optimization criterion. Specifically, we select and maintain a ’coreset’ that
closely approximates the gradient of all the data seen so
far with respect to current model parameters, and discuss
key strategies needed for its effective application to the continual learning setting. We show significant gains (2%-4%
absolute) over the state-of-the-art in the well-studied offline continual learning setting. Our findings also effectively
transfer to online / streaming CL settings, showing up to 5%
gains over existing approaches. Finally, we demonstrate the
value of supervised contrastive loss for continual learning,
which yields a cumulative gain of up to 5% accuracy when
combined with our subset selection strategy.

1. Introduction
The field of continual learning (CL) [44] studies the
training of models in an incremental fashion, to generalize across a number of sequentially encountered scenarios
or tasks, and to avoid the training & maintenance costs of
one-off models. A key challenge in CL is the limited access
to data from prior tasks; this results in catastrophic forgetting [30], where training on subsequent tasks may potentially erase information in the model parameters pertaining
to previous tasks. Approaches to address catastrophic for-

Figure 1. When training CL models on S-Cifar100 with different replay buffer sizes K ∈ [200, 500, 2000], the use of replay buffers selected by GCR produces higher model accuracy
and lower model forgetting than using reservoir-sampled replay
buffers [6]. See text for more details.

getting1 include modifications to the loss function (e.g., [23,
39]), to the network architecture (e.g., [18, 43]), and to the
training procedure and data augmentation (e.g., [6]). In particular, replay-based continual learning maintains a small
data sketch from previous tasks, to be included in the training mix throughout the lifetime learning of the model. Remarkably, as little as 1% of saved historical data, using
random sampling, is enough to provide significant gains
over other CL approaches [6]. This suggests that sophisticated methods for selecting compact data summaries or
coresets may perform much better. However, previous approaches to coreset in continual learning have focused on
qualitative/diversity-based criteria [3, 47], or bi-level optimizations with significant computational costs and scaling
limitations [4].
We present Gradient-based Coresets for Replay-based
CL (GCR), a principled, optimization-driven criterion for
selecting and updating coresets for continual learning.
Specifically, we select a coreset that approximates the gradient of model parameters over the entirety of the data seen
so far. We provide empirical evidence that coresets selected
1 The papers cited, here and subsequently, under each paradigm or technique are representative or recent papers, not necessarily the papers defining or proposing said paradigm.

99

