Winoground: Probing Vision and Language Models
for Visio-Linguistic Compositionality
Tristan Thrush¶ *, Ryan Jiang‡ , Max Bartolo§ ,
Amanpreet Singh¶ , Adina Williams† , Douwe Kiela¶ , Candace Ross† *
¶
Hugging Face; † Facebook AI Research; ‡ University of Waterloo; § University College London
tristan@huggingface.co, ccross@fb.com

Abstract
We present a novel task and dataset for evaluating
the ability of vision and language models to conduct
visio-linguistic compositional reasoning, which we call
Winoground. Given two images and two captions, the goal
is to match them correctly—but crucially, both captions
contain a completely identical set of words, only in a different order. The dataset was carefully hand-curated by expert annotators and is labeled with a rich set of fine-grained
tags to assist in analyzing model performance. We probe a
diverse range of state-of-the-art vision and language models and find that, surprisingly, none of them do much better
than chance. Evidently, these models are not as skilled at
visio-linguistic compositional reasoning as we might have
hoped. We perform an extensive analysis to obtain insights
into how future work might try to mitigate these models’
shortcomings. We aim for Winoground to serve as a useful
evaluation set for advancing the state of the art and driving further progress in the field. The dataset is available at
https://huggingface.co/datasets/facebook/winoground.

1. Introduction
Despite the impressive performance of pretrained vision
and language transformers on a wide variety of multimodal
tasks [43, 47, 50], they remain poorly understood [6, 15, 42,
61]. One important question is to what extent such models are able to conduct unimodal and multimodal compositional reasoning. For humans, the visual differences between images depicting “the tree is in the shopping cart”
and “the shopping cart is in the tree” will be blatantly obvious, even when the words in the captions are identical—but
is the same true for machines?
While matching simple images and captions may seem
almost too trivial a task, recent work in NLP has shown
* Equal contribution. TT, AS, and DK conducted most of the work for
this paper when they were at Facebook AI Research.

(a) some plants
surrounding a
lightbulb

(b) a lightbulb surrounding some plants

Figure 1. An example from Winoground. The two sentences contain the same words but in a different order. The task of understanding which image and caption match is trivial for humans but
proves much more difficult for vision and language models. Every model that we tested (UNITER, ViLLA, VinVL, VisualBERT,
ViLT, LXMERT, ViLBERT, UniT, CLIP, VSE++, and VSRN) fails
to correctly pair the images and captions, except the large checkpoint of ViLLA by a very thin margin (0.00013 confidence).

that transformers are often remarkably insensitive to word
order [63]. Understanding the relationship between text in
captions and corresponding visual content is a fundamental
goal of computer vision, and the fact that different word orders correspond to wildly different visual depictions should
be reflected in the capabilities of our models.
Motivated by this, we propose a novel task, called
Winoground, for measuring visio-linguistic compositional
reasoning, whereby two images and two captions have to be
matched correctly; both captions contain exactly the same
set of words, ordered in such a way that each describes primarily one of the images. To perform well on Winoground,
models must not only encode text and images well (i.e.,
be sensitive to the compositional structure present in each
modality), but they also must be able to synthesize information across the two modalities.
We draw inspiration from the Winograd Schema Challenge [40], which tests the commonsense capabilities of
models. In the challenge, a model is given two sentences

5238

