Come-Closer-Diffuse-Faster: Accelerating Conditional Diffusion Models for
Inverse Problems through Stochastic Contraction

1

Hyungjin Chung1
Byeongsu Sim2
Jong Chul Ye1,2,3
2
3
Bio and Brain Engineering, Mathematical Sciences, Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, Korea
{hj.chung, byeongsu.s, jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr

Figure 1. Reconstruction results of three different tasks - super-resolution, inpainting, and MRI reconstruction. Numbers in parenthesis
indicate the iteration numbers for reverse diffusion. Proposed method is compared with canonical conditional diffusion models for each
task. (a) Corrupted measurement, (b) ILVR [5], score-SDE [34], and score-MRI [6], respectively, for each task. (c) Proposed method.

Abstract
Diffusion models have recently attained significant interest
within the community owing to their strong performance as
generative models. Furthermore, its application to inverse
problems have demonstrated state-of-the-art performance.
Unfortunately, diffusion models have a critical downside
- they are inherently slow to sample from, needing few
thousand steps of iteration to generate images from pure
Gaussian noise. In this work, we show that starting
from Gaussian noise is unnecessary. Instead, starting
from a single forward diffusion with better initialization
significantly reduces the number of sampling steps in the
This work was supported by Institute of Information & communications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government(MSIT) (No.2019-0-00075, Artificial Intelligence Graduate School Program(KAIST)), and by National Research Foundation(NRF)
of Korea grant NRF-2021M3I1A1097938

reverse conditional diffusion. This phenomenon is formally
explained by the contraction theory of the stochastic difference equations like our conditional diffusion strategy - the
alternating applications of reverse diffusion followed by a
non-expansive data consistency step. The new sampling
strategy, dubbed Come-Closer-Diffuse-Faster (CCDF),
also reveals a new insight on how the existing feed-forward
neural network approaches for inverse problems can be
synergistically combined with the diffusion models. Experimental results with super-resolution, image inpainting,
and compressed sensing MRI demonstrate that our method
can achieve state-of-the-art reconstruction performance at
significantly reduced sampling steps.

1. Introduction
Denoising diffusion models [8, 10, 15, 29] and scorebased models [31,32,34] are new trending classes of gener-

12413

