Multi-Objective Diverse Human Motion Prediction with Knowledge Distillation
Hengbo Ma1,2† Jiachen Li3 Ramtin Hosseini1,4† Masayoshi Tomizuka2 Chiho Choi1
1
Honda Research Institute, USA 2 University of California, Berkeley
3
Stanford University 4 Tufts University
{hengbo_ma, tomizuka}@berkeley.edu

jiachen_li@stanford.edu

ramtin.hosseini@tufts.edu

cchoi@honda-ri.com

Abstract
Obtaining accurate and diverse human motion prediction is essential to many industrial applications, especially
robotics and autonomous driving. Recent research has explored several techniques to enhance diversity and maintain
the accuracy of human motion prediction at the same time.
However, most of them need to define a combined loss, such
as the weighted sum of accuracy loss and diversity loss,
and then decide their weights as hyperparameters before
training. In this work, we aim to design a prediction framework that can balance the accuracy sampling and diversity
sampling during the testing phase. In order to achieve this
target, we propose a multi-objective conditional variational
inference prediction model. We also propose a short-term
oracle to encourage the prediction framework to explore
more diverse future motions. We evaluate the performance
of our proposed approach on two standard human motion
datasets. The experiment results show that our approach is
effective and on a par with state-of-the-art performance in
terms of accuracy and diversity.

Group similar poses for the 1st time
Group similar poses for the 2nd time

Figure 1. Illustration of obtaining multi-modal pseudo future motions in a dataset. We can cluster the similar initial poses (purple
dashed circle) and share their future poses as the common ground
truth. The solid poses are the ground truth and the transparent ones
are the augmented poses. We argue that such an approach can be
applied recursively (orange dashed circle), which will lead to discovering more different and realistic modes of motion in the data.

1. Introduction
Human motion prediction plays a significant role in several applications such as human-robot interaction [3, 4], autonomous driving [13, 14, 33, 39], and animation [45]. For
instance, an autonomous driving system can make a safe
planning strategy given an accurate motion prediction of
pedestrians. Moreover, robots can cooperate reasonably
with people when they have a good understanding of human
beings’ future plans. However, since diversity and uncertainty are human future motion’s intrinsic properties, it becomes a challenging problem in the computer science community. Unlike the vehicle trajectory prediction scenarios
where we can get prior knowledge such as the traffic rules
and routing information [40, 41] to constrain the different
† Work done during Hengbo and Ramtin’s internship at Honda Research
Institute.

modes of trajectories, we can hardly get any prior knowledge about what humans will do in the future. Thus, we can
only leverage the information from the given dataset, which
increases the difficulty of diverse human motion prediction.
There are two lines of research in this area. First, several works attempt to get an accurate human motion prediction without considering the diversity, such as [36] based
on graph neural network and [56] based on recurrent neural network. On the other line, some research investigates
how to increase the diversity of human motion prediction
based on deep generative models [2, 47, 60, 63] or diverse
sampling techniques [61]. Deep generative models such as
variational autoencoder and generative adversarial network
naturally capture the stochastic behaviors, while they may
suffer from mode collapse problems. Otherwise, even if we
assume that the generative models can capture the actual

8161

