Neural Inertial Localization
Sachini Herath1∗
1

David Caruso2

Chen Liu2

Simon Fraser University, BC, Canada

2

Yufan Chen2

Yasutaka Furukawa1

Reality Labs, Meta, Redmond, USA

Figure 1. From IMU measurements to location estimates. Given inertial sensor data (left), our approach (center) uses a neural inertial
navigation technique to find a sequence of velocity vectors; then train a scene-specific transformer-based neural architecture, which maps
a velocity sequence to a location likelihood. The figure shows sample localization results from our office dataset. Color shows temporal
correspondence between input(left), intermediate representations(middle), and location (right).

Abstract
This paper proposes the inertial localization problem,
the task of estimating the absolute location from a sequence
of inertial sensor measurements. This is an exciting and
unexplored area of indoor localization research, where we
present a rich dataset with 53 hours of inertial sensor data
and the associated ground truth locations. We developed
a solution, dubbed neural inertial localization (NILoc)
which 1) uses a neural inertial navigation technique to turn
inertial sensor history to a sequence of velocity vectors;
then 2) employs a transformer-based neural architecture
to find the device location from the sequence of velocities.
We only use an IMU sensor, which is energy efficient and
privacy preserving compared to WiFi, cameras, and other
data sources. Our approach is significantly faster and
achieves competitive results even compared with state-ofthe-art methods that require a floorplan and run 20 to
30 times slower. We share our code, model and data at
https://sachini.github.io/niloc.

1. Introduction
Imagine one stands up, walks for 3 meters, turns right,
and opens a door in an office. This information might be
sufficient to identify the location of the individual. A recent
* Corresponding author sherath@sfu.ca. (This work was partially
done when Sachini was an intern at Meta.)

breakthrough in inertial navigation [10, 14, 22] allows us to
obtain such motion history using an inertial measurement
unit (IMU). What is missing is the technology that maps
a motion history to a location. This papers addresses this
gap, seeking to open a new paradigm in the localization
research, named “inertial localization”, whose task is to
infer the location from a sequence of IMU sensor data.
Indoor localization is a crucial technology for locationaware services, such as mobile business applications for
consumers, entertainment (e.g., Pokemon Go) for casual
users, and industry verticals for professional operators
(e.g., maintenance at a factory). State-of-the-art indoor
localization systems [5] mostly rely on WiFi, whose
infrastructure is ubiquitous thanks to the demands on
Internet of Things (IoT). Nevertheless, accuracy of WiFi
based localization depends on infrastructure (i.e number of
access points) thus cannot scale easily to non-commercial
private spaces.
IMU is a powerful complementary modality to WiFi,
which has proven effective for the navigation task
recently [10,14,22]. IMU 1) works anytime anywhere (e.g.,
inside a pocket/bag/hand); 2) is energy efficient to be an
always-on sensor and 3) protects the privacy of bystanders.
This paper introduces a novel inertial localization
problem as a task of estimating the location from a history
of IMU measurements. The paper provides the first inertial
localization benchmark, consisting of 53 hours of motion
data and ground-truth locations over 3 buildings. The

6604

