TransFusion: Robust LiDAR-Camera Fusion for 3D Object Detection with Transformers
Xuyang Bai1 Zeyu Hu1 Xinge Zhu2 Qingqiu Huang2 Yilun Chen2 Hongbo Fu3 Chiew-Lan Tai1
1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
LiDAR and camera are two important sensors for 3D object detection in autonomous driving. Despite the increasing popularity of sensor fusion in this field, the robustness
against inferior image conditions, e.g., bad illumination
and sensor misalignment, is under-explored. Existing fusion methods are easily affected by such conditions, mainly
due to a hard association of LiDAR points and image pixels,
established by calibration matrices.
We propose TransFusion, a robust solution to LiDARcamera fusion with a soft-association mechanism to handle inferior image conditions. Specifically, our TransFusion consists of convolutional backbones and a detection
head based on a transformer decoder. The first layer of the
decoder predicts initial bounding boxes from a LiDAR point
cloud using a sparse set of object queries, and its second
decoder layer adaptively fuses the object queries with useful image features, leveraging both spatial and contextual
relationships. The attention mechanism of the transformer
enables our model to adaptively determine where and what
information should be taken from the image, leading to a
robust and effective fusion strategy. We additionally design
an image-guided query initialization strategy to deal with
objects that are difficult to detect in point clouds. TransFusion achieves state-of-the-art performance on large-scale
datasets. We provide extensive experiments to demonstrate
its robustness against degenerated image quality and calibration errors. We also extend the proposed method to the
3D tracking task and achieve the 1st place in the leaderboard of nuScenes tracking, showing its effectiveness and
generalization capability. [code release]

1. Introduction
As one of the fundamental tasks in self-driving, 3D object detection aims to localize a set of objects in 3D space
and recognize their categories. Thanks to the accurate
depth information provided by LiDAR, early works such
as VoxelNet [67] and PointPillar [14] achieve reasonably
good results using only point clouds as input. However,
these LiDAR-only methods are generally surpassed by the
methods using both LiDAR and camera data on large-scale

2

ADS, IAS BU, Huawei

3

City University of Hong Kong

datasets with sparser point clouds, such as nuScenes [1] and
Waymo [42]. LiDAR-only methods are surely insufficient
for robust 3D detection due to the sparsity of point clouds.
For example, small or distant objects are difficult to detect
in LiDAR modality. In contrast, such objects are still clearly
visible and distinguishable in high-resolution images. The
complementary roles of point clouds and images motivate
researchers to design detectors utilizing the best of the two
worlds, i.e., multi-modal detectors.
Existing LiDAR-camera fusion methods roughly fall
into three categories: result-level, proposal-level, and pointlevel. The result-level methods, including FPointNet [29]
and RoarNet [39], use off-the-shelf 2D detectors to seed
3D proposals, followed by a PointNet [30] for object localization. The proposal-level fusion methods, including
MV3D [5] and AVOD [12], perform fusion at the region
proposal level by applying RoIPool [31] in each modality
for shared proposals. These coarse-grained fusion methods show unsatisfactory results since rectangular regions
of interest (RoI) usually contain lots of background noise.
Recently, a majority of approaches have tried to do pointlevel fusion and achieved promising results. They first find
a hard association between LiDAR points and image pixels based on calibration matrices, and then augment LiDAR
features with the segmentation scores [46, 51] or CNN features [10, 22, 40, 47, 62] of the associated pixels through
point-wise concatenation. Similarly, [16, 17, 50, 59] first
project a point cloud onto the bird’s eye view (BEV) plane
and then fuse the image features with the BEV pixels.
Despite the impressive improvements, these point-level
fusion methods suffer from two major problems, as shown
in Fig. 1. First, they simply fuse the LiDAR features and
image features through element-wise addition or concatenation, and thus their performance degrades seriously with
low-quality image features, e.g., images in bad illumination conditions. Second, finding the hard association between sparse LiDAR points and dense image pixels not only
wastes many image features with rich semantic information,
but also heavily relies on high-quality calibration between
two sensors, which is usually hard to acquire due to the inherent spatial-temporal misalignment [63].
To address the shortcomings of the previous fusion approaches, we introduce an effective and robust multi-modal

1090

