Domain Adaptation on Point Clouds via Geometry-Aware Implicits
Yuefan Shen1∗

Yanchao Yang2†∗
1

Zhejiang Univerisy‡

Mi Yan3
2

He Wang3

Stanford Univerisy

1. Introduction
Point clouds captured under different settings can exhibit
prominent variations that cause performance drop when
neural networks are tested on a domain that is different
from the training ones. This can be troublesome if the net‡ The authors from Zhejiang University are affiliated with the State Key
Lab of CAD&CG. ∗ Equal Contributions, † Corresponding Authors.

3

Leonidas Guibas2

Peking Univerisy

PointDA-10

Abstract
As a popular geometric representation, point clouds
have attracted much attention in 3D vision, leading to many
applications in autonomous driving and robotics. One important yet unsolved issue for learning on point cloud is
that point clouds of the same object can have significant geometric variations if generated using different procedures
or captured using different sensors. These inconsistencies
induce domain gaps such that neural networks trained on
one domain may fail to generalize on others. A typical technique to reduce the domain gap is to perform adversarial
training so that point clouds in the feature space can align.
However, adversarial training is easy to fall into degenerated local minima, resulting in negative adaptation gains.
Here we propose a simple yet effective method for unsupervised domain adaptation on point clouds by employing a
self-supervised task of learning geometry-aware implicits,
which plays two critical roles in one shot. First, the geometric information in the point clouds is preserved through
the implicit representations for downstream tasks. More importantly, the domain-specific variations can be effectively
learned away in the implicit space. We also propose an
adaptive strategy to compute unsigned distance fields for
arbitrary point clouds due to the lack of shape models in
practice. When combined with a task loss, the proposed
outperforms state-of-the-art unsupervised domain adaptation methods that rely on adversarial domain alignment
and more complicated self-supervised tasks. Our method
is evaluated on both PointDA-10 and GraspNet datasets.
Code and data are available at: https://github.
com/Jhonve/ImplicitPCDA.

Youyi Zheng1†

GraspNetPC-10

Sofa

Banana

Monitor

Scissors

Lamp

Can

Plant

Dish

Figure 1. Point clouds in the real world exhibit diverse geometric variations caused by differences in the data capture pipeline.
Given these variations, networks trained on one collection of point
clouds may incur a performance drop when tested on different
ones. Thus adaptation is needed to alleviate generalization issues,
especially for domains where the annotation is scarce.

work can not be fine-tuned due to time constraints or limited computational budget. More often, labels needed for
fine-tuning on the test domain are simply unavailable due
to high annotation cost, which is the situation we are interested in and is always formulated as unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) problems. In UDA, the source domain comes with rich annotations, while the target domain
has no annotation at all. The key to a successful domain
adaptation lies in two folds. First, the two domains have to
be (statistically) aligned, either in the point cloud space or
in a feature space, so that the shared mapping to the output space can now operate on the same ground across domains. Moreover, the alignment between domains has to be
semantically meaningful, e.g., chairs in the source should
be aligned with chairs in the target. Otherwise, the shared
mapping can still fail in predicting the labels even if the two
domains are aligned.

7223

