Pushing the Envelope of Gradient Boosting Forests
via Globally-Optimized Oblique Trees
Magzhan Gabidolla Miguel Á. Carreira-Perpiñán
Dept. CSE, University of California, Merced
{mgabidolla, mcarreira-perpinan}@ucmerced.edu

Abstract
Ensemble methods based on decision trees, such as Random Forests or boosted forests, have long been established
as some of the most powerful, off-the-shelf machine learning models, and have been widely used in computer vision
and other areas. In recent years, a specific form of boosting, gradient boosting (GB), has gained prominence. This
is partly because of highly optimized implementations such
as XGBoost or LightGBM, which incorporate many clever
modifications and heuristics. However, one gaping hole
remains unexplored in GB: the construction of individual
trees. To date, all successful GB versions use axis-aligned
trees trained in a suboptimal way via greedy recursive partitioning. We address this gap by using a more powerful type
of trees (having hyperplane splits) and an algorithm that
can optimize, globally over all the tree parameters, the objective function that GB dictates. We show, in several benchmarks of image and other data types, that GB forests of
these stronger, well-optimized trees consistently exceed the
test accuracy of axis-aligned forests from XGBoost, LightGBM and other strong baselines. Further, this happens using many fewer trees and sometimes even fewer parameters
overall.
The last 30 years have established ensemble methods
as some of the most accurate models for classification, regression and other ML tasks. The most successful of these
are based on decision trees, ensembled using bagging (such
as Random Forests [5]) or boosting. Many types of boosting exist, such as AdaBoost and its variations [33], but one
that has gained much attention in recent years is gradient
boosting (GB). This is partly due to GB’s performance, empirically demonstrated in many works, and to the development of extremely efficient implementations such as XGBoost [12], LightGBM [23] or CatBoost [28]. These toolkits, continuously refined by a large team of academic and
industrial researchers and developers, provide a convenient
user interface and train forests of thousands of trees very
efficiently—not an easy task given that GB requires trees to

be constructed sequentially. The success of these forests is
evident in their widespread use in applications in computer
vision and other areas, and their many victories in data science challenges such as those organized by Kaggle.
Another advantage of forests is that a user can typically
get a highly accurate model with little hyperparameter exploration, usually just the number of trees, tree size (depth
or number of leaves) and learning rate (weight of each tree).
This is far simpler than selecting the architecture and SGD
hyperparameters of a deep net, hence Random Forests and
GB forests are often considered “off-the-shelf” models. In
reality, they do depend on a larger set of hyperparameters
(many of them controlling the training of the individual
trees), but it is fair to say that these have secondary importance. Finally, GB forests are also much faster to train than
neural nets. On the negative side, forests can be very big,
using thousands of trees or more and comprising many parameters.
Many variations of GB forests have been researched,
which has resulted in the very powerful GB toolkits mentioned above. These involve modifications to the GB ensembling mechanism (e.g. choice of loss function) and the tree
optimization (e.g. choice of purity function). Many of them
are algorithmically heuristic or guided by system-level optimizations; this makes XGBoost very different from LightGBM, for example. Given this, how can we further improve
GB forests? We observe that all popular GB forest variants are consistently based on the same type of trees (axisaligned, where each decision node tests a single input feature), and on the same type of training algorithm (greedy
recursive partitioning as in CART [6], C4.5 [30] or variations of it [12, 23]). On the one hand, such trees are very
unstable learners, and this introduces diversity in the ensemble, which is necessary for its success. On the other hand,
axis-aligned trees impose restrictive modeling assumptions
and have low individual accuracy. Yet, while more complex
types of trees (such as oblique trees) have been proposed for
use in forests, they have not been able to compete robustly
with axis-aligned trees in either accuracy or model size. Are
axis-aligned forests then the best option?

285

