Beyond 3D Siamese Tracking: A Motion-Centric Paradigm for
3D Single Object Tracking in Point Clouds
Chaoda Zheng123 , Xu Yan123 , Haiming Zhang123 ,
Baoyuan Wang4 , Shenghui Cheng5 , Shuguang Cui123 , Zhen Li123 *
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen) 2 The Future Network of Intelligence Institute
3
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data 4 Xiaobing.AI 5 Westlake University
{chaodazheng@link., xuyan1@link., haimingzhang@link., lizhen@}cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract

Crop

Backbone

Center

3D single object tracking (3D SOT) in LiDAR point
clouds plays a crucial role in autonomous driving. Current approaches all follow the Siamese paradigm based
on appearance matching. However, LiDAR point clouds
are usually textureless and incomplete, which hinders effective appearance matching. Besides, previous methods greatly overlook the critical motion clues among targets. In this work, beyond 3D Siamese tracking, we introduce a motion-centric paradigm to handle 3D SOT
from a new perspective. Following this paradigm, we propose a matching-free two-stage tracker M2 -Track. At the
1st -stage, M 2 -Track localizes the target within successive
frames via motion transformation. Then it refines the target box through motion-assisted shape completion at the
2nd -stage. Extensive experiments confirm that M 2 -Track
significantly outperforms previous state-of-the-arts on three
large-scale datasets while running at 57FPS (∼ 8%, ∼
17% and ∼ 22% precision gains on KITTI, NuScenes, and
Waymo Open Dataset respectively). Further analysis verifies each component’s effectiveness and shows the motioncentric paradigm’s promising potential when combined
with appearance matching. Code will be made available
at https://github.com/Ghostish/Open3DSOT.

1. Introduction
Single Object Tracking (SOT) is a basic computer vision problem with various applications, such as autonomous
driving [22, 38, 39] and surveillance system [32]. Its goal is
to keep track of a specific target across a video sequence,
given only its initial state (appearance and location).
Existing LiDAR-based SOT methods [8,10,23,26,43,44]
all follow the Siamese paradigm, which has been widely
* Corresponding author

Previous Frame+Box

Canonical
Target Template

Shared

Appearance
Matching

Backbone
Current Frame

Error-prone
Prediction

(a) Matching-based Siamese Paradigm

Ground Truth
Prediction

Previous Frame+Box

Motion
Transform

Backbone
Motion State

Current Frame

Precise
Prediction

(b) Motion-centric Paradigm

Figure 1. Top. Previous Siamese approaches obtain a canonical target template using the previous target box and search for
the target in the current frame according to the matching similarity, which is sensitive to distractors. Bottom. Our motion-centric
paradigm learns the relative target motion from two consecutive
frames and then robustly localizes the target in the current frame
via motion transformation.

adopted in 2D SOT since it strikes a balance between performance and speed. During the tracking, a Siamese model
searches for the target in the candidate region with an appearance matching technique, which relies on the features
of the target template and the search area extracted by a
shared backbone (see Fig.1(a)).
Though the appearance matching for 3D SOT shows
satisfactory results on KITTI dataset [9], we observe that
KITTI has the following proprieties: i) the target’s motion
between two consecutive frames is minor, which ensures no
drastic appearance change; ii) there are few/no distractors in
the surrounding of the target. However, the above characteristics do not hold in natural scenes. Due to self-occlusion,
significant appearance changes may occur in consecutive

8111

