E NV E DIT: Environment Editing for Vision-and-Language Navigation
Jialu Li

Hao Tan
Mohit Bansal
UNC Chapel Hill
{jialuli, airsplay, mbansal}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
In Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN), an agent
needs to navigate through the environment based on natural language instructions. Due to limited available data
for agent training and finite diversity in navigation environments, it is challenging for the agent to generalize to
new, unseen environments. To address this problem, we
propose E NV E DIT, a data augmentation method that creates new environments by editing existing environments,
which are used to train a more generalizable agent. Our
augmented environments can differ from the seen environments in three diverse aspects: style, object appearance,
and object classes. Training on these edit-augmented environments prevents the agent from overfitting to existing environments and helps generalize better to new, unseen environments. Empirically, on both the Room-to-Room and
the multi-lingual Room-Across-Room datasets, we show
that our proposed E NV E DIT method gets significant improvements in all metrics on both pre-trained and nonpre-trained VLN agents, and achieves the new state-ofthe-art on the test leaderboard. We further ensemble the
VLN agents augmented on different edited environments
and show that these edit methods are complementary.1

1. Introduction
The Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) task requires an agent to navigate through the environment based
on natural language instructions. Existing Vision-andLanguage Navigation datasets are usually small in scale and
contain a limited number of environments due to the difficulty of such data collection. However, navigation environments might differ greatly from each other. For example,
indoor navigation environments might differ in the style of
the room, the layout of the furniture, and the structure of
the entire house. This makes it difficult for the agent to generalize to previously unseen environments. Previous works
[14,21,23,28,40,60,66] have seen that agents perform sub1 Code and data are available at https : / / github . com /
jialuli-luka/EnvEdit.

Testing Environment

Training Environment

Environment-level Augmentation
Edit Style

(a)

(b)

Edit Appearance

(c)

(d)

Edit Object Class

(e)

(f)

Edited Synthetic Environments

Figure 1. We create synthetic environments through editing the
style (a, b), object appearance (c, d), and object classes (e, f) of
the training environment. Our synthetic environments serve as
environment-level data augmentation during training and help the
agent’s generalization to unseen testing environment.

stantially worse in unseen environments, and many thoughtful methods [18,22,37,41,56,61,62] have been proposed to
solve this generalization problem. One line of the previous
work focuses on augmenting the environments to mitigate
the environment bias. For example, [56] proposes to drop
out environment-level features during training. However,
this feature-dropping approach lacks the interpretability of
the actually modified environments that the agent learns
from to gain better generalizability. [37] takes one step further in creating in-domain augmentation data by mixing up
existing training environments, which effectively reduces
generalization error of VLN agents. However, these mixedup environments did not bring unseen changes or modifications to existing environments, and hence did not break the
limitations of existing seen environments, which restricts
agent’s generalizability to unseen environments. Thus, in
this paper, we propose to create new environments that differ from the original environments in style, appearance, and
objects with style transfer and image synthesis approaches.
Another line of work tries to address environment bias by
pre-training from large image-text datasets [18, 41], which
equips the agent with diverse visual knowledge. Although

15407

