Federated Class-Incremental Learning
Jiahua Dong1, 2 *, Lixu Wang3 *, Zhen Fang4 , Gan Sun1†, Shichao Xu3 , Xiao Wang3†, Qi Zhu3†
1
State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences. 3 Northwestern University.
4
DeSI Lab, AAII, University of Technology Sydney.
dongjiahua@sia.cn, lixuwang2025@u.northwestern.edu, {fzjlyt, sungan1412}@gmail.com
{shichaoxu2023@u., wangxiao@, qzhu@}northwestern.edu

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) has attracted growing attentions via data-private collaborative training on decentralized clients. However, most existing methods unrealistically
assume object classes of the overall framework are fixed
over time. It makes the global model suffer from significant
catastrophic forgetting on old classes in real-world scenarios, where local clients often collect new classes continuously and have very limited storage memory to store old
classes. Moreover, new clients with unseen new classes
may participate in the FL training, further aggravating the
catastrophic forgetting of global model. To address these
challenges, we develop a novel Global-Local Forgetting
Compensation (GLFC) model, to learn a global classincremental model for alleviating the catastrophic forgetting from both local and global perspectives. Specifically,
to address local forgetting caused by class imbalance at
the local clients, we design a class-aware gradient compensation loss and a class-semantic relation distillation
loss to balance the forgetting of old classes and distill
consistent inter-class relations across tasks. To tackle the
global forgetting brought by the non-i.i.d class imbalance
across clients, we propose a proxy server that selects the
best old global model to assist the local relation distillation. Moreover, a prototype gradient-based communication
mechanism is developed to protect the privacy. Our model
outperforms state-of-the-art methods by 4.4%∼15.1% in
terms of average accuracy on representative benchmark
datasets. The code is available at https://github.
com/conditionWang/FCIL.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) [4, 18, 42, 46] enables multiple
local clients to collaboratively learn a global model while
* Equal contributions (ordered alphabetically). † Corresponding authors.

providing secure privacy protection for local clients. It successfully addresses the data island challenge without completely compromising clients’ privacy [12, 22]. Recently, it
has attracted significant interests in academia and achieved
remarkable successes in various industrial applications, e.g.,
autonomous driving [39], wearable devices [33], medical
diagnosis [10, 52] and mobile phones [36].
Generally, most existing FL methods [16, 42, 46, 52] are
modeled in a static application scenario, where data classes
of the overall FL framework are fixed and known in advance. However, real-world applications are often dynamic,
where local clients receive the data of new classes in an online manner. To handle such a setting, existing FL methods
typically require storing all training data of old classes at
the local clients’ side so that a global model can be obtained
via FL, however the high storage and computation overhead
may render the FL unrealistic when new classes arrive dynamically [33, 36, 47, 52]. And if these methods [42, 52] are
required to learn new classes continuously with very limited
storage memory, they may suffer from significant performance degradation (i.e., catastrophic forgetting [20,37,40])
on old classes. Moreover, in real-world scenarios, new local clients that collect the data of new classes in a streaming
manner may want to participate in the FL training, which
could further exacerbate the catastrophic forgetting on old
classes in the global model training.
To address these practical scenarios, we consider a challenging FL problem named Federated Class-Incremental
Learning (FCIL) in this work. In the FCIL setting, each
local client collects the training data continuously with its
own preference, while new clients with unseen new classes
could join in the FL training at any time. More specifically,
the data distributions of the collected classes across the current and newly-added clients are non-independent and identically distributed (non-i.i.d.). FCIL requires these local
clients to collaboratively train a global model to learn new
classes continuously, with constraints on privacy preservation and limited memory storage [37, 49]. To better com-

10164

