DST: Dynamic Substitute Training for Data-free Black-box Attack
Xuelin Qian† Yanwei Fu Xiangyang Xue
Fudan University
{wxwang19,xlqian,yanweifu,xyxue}@fudan.edu.cn

Wenxuan Wang

Abstract
With the wide applications of deep neural network models in various computer vision tasks, more and more works
study the model vulnerability to adversarial examples. For
data-free black box attack scenario, existing methods are inspired by the knowledge distillation, and thus usually train
a substitute model to learn knowledge from the target model
using generated data as input. However, the substitute
model always has a static network structure, which limits
the attack ability for various target models and tasks. In
this paper, we propose a novel dynamic substitute training
attack method to encourage substitute model to learn better
and faster from the target model. Specifically, a dynamic
substitute structure learning strategy is proposed to adaptively generate optimal substitute model structure via a dynamic gate according to different target models and tasks.
Moreover, we introduce a task-driven graph-based structure
information learning constrain to improve the quality of
generated training data, and facilitate the substitute model
learning structural relationships from the target model multiple outputs. Extensive experiments have been conducted
to verify the efficacy of the proposed attack method, which
can achieve better performance compared with the stateof-the-art competitors on several datasets. Project page:
https://wxwangiris.github.io/DST

1. Introduction
Deep neural network models have achieved the state of
the art performances in many challenging computer-vision
tasks [9, 16, 29]. These models have been wide-spread
adopted in real-world applications, e.g., self-driving cars, license plate reading, disease diagnosis from medical images,
and activity classification. However, recent studies [8, 30]
show that deep neural networks are highly vulnerable to adversarial examples, which contain small and imperceptible
perturbations crafted to fool the target models. This attracts
more researchers to study the attack and defense for better
† indicates corresponding author.

Figure 1. A conceptual overview of our method. Rather than retain
all blocks, our approach learns to generate optimal substitute structure according to the black-box attack target. The lighter green
blocks with ‘S’ indicate the skipped blocks, and dark green blocks
with ‘K’ are the keeping blocks. The graph-based structural information is used to facilitate substitute training.

assessing and improving the robustness of deep models.
Adversarial attack methods can be categorized into two
main settings, i.e., white-box attack [2, 5, 17, 21, 24] and
black-box attack [3, 3, 4, 6, 7, 12, 13, 35], by whether or not
the attackers can have full access to the structure and parameters of the target model. Nowadays, in the era of big data,
data is one of the most valuable assets for companies, and
much of it also has privacy issues. Thus, in practical cases,
it is not only difficult for attackers to know the details of the
target model, but also hardly obtain the training data for the
target model, even the number of categories.
The purpose of this paper is to successfully achieve a
data-free black-box attack according to the given target
model. “Data-free” suggests that we cannot access any
knowledge about the data distribution (e.g., the type of data,
number of categories, etc.), which was used for the target
model; “Black-box” indicates the target model structure is
completely shielded from the attackers, resulting in the limitation on getting model parameters or features of middle
layers. The only available thing we can use is the output
of probabilities/labels from the target model. Such a strict
setting is more in line with the requirements of real-world
scenarios, especially at a time when privacy data protection has attracted more attention. Inspired by the substitute
training methods in black-box attack, many works [32, 38]

14361

