StyleSwin: Transformer-based GAN for High-resolution Image Generation
Shuyang Gu1
Bo Zhang2†
Jianmin Bao2
Dong Chen2
Fang Wen2
Yong Wang1
Baining Guo2
1
2
University of Science and Technology of China
Microsoft Research Asia

Bowen Zhang1 *

Figure 1. Image samples generated by our StyleSwin on FFHQ 1024 × 1024 and LSUN Church 256 × 256 respectively.

Abstract
Despite the tantalizing success in a broad of vision tasks,
transformers have not yet demonstrated on-par ability as
ConvNets in high-resolution image generative modeling. In
this paper, we seek to explore using pure transformers to
build a generative adversarial network for high-resolution
image synthesis. To this end, we believe that local attention is crucial to strike the balance between computational
efficiency and modeling capacity. Hence, the proposed generator adopts Swin transformer in a style-based architecture. To achieve a larger receptive field, we propose double
attention which simultaneously leverages the context of the
local and the shifted windows, leading to improved generation quality. Moreover, we show that offering the knowledge of the absolute position that has been lost in windowbased transformers greatly benefits the generation quality.
The proposed StyleSwin is scalable to high resolutions, with
both the coarse geometry and fine structures benefit from
the strong expressivity of transformers. However, blocking artifacts occur during high-resolution synthesis because
performing the local attention in a block-wise manner may
break the spatial coherency. To solve this, we empirically
investigate various solutions, among which we find that employing a wavelet discriminator to examine the spectral
discrepancy effectively suppresses the artifacts. Extensive
experiments show the superiority over prior transformerbased GANs, especially on high resolutions, e.g., 1024 ×
* Author did this work during his internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
† Corresponding author.

1024. The StyleSwin, without complex training strategies,
excels over StyleGAN on CelebA-HQ 1024, and achieves
on-par performance on FFHQ-1024, proving the promise
of using transformers for high-resolution image generation. The code and pretrained models are available at
https://github.com/microsoft/StyleSwin.

1. Introduction
The state of image generative modeling has seen dramatic advancement in recent years, among which generative adversarial networks [14, 41] (GANs) offer arguably
the most compelling quality on synthesizing high-resolution
images. While early attempts focus on stabilizing the training dynamics via proper regularization [15,16,36,46,47] or
adversarial loss designs [2, 25, 39, 45], remarkable performance leaps in recent prominent works mainly attribute to
the architectural modifications that aim for stronger modeling capacity, such as adopting self-attention [66], aggressive model scaling [4], or style-based generators [29, 30].
Recently, drawn by the broad success of transformers in discriminative models [11, 32, 43], a few works [24, 37, 62, 67]
attempt to use pure transformers to build generative networks in the hope that the increased expressivity and the
ability to model long-range dependencies can benefit the
generation of complex images, yet high-quality image generation, especially on high resolutions, remains challenging.
This paper aims to explore key ingredients when using transformers to constitute a competitive GAN for highresolution image generation. The first obstacle is to tame
the quadratic computational cost so that the network is scal-

11304

