Holocurtains: Programming Light Curtains via Binary Holography
Dorian Chan, Srinivasa G. Narasimhan, and Matthew O’Toole
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
[dychan, srinivas, motoole2]@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Light curtain systems are designed for detecting the presence of objects within a user-defined 3D region of space,
which has many applications across vision and robotics.
However, the shape of light curtains have so far been limited
to ruled surfaces, i.e., surfaces composed of straight lines.
In this work, we propose Holocurtains: a light-efficient approach to producing light curtains of arbitrary shape. The
key idea is to synchronize a rolling-shutter camera with a
2D holographic projector, which steers (rather than block)
light to generate bright structured light patterns. Our prototype projector uses a binary digital micromirror device
(DMD) to generate the holographic interference patterns at
high speeds. Our system produces 3D light curtains that
cannot be achieved with traditional light curtain setups and
thus enables all-new applications, including the ability to
simultaneously capture multiple light curtains in a single
frame, detect subtle changes in scene geometry, and transform any 3D surface into an optical touch interface.

1. Introduction
A light curtain is an optical barrier that detects the presence or absence of objects within regions of 3D space [2].
For example, light curtains are used in elevators and garage
doors, in order to keep doors open when a person or object
is in the doorway. Safety light curtains also are used in environments containing hazardous equipment (e.g., machine
tools, robotic arms) to protect personnel from injury, by
automatically turning off dangerous machinery whenever a
curtain is breached.
These light curtains involve two key components: emitters and receivers. Traditional light curtains position an
emitter to directly illuminate a receiver through direct line
of sight. If an obstacle blocks the light traveling from the
emitter to the receiver, the drop in the detected light signal
triggers an event. While extremely reliable and simple devices, light curtains must be physically configured for their
specific environments, which is a laborious process.
Wang et al. [35] recently proposed a programmable ap-

(a) An arm passes through a toy cow-shaped light curtain

(b) A foam board sweeps through the light curtain
Figure 1. Our Holocurtain system turns a user-defined volume or
surface (e.g., a toy cow) into a 3D light curtain. (a) An arm passes
through the light curtain. In the left image, blue pixels represent
the light curtain and green pixels highlight areas intersecting the
light curtain. The right image represents the raw data from the
system used to detect the intersections. (b) The left image shows a
foam board moving through the light curtain. The right image is a
composition of raw measurements captured at different instances
in time, where the colors represent different frames.

proach to generate light curtains through triangulation. A
scene is illuminated with a laser line, and the response is
measured with a line scan camera [35] or a rolling-shutter
camera [5]. The intersection of the illumination and sensing planes produces a 3D line (see Fig. 2(a)). If an object
touches this line, light from the source reflects off the object and reaches the camera—triggering an event. Rapidly
changing the position of the illumination and sensing planes
(e.g., with mirror galvanometers) creates ruled surfaces, i.e.,
surfaces defined by unions of straight lines. Triangulation
light curtains offer several benefits, including the ability to
program the shape in real time and operate under strong
ambient light, which can potentially be leveraged for new
safety applications including assisted or autonomous navi-

17886

