Object Localization under Single Coarse Point Supervision
Xuehui Yu1 ,* Pengfei Chen1∗ , Di Wu1 , Najmul Hassan2 , Guorong Li1 ,
Junchi Yan3 , Humphrey Shi2,4 , Qixiang Ye1 , Zhenjun Han1†
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 2 U of Oregon, 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 4 Picsart AI Research (PAIR)

Abstract
Point-based object localization (POL), which pursues
high-performance object sensing under low-cost data annotation, has attracted increased attention. However, the
point annotation mode inevitably introduces semantic variance for the inconsistency of annotated points. Existing
POL methods heavily reply on accurate key-point annotations which are difficult to define. In this study, we propose
a POL method using coarse point annotations, relaxing the
supervision signals from accurate key points to freely spotted points. To this end, we propose a coarse point refinement (CPR) approach, which to our best knowledge is the
first attempt to alleviate semantic variance from the perspective of algorithm. CPR constructs point bags, selects
semantic-correlated points, and produces semantic center
points through multiple instance learning (MIL). In this
way, CPR defines a weakly supervised evolution procedure,
which ensures training high-performance object localizer
under coarse point supervision. Experimental results on
COCO, DOTA and our proposed SeaPerson dataset validate the effectiveness of the CPR approach. The dataset
and code will be available at https://github.com/
ucas-vg/PointTinyBenchmark/.

1. Introduction
Humans can recognize and easily achieve a sense of the
objects present in their eye-sight. In computer-vision, this
is usually framed as drawing bounding boxes around objects [21,25,40,41] or dense annotations of the entire scene
[13, 16]. However, one inevitable circumstance for training
such models is that they require high-quality densely annotated data which is expensive and difficult to obtain. In
some applications [27], just the object’s location is necessary while costly annotation (e.g. bounding box) is redundant or even undesirable (e.g. a robotic arm aims at a single
point to pick up an object [27]).
Hence point-based object localization (POL) is studied.
Due to the simple and time-efficient annotation, point-based
object localization has attracted increasing attention in re* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors. (hanzhj@ucas.ac.cn)

Figure 1. Examples of coarse point annotation and the problem of
semantic variance. (Best viewed in color.)

cent years [26, 29]. POL based methods require point-level
object annotations and can predict the object’s location as a
2D coordinate in the original image.
However, while annotating an object as a point, there can
be multiple candidate points. One problem that arises with
optional candidate points is that multiple regions of varying semantic information are labeled positive for the same
class. Conversely, identical regions with similar semantic
information are labeled differently. Take bird category as
an example, during annotation, we label the bird’s different
body parts (e.g. neck and tail etc.) as positive based on the
visible regions in the image. Based on the annotation, for
different images in the dataset, we have labeled same body
part (e.g. neck) of the bird as both positive and negative
(see Fig. 1). Therefore, during training, the model has to
consider the neck region as positive for one image and negative in another (the image where tail is annotated). This
phenomenon introduces ambiguity and confuses the model
which results in poor performance.
Previous works [29, 37] addressed this issue by setting
strict annotation rules by annotating only the pre-defined
key-point areas of the object. As a result, they suffer from
the following challenges: i) the key points are not easy
to define, especially for some broadly defined categories
where they do not have a specific shape (Fig. 2 (a)); ii) the
key point may not exist in the image due to the different
poses of objects and different camera views (Fig. 2 (b)); iii)
when objects have large scale variance, it is difficult to decide the appropriate granularity of the key points ( Fig. 2
(c)). For a person, if the head is a key point [29] (coarsegrained) then there remains a large semantic variance for the

4868

