Event-based Video Reconstruction via Potential-assisted Spiking Neural Network
Lin Zhu1,2 , Xiao Wang2 , Yi Chang2 , Jianing Li1,2 , Tiejun Huang1 , Yonghong Tian1,2,∗
Peking University1 , Peng Cheng Laboratory2

Abstract
Neuromorphic vision sensor is a new bio-inspired imaging paradigm that reports asynchronous, continuously perpixel brightness changes called ‘events’ with high temporal resolution and high dynamic range. So far, the eventbased image reconstruction methods are based on artificial neural networks (ANN) or hand-crafted spatiotemporal smoothing techniques. In this paper, we first implement the image reconstruction work via deep spiking neural network (SNN) architecture. As the bio-inspired neural
networks, SNNs operating with asynchronous binary spikes
distributed over time, can potentially lead to greater computational efficiency on event-driven hardware. We propose a novel Event-based Video reconstruction framework
based on a fully Spiking Neural Network (EVSNN), which
utilizes Leaky-Integrate-and-Fire (LIF) neuron and Membrane Potential (MP) neuron. We find that the spiking neurons have the potential to store useful temporal information
(memory) to complete such time-dependent tasks. Furthermore, to better utilize the temporal information, we propose
a hybrid potential-assisted framework (PA-EVSNN) using
the membrane potential of spiking neuron. The proposed
neuron is referred as Adaptive Membrane Potential (AMP) neuron, which adaptively updates the membrane potential according to the input spikes. The experimental results
demonstrate that our models achieve comparable performance to ANN-based models on IJRR, MVSEC, and HQF
datasets. The energy consumptions of EVSNN and PAEVSNN are 19.36× and 7.75× more computationally efficient than their ANN architectures, respectively. The code
and pretrained model are available at https://sites.
google.com/view/evsnn.

1. Introduction
Event cameras [2, 5] are bio-inspired vision sensors that
pose a paradigm shift in the way visual information is acquired. Compared with standard cameras, event cameras
have high temporal resolution, high dynamic range (140 dB
∗ Corresponding author.

vs. 60 dB of standard cameras), and low power consumption. Event cameras work asynchronously, recording the
stream of events (t, x, y, p) which includes the timestamp,
pixel location and polarity of the brightness changes.
Despite the advantages of the event data, it is not friendly to human vision and traditional computer vision [48, 53].
As a solution, image reconstruction bridges the gap between
human visualization and events, giving us an intuition of
the rich information encoded by events. On other hand, image is a useful representation for conventional frame-based
computer vision [42]. Reconstructing images from asynchronous events has been explored in various researches.
Early works attempt to recover the intensity of an image
from events based on hand-crafted priors [46, 47, 3, 30].
Recently, deep neural network based reconstruction models [52, 42, 43, 48, 50, 34, 55] have demonstrated impressive
performance. The events usually be transformed in to timesurfaces, event images or voxel grids as the input of convolutional neural network. However, large artificial neural
networks (ANN) can be memory and computationally intensive [48], consuming power and hampering the low latency of event cameras.
In fact, the sparse event data can be effectively combined with neuromorphic hardware for low-power spiking
neural network (SNN) applications [14]. Compared with
ANN, SNN is more biologically realistic and its neurons
communicate with each other via discrete spikes instead of
continuous-valued activations. Visual systems [32, 1] constructed with SNN and event cameras have demonstrated
their capacity in solving visual tasks as well as prominent
energy-efficiency. However, most of the SNN work has so
far been focused on problems like classification [10, 59, 62],
optical estimation [35, 15], motion segmentation [33], and
angular velocity regression [11]. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to attempt image reconstruction task
based on a deep SNN architecture.
In this paper, we propose a novel Event-based Video reconstruction framework based on a fully Spiking Neural
Network (EVSNN), which utilizes the Leaky-Integrate-andFire (LIF) neurons and a Membrane Potential (MP) neuron.
To better extract the temporal information, we propose a hybrid potential-assisted framework (PA-EVSNN) using the

3594

