RGB-Multispectral Matching: Dataset, Learning Methodology, Evaluation
Fabio Tosi∗
Pierluigi Zama Ramirez∗
Matteo Poggi∗
Samuele Salti
Stefano Mattoccia
Luigi Di Stefano
CVLAB, Department of Computer Science and Engineering (DISI)
University of Bologna, Italy
{fabio.tosi5, pierluigi.zama, m.poggi}@unibo.it

(a) RGB (3222×1605×3)

(b) MS (510×254×10) (c) Ground-truth (3222×1605) (d) Prediction (3222×1605)

Figure 1. (a) RGB images and (b) low-resolution multi-spectral images acquired under varying lighting conditions. Visualization as a
cube with on top the first band and on sides two stretched spectral slices of the bottom row and far-right column after the application of a
color-map. (c) ground-truth disparity aligned with the RGB image and its point-cloud visualization while (d) prediction by our architecture.

Abstract
We address the problem of registering synchronized
color (RGB) and multi-spectral (MS) images featuring very
different resolution by solving stereo matching correspondences. Purposely, we introduce a novel RGB-MS dataset
framing 13 different scenes in indoor environments and providing a total of 34 image pairs annotated with semi-dense,
high-resolution ground-truth labels in the form of disparity maps. To tackle the task, we propose a deep learning
architecture trained in a self-supervised manner by exploiting a further RGB camera, required only during training
data acquisition. In this setup, we can conveniently learn
cross-modal matching in the absence of ground-truth labels
by distilling knowledge from an easier RGB-RGB matching
task based on a collection of about 11K unlabeled image
triplets. Experiments show that the proposed pipeline sets
a good performance bar (1.16 pixels average registration
error) for future research on this novel, challenging task.

1. Introduction
Traditional RGB sensors acquire images with three
channels, approximately mimicking color perception in
trichromatic mammals like humans, where three kinds of

cone cells are sensitive to three different ranges of wavelengths in the visible spectrum. This is usually achieved
by using bandpass optical filters corresponding to such colors, arranged in a Bayer pattern [6]. Multi-spectral (MS)
imaging devices generalize such image acquisition mechanics and enable acquisition of images with a larger number
of channels, i.e. ten or more, usually corresponding to narrower wavelength ranges. MS sensors may also be sensitive to wavelengths outside the visible spectrum, e.g.in the
infra-red or ultra-violet bands. By extending the range of
wavelengths as well as the granularity of their quantization into image channels, MS devices enable extraction of
additional information about the sensed scene that human
eyes fail to capture, which in turns forms the basis of peculiar applications. For instance, MS imaging devices are
used to perform analysis of artworks [15], remote sensing
for agriculture [81] and land use [79], target tracking [21],
pedestrian detection [31], counterfeit detection, e.g. of banknotes [3], diagnostic medicine and skin inspection [39],
food inspection [54] and contamination detection [20]. In
spite of such broad range of applications, deployment of MS
sensors is usually limited to industrial settings or expensive
equipment like satellites. However, the ability to run several
of these applications on mobile phones and other consumer
devices directly operated by end users could open up interesting scenarios, like, e.g., enabling early diagnosis of skin
diseases [35], democratizing food quality control [4], mak-

∗ Joint first authorship.

15958

