The Principle of Diversity: Training Stronger Vision Transformers Calls for
Reducing All Levels of Redundancy
Tianlong Chen1 , Zhenyu Zhang1 , Yu Cheng2 , Ahmed Awadallah2 , Zhangyang Wang1
1
University of Texas at Austin, 2 Microsoft Research
{tianlong.chen, zhenyu.zhang, atlaswang}@utexas.edu, {yu.cheng, hassanam}@microsoft.com

Embedding Similarity

Abstract
Vision transformers (ViTs) have gained increasing popularity as they are commonly believed to own higher modeling capacity and representation flexibility, than traditional convolutional networks. However, it is questionable
whether such potential has been fully unleashed in practice, as the learned ViTs often suffer from over-smoothening,
yielding likely redundant models. Recent works made preliminary attempts to identify and alleviate such redundancy,
e.g., via regularizing embedding similarity or re-injecting
convolution-like structures. However, a “head-to-toe assessment” regarding the extent of redundancy in ViTs, and
how much we could gain by thoroughly mitigating such,
has been absent for this field. This paper, for the first
time, systematically studies the ubiquitous existence of redundancy at all three levels: patch embedding, attention
map, and weight space. In view of them, we advocate a
principle of diversity for training ViTs, by presenting corresponding regularizers that encourage the representation
diversity and coverage at each of those levels, that enabling
capturing more discriminative information. Extensive experiments on ImageNet with a number of ViT backbones
validate the effectiveness of our proposals, largely eliminating the observed ViT redundancy and significantly boosting
the model generalization. For example, our diversified DeiT
obtains 0.70% ∼ 1.76% accuracy boosts on ImageNet with
highly reduced similarity. Our codes are fully available in
https://github.com/VITA-Group/Diverse-ViT .

1. Introduction
Transformer [57], as the de facto neural architecture in
natural language processing (NLP) [4, 19], recently revolutionizes modern computer vision applications such as image
classification [21, 26, 53], object detection [5, 17, 74, 80],
and image generation [10, 31, 46]. Rather than relying on
convolution-like inductive bias, vision transformers [21]
(ViTs) leverage the self-attention [57] to aggregate image
patches across all spatial positions and model their globalrange relationships, which are believed to improve model

Attention Similarity

Weight Similarity

Figure 1. Relative similarity comparisons in embedding, attention,
and weight spaces of DeiT-Small on ImageNet. The larger number indicates severer correlation/redundancy. B1∼B5 donate the
blocks in the DeiT-Small model. Cosine, (normalized) MSE, 1 (normalized) reconstruction loss are adopted to measure embedding, attention, and weight similarity. The former two are computed with 10, 000 images from the ImageNet training set without
data augmentation, following the standard in [23].

expressiveness and representation flexibility.
Despite their promising potentials, the ViT training still
suffers from considerable instability, especially when going
deeper [23, 55]. One of the major reasons [23] is that the
global information aggregation among all patches encourages their representations to become overly similar, causing substantially degraded discrimination ability. This phenomenon, known as over-smoothening, suggests a high degree of “redundancy” or ineffective usage of the ViT expressiveness and flexibility, and has been studied by a few
prior arts [23,55,75,76]. Several initial attempts strive to fill
the gap from different aspects. For example [23] proposes
contrastive-based regularization to diversity patch embed-

12020

