What’s in your hands? 3D Reconstruction of Generic Objects in Hands
Yufei Ye12
Abhinav Gupta12
1
Carnegie Mellon University
yufeiy2@cs.cmu.edu

gabhinav@fb.com

Shubham Tulsiani1
2
Meta AI
shubhtuls@cmu.edu

https://judyye.github.io/ihoi/

Figure 1. Given an RGB image depicting a hand holding an object, we infer the 3D shape of the hand-held object (rendered in the image
frame and from a novel view).

Abstract
Our work aims to reconstruct hand-held objects given
a single RGB image. In contrast to prior works that typically assume known 3D templates and reduce the problem
to 3D pose estimation, our work reconstructs generic handheld object without knowing their 3D templates. Our key
insight is that hand articulation is highly predictive of the
object shape, and we propose an approach that conditionally reconstructs the object based on the articulation and
the visual input. Given an image depicting a hand-held object, we first use off-the-shelf systems to estimate the underlying hand pose and then infer the object shape in a normalized hand-centric coordinate frame. We parameterized
the object by signed distance which are inferred by an implicit network which leverages the information from both
visual feature and articulation-aware coordinates to process a query point. We perform experiments across three

datasets and show that our method consistently outperforms
baselines and is able to reconstruct a diverse set of objects.
We analyze the benefits and robustness of explicit articulation conditioning and also show that this allows the hand
pose estimation to further improve in test-time optimization.

1. Introduction
Humans interact with their surrounding world with their
hands. Not only do we understand interaction as abstract
concepts such as touching screens, squeezing balls, holding pens, etc., we also perceive their underlying 3D shape.
Holding a pen means a stick lying on the purlicue and
gripped by thumb, index, and middle fingers; holding a
bowl is placing it on top of an up-facing palm. We aim
to build a recognition system that can perceive and reason
about the geometric information of hand-object interactions
(HOI) for generic objects.

3895

