Shifting More Attention to Visual Backbone: Query-modulated Refinement
Networks for End-to-End Visual Grounding
Jiabo Ye1 Junfeng Tian2 Ming Yan2 Xiaoshan Yang3
Xuwu Wang4 Ji Zhang2 Liang He1 Xin Lin1
1

East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
3

NLPR, CASIA, Beijing, China

4

2

Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China

Fudan University, Shanghai, China

jiabo.ye@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, {xlin,lhe}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, xwwang18@fudan.edu.cn
xiaoshan.yang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, {tjf141457,ym119608,zj122146}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Visual grounding focuses on establishing fine-grained
alignment between vision and natural language, which has
essential applications in multimodal reasoning systems. Existing methods use pre-trained query-agnostic visual backbones to extract visual feature maps independently without
considering the query information. We argue that the visual
features extracted from the visual backbones and the features really needed for multimodal reasoning are inconsistent. One reason is that there are differences between pretraining tasks and visual grounding. Moreover, since the
backbones are query-agnostic, it is difficult to completely
avoid the inconsistency issue by training the visual backbone end-to-end in the visual grounding framework. In this
paper, we propose a Query-modulated Refinement Network
(QRNet) to address the inconsistent issue by adjusting intermediate features in the visual backbone with a novel Queryaware Dynamic Attention (QD-ATT) mechanism and queryaware multiscale fusion. The QD-ATT can dynamically
compute query-dependent visual attention at the spatial and
channel levels of the feature maps produced by the visual
backbone. We apply the QRNet to an end-to-end visual
grounding framework. Extensive experiments show that the
proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art methods on
five widely used datasets. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/LukeForeverYoung/QRNet.

1. Introduction
Visual grounding [25, 32, 36, 59], i.e., localizing the
referent object in an image according to the given natural language query, is a fundamental component of multiThe work was done when Jiabo Ye was working as an intern at Alibaba
DAMO Academy.

Textual
Encoder

top middle
orange whole

Cross-Modal
Interaction

Visual
Encoder
Sensitive to queryunrelated areas

query-inconsistent
visual feature

Wrong

(a) Previous end-to-end framework
top middle
orange whole

Textual
Encoder
Attention

Attend to the
correct areas

Cross-Modal
Interaction

QRNet

query-consistent
visual feature

Correct

(b) Our QRNet-based framework

Figure 1. (a) A typical end-to-end visual grounding framework
that uses two individual encoders to extract visual and textual features for cross-modal interaction. (b) Our visual grounding framework based on a Query-modulated Refinement Network (QRNet).

modal reasoning system. Compared with conventional object detection methods [38, 39] which can only recognize
the restricted categories contained in the training data, visual grounding has the advantage of detecting novel combinations of categories and attributes expressed in free-form
text. In recent years, it has attracted much attention in the
field of computer vision and machine learning due to its
potential applications in many downstream tasks, such as
visual question answering [15, 50, 63], visually-grounded
language navigation [2, 47] and image captioning [1, 8, 57].

15502

