Discrete Cosine Transform Network for Guided Depth Map Super-Resolution
Zixiang Zhao1,2

Jiangshe Zhang1 * Shuang Xu1,3∗ Zudi Lin2 Hanspeter Pfister2
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
2
Harvard University, Cambridge MA, USA
3
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China

zixiangzhao@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, jszhang@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, xs@nwpu.edu.cn,
{linzudi,pfister}@g.harvard.edu

1. Introduction
With the popularity of consumer-oriented depth estimation sensors, e.g., Time-of-Flight (ToF) and Kinect cameras,
depth maps have promoted advancements in autonomous
driving [24, 37], pose estimation [42, 56], virtual reality
[20, 28], and scene understanding [10, 64]. Unfortunately,
due to the technical limitations and suboptimal imaging conditions, depth images are often low-resolution (LR) and
noisy. However, high-resolution (HR) RGB images (or intensity images) are relatively easy to obtain in the same scene
* Corresponding authors.

LR depth
map

Input

Guided Edge
Spatial Attention

Semi-Coupled Residual Block P

Shared
Kernel
Shared
Kernel

Private
Kernel
Private
Kernel

Semi-Coupled
Residual Block 1

Private
Kernel
Private
Kernel

Guided depth super-resolution (GDSR) is an essential
topic in multi-modal image processing, which reconstructs
high-resolution (HR) depth maps from low-resolution ones
collected with suboptimal conditions with the help of HR
RGB images of the same scene. To solve the challenges in
interpreting the working mechanism, extracting cross-modal
features and RGB texture over-transferred, we propose a
novel Discrete Cosine Transform Network (DCTNet) to alleviate the problems from three aspects. First, the Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT) module reconstructs the multi-channel
HR depth features by using DCT to solve the channel-wise
optimization problem derived from the image domain. Second, we introduce a semi-coupled feature extraction module
that uses shared convolutional kernels to extract common
information and private kernels to extract modality-specific
information. Third, we employ an edge attention mechanism
to highlight the contours informative for guided upsampling.
Extensive quantitative and qualitative evaluations demonstrate the effectiveness of our DCTNet, which outperforms
previous state-of-the-art methods with a relatively small
number of parameters. The code is available at https://
github.com/Zhaozixiang1228/GDSR-DCTNet.

HR RGB
image

Semi-Coupled Residual Block 2

Abstract

guided edge
attention weight

RGB feature

Discrete Cosine Transform Module

depth reconstruction module
Depth
feature

HR depth
map

Semi-Coupled Feature Extraction Module

Output

Figure 1. Overview of DCTNet. First, the SCFE module extracts
shared and private features from the depth (LR) and RGB (HR)
images. The GESA module employs the RGB feature to obtain
edge attention weights useful for SR. The multi-modal features and
attention weights are then processed by the DCT module, where
DCT is utilized in each channel to get HR depth features. Finally,
the reconstruction module outputs the SR depth map.

when acquiring depth maps. Therefore, guided depth map
super-resolution (GDSR) with RGB images has become an
essential topic in multi-modal image processing and multimodal super-resolution (SR). Our research is based on the
assumption that there are statistical co-occurrences between
the texture edges of RGB images and the discontinuities of
depth maps [40]. In this way, information in RGB images
can be utilized to restore HR depth maps when the LR depth
maps are unsatisfactory for downstream applications.
For image SR, deep neural networks have become the
de facto methodology due to their ability in modeling the
mapping from LR to HR images [5, 25, 62]. However, image
SR mainly focuses on reconstructing fine details and textures, while depth SR models need to infer textureless and
piecewise affine regions that have sharp depth discontinuities [40]. Besides, depth maps can be noisy and suffer from
a lower tolerance for artifacts in real-world applications [54].
Therefore, we can hardly adopt the methods for image SR
without appraising the unique characteristics of depth SR.

5697

