Discrete time convolution for fast event-based stereo
Kaixuan Zhang1,3∗ Kaiwei Che2,3
Jie Cheng3
1
2

Ziyang Zhang3

Jianguo Zhang1,4

Qinghai Guo3

Luziwei Leng3∗†

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, China

Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, China
3

4

ACS Lab, Huawei Technologies, Shenzhen, China

Abstract
Inspired by biological retina, dynamical vision sensor
transmits events of instantaneous changes of pixel intensity, giving it a series of advantages over traditional framebased camera, such as high dynamical range, high temporal resolution and low power consumption. However, extracting information from highly asynchronous event data
is a challenging task. Inspired by continuous dynamics
of biological neuron models, we propose a novel encoding method for sparse events - continuous time convolution
(CTC) - which learns to model the spatial feature of the data
with intrinsic dynamics. Adopting channel-wise parameterization, temporal dynamics of the model is synchronized on
the same feature map and diverges across different ones,
enabling it to embed data in a variety of temporal scales.
Abstracted from CTC, we further develop discrete time convolution (DTC) which accelerates the process with lower
computational cost. We apply these methods to event-based
multi-view stereo matching where they surpass state-of-theart methods on benchmark criteria of the MVSEC dataset.
Spatially sparse event data often leads to inaccurate estimation of edges and local contours. To address this problem,
we propose a dual-path architecture in which the feature
map is complemented by underlying edge information from
original events extracted with spatially-adaptive denormalization. We demonstrate the superiority of our model in
terms of speed (up to 110 FPS), accuracy and robustness,
showing a great potential for real-time fast depth estimation. Finally, we perform experiments on the recent DSEC
dataset to demonstrate the general usage of our model.

1. Introduction
Depth estimation has been viewed as one of the key
problems in computer vision, with a variety of applications
∗ These authors contribute equally to this work.
† Corresponding author. lengluziwei@huawei.com

Peng Cheng Lab, Shenzhen, China

such as robotics, autonomous driving, augmented reality
and medical imaging. Multi-view stereo matching solves
this problem by reconstructing 3D scenes based on pixel
differences of the same physical point from images taken
from multiple views. Current deep learning models for
stereo matching mainly work with static images produced
by frame-based cameras. These sensors have drawbacks
such as high power consumption, low dynamical range and
low data rate, which limit their usage in edge computing
platforms or high-speed scenarios. Inspired by biological
retina, the recently emerging dynamical vision sensor, or
event-based sensor, addresses these problems by transmitting events of instantaneous changes of pixel intensity, in
millisecond-level temporal resolution. When the change
of brightness at a pixel exceeds a certain threshold, the
sensor will fire an event, which is a four-dimensional vector
including spatial coordinates, polarity and timestamp.
Since the event-based sensor transmits events rather than
frames, motion blur caused by high-speed movements of
objects during exposure can be avoided. This property
makes it perfectly suitable for high-speed vision tasks, such
as object detection, tracking and obstacle avoidance, etc.

1.1. Event-based stereo matching
Most of the works in stereo matching based on deep
learning are established on image datasets [20, 32, 52, 56,
59]. Therefore, to take advantage of accumulated knowledge in this field, a straightforward approach is to convert
the highly asynchronous event sequences into frame-based
images. Following this idea, various methods have been
proposed. The so-called handcrafted methods [25, 31, 35,
36, 40, 53, 58, 64] directly convert events to event frames
based on the four dimensional information of each event.
For example, in [36, 53], stacking based on time (SBT)
merges events into predefined temporally neighboring bins
and sums up polarity values of events if they share the same
spatial coordinate; stacking based on the number of events

8676

