Self-Supervised Models are Continual Learners
Enrico Fini* 1,2 Victor G. Turrisi da Costa* 1 Xavier Alameda-Pineda2
Elisa Ricci1,3 Karteek Alahari2 Julien Mairal2
1

University of Trento

2

Inria†

3

Fondazione Bruno Kessler

Class-incremental

Abstract

65

62.2

CIFAR100
60.4

59.5

60

Self-supervised models have been shown to produce
comparable or better visual representations than their supervised counterparts when trained offline on unlabeled
data at scale. However, their efficacy is catastrophically
reduced in a Continual Learning (CL) scenario where data
is presented to the model sequentially. In this paper, we
show that self-supervised loss functions can be seamlessly
converted into distillation mechanisms for CL by adding a
predictor network that maps the current state of the representations to their past state. This enables us to devise a
framework for Continual self-supervised visual representation Learning that (i) significantly improves the quality of
the learned representations, (ii) is compatible with several
state-of-the-art self-supervised objectives, and (iii) needs
little to no hyperparameter tuning. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach empirically by training six popular self-supervised models in various CL settings. Code:
github.com/DonkeyShot21/cassle.

1. Introduction
During the last few years, self-supervised learning (SSL)
has become the most popular paradigm for unsupervised visual representation learning [3, 7, 8, 13, 14, 25, 27, 54]. Indeed, under certain assumptions (e.g., offline training with
large amounts of data and resources), SSL methods are able
to extract representations that match the quality of representations obtained with supervised learning, without requiring annotations. However, these assumptions do not always
hold in real-world scenarios, e.g., when new unlabeled data
are made available progressively over time. In fact, in order
to integrate new knowledge into the model, training needs
to be repeated on the whole dataset, which is impractical,
expensive, and sometimes even impossible when old data is
not available. This issue is exacerbated by the fact that SSL
models are notoriously computationally expensive to train.
* Enrico Fini and Victor G. Turrisi da Costa contributed equally.
† Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France.

58.3

57.8
53.6

55
50
45
40
BYOL

Barlow Twins MoCoV2+

SimCLR

Class-incremental
70
68

68.2

SwAV

VICReg

ImageNet100
68.8

68

66.4

66
64.8

66
64
62
60
58
BYOL

Barlow Twins MoCoV2+
Supervised fine-tuning

SimCLR
Ours

SwAV

VICReg

SSL fine-tuning

Figure 1. Linear evaluation accuracy of representations learned
with different self-supervised methods on class-incremental CIFAR100 and ImageNet100. In blue the accuracy of SSL finetuning, in green the improvement brought by CaSSLe. The red
dashed line is the accuracy attained by supervised fine-tuning.

Continual learning (CL) studies the ability of neural networks to learn tasks sequentially. Prior art in the field focuses on mitigating catastrophic forgetting [17, 22, 24, 37].
Common benchmarks in the CL literature evaluate the discriminative performance of classifiers learned with supervision from non-stationary distributions. In this paper, we
tackle the same forgetting phenomenon in the context of
SSL. Unsupervised representation learning is indeed appealing for sequential learning since it does not require human annotations, which are particularly hard to obtain when
new data is generated on-the-fly. This setup, called Continual Self-Supervised Learning (CSSL), is surprisingly underinvestigated in the literature.
In this work, we propose CaSSLe, a simple and effective framework for CSSL of visual representations based on
the intuition that SSL models are intrinsically capable of
learning continually, and that SSL losses can be seamlessly
converted into distillation losses. Our key idea is to train the
19621

