Egocentric Scene Understanding via Multimodal Spatial Rectifier
Tien Do1
1

Khiem Vuong2

University of Minnesota

2

Hyun Soo Park1

Carnegie Mellon University

Figure 1. We study the problem of predicting geometry (depths and surface normals) from a single view egocentric image that includes
dynamic objects (e.g., hand and people). We design a multimodal spatial rectifier that can effectively handle the excessively tilted images caused by head movement (e.g., nearly 90 degree pitch angle when engaging eye-hand coordination). Our method shows strong
performance on unseen images from EPIC-KITCHENS [7] (left), FPHA [18] (top right), and our EDINA (bottom right) datasets.

Abstract
In this paper, we study a problem of egocentric scene
understanding, i.e., predicting depths and surface normals
from an egocentric image. Egocentric scene understanding poses unprecedented challenges: (1) due to large head
movements, the images are taken from non-canonical viewpoints (i.e., tilted images) where existing models of geometry prediction do not apply; (2) dynamic foreground objects including hands constitute a large proportion of visual scenes. These challenges limit the performance of the
existing models learned from large indoor datasets, such
as ScanNet [6] and NYUv2 [36], which comprise predominantly upright images of static scenes. We present a multimodal spatial rectifier that stabilizes the egocentric images to a set of reference directions, which allows learning
a coherent visual representation. Unlike unimodal spatial
rectifier that often produces excessive perspective warp for
egocentric images, the multimodal spatial rectifier learns
from multiple directions that can minimize the impact of the
perspective warp. To learn visual representations of the dynamic foreground objects, we present a new dataset called
EDINA (Egocentric Depth on everyday INdoor Activities)
that comprises more than 500K synchronized RGBD frames
and gravity directions. Equipped with the multimodal spatial rectifier and the EDINA dataset, our proposed method

on single-view depth and surface normal estimation significantly outperforms the baselines not only on our EDINA dataset, but also on other popular egocentric datasets,
such as First Person Hand Action (FPHA) [18] and EPICKITCHENS [7].

1. Introduction
We interact with surrounding objects in structured yet
rather complex, unorganized, and dynamic environments,
enabled by our robust egocentric perception that facilitates
understanding 3D scene geometry around us. Such innate
perceptual ability shows in stark contrast with that of existing computer vision systems, trained to operate on images depicting static and well-organized scenes recorded
by carefully controlled cameras [6, 19, 36]. These trained
models [14, 23] are, despite their remarkable performance,
shown to be highly brittle when predicting the scene geometry of egocentric images that observe unscripted everyday activities, including diverse hand-object interactions,
captured by in situ embodied sensors such as head/bodymounted cameras [8]. This requires additional sensors such
as IMU and depth sensors in augmented/mixed reality devices (e.g., Hololens and Magic Leap One) to deliver interactive and immersive experiences in our daily spaces.
In this paper, we study a problem of egocentric 3D

2832

