Joint Hand Motion and Interaction Hotspots Prediction from Egocentric Videos
Subarna Tripathi2
Somdeb Majumdar2
Shaowei Liu1*
1
2
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Intel Labs

3

Xiaolong Wang3
UC San Diego

Abstract
We propose to forecast future hand-object interactions given
an egocentric video. Instead of predicting action labels or pixels,
we directly predict the hand motion trajectory and the future
contact points on the next active object (i.e., interaction hotspots).
This relatively low-dimensional representation provides a concrete description of future interactions. To tackle this task, we
first provide an automatic way to collect trajectory and hotspots
labels on large-scale data. We then use this data to train an
Object-Centric Transformer (OCT) model for prediction. Our
model performs hand and object interaction reasoning via the
self-attention mechanism in Transformers. OCT also provides
a probabilistic framework to sample the future trajectory and
hotspots to handle uncertainty in prediction. We perform experiments on the Epic-Kitchens-55, Epic-Kitchens-100 and EGTEA
Gaze+ datasets, and show that OCT significantly outperforms
state-of-the-art approaches by a large margin. Project page is
available at https://stevenlsw.github.io/hoi-forecast.

1. Introduction
Achieving the ability to predict a person’s intent, preference
and future activities is one of the fundamental goals for AI systems. This is particularly useful when it comes to egocentric video
data for applications such as augmented reality (AR) and robotics.
Imagining with an egocentric view inside the kitchen (e.g., Figure 1), if an AI system can forecast what the human would do next,
an AR headset could provide useful and timely guidance, and a
robot can react and collaborate with the human more smoothly.
What space should the model predict on? Recent approaches [25,26,28,72] have been proposed to predict the discrete
future action category given a sequence of frames as inputs,
namely action anticipation. However, predicting a semantic label
does not reveal how the human moves and what the human
will interact with in the future. On the other hand, predicting
pixels for future frames [9, 44, 53, 84] is very challenging due
to its high dimension outputs with large uncertainties. Instead
of adopting these two representations, our work is inspired by
recent work on human motion trajectory prediction [11] which
takes images as inputs and outputs the coordinates of future pose
joints. Trajectory not only provides a concrete description of
motion, but also is a much smaller space to predict compared
* Work partially done during an internship at Intel Labs.

Figure 1. Going beyond predicting a single action label in the future,
we propose to jointly predict the future hand motion trajectories (blue
and red lines) and interaction hotspots (heatmaps) on the next-active
object in egocentric videos.

to pixel prediction. However, unlike previous works, prediction
in egocentric videos also involves dense interactions with objects,
which cannot be modeled by trajectory alone.
In this paper, we propose to jointly predict the future hand
motion trajectory and the interaction hotspots (affordance) of
the next-active object, given a sequence of input frames from
an egocentric video. Starting from the final frame of the input
video, we will predict the trajectories for both hands by sampling
from a probabilistic distribution inferred by the model. Instead
of learning a deterministic model, we tackle the uncertainty
of future in a probabilistic manner. At the same time, we will
predict the contact points on the next-active object interacted by
the future hands. These contact points are also represented via
probabilistic distributions in the form of interaction hotspots [61]
and conditioned on the predicted hand trajectory. To perform
joint predictions, we introduce a Transformer-based model and
an automatic way to generate a large-scale dataset for training.
Instead of collecting annotations for hand trajectories and
interaction hotspots with high-cost human labor, we propose
an automatic manner to collect the data in a large-scale. Given
a video, we call the input frames to our model the observation
frames and the predicted ones are called future frames. We first
utilize off-the-shelf hand detectors [73] to locate hands in all the
future frames. Since the camera is usually moving in egocentric
videos, we leverage homography in nearby frames and project
the detected future hands’ locations back to the last observation
frame. In this way, all the detections are aligned in the same
coordinate system. Similarly, we also detect the locations where

3282

