Lifelong Unsupervised Domain Adaptive Person Re-identification
with Coordinated Anti-forgetting and Adaptation
Zhipeng Huang1† * Zhizheng Zhang2†‡ Cuiling Lan2‡ Wenjun Zeng3 Peng Chu2
Quanzeng You2 Jiang Wang2 Zicheng Liu2 Zheng-jun Zha1
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Microsoft 3 EIT Institute for Advanced Study
hzp1104@mail.ustc.edu.cn

zengw2011@hotmail.com

zhazj@ustc.edu.cn

{zhizzhang, culan, pengchu, quyou, jiangwang, zliu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptive person re-identification
(ReID) has been extensively investigated to mitigate the adverse effects of domain gaps. Those works assume the target domain data can be accessible all at once. However, for
the real-world streaming data, this hinders the timely adaptation to changing data statistics and sufficient exploitation of increasing samples. In this paper, to address more
practical scenarios, we propose a new task, Lifelong Unsupervised Domain Adaptive (LUDA) person ReID. This is
challenging because it requires the model to continuously
adapt to unlabeled data in the target environments while
alleviating catastrophic forgetting for such a fine-grained
person retrieval task. We design an effective scheme for
this task, dubbed CLUDA-ReID, where the anti-forgetting
is harmoniously coordinated with the adaptation. Specifically, a meta-based Coordinated Data Replay strategy is
proposed to replay old data and update the network with
a coordinated optimization direction for both adaptation
and memorization. Moreover, we propose Relational Consistency Learning for old knowledge distillation/inheritance
in line with the objective of retrieval-based tasks. We set up
two evaluation settings to simulate the practical application
scenarios. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our CLUDA-ReID for both scenarios with stationary
target streams and scenarios with dynamic target streams.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) aims to identify the same
person across different locations, time instances and cameras. It is of high value in a wide range of applications [36]
* This work was done when Zhipeng Huang was an intern at MSRA.
† Equal contribution.
‡ Corresponding authors.

Figure 1. Illustration of the regular UDA (a), the lifelong UDA in
the stationary target scenario (b) and dynamic target scenario (c).

in diverse environments, such as customer activity analysis, missing children finding. In practice, a trained ReID
model usually suffers from severe performance drops when
deployed in new environments due to the domain gaps between the training data and the data in new environments.
Unsupervised domain adaptive (UDA) person ReID has
been widely studied to help deployed person ReID models
better adapt to new environments, by transferring learned
knowledge from labeled source domain to unlabeled target
domain [1, 9, 10, 31, 45, 46].
Existing UDA person ReID methods [1, 9, 10, 31, 45, 46]
assume that the data in the target domain can be accessible
all at once, which does not accord well with practical scenarios. In deployment environments, new people are often
showing up constantly and the data statistics may vary over
time. This imposes strong demands in developing a practical person ReID model/system that can support 1) flexible
adaptation to data statistics on the fly so that we can timely
obtain adapted performance without waiting for a long time
to collect massive data and 2) continuous knowledge acquisition from increasing data. Recent works begin to look into
lifelong (supervised) person ReID [27,39]. They greatly advance practical applications by supporting continuous su-

14288

