SmartPortraits: Depth Powered Handheld Smartphone Dataset of Human
Portraits for State Estimation, Reconstruction and Synthesis
Anastasiia Kornilova
Marsel Faizullin
Konstantin Pakulev
Andrey Sadkov
Denis Kukushkin
Azat Akhmetyanov
Timur Akhtyamov
Hekmat Taherinejad
Gonzalo Ferrer
Center for AI Technology (CAIT), Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology

Figure 1. From top-left: examples of frames from the SmartPortraits dataset videos that capture human portraits in different natural
environments, with varying lightning conditions, using a smartphone and external depth camera on a rig. Bottom-right: recorded trajectory
(red – initial time, green – end time) and dense reconstruction obtained by ACMP [88].

Abstract
We present a dataset of 1000 video sequences of human
portraits recorded in real and uncontrolled conditions by
using a handheld smartphone accompanied by an external
high-quality depth camera. The collected dataset contains
200 people captured in different poses and locations and its
main purpose is to bridge the gap between raw measurements obtained from a smartphone and downstream applications, such as state estimation, 3D reconstruction, view
synthesis, etc. The sensors employed in data collection are
the smartphone’s camera and Inertial Measurement Unit
(IMU), and an external Azure Kinect DK depth camera
software synchronized with sub-millisecond precision to the
smartphone system. During the recording, the smartphone
flash is used to provide a periodic secondary source of lightning. Accurate mask of the foremost person is provided as
well as its impact on the camera alignment accuracy.
For evaluation purposes, we compare multiple state-ofthe-art camera alignment methods by using a Motion Capture system. We provide a smartphone visual-inertial benchmark for portrait capturing, where we report results for

multiple methods and motivate further use of the provided
trajectories, available in the dataset, in view synthesis and
3D reconstruction tasks.

1. Introduction
Realistic rendering of people, and in general of objects,
has recently achieved an unprecedented level of detail and
realism [4, 27, 46, 49, 76, 87, 93, 94] with potential groundbreaking applications in telepresence, VR and AR. Most of
these methods have focused on static scenes and synthetic
data, leaving apart the computational time required, which
is still prohibitive. In contrast, many potential usages of reconstruction and rendering are ideal candidate applications
for smartphones, or other consumer-level devices, whose
sensors are improving every year but still of limited quality.
Our objective is to create a dataset that recreates in the wild
conditions emulating smartphone users.
The SmartPortrait dataset1 is an effort to bridge the gap
between realistic raw data obtained from people, collected
1 https://MobileRoboticsSkoltech.github.io/SmartPortraits/

21318

