MVS2D: Efficient Multi-view Stereo via Attention-Driven 2D Convolutions
Zhenpei Yang1,∗ Zhile Ren2 Qi Shan2
1
The University of Texas at Austin

Qixing Huang1
2
Apple

Abstract
Deep learning has made significant impacts on multiview stereo systems. State-of-the-art approaches typically
involve building a cost volume, followed by multiple 3D
convolution operations to recover the input image’s pixelwise depth. While such end-to-end learning of planesweeping stereo advances public benchmarks’ accuracy,
they are typically very slow to compute. We present MVS2D,
a highly efficient multi-view stereo algorithm that seamlessly integrates multi-view constraints into single-view networks via an attention mechanism. Since MVS2D only
builds on 2D convolutions, it is at least 2× faster than all
the notable counterparts. Moreover, our algorithm produces precise depth estimations and 3D reconstructions,
achieving state-of-the-art results on challenging benchmarks ScanNet, SUN3D, RGBD, and the classical DTU
dataset. our algorithm also out-performs all other algorithms in the setting of inexact camera poses. Our code is
released at https://github.com/zhenpeiyang/
MVS2D

1. Introduction
Multi-view Stereo (MVS) aims to reconstruct the underlying 3D scene or estimate the dense depth map using multiple neighboring views. It plays a key role in a variety of
3D vision tasks. With high-quality cameras becoming more
and more accessible, there are growing interests in developing reliable and efficient stereo algorithms in various applications, such as 3D reconstruction, augmented reality, and
autonomous driving. As a fundamental problem in computer vision, MVS has been extensively studied [9]. Recent
research shows that deep neural networks, especially convolutional neural networks (CNNs), lead to more accurate
and robust systems than traditional solutions. Several approaches [20, 57] report exceptional accuracy on challenging benchmarks like ScanNet [7] and SUN3D [47].
State-of-the-art CNN-based multi-view approaches typically fall into three categories: 1) Variants of a standard 2D
UNet architecture with feature correlation [22, 28]. However, these approaches work best for rectified stereo pairs,
∗ Experiments are conducted by Z. Yang at The University of Texas
at Austin. Email: yzp@utexas.edu

Figure 1. Inference frame per second (FPS) vs. depth error (AbsRel) on ScanNet [7]. Our model achieve significant reduction in
inference time, while maintaining state-of-the-art accuracy.

and extending them to multi-view is nontrivial. 2) Constructing a differential 3D cost volume [12,14,15,30,53,54].
These algorithms significantly improve the accuracy of
MVS, but at the cost of heavy computational burdens. Furthermore, the predicted depth map by 3D convolution usually contains salient artifacts which have to be rectified by a
2D refinement network [15]. 3) Maintain a global scene representation and fuse multi-view information through raycasting features from 2D images [29]. This paradigm cannot handle large-scale scenes because of the vast memory
consumption on maintaining a global representation.
Aside from multi-view depth estimation, we have also
witnessed the tremendous growth of single-view depth prediction networks [21, 32, 48, 52, 56]. As shown in Table
3, Bts [21] has achieved impressive result on ScanNet [7].
Single-view depth prediction roots in learning feature representations to capture image semantics, which is orthogonal
to correspondence-computation in multi-view techniques.
A natural question is how to combine single-view depth
cues and multi-view depth cues.
We introduce MVS2D that combines the strength of
single-view and multi-view depth estimations. The core
contribution is an attention mechanism that aggregates features along epipolar lines of each query pixel on the reference images. This module captures rich signals from the
reference images. Most importantly, it can be easily integrated into standard CNN architectures defined on the input

8574

