Learning Multiple Adverse Weather Removal via Two-stage Knowledge
Learning and Multi-contrastive Regularization: Toward a Unified Model
Wei-Ting Chen1∗ , Zhi-Kai Huang2∗ ,
Cheng-Che Tsai , Hao-Hsiang Yang2 , Jian-Jiun Ding2 , and Sy-Yen Kuo2
1

1

Graduate Institute of Electronics Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taiwan
2
Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taiwan
{f05943089, r10921059, r08943148, r05921014, jjding, sykuo}@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
In this paper, an ill-posed problem of multiple adverse
weather removal is investigated. Our goal is to train a
model with a ’unified’ architecture and only one set of pretrained weights that can tackle multiple types of adverse
weathers such as haze, snow, and rain simultaneously. To
this end, a two-stage knowledge learning mechanism including knowledge collation (KC) and knowledge examination (KE) based on a multi-teacher and student architecture
is proposed. At the KC, the student network aims to learn
the comprehensive bad weather removal problem from multiple well-trained teacher networks where each of them is
specialized in a specific bad weather removal problem. To
accomplish this process, a novel collaborative knowledge
transfer is proposed. At the KE, the student model is trained
without the teacher networks and examined by challenging
pixel loss derived by the ground truth. Moreover, to improve
the performance of our training framework, a novel loss
function called multi-contrastive knowledge regularization
(MCR) loss is proposed. Experiments on several datasets
show that our student model can achieve promising results
on different bad weather removal tasks simultaneously. The
code is available in our project page.

1. Introduction
Adverse weather such as haze, rain, snow, and adherent
raindrop is a common phenomenon in our daily life. It may
usually degrade the visibility of images and deteriorate the
performance of high-level vision applications (e.g., object
detection and semantic segmentation). To tackle this problem, several adverse weather restoration algorithms such
as deraining [1–10], desnowing [11–13], dehazing [14–20],
and all in one bad weather removal [21] have been widely
*Indicates equal contribution.

Figure 1. Overview of the existing bad weather removal algorithms. Our proposed method can achieve promising performance in comprehensive bad weather removal problems without
additional cost at the inference stage.

explored in past decades. Although these methods achieve a
promising performance, there still exists a limitation for deploying adverse weather removal in real-world applications
such as surveillance systems, autonomous vehicle systems,
or edge devices due to the high extension cost. Specifically,
existing approaches cannot address several weather types in
a unified architecture or a set of pre-trained weights simultaneously. In real-world scenarios, it is unavoidable to handle various weather types. As shown in Fig. 1, the existing
methods may have several limitations and we summarize
them as follows.
(i) Single Weather Removal Algorithms: For most single weather removal algorithms [15, 22, 23], although they
can achieve promising results in the specific weather, they

17653

