Robust Structured Declarative Classifiers for 3D Point Clouds: Defending
Adversarial Attacks with Implicit Gradients
Kaidong Li1 , Ziming Zhang2 *, Cuncong Zhong1 , Guanghui Wang3
1
Department of EECS, University of Kansas, KS, USA
2
Department of ECE, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, MA, USA
3
Department of CS, Ryerson University, Toronto ON, Canada
{kaidong.li, cczhong}@ku.edu, zzhang15@wpi.edu, wangcs@ryerson.ca

Abstract
Deep neural networks for 3D point cloud classification,
such as PointNet, have been demonstrated to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks. Current adversarial defenders
often learn to denoise the (attacked) point clouds by reconstruction, and then feed them to the classifiers as input. In
contrast to the literature, we propose a family of robust
structured declarative classifiers for point cloud classification, where the internal constrained optimization mechanism can effectively defend adversarial attacks through
implicit gradients. Such classifiers can be formulated using
a bilevel optimization framework. We further propose an
effective and efficient instantiation of our approach, namely,
Lattice Point Classifier (LPC), based on structured sparse
coding in the permutohedral lattice and 2D convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) that is end-to-end trainable. We
demonstrate state-of-the-art robust point cloud classification performance on ModelNet40 and ScanNet under seven
different attackers. For instance, we achieve 89.51% and
83.16% test accuracy on each dataset under the recent
JGBA attacker that outperforms DUP-Net and IF-Defense
with PointNet by ∼70%. The demo code is available at
https://zhang-vislab.github.io.

1. Introduction
Point clouds are unstructured data which is widely used
in real-world applications such as autonomous driving. To
recognize them using deep neural networks, point clouds
can be represented as points [36], images [30], voxels [61],
or graphs [56]. Recent works [74, 63, 31, 14, 62, 58, 28]
have demonstrated that such deep networks are vulnerable
to (gradient-based) adversarial attacks. Accordingly, several
adversarial defenders [75, 60, 29] have been proposed for
robust point cloud classification. The basic ideas are often to
* Joint first author

Our robust structured declara6ve classiﬁer
𝑥

Declarative defender
𝑥! = argmin!∈# 𝑓(𝑥, 𝑧; 𝜃)

Network backbone
𝑦 = 𝑔( !
𝑥; 𝜔)

𝑦

𝑧 ∈ 𝑍 is defined in a structural space, e.g., permutohedral lattice space

Figure 1: Illustration of robust structured declarative classifiers, where our defender is optimized in a structural space.
denoise the (attacked) point clouds before feeding them into
the classifiers as input to preserve their prediction accuracy.
Obfuscated gradients. In the white-box adversarial attacks,
the attackers are assumed to have full access to both classifiers and defenders. To defend such attacks, one common
way is to break the gradient over the input data in the backpropagation (either inadvertently or intentionally, e.g., a defender is non-differentiable or prevents gradient signal from
flowing through the network) so that the attackers fail to be
optimized. Such scenarios are called obfuscated gradients.
In [4] Athalye et al. have discussed the false sense of security in such defenders and proposed new methods, such
as Backward Pass Differentiable Approximation (BPDA),
to attack them successfully. Take DUP-Net [75] for example, where a non-differentiable Statistical Outlier Removal
(SOR) defense strategy was proposed. In [31] Ma et al. proposed Joint Gradient Based Attack (JGBA) that can compute
the gradient with a linear approximation (an instantiation of
BPDA) of the SOR defense to attack DUP-Net successfully.
Implicit gradients. Now let us consider the scenarios where
both defenders and classifiers are differentiable. Then in
order to defend the adversarial attacks, one way is to make
the calculation of the gradient challenging. To this end,
implicit gradients [40] may be more suitable for designing
∂y
the defenders. An implicit gradient, ∂x
, is defined by a
differentiable function h that takes x, y as its input, i.e.,
∂y
∂x = h(x, y). Such an equation can be also considered as
a first-order ordinary differential equation (ODE), which is

15294

