Point Density-Aware Voxels for LiDAR 3D Object Detection
Jordan S. K. Hu Tianshu Kuai Steven L. Waslander
University of Toronto Robotics Institute
{jordan.hu, tianshu.kuai}@mail.utoronto.ca, steven.waslander@robotics.utias.utoronto.ca

Abstract
LiDAR has become one of the primary 3D object detection sensors in autonomous driving. However, LiDAR’s
diverging point pattern with increasing distance results in
a non-uniform sampled point cloud ill-suited to discretized
volumetric feature extraction. Current methods either rely
on voxelized point clouds or use inefficient farthest point
sampling to mitigate detrimental effects caused by density
variation but largely ignore point density as a feature and
its predictable relationship with distance from the LiDAR
sensor. Our proposed solution, Point Density-Aware Voxel
network (PDV), is an end-to-end two stage LiDAR 3D object
detection architecture that is designed to account for these
point density variations. PDV efficiently localizes voxel
features from the 3D sparse convolution backbone through
voxel point centroids. The spatially localized voxel features
are then aggregated through a density-aware RoI grid pooling module using kernel density estimation (KDE) and selfattention with point density positional encoding. Finally, we
exploit LiDAR’s point density to distance relationship to refine our final bounding box confidences. PDV outperforms
all state-of-the-art methods on the Waymo Open Dataset
and achieves competitive results on the KITTI dataset.

1. Introduction
3D object detection is one of the key perception problems in the autonomous vehicle space as object pose estimation directly impacts the effectiveness of downstream tasks
in the perception pipeline. Within the autonomous driving
sensor stack, LiDAR has become one of the most popular
sensors used for 3D object detection [23,25,37], because of
the accurate 3D point cloud it produces through laser light.
However, the reliance on LiDAR data comes at the cost
of point density variations across distance. Other factors
such as occlusion play a role, but the primary reason is
the natural divergence of points from the LiDAR with increasing distance due to the angular offsets between the LiDAR lasers. Thus, objects located at farther distances return
fewer points than objects located closer to the LiDAR.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Voxel feature localization using (a) voxel centers, (b) farthest point sampling, and (c) voxel point centroids on a vehicle in
the Waymo Open Dataset [29]. By using the raw point cloud to
localize voxel features, voxel point centroids provide dense geometric information for second-stage proposal refinement.

Voxel-based methods [4,37,40,43] typically ignore point
density, solely relying on the quantized representation of
the point cloud. When a high voxel resolution is afforded,
as is the case on the KITTI dataset [6], voxel-based methods [41] have outperformed point-based and point-voxelbased methods. However, on datasets with larger input
spaces such as the Waymo Open Dataset [29], the voxel
resolution is limited due to memory constraints. Fine object details are therefore lost due to spatial misalignment
between the voxel features and the point cloud as shown in
Figure 1 (a), resulting in a degradation in performance.
Other methods [23, 25] attempt to remedy point density
variations through farthest point sampling (FPS) as seen
in Figure 1 (b). Although effective at sampling locations
on non-uniformly distributed point clouds, the computation
scales poorly as a function of the number of points in the
point cloud, increasing runtime and limiting the number of
sampled points for second-stage proposal refinement.
Point density also affects detection of smaller objects
such as pedestrians and cyclists. These objects have less
surface area to intersect the LiDAR’s laser beams, resulting
in poorer object localization. Perhaps informatively, current state-of-the-art methods have largely ignored detection
performance for pedestrians and cyclists, focusing solely on
the car or vehicle class [4, 14, 15, 41]. As we move towards

8469

