Cross-modal Background Suppression for Audio-Visual Event Localization
Yan Xia
Zhejiang University

Zhou Zhao*
Zhejiang University

xiayan.zju@gmail.com

zhaozhou@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Audiovisual Event (AVE) localization requires the model
to jointly localize an event by observing audio and visual
information. However, in unconstrained videos, both information types may be inconsistent or suffer from severe
background noise. Hence this paper proposes a novel crossmodal background suppression network for AVE task, operating at the time- and event-level, aiming to improve localization performance through suppressing asynchronous
audiovisual background frames from the examined events
and reducing redundant noise. Specifically, the time-level
background suppression scheme forces the audio and visual
modality to focus on the related information in the temporal
dimension that the opposite modality considers essential,
and reduces attention to the segments that the other modal
considers as background. The event-level background suppression scheme uses the class activation sequences predicted by audio and visual modalities to control the final event category prediction, which can effectively suppress noise events occurring accidentally in a single modality. Furthermore, we introduce a cross-modal gated attention scheme to extract relevant visual regions from complex
scenes exploiting both global visual and audio signals. Extensive experiments show our method outperforms the stateof-the-art methods by a large margin in both supervised and
weakly supervised AVE settings. 1

1. Introduction
Event location and action recognition [3, 10, 30] have
become increasingly important in understanding and analyzing video content, with most methods relying on optical
flow and RGB features processing. However, audio can also
provide valuable clues for understanding holistic video content [11, 22, 37]. To comprehensively realize how to combine audio and visual modalities and understand the video
contents, Tian et al. [32] introduce the audio-visual event
* Corresponding author.
1 The source code and pre-trained models are publicly available at:

https://github.com/marmot-xy/CMBS

Figure 1. An illustration example of AVE task. An audio-visual
event will be identified when it is both audible and visible. In this
example, only when we see the car and hear the engine sound at
the same time (the 2nd and 3rd segments) can we determine an
audio-visual event ”running car” happened.

(AVE) localization task, where the model determines the
presence of an event and localizes its boundary in the temporal dimension when the event is both audible and visible
at the same time. Figure 1 demonstrates that this way of
judging an audio-visual event is necessary, as only simultaneously observing the car and hearing the engine sound
indicates that the car is running. Compared with the traditional video event localization, the challenges of the AVE
task mainly exist in the following aspects [1, 21, 38]: i).
Merging the complementary audio and visual features while
preserving the simultaneously modal-specific information
is not trivial. ii). Sudden noise and complex background
existing in the unconstrained videos will hinder the predictions of the event categories. iii). AVE requires the event
to be audible and visible, while unsynchronized audio and
visual information mislead the event boundary prediction.
Early models mainly focused on solving the first challenge by simply fusing the information of the two modalities after processing each modality independently [14,32] or
aligning audio and visual information and then fusing them
by cross attention [4, 34, 36]. However, problems such as
event category detection errors caused by the sudden noise
existing in single mode or inaccurate temporal event localization caused by unsynchronized audio and visual information are still an open research case.
Unlike previous methods, we consider the problem of
audio-visual event localization from the viewpoint of crossmodal background suppression, which can effectively alleviate challenges (ii) and (iii). Background suppression
methods have been successfully used in the previous weakly

19989

