CSWin Transformer: A General Vision Transformer Backbone with
Cross-Shaped Windows
Xiaoyi Dong1 *, Jianmin Bao2 , Dongdong Chen3†, Weiming Zhang1 ,
Nenghai Yu1 , Lu Yuan3 , Dong Chen2 , Baining Guo2
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Microsoft Research Asia 3 Microsoft Cloud + AI
{dlight@mail., zhangwm@, ynh@}.ustc.edu.cn cddlyf@gmail.com
{jianbao, luyuan, doch, bainguo }@microsoft.com

Abstract
We present CSWin Transformer, an efﬁcient and effective Transformer-based backbone for general-purpose vision
tasks. A challenging issue in Transformer design is that
global self-attention is very expensive to compute whereas
local self-attention often limits the ﬁeld of interactions of
each token. To address this issue, we develop the CrossShaped Window self-attention mechanism for computing
self-attention in the horizontal and vertical stripes in parallel
that form a cross-shaped window, with each stripe obtained
by splitting the input feature into stripes of equal width. We
provide a mathematical analysis of the effect of the stripe
width and vary the stripe width for different layers of the
Transformer network which achieves strong modeling capability while limiting the computation cost. We also introduce
Locally-enhanced Positional Encoding (LePE), which handles the local positional information better than existing
encoding schemes. LePE naturally supports arbitrary input
resolutions, and is thus especially effective and friendly for
downstream tasks. Incorporated with these designs and a hierarchical structure, CSWin Transformer demonstrates competitive performance on common vision tasks. Speciﬁcally,
it achieves 85.4% Top-1 accuracy on ImageNet-1K without
any extra training data or label, 53.9 box AP and 46.4 mask
AP on the COCO detection task, and 52.2 mIOU on the
ADE20K semantic segmentation task, surpassing previous
state-of-the-art Swin Transformer backbone by +1.2, +2.0,
+1.4, and +2.0 respectively under the similar FLOPs setting.
By further pretraining on the larger dataset ImageNet-21K,
we achieve 87.5% Top-1 accuracy on ImageNet-1K and high
segmentation performance on ADE20K with 55.7 mIoU. 1
* Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
† Dongdong Chen is the corresponding author.
1 Code and pretrain model is available at https://github.com/
microsoft/CSWin-Transformer

1. Introduction
Transformer-based architectures [12, 30, 42, 49] have recently achieved competitive performances compared to their
CNN counterparts in various vision tasks. By leveraging
the multi-head self-attention mechanism, these vision Transformers demonstrate a high capability in modeling the longrange dependencies, which is especially helpful for handling
high-resolution inputs in downstream tasks, e.g., object detection and segmentation. Despite the success, the Transformer architecture with full-attention mechanism [12] is
computationally inefﬁcient.
To improve the efﬁciency, one typical way is to limit
the attention region of each token from full-attention to local/windowed attention [30, 44]. To bridge the connection
between windows, researchers further proposed halo and
shift operations to exchange information through nearby windows. However, the receptive ﬁeld is enlarged quite slowly
and it requires stacking a great number of blocks to achieve
global self-attention. A sufﬁciently large receptive ﬁeld is
crucial to the performance especially for the downstream
tasks(e.g., object detection and segmentation). Therefore it
is important to achieve large receptive ﬁled efﬁciently while
keeping the computation cost low.
In this paper, we present the Cross-Shaped Window
(CSWin) self-attention, which is illustrated in Figure 1 and
compared with existing self-attention mechanisms. With
CSWin self-attention, we perform the self-attention calculation in the horizontal and vertical stripes in parallel, with
each stripe obtained by splitting the input feature into stripes
of equal width. This stripe width is an important parameter
of the cross-shaped window because it allows us to achieve
strong modelling capability while limiting the computation
cost. Speciﬁcally, we adjust the stripe width according to the
depth of the network: small widths for shallow layers and
larger widths for deep layers. A larger stripe width encourages a stronger connection between long-range elements and

12124

