DanceTrack: Multi-Object Tracking in Uniform Appearance and Diverse Motion
Peize Sun1∗ , Jinkun Cao2∗ , Yi Jiang3 , Zehuan Yuan3 , Song Bai3 , Kris Kitani2 , Ping Luo1
1

The University of Hong Kong

1 2 3 4

5

6

3 12 5 7 8 4

2

Carnegie Mellon University

9

3

2 1

758

4

9

3

ByteDance Inc.

23

1

7

5 8 49

Figure 1 – Sample images from a video in DanceTrack: 1st, 66th, 307th and 327th frame in DanceTrack0027 video. . The emphasized
properties of this dataset are (1) uniform appearance: humans are in highly similar and almost undistinguished appearance. (2) diverse
motion: they are in complicated motion and interaction pattern. The numbers below show their identifications which experience frequent
relative position switches and occlusions. We expect the combination of uniform appearance and complicated motion pattern makes
DanceTrack a platform to encourage more comprehensive and intelligent multi-object tracking algorithms.

Abstract
A typical pipeline for multi-object tracking (MOT) is to
use a detector for object localization, and following reidentification (re-ID) for object association. This pipeline is
partially motivated by recent progress in both object detection and re-ID, and partially motivated by biases in existing
tracking datasets, where most objects tend to have distinguishing appearance and re-ID models are sufficient for establishing associations. In response to such bias, we would
like to re-emphasize that methods for multi-object tracking should also work when object appearance is not sufficiently discriminative. To this end, we propose a large-scale
dataset for multi-human tracking, where humans have similar appearance, diverse motion and extreme articulation.
As the dataset contains mostly group dancing videos, we
name it “DanceTrack”. We expect DanceTrack to provide
a better platform to develop more MOT algorithms that rely
less on visual discrimination and depend more on motion
analysis. We benchmark several state-of-the-art trackers on
our dataset and observe a significant performance drop on
DanceTrack when compared against existing benchmarks.
The dataset, project code and competition is released at:
https://github.com/DanceTrack .
* indicates equal contribution.

1. Introduction
Object tracking has been long studied and can be beneficial to applications such as autonomous driving, video
analysis and robot planning [1,4,25,35]. Multi-object tracking aims to localize and associate objects of interest along
time. Interestingly, we observe that recent developments in
multi-object tracking rely heavily on a paradigm of detection followed by re-ID, where mostly appearance cues are
used to associate objects. This trend in algorithmic development makes existing solutions fail catastrophically in situations where objects share very similar appearance, e.g.,
group dancing where performers wear uniform clothes. It
inspires us to propose more comprehensive solutions by taking other cues into modeling, such as object motion patterns
and temporal dynamics.
As with many other areas of computer vision, the development of multi-object tracking is influenced by benchmark datasets. Based on specified datasets [9, 13, 22, 36],
data-driven methods are sometimes argued to be biased to
certain data distributions. In this work, we recognize the
limitations of existing multi-object tracking datasets lie on
that many objects have distinct appearance and the motion
pattern of objects are very regular or even linear. Motivated by these dataset properties, most recently developed
multi-object tracking methods [23, 32, 33, 39] highly rely

20993

