CoordGAN: Self-Supervised Dense Correspondences Emerge from GANs
Jiteng Mu1* ,

Corr-Map

Corr-Map

Shalini De Mello2 , Zhiding Yu2 , Nuno Vasconcelos1 ,
Xiaolong Wang1 , Jan Kautz2 , Sifei Liu2
1
UC San Diego, 2 Nvidia
Corr-Map

Generated Images

(Crop)

Corr-Map
(Crop)

Generated Images

Figure 1. Images synthesized by the proposed CoordGAN for various object categories (left: faces; top-right: cars; bottom-right: cats) :
each row displays images with the same structure but different textures; in each column, structure varies while keeping texture fixed. The
correspondence maps (Corr-Map) controlling the structure of the synthesized images are shown in the first column of each row. For better
visualization, we use off-the-shelf segmentation models to highlight the foreground areas of all the correspondence maps, as shown with
Corr-Map (Crop).

Abstract

Recent advances show that Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) can synthesize images with smooth variations along semantically meaningful latent directions, such
as pose, expression, layout, etc. While this indicates that
GANs implicitly learn pixel-level correspondences across
images, few studies explored how to extract them explicitly.
In this work, we introduce Coordinate GAN (CoordGAN),
a structure-texture disentangled GAN that learns a dense
correspondence map for each generated image. We represent the correspondence maps of different images as warped
coordinate frames transformed from a canonical coordinate frame, i.e., the correspondence map, which describes
the structure (e.g., the shape of a face), is controlled via
a transformation. Hence, finding correspondences boils
down to locating the same coordinate in different correspondence maps. In CoordGAN, we sample a transformation to represent the structure of a synthesized instance,
while an independent texture branch is responsible for ren* Work done while an intern at Nvidia.

10011

dering appearance details orthogonal to the structure. Our
approach can also extract dense correspondence maps for
real images by adding an encoder on top of the generator. We quantitatively demonstrate the quality of the learned
dense correspondences through segmentation mask transfer on multiple datasets. We also show that the proposed
generator achieves better structure and texture disentanglement compared to existing approaches. Project page:
https://jitengmu.github.io/CoordGAN/

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have achieved
great success in synthesizing high-quality images [3,20–22,
37], and many recent studies show that they also learn a rich
set of interpretable directions in the latent space [40, 41].
Moving latent codes along a semantically meaningful direction (e.g., pose) generates instances with smoothly varying
appearance (e.g., continually changing viewpoints), implying that GANs also implicitly learn which pixels or regions

