Long-tail Recognition via Compositional Knowledge Transfer
Sarah Parisot

Pedro M. Esperança
Steven McDonagh
Yongxin Yang
Zhenguo Li

Tamas J. Madarasz

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3 Enhanced classifier

Abstract
strong classifier

2

In this work, we introduce a novel strategy for long-tail
recognition that addresses the tail classes’ few-shot problem via training-free knowledge transfer. Our objective is
to transfer knowledge acquired from information-rich common classes to semantically similar, and yet data-hungry,
rare classes in order to obtain stronger tail class representations. We leverage the fact that class prototypes and
learned cosine classifiers provide two different, complementary representations of class cluster centres in feature
space, and use an attention mechanism to select and recompose learned classifier features from common classes
to obtain higher quality rare class representations. Our
knowledge transfer process is training free, reducing overfitting risks, and can afford continual extension of classifiers to new classes. Experiments show that our approach
can achieve significant performance boosts on rare classes
while maintaining robust common class performance, outperforming directly comparable state-of-the-art models.

1. Introduction
Standard classification models rely on the assumption
that all classes of interest are equally represented in training datasets. This strong assumption is rarely valid in practice: most real life datasets exhibit long-tail distributions
where a subset of classes comprise a large amount of training data (the so-called common or head classes) and remaining tail (rare) classes only possess a handful of training
samples [17]. These distributions typically reflect what is
observed in the wild, with data corresponding to tail classes
being more challenging to learn due to sample rarity, acquisition and collation costs or combinations of these factors. This results in trained models that display highly imbalanced accuracies, achieving strong performance on common classes, and poor performance on rare classes.
Long-tail distributions present two main challenges for
recognition models. Firstly, the imbalanced distribution of
class specific data leads to models exceedingly biased to-

Compositional rare
class representation

Weak classifier
strong classifier

strong classifier

1 Identify semantically similar classes

Figure 1. Our approach for long-tail recognition seeks to improve
representations for rare classes via knowledge transfer from common classes. We identify semantically similar head classes using
class prototypes and transfer reliable learned characteristics from
these classes to obtain higher quality rare class representations.

wards common classes. Numerous strategies have been
developed to address this imbalance challenge. Popular
strategies aim to rebalance the training process via biased resampling [14, 17, 21, 33], rebalancing loss functions [2, 7, 12, 21, 25], or ensembling and routing [6, 29, 31].
While the class imbalance problem has been extensively
studied, a second important challenge associated with longtail distributions has received only limited attention. Rare
classes on the distribution tail typically have very limited
amounts of data available (e.g. 1 to 20 training samples per
class), which can easily lead to overfitting or memorisation when attempting to learn class specific decision boundaries. This issue is exacerbated by rebalancing strategies,
in particular those relying on oversampling data from the
tail. However approaches dedicated to long-tail recognition very rarely include specific mechanisms to account for
the limited tail data. A synthetic sample generation process was proposed in [27] to improve rare class distributions. A knowledge transfer mechanism was proposed in
[17], aiming to learn better feature representations by trans-

6939

