DECORE: Deep Compression with Reinforcement Learning
Manoj Alwani
Element Inc.

Yang Wang
Element Inc.

Vashisht Madhavan
Element Inc.

ma@discoverelement.com

yw@discoverelement.com

vm@discoverelement.com

Abstract
Deep learning has become an increasingly popular and
powerful methodology for modern pattern recognition systems. However, many deep neural networks have millions
or billions of parameters, making them untenable for realworld applications due to constraints on memory size or
latency requirements. As a result, efficient network compression techniques are often required for the widespread
adoption of deep learning methods. We present DECORE,
a reinforcement learning-based approach to automate the
network compression process. DECORE assigns an agent
to each channel in the network along with a light policy
gradient method to learn which neurons or channels to be
kept or removed. Each agent in the network has just one
parameter (keep or drop) to learn, which leads to a much
faster training process compared to existing approaches.
DECORE provides state-of-the-art compression results on
various network architectures and various datasets. For example, on the ResNet-110 architecture, it achieves a 64.8%
compression and 61.8% FLOPs reduction as compared to
the baseline model without any accuracy loss on the CIFAR10 dataset. It can reduce the size of regular architectures
like the VGG network by up to 99% with just a small accuracy drop of 2.28%. For a larger dataset like ImageNet with
only 30 epochs of training, it can compress the ResNet-50
architecture by 44.7% and reduce FLOPs by 42.3%, with
just a 0.69% drop on Top-5 accuracy of the uncompressed
model. We also demonstrate that DECORE can be used to
search for compressed network architectures based on various constraints, such as memory and FLOPs.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have led to significant
advances in image recognition tasks, most notably benchmarked by the ImageNet challenge [42]. Recent trends
suggest that deeper architectures with more parameters
and more complex computational blocks lead to better results [13, 47]. These increases in model size, however, incur a higher inference cost, making them difficult to be

deployed in embedded systems or mobile devices. Additionally, real-world applications have memory, latency,
or throughput constraints which make it difficult to use
large convolutional neural networks (CNNs) as is. Therefore, lowering the inference time and memory consumption
of large models would benefit the wider adoption of deep
learning models for these real-world applications.
There has been a significant amount of work on reducing the inference cost via a more efficient network architecture [5, 7, 27, 43]. Although much progress has been made,
the process of finding efficient architectures often requires
a lot of experience and manual design. The automation of
this process is an active research area of great value, as
newer, more powerful DNN architectures are rapidly being discovered. Meanwhile, a large body of work has also
been done in the direction of network compression, such as
low-rank decomposition [5, 29, 30, 59], parameter quantization [22, 41, 61], and pruning [18, 27, 28, 31, 32, 56].
These compression techniques can be broadly divided
into two categories: non-structured and structured pruning. Non-structured pruning methods [9–12] directly prune
weights of CNN models to get sparse weight matrices.
Along with compression, these approaches can provide
faster network inference using specialized software [8] or
hardware [8, 21, 39]. However, they often cause irregular
memory access that adversely affects the network inference
on general-purpose hardware or BLAS libraries. Structured
pruning overcomes these limitations by removing structured
weights like 2D kernels and feature maps (channels) or layers, which focuses on network architecture changes and can
be supported by off-the-shelf deep learning libraries like
PyTorch [40], and TensorFlow [1] etc. Pruning structured
weights is a complex problem as we have to find out which
layers or channels are least important in the network and removing them will not affect the accuracy significantly. For
example, in VGG16 [47] the first hidden layer has 64 channels, an exhaustive search for which channels to remove
without affecting accuracy involves 264 combinations. For
the whole network with around 5, 000 channels in total, it is
computationally infeasible to go through all combinations.
To overcome this problem many techniques have been pro-

12349

