PartGlot: Learning Shape Part Segmentation from Language Reference Games
Juil Koo1

Ian Huang2
Panos Achlioptas2,3
Leonidas Guibas2
1
KAIST 2 Stanford University 3 Snap Inc.

“this chair has an oval back”

Attention Maps

Input
(Super-Seg.)

Back

0

Seat

Minhyuk Sung1

1

Leg

Arm

Output
Segments

Target

“totally solid no leg”

Target

(a) Referential Language for Shapes

(b) Language-guided 3D Part Segmentations via Neural Attention

Figure 1. Overview. On the left, we present examples of referential language distinguishing the shape of a target geometry (enclosed
inside a green box) from two distractor objects. Using such language, our proposed task is to directly predict semantic part segments
of 3D objects. On the right, we present the examples of our segmentation results: given unsupervised 3D super-segments of a shapes
and the referential language, we learn a set of attention maps that corresponds to semantic shape parts, discovered solely by solving the
language-reference problems of identifying the target shape. Tapping on the zero-shot learning capacity of natural language learners, and
the shared part composition of common objects, we find examples of zero-shot segmentations on a table and lamp objects, extracted from
learners and language concerning only chair-based comparisons (the second and third rows).

Abstract
We introduce PartGlot, a neural framework and associated architectures for learning semantic part segmentation of 3D shape geometry, based solely on part referential language. We exploit the fact that linguistic descriptions of a shape can provide priors on the shape’s parts –
as natural language has evolved to reflect human perception of the compositional structure of objects, essential to
their recognition and use. For training we use ShapeGlot’s
paired geometry / language data collected via a reference
game where a speaker produces an utterance to differentiate a target shape from two distractors and the listener has
to find the target based on this utterance [3]. Our network is
designed to solve this target multi-modal recognition problem, by carefully incorporating a Transformer-based attention module so that the output attention can precisely highlight the semantic part or parts described in the language.
Remarkably, the network operates without any direct supervision on the 3D geometry itself. Furthermore, we also
demonstrate that the learned part information is generaliz-

able to shape classes unseen during training. Our approach
opens the possibility of learning 3D shape parts from language alone, without the need for large-scale part geometry
annotations, thus facilitating annotation acquisition. The
code is available at https://github.com/63days/PartGlot.

1. Introduction
Object perception is often based on structural abstractions — the decomposition of an object into its parts and
their inter-relationships [10, 11, 16]. Natural language reflects this aspect of human perception of 3D shapes – when
a human is asked to describe an object, the description usually involves words naming parts and expressions about part
attributes and their relationships. This implies that, conversely, language descriptions of an object can provide priors on the compositional structure of the object geometry,
including the identity of its components or parts. In this paper, we study the interplay between these two very different
modalities, geometry and language, and how it can guide
16505

