Scaling Up Vision-Language Pre-training for Image Captioning
Xiaowei Hu, Zhe Gan, Jianfeng Wang, Zhengyuan Yang,
Zicheng Liu, Yumao Lu, Lijuan Wang
Microsoft
{xiaowei.hu,zhe.gan,jianfw,zhengyang,zliu,yumaolu,lijuanw}@microsoft.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recent advances in image captioning [1, 5, 35] can
be largely attributed to vision-language pre-training
(VLP) [26, 30, 37, 40], the current prevailing training
paradigm for vision-language (VL) research. VLP [6]
is usually conducted on a combined image-text dataset
comprising of several or tens of millions images in total,
e.g., Visual Genome [20], SBU [32] and Conceptual Captions [4, 35]. While previous studies [29, 48, 49] have ana1 The dataset is released at https://github.com/xiaoweihu/
ALT200M.

12M

40M

100M

200M

138
136
134
132
130
128
126

M)

huge

(1 0 0 0

Model Sizes (#Params)

large

24
base

base

l24
smal

smal

l

124

(1 0 M
)
tiny
tiny1
2

finetuned model evaluated on COCO (CIDEr)

In recent years, we have witnessed significant performance boost in the image captioning task based on visionlanguage pre-training (VLP). Scale is believed to be an important factor for this advance. However, most existing
work only focuses on pre-training transformers with moderate sizes (e.g., 12 or 24 layers) on roughly 4 million images. In this paper, we present LEMON , a LargE-scale
iMage captiONer, and provide the first empirical study on
the scaling behavior of VLP for image captioning. We use
the state-of-the-art VinVL model as our reference model,
which consists of an image feature extractor and a transformer model, and scale the transformer both up and down,
with model sizes ranging from 13 to 675 million parameters. In terms of data, we conduct experiments with up to
200 million image-text pairs which are automatically collected from web based on the alt attribute of the image
(dubbed as ALT200M1 ). Extensive analysis helps to characterize the performance trend as the model size and the
pre-training data size increase. We also compare different
training recipes, especially for training on large-scale noisy
data. As a result, LEMON achieves new state of the arts
on several major image captioning benchmarks, including
COCO Caption, nocaps, and Conceptual Captions. We
also show LEMON can generate captions with long-tail visual concepts when used in a zero-shot manner.

3M

Figure 1. Image captioning performance on COCO when upscaling model for each dataset size. The x-axis plots the number of parameters for each model size (e.g., tiny, small, huge) in
a logarithmic scale. The definition of model sizes is detailed in
Table 2. Increasing the model size is not significantly beneficial
at small pre-training dataset scales. However, when we use sufficiently large datasets, we see strong performance boost from a
larger model.

lyzed various choices of pre-training objectives and model
architectures, it remains unclear to what extent the pretraining dataset would impact the performance, and how it
correlates with different model settings. Along the journey
of pushing the limit of VLP, it becomes increasingly important to answer this question.
Scale is believed to be an important ingredient in attaining excellent performance [17, 33, 43]. Recent work has investigated the Pareto frontier of training transformer models, often referred to as the neural scaling law, in the domains of natural language processing [2, 18, 41] and computer vision [12,47], via unsupervised or weakly-supervised
learning methods. These studies have observed consistent
benefits of increasing the model size to billions of parame-

17980

