VisualHow: Multimodal Problem Solving
Jinhui Yang*

Xianyu Chen*

Ming Jiang
Shi Chen
University of Minnesota

Louis Wang

Qi Zhao

{yang7004, chen6582, mjiang, chen4595, wangx723}@umn.edu, qzhao@cs.umn.edu

Abstract
Recent progress in the interdisciplinary studies of computer vision (CV) and natural language processing (NLP)
has enabled the development of intelligent systems that can
describe what they see and answer questions accordingly.
However, despite showing usefulness in performing these
vision-language tasks, existing methods still struggle in understanding real-life problems (i.e., how to do something)
and suggesting step-by-step guidance to solve them. With
an overarching goal of developing intelligent systems to
assist humans in various daily activities, we propose VisualHow, a free-form and open-ended research that focuses on understanding a real-life problem and deriving
its solution by incorporating key components across multiple modalities. We develop a new dataset with 20,028
real-life problems and 102,933 steps that constitute their
solutions, where each step consists of both a visual illustration and a textual description that guide the problem solving. To establish better understanding of problems and solutions, we also provide annotations of multimodal attention
that localizes important components across modalities and
solution graphs that encapsulate different steps in structured representations. These data and annotations enable
a family of new vision-language tasks that solve real-life
problems. Through extensive experiments with representative models, we demonstrate their effectiveness on training and testing models for the new tasks, and there is significant scope for improvement by learning effective attention mechanisms. Our dataset and models are available at
https://github.com/formidify/VisualHow.

1. Introduction
The remarkable progress in vision-language studies has
developed visual systems with the ability to understand and
generate natural language information. Existing visionlanguage models mainly focus on the understanding of vi* Equal contributions.

Problem: How to Involve a Pet in Christmas.
Solution:

Create an ornament
with their picture on it.

Cut out previous photos
of your pet and make a
collage.

Give your pet a gift.

Play with your animal
around the holidays.

Figure 1. VisualHow is a vision-language task aiming to infer the
solution to a real-life problem. The solution consists of multiple
steps each described with an image and a caption.

sual input in task-free (i.e., Image Captioning [3, 12, 17]
and Visual Storytelling [28]) or question-directed (i.e., Visual Question Answering [2, 24] and Visual Dialog [18])
settings. In other words, their aim is to develop visual systems that can “look and tell”, by describing or answering
questions about what is observed in a scene. On large-scale
vision-language datasets [1, 2, 12, 14, 18, 24, 28, 37, 39, 62],
state-of-the-art models have obtained promising achievements in understanding and predicting visual and textual
information. Although achieving significant progress, these
methods only perform well on standardized vision-language
inference benchmarks and do not generalize to real-life situations to solve problems, which makes their scope of application relatively limited.
We believe that the next generation of visual intelligence
systems will need to develop the ability to help humans

15627

