CLIP-Forge: Towards Zero-Shot Text-to-Shape Generation
Aditya Sanghi1
Chin-Yi Cheng1

Hang Chu1
Joseph G. Lambourne1
Ye Wang2
Marco Fumero1
Kamal Rahimi Malekshan1
1
2
Autodesk AI Lab
Autodesk Research

{aditya.sanghi,hang.chu,joseph.lambourne,ye.wang,chin-yi.cheng,marco.fumero,kamal.malekshan}@autodesk.com

https://github.com/AutodeskAILab/Clip-Forge

Figure 1. We propose a zero-shot text-to-shape generation method named CLIP-Forge. Without training on any shape-text pairing labels,
our method generates meaningful shapes that correctly reflect the common name, (sub-)category, and semantic attribute information.

Abstract
Generating shapes using natural language can enable
new ways of imagining and creating the things around
us. While significant recent progress has been made in
text-to-image generation, text-to-shape generation remains
a challenging problem due to the unavailability of paired
text and shape data at a large scale. We present a simple yet effective method for zero-shot text-to-shape generation that circumvents such data scarcity. Our proposed
method, named CLIP-Forge, is based on a two-stage training process, which only depends on an unlabelled shape
dataset and a pre-trained image-text network such as CLIP.
Our method has the benefits of avoiding expensive inference
time optimization, as well as the ability to generate multiple
shapes for a given text. We not only demonstrate promising
zero-shot generalization of the CLIP-Forge model qualitatively and quantitatively, but also provide extensive comparative evaluations to better understand its behavior.

1. Introduction
Generating 3D shapes from text input has been a challenging and interesting research problem with both significant scientific and applied value [19, 22, 23, 34]. In the
artificial intelligence and cognitive science research communities, researchers have long sought to bridge the two

modalities of natural language and geometric shape [3, 55].
In practice, text-to-shape generation models are a key enabling component to new smart tools in creative design and
manufacture as well as animation and games [6].
Significant progress has been made to connect text and
image modalities [10, 18, 26, 27, 52, 54]. Recently, DALLE [49] and its associated pre-trained visual-textual embedding model CLIP [48] has shown promising results on the
problem of text-to-image generation [44]. Notably, they
have demonstrated strong zero-shot generalization while
evaluated on tasks the model has not been specifically
trained on. Shape generation is a more fundamental problem than image generation, because images are projections
and renderings of the inherently 3D physical world. Therefore, one may wonder if the success in 2D can be transferred
to the 3D domain. This turns out to be a non-trivial problem. Unlike the text-to-image case, where paired data is
abundant, it is impractical to acquire huge paired datasets
of texts and shapes.
Leveraging the progress of text-to-image generation, we
present CLIP-Forge. As shown in Figure 2, we overcome
the limitation of shape-text pair data scarcity via a simple
and effective approach. We exploit the fact that 3D shapes
can be easily and automatically rendered into images using standard graphics pipelines. We then utilize pre-trained
image-text joint embedding models such as [25, 48], which
bring text and image embeddings in a similar latent space so
that they can be used interchangeably. Hence, we can train

18603

