Knowledge Distillation via the Target-aware Transformer
Sihao Lin1,3† ‡, Hongwei Xie2†, Bing Wang2 , Kaicheng Yu2 ,
Xiaojun Chang3§, Xiaodan Liang4 , Gang Wang2
1
RMIT University 2 Alibaba Group 3 ReLER, AAII, UTS 4 Sun Yat-sen University
{linsihao6, hongwei.xie.90, Kaicheng.yu.yt, xdliang328}@gmail.com
{fengquan.wb, wg134231}@alibaba-inc.com, xiaojun.chang@uts.edu.au

Layer1

Abstract
Layer3

Knowledge distillation becomes a de facto standard to
improve the performance of small neural networks. Most
of the previous works propose to regress the representational features from the teacher to the student in a oneto-one spatial matching fashion. However, people tend to
overlook the fact that, due to the architecture differences,
the semantic information on the same spatial location usually vary. This greatly undermines the underlying assumption of the one-to-one distillation approach. To this end,
we propose a novel one-to-all spatial matching knowledge
distillation approach. Specifically, we allow each pixel of
the teacher feature to be distilled to all spatial locations
of the student features given its similarity, which is generated from a target-aware transformer. Our approach surpasses the state-of-the-art methods by a significant margin on various computer vision benchmarks, such as ImageNet, Pascal VOC and COCOStuff10k. Code is available
at https://github.com/sihaoevery/TaT.

1. Introduction
Knowledge distillation [19, 31] refers to a simple technique to improve the performance of any machine learning
algorithms. One common scenario is to distill the knowledge from a larger teacher neural network to a smaller
student one, such that the performance of student model
can be significantly boosted comparing to training the student model alone. Concretely, people formulate an external
loss function that guides the student feature map to mimic
teacher’s. Recently, it has been applied to various downstream applications, such as model compression [42, 48],
continual learning [25], and semi-supervised learning [8].
Earlier works only distill the knowledge from the final
layer of neural networks, for example, the “logits” in image
classification task [1, 19]. Recently, people discover that
§ Corresponding Author.
† Equal contribution.
‡ Part of the work done when as an intern in DAMO Academy.

Layer2

Teacher
Student

Input
Layer2
Layer1
(a) Comparison of Receptive Filed
𝑠!
Student

Teacher

Student
Teacher

(b) Spatial Order

𝑠"

𝑠#

𝑠$
Align

𝑡!

⨂

𝑡!

𝑡"

⨂

𝑡"

𝑡#

⨂

𝑡#

𝑡$

⨂

𝑡$

TaT Map

(c) Target-aware Transformer

Figure 1. Illustration of semantic mismatch. Suppose that
teacher and student are the 3-layers and 2-layers convnets with
kernel size 3 × 3 and stride 1 × 1. (a) shows the receptive field of
the middle pixel of the final feature map, where the blue box represents the teacher’s receptive field and the orange box is that of the
student’s. Since teacher model has more convolutional operations,
the resulting teacher feature map has a larger receptive field and
thus contains richer semantic information. (b) Hence, directly regressing the student’s and teacher’s feature in a one-to-one spatial
matching fashion may be suboptimal. (c) We proposed a one-to-all
knowledge distillation via a target-aware transformer that can let
the teacher’s spatial components be distilled to the entire student
feature maps.

distilling the intermediate feature maps is a more effective
approach to boost the student’s performance. This line of
works encourage similar patterns to be elicited in the spatial dimensions [36,50], and is constituted as state-of-the-art
knowledge distillation approach [7, 22].
To compute the distillation loss of the aforementioned
approach, one need to select the source feature map from
the teacher and the target feature map from the student,
where these two feature maps must have the same spatial
dimension. As shown in Figure 1 (b), the loss is computed

10915

