A study on the distribution of social biases
in self-supervised learning visual models
Kirill Sirotkin, Pablo Carballeira, Marcos Escudero-Viñolo
Video Processing and Understanding Lab, Univ. Autónoma de Madrid, 28049, Madrid, Spain
{kirill.sirotkin, pablo.carballeira, marcos.escudero}@uam.es

Abstract
Deep neural networks are efficient at learning the data
distribution if it is sufficiently sampled. However, they can
be strongly biased by non-relevant factors implicitly incorporated in the training data. These include operational
biases, such as ineffective or uneven data sampling, but
also ethical concerns, as the social biases are implicitly
present—even inadvertently, in the training data or explicitly defined in unfair training schedules. In tasks having
impact on human processes, the learning of social biases
may produce discriminatory, unethical and untrustworthy
consequences. It is often assumed that social biases stem
from supervised learning on labelled data, and thus, SelfSupervised Learning (SSL) wrongly appears as an efficient
and bias-free solution, as it does not require labelled data.
However, it was recently proven that a popular SSL method
also incorporates biases. In this paper, we study the biases
of a varied set of SSL visual models, trained using ImageNet
data, using a method and dataset designed by psychological experts to measure social biases. We show that there is a
correlation between the type of the SSL model and the number of biases that it incorporates. Furthermore, the results
also suggest that this number does not strictly depend on
the model’s accuracy and changes throughout the network.
Finally, we conclude that a careful SSL model selection process can reduce the number of social biases in the deployed
model, whilst keeping high performance. The code is available at https://github.com/vpulab/SB-SSL.

1. Introduction
Supervised Deep Learning models currently constitute
the state-of-the-art in the fields of computer vision and natural language processing. However, the recent developments
[17, 24] in the field of Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) —a
type of unsupervised learning, are slowly closing the performance gap gained via human guidance usually provided
in the shape of target labels. SSL methods aim at solving a

pre-formulated pretext task—defined by automatically generated labels, whose solution is expected to require highlevel understanding of the data in order to learn descriptive
feature embeddings with strong transferability potential.
Human social biases are a well-studied and, in some
cases, numerically quantifiable phenomenon [23] that
causes unjustified prejudices against social groups based,
among others, on aspects such as age, gender and race.
Whereas one cannot assign prejudices or preferences to
deep learning approaches as these are highly subjective
characteristics attributed solely to humans, deep learning
methods can wrongly correlate certain concepts if the labeled training data distribution is biased itself [45]. In practice, this leads to the replication of social biases. Several cases have been studied and reported, including: an
incorrect gender prediction based on the contextual cues
(i.e., location - kitchen, office), rather than on visual evidence associated with the described person [30], a fewer
number of automatic high-paying job recommendations for
female candidates than for male ones [20] and a promotion of biased suggestions in the dating/political decisionmaking context [7]. Anticipating these situations, institutional initiatives are being developed internationally to extinguish social biases from the training data, as declared in
the Ethics Guidelines for a Trustworthy AI issued by the European Commission, and regulate the use of machine learning methods with potential human implications, as stated in
numerous US bills [2, 3, 18] and the legislative documents
of other countries [1, 4–6].
Previously, it was demonstrated that supervised learning models are prone to implicitly learn biases from the
datasets containing them [9, 27, 30], as these human biases are encapsulated in the target labels. For instance, it
has been shown that the earlier versions of ImageNet [21]
exposed an imbalanced distribution regarding skin colors,
ages and genders, leading to the under-representation of certain groups [43]. Furthermore, datasets collecting raw comments scraped from the web [10, 40] contain explicit biases
against certain social groups [31].
SSL approaches, being unsupervised, are expected to be

10442

