SharpContour: A Contour-based Boundary Refinement Approach
for Efficient and Accurate Instance Segmentation
Chenming Zhu1† , Xuanye Zhang2† , Yanran Li4 , Liangdong Qiu1,2 , Kai Han5 , Xiaoguang Han1,3‡
1
SSE, CUHK-Shenzhen 2 Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data 3 FNii, CUHK-Shenzhen
4
Birmingham University 5 The University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Excellent performance has been achieved on instance
segmentation but the quality on the boundary area remains
unsatisfactory, which leads to a rising attention on boundary refinement. For practical use, an ideal post-processing
refinement scheme are required to be accurate, generic
and efficient. However, most of existing approaches propose pixel-wise refinement, which either introduce a massive computation cost or design specifically for different
backbone models. Contour-based models are efficient and
generic to be incorporated with any existing segmentation
methods, but they often generate over-smoothed contour
and tend to fail on corner areas. In this paper, we propose an efficient contour-based boundary refinement approach, named SharpContour, to tackle the segmentation of
boundary area. We design a novel contour evolution process together with an Instance-aware Point Classifier. Our
method deforms the contour iteratively by updating offsets
in a discrete manner. Differing from existing contour evolution methods, SharpContour estimates each offset more
independently so that it predicts much sharper and accurate contours. Notably, our method is generic to seamlessly
work with diverse existing models with a small computational cost. Experiments show that SharpContour achieves
competitive gains whilst preserving high efficiency.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation is a fundamental topic in computer vision which plays important role in scene understanding [45], intelligent robots [36], clinical analysis [6,
46] and autonomous driving [10, 14]. The mainstream
of instance segmentation approaches follow the design
of detection-then-segmentation framework like Mask RCNN [13] and achieve promising performance. However,
high fidelity segmentation of fine details especially in the
† The two authors contribute equally to this paper.
‡ Corresponding author: hanxiaoguang@cuhk.edu.cn

(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

Figure 1. Instance segmentation with SharpContour. Top: A is
the coarse mask predicted by Mask R-CNN and B is the refinement
result of SharpContour. Bottom: C is the coarse contour generated
by DANCE and D is the refinement result of SharpContour. In the
corner areas, SharpContour yields significant improvements.

boundary area remains extremely challenging.
To address this issue, the refinement of boundaries is
raised as a new topic in recent years. A novel evaluation metric called Boundary AP [7] and a number of approaches [8, 18, 33, 42] are proposed. Boundary AP [7] focuses on the accuracy of the object boundary region thus can
better reflect boundary refinement. As for the approaches,
refinement can be generally recognized as a post-processing
operation which is expected to meet three basic requirements: accurate, efficient and generic. It is worth mentioning that “generic” is also a significant factor. However, existing top-performing refinement methods mainly focus on
accuracy and lacks consideration of other two factors which
are actually important in the practical application scenarios. For example, Boundary Patch Refinement method [33]
proposed to additionally process patches along boundaries
after the instance segmentation model, resulting in massive
computational cost. RefineMask [42] designed a new architecture built upon Mask-RCNN [13] to refine the quality of
instance mask with fine-grained features. Though the computational cost is not extremely expensive, this method is

4392

