Bi-level Doubly Variational Learning for Energy-based Latent Variable Models
Ge Kan1 , Jinhu Lü1 , Tian Wang1 ,* Baochang Zhang1 , Aichun Zhu2
Lei Huang1 , Guodong Guo3 , Hichem Snoussi4
1
School of Automation Science and Electrical Engineering, Institue of Artificial Intelligence,
Beihang University, Beijing China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing Tech University, Nanjing China
3
Institute of Deep Learning, Baidu Research,
National Engineering Laboratory for Deep Learning Technology and Application, Beijing China
4
University of Technology of Troyes, Troyes France
{gekan,wangtian,bczhang}@buaa.edu.cn,jhlu@iss.ac.cn,aichun.zhu@njtech.edu.cn
huanglei36060520@gmail.com,guoguodong01@baidu.com,hichem.snoussi@utt.fr

Abstract
Energy-based latent variable models (EBLVMs) are
more expressive than conventional energy-based models.
However, its potential on visual tasks are limited by its
training process based on maximum likelihood estimate that
requires sampling from two intractable distributions. In
this paper, we propose Bi-level doubly variational learning (BiDVL), which is based on a new bi-level optimization framework and two tractable variational distributions
to facilitate learning EBLVMs. Particularly, we lead a decoupled EBLVM consisting of a marginal energy-based distribution and a structural posterior to handle the difficulties
when learning deep EBLVMs on images. By choosing a
symmetric KL divergence in the lower level of our framework, a compact BiDVL for visual tasks can be obtained.
Our model achieves impressive image generation performance over related works. It also demonstrates the significant capacity of testing image reconstruction and out-ofdistribution detection.

1. Introduction
Energy-based models (EBMs) [24] are known as powerful generative models widely studied in the field of machine learning, which define a general distribution explicitly by normalizing exponential negative energy. EBMs
have also been successfully applied to solve visual tasks,
such as image synthesis [6], classification [12], out-ofdistribution (OOD) detection [30] or semi-supervised learning [7]. Further, latent variables are incorporated to define
* Corresponding Author

energy-based latent variable models (EBLVMs), which are
more expressive and capable of representation learning [4].
However, the effectiveness of EBLVM deteriorates when
applying it to solve computer vision problems, because
learning by maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) usually
suffers from the doubly intractable model problem [42],
i.e., sampling from the posterior and the joint distribution of model is nontrivial due to the intractable integrals
in normalizing denominator. Recent works [6, 35] leverage gradient-based Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC),
such as Langevin dynamics, to approximately sample from
EBMs but require lots of steps, since fewer steps may
lead to arbitrarily far sampling distribution from the target. Moreover, to handle the doubly intractable problem
of EBLVMs, double MCMC sampling are needed and as a
result making it infeasible on high-dimensional images.
To accomplish EBLVMs efficiently, this paper introduces a Bi-level Doubly Variational Learning (BiDVL)
framework, which is based on tractable variational posterior and variational joint distribution to estimate the gradients in MLE. We formulate BiDVL as a bi-level optimization (BLO) problem as illustrated in Fig. 1. In specific, the
gradient estimate is compelled to fit the real one by exploring variational distributions to achieve the model distributions in the lower level, and the resulting gradient estimate
is then used for optimizing the objective in the upper level.
Theoretically, BiDVL is equivalent to the original MLE objective under the nonparametric assumption [10], while to
optimize it practically, we propose an efficient alternative
optimization scheme.
Moreover, the drawbacks of doubly variational learning
come from its unstableness when learning a deep EBLVM
on images. For example, AdVIL [25] that can be approx-

18460

