Sound-Guided Semantic Image Manipulation

Fire crackling

Fire crackling

Siren

Underwater bubbling

Wind noise

Giggling

Sobbing

Nose blow

Manipulated image

Mel-spectrogram
Acoustic features

Input image

Seung Hyun Lee1 , Wonseok Roh1 , Wonmin Byeon2 , Sang Ho Yoon3 , Chanyoung Kim1 ,
Jinkyu Kim4∗ and Sangpil Kim1∗
1
Department of Artificial Intelligence and 4 CSE, Korea University
2
NVIDA Research, NVIDIA Corporation
3
Graduate School of Culture Technology, KAIST

Figure 1: Modified images with sound-guided semantic image manipulation. Our method manipulates source images (top
row) given user-provided sound (middle row) into semantic images (last row).

Abstract
The recent success of the generative model shows that
leveraging the multi-modal embedding space can manipulate an image using text information. However, manipulating an image with other sources rather than text, such as
sound, is not easy due to the dynamic characteristics of the
sources. Especially, sound can convey vivid emotions and
dynamic expressions of the real world. Here, we propose
a framework that directly encodes sound into the multimodal (image-text) embedding space and manipulates an
image from the space. Our audio encoder is trained to produce a latent representation from an audio input, which is
forced to be aligned with image and text representations in
the multi-modal embedding space. We use a direct latent optimization method based on aligned embeddings for soundguided image manipulation. We also show that our method
can mix different modalities, i.e., text and audio, which enrich the variety of the image modification. The experiments
on zero-shot audio classification and semantic-level image
classification show that our proposed model outperforms
other text and sound-guided state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Image manipulation has been widely studied in the field
of computer vision due to its usefulness in photo-realistic
manipulation applications, social media image sharing, and
image-based advertisement. An image can be used to transfer its style into the target image [14, 13]. Also, modifying
specific parts in the human face image, such as hairstyle or
color, is useful in image manipulation applications [49, 34].
The purpose of semantic image manipulation is to generate
a novel image that contains both source image identification and semantic information of user intention. In this paAcknowledgement. This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea grant (NRF-2021R1G1A1093855) and partially supported by Institute of Information & communications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP)
grant funded by the Korea government(MSIT) (No. 2019-0-00079, Artificial Intelligence Graduate School Program(Korea University)). J. Kim is partially supported by
the National Research Foundation of Korea grant (NRF-2021R1C1C1009608), Basic Science Research Program (NRF-2021R1A6A1A13044830), and ICT Creative
Consilience program (IITP-2022-2022-0-01819). S. Yoon is supported by KAIST
grant (G04210059). Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the funding agency.
∗
Corresponding authors: Jinkyu Kim (jinkyukim@korea.ac.kr) and Sangpil
Kim (spk7@korea.ac.kr). Code and more diverse examples are available at https:
//kuai-lab.github.io/cvpr2022sound.

13377

