An MIL-Derived Transformer for Weakly Supervised Point Cloud Segmentation
Cheng-Kun Yang1 Ji-Jia Wu2 Kai-Syun Chen2 Yung-Yu Chuang1
1
National Taiwan University 2 National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University

Abstract
We address weakly supervised point cloud segmentation
by proposing a new model, MIL-derived transformer, to
mine additional supervisory signals. First, the transformer
model is derived based on multiple instance learning (MIL)
to explore pair-wise cloud-level supervision, where two
clouds of the same category yield a positive bag while two
of different classes produce a negative bag. It leverages not
only individual cloud annotations but also pair-wise cloud
semantics for model optimization. Second, Adaptive global
weighted pooling (AdaGWP) is integrated into our transformer model to replace max pooling and average pooling.
It introduces learnable weights to re-scale logits in the class
activation maps. It is more robust to noise while discovering
more complete foreground points under weak supervision.
Third, we perform point subsampling and enforce feature
equivariance between the original and subsampled point
clouds for regularization. The proposed method is endto-end trainable and is general because it can work with
different backbones with diverse types of weak supervision
signals, including sparsely annotated points and cloud-level
labels. The experiments show that it achieves state-of-theart performance on the S3DIS and ScanNet benchmarks.
The source code will be available at https://github.
com/jimmy15923/wspss_mil_transformer.

1. Introduction
Point clouds capture geometric characteristics and surface context, and hence serve as an essential representation
for many 3D vision applications such as scene understanding [6, 22, 28], autonomous vehicles [4, 5], and robotics [9].
Point cloud segmentation aims to identify points belonging to semantic categories of interest. It offers point-level
recognition, thereby being an intrinsic component of point
cloud analysis. However, learning a segmentation model relies on training data with point-level annotations. The high
annotation cost poses an obstacle to this task. To address
this issue, existing weakly supervised methods derive the
segmentation model with different weak supervisory signals, such as partially labeled points [26, 42, 46, 47], subcloud level annotations [38] or scene level annotations [31].

Yen-Yu Lin2,3
3
Academia Sinica

To compensate for the lack of complete annotations,
weakly supervised point cloud segmentation methods [26,
31, 38, 42, 46, 47] make the most of weakly labeled data by
different techniques such as graph propagation, permutation
consistency, and object proposals. Despite effectiveness,
these methods use only intra-cloud information: The supervisory signals are grabbed from point clouds independently.
Inspired by image co-segmentation [13,45] and cross-image
pattern mining [32], we aim to explore inter-cloud semantics to supervise segmentation model training. To this end,
we generalize the transformer model [34] to work on paired
point clouds and formulate the problem as a multiple instance learning (MIL) [27] task. It follows that our method
can use both intra-cloud and inter-cloud information to better accomplish weakly supervised segmentation.
Specifically, we develop an MIL-derived transformer
where MIL addresses the uncertainty of weak labels. As
shown in Figure 1, we apply the transformer to two point
clouds of the same category. One cloud is treated as an
anchor with each of its points being a query in the transformer. The other cloud serves as a reference where each of
its points forms a key-value pair. The transformer encoder
and decoder are applied to the reference and the anchor respectively. Through the cross-attention [34] mechanism of
the decoder, each query (from the anchor) is expressed as a
weighted sum of the values (from the reference). The resultant feature vectors of all points (i.e., queries) of the anchor
yield a positive bag in MIL for the common category of the
two clouds. MIL via this positive bag encourages the model
to attend to the foreground points of the anchor.
In contrast, we consider another reference point cloud
whose category is different from the anchor. This time,
the feature vectors of all queries of the anchor generate a
negative bag because the feature vector of each query is a
weighted sum of values of this reference where the target
category is not present. The model via this negative bag is
enforced to suppress irrelevant points. With the proposed
MIL-transformer, each pair of point clouds, forming either
a positive or a negative bag, produces extra signal to supervise model training. In addition, long-range dependency
can be taken into account via the transformer.
Max or average pooling is widely used to aggregate in11830

