Teaser Figure v2 – Final Dr

240*320*2000*2*30 / (1000

Compressive Single-Photon 3D Cameras

Gated has 40 codes, Proposed

SBR == 0.5, Mean photon c

Felipe Gutierrez-Barragan, Atul Ingle, Trevor Seets, Mohit Gupta, Andreas Velten
University of Wisconsin-Madison
{fgutierrez3, ingle, seets}@wisc.edu, mohitg@cs.wisc.edu, velten@wisc.edu

Abstract
Single-photon avalanche diodes (SPADs) are an emerging pixel technology for time-of-flight (ToF) 3D cameras
that can capture the time-of-arrival of individual photons at
picosecond resolution. To estimate depths, current SPADbased 3D cameras measure the round-trip time of a laser
pulse by building a per-pixel histogram of photon timestamps. As the spatial and timestamp resolution of SPADbased cameras increase, their output data rates far exceed the capacity of existing data transfer technologies.
One major reason for SPAD’s bandwidth-intensive operation is the tight coupling that exists between depth resolution and histogram resolution. To weaken this coupling,
we propose compressive single-photon histograms (CSPH).
CSPHs are a per-pixel compressive representation of the
high-resolution histogram, that is built on-the-fly, as each
photon is detected. They are based on a family of linear
coding schemes that can be expressed as a simple matrix
operation. We design different CSPH coding schemes for
3D imaging and evaluate them under different signal and
background levels, laser waveforms, and illumination setups. Our results show that a well-designed CSPH can consistently reduce data rates by 1-2 orders of magnitude without compromising depth precision.

1. Introduction
Single-photon cameras (SPC) are an emerging sensor
technology with ultra-high sensitivity down to individual
photons [7, 9]. In addition to their extreme sensitivity,
SPCs based on single-photon avalanche diodes (SPADs)
can also record photon-arrival timestamps with extremely
high (sub-nanosecond) time resolution [43]. Moreover,
SPAD-based SPCs are compatible with the complementary metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS) photolithography
process which can enable fabrication of kilo-to-mega-pixel
resolution SPAD arrays [12, 40] at low costs. Due to
these capabilities, SPAD-based SPCs are gaining popularity in various imaging applications including 3D imaging [14, 48, 49, 55], passive low-light imaging [3, 38, 51],
HDR imaging [29, 30], non-line-of-sight (NLOS) imaging [5, 36, 58], fluorescence lifetime imaging (FLIM) microscopy [61], and diffuse optical tomography [37, 60].
Unlike a conventional camera pixel that outputs a single

(a) Full-Resolution Hist.

Naïve Coarse Hist. Compressive Hist. (Ours)
Data Rate = 9.2GB/sec Data Rate = 0.18GB/sec Data Rate = 0.09GB/sec

(b)

Figure 1. Compressive Single-Photon 3D Imaging. (a) Example
depth maps with conventional (full histogram) capture, coarse resolution capture and our method with compressive capture. In this
simulation, our method generates 100× lower data, yet generates
depth maps that are visually indistinguishable from the conventional method. (b) With conventional acquisition schemes, data
bandwidth requirements scale linearly with the desired depth resolution. Our proposed compressive acquisition does not scale as
strongly with depth resolution, keeping the output data rates manageable with existing data transfer standards like USB and PCIe.

intensity value integrated over micro-to-millisecond timescales, a SPAD pixel generates an electrical pulse for each
photon detection event. A time-to-digital conversion circuit
converts each pulse into a timestamp recording the time-ofarrival of each photon. Under normal illumination conditions, a SPAD pixel can generate millions of photon timestamps per second. The photon timestamps are often captured with respect to a periodic synchronization signal generated by a pulsed laser source. To make this large volume
of timestamp data more manageable, SPAD-based SPCs
build a timing histogram in-sensor instead of transferring
the raw photon timestamps to the processing chip. The histogram records the number of photons as a function of the
time delay with respect to the synchronization pulse.
Consider a megapixel SPAD-based 3D camera. For short
range indoor applications (up to tens of meters), a millimeter depth resolution would be desirable. For longer range

17854

