Weakly-supervised Metric Learning with Cross-Module Communications for the
Classification of Anterior Chamber Angle Images
Jingqi Huang,1 Yue Ning,2 Dong Nie,3* Linan Guan,1 Xiping Jia 1
1
Guangdong Polytechnic Normal University, 2 Stevens Institute of Technology
3
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

Abstract
As the basis for developing glaucoma treatment strategies, Anterior Chamber Angle (ACA) evaluation is usually dependent on experts’ judgements. However, experienced ophthalmologists needed for these judgements are
not widely available. Thus, computer-aided ACA evaluations become a pressing and efficient solution for this issue. In this paper, we propose a novel end-to-end framework GCNet for automated Glaucoma Classification based
on ACA images or other Glaucoma-related medical images.
We first collect and label an ACA image dataset with some
pixel-level annotations. Next, we introduce a segmentation module and an embedding module to enhance the performance of classifying ACA images. Within GCNet , we
design a Cross-Module Aggregation Net (CMANet) which
is a weakly-supervised metric learning network to capture
contextual information exchanging across these modules.
We conduct experiments on the ACA dataset and two public datasets REFUGE and SIGF. Our experimental results
demonstrate that GCNet outperforms several state-of-theart deep models in the tasks of glaucoma medical image
classifications. The source code of GCNet can be found at
https://github.com/Jingqi-H/GCNet.

1. Introduction
Glaucoma is a leading cause of irreversible blindness in
the world [44]. The main basis for determining clinical
treatment protocols when glaucoma is diagnosed is using
Anterior Chamber Angle (ACA) images and gonioscopy is
widely regarded as the “Gold Standard” in ACA evaluation. There are five ACA levels that correspond to different
glaucoma treatments. In order to determine these ACA levels, ophthalmologists examine four local structures in ACA
images: Schwalbe Line (SL), Trabecular Meshwork (TM),
Scleral Spur (SS), and Ciliary Body Band (CBB), with the
help of microgonioscopy [8,11] as shown in Figure 1. How* Now at Alibaba Inc.

SL
TM
SS
CBB

Figure 1. The main structures in ACA consist of Schwalbe line
(SL), pigmentation of trabecular meshwork (TM), scleral spur
(SS), and ciliary body band (CBB). The bottom figure shows the
color annotations of these four structures.

ever, ACA evaluation needs expert ophthalmologists, while
the availability of experienced ophthalmologists is severely
sparse given the large number of glaucoma patients. Therefore, computer-aided systems are urgently needed for efficient ACA evaluation.
Recently, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have become a default choice given its successful applications in
Glaucoma-related medical image analysis. For instance,
DNNs have been used to segment optic cup (OC) regions
and optic disk (OD) regions [9], and to detect glaucomatous optic neuropathy [25]. Li et al. [21] apply a ResNet-18
model for automatic measurement of trabecular-iris angle
(TIA). Peroni et al. [36] exploit a dense U-Net architecture
to segment irido-corneal interface images. However, directly applying traditional DNN models for ACA level classification is suboptimal and the following challenges need
to be overcome:
(1) In ACA images, the four spatial structures (SL, TM,
SS, and CBB) are the main basis for ophthalmologists in
their ACA level evaluations. However, these four structures
concentrate in a small area of a full ACA picture as shown in
Figure 1. This leads to great challenges for machine learn-

752

