Incremental Transformer Structure Enhanced Image Inpainting with Masking
Positional Encoding
Qiaole Dong*, Chenjie Cao*, Yanwei Fu†
School of Data Science, Fudan University
{18307130096,20110980001,yanweifu}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Image inpainting has made significant advances in recent years. However, it is still challenging to recover
corrupted images with both vivid textures and reasonable
structures. Some specific methods only tackle regular textures while losing holistic structures due to the limited receptive fields of convolutional neural networks (CNNs). On
the other hand, attention-based models can learn better
long-range dependency for the structure recovery, but they
are limited by the heavy computation for inference with
large image sizes. To address these issues, we propose to
leverage an additional structure restorer to facilitate the
image inpainting incrementally. The proposed model restores holistic image structures with a powerful attentionbased transformer model in a fixed low-resolution sketch
space. Such a grayscale space is easy to be upsampled to
larger scales to convey correct structural information. Our
structure restorer can be integrated with other pretrained
inpainting models efficiently with the zero-initialized residual addition. Furthermore, a masking positional encoding strategy is utilized to improve the performance with
large irregular masks. Extensive experiments on various
datasets validate the efficacy of our model compared with
other competitors. Our codes are released in https:
//github.com/DQiaole/ZITS_inpainting.

1. Introduction
Image inpainting has been investigated as a longstanding challenge to address the difficulty of filling in
missing areas of pictures. It is very useful to various
real-world applications, such as object removal [12], photo
restoration, and image editing [25]. To achieve realistic outcomes, the inpainted images should remain both semantically coherent textures and visually reasonable structures.
Many classical algorithms [3, 9, 19, 31, 42] search similar
patches for the reconstruction heuristically. But preserving
* Equal contributions.
† Corresponding authors.

Figure 1. High quality 1024×1024 inpainted results. From left to
right, masked inputs, results of LaMa [44], results of our method.

good textures and holistic structures in large images is still
non-trivial for these conventional methods.
Benefited from excellent capacities of Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) [28] and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [15], existing deep learning methods [4,18,30,35,44,46,54,59] could efficiently conduct the
image inpainting tasks in some common cases. However,
they still suffer from some dilemmas. (1) Limited receptive fields. Learning semantically consistent textures is difficult for traditional CNNs due to the local inductive priors
and narrow receptive field of convolution operations. Even
dilated convolutions [55] fail to tackle large corrupted regions or high-resolution images. (2) Missing holistic structures. Recovering key edges and lines for scenes, especially
ones with weak texture is difficult without the holistic understanding of large images as shown in Fig. 1. (3) Heavy
computations. Training GANs with large image sizes is
still very tricky and costly [27]. And the inpainting performance may be degraded on high-resolution images. (4) No
positional information in masked regions. The inpainting
model tends to repeat meaningless artifacts in large irregular masked regions without explicit positional clues.
Some pioneering works can partially solve these problems. For the limited receptive fields, attention-based meth-

11358

