Multi-class Token Transformer for Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Lian Xu1 , Wanli Ouyang2 , Mohammed Bennamoun1 , Farid Boussaid1 , and Dan Xu3
1
The University of Western Australia 3 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
The University of Sydney, SenseTime Computer Vision Group, Australia
{lian.xu,mohammed.bennamoun,farid.boussaid}@uwa.edu.au,
wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au, danxu@cse.ust.hk

Class-agnostic attention map

Abstract

Re ha e

e f-a e

This paper proposes a new transformer-based framework to learn class-specific object localization maps as
pseudo labels for weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS). Inspired by the fact that the attended regions
of the one-class token in the standard vision transformer
can be leveraged to form a class-agnostic localization map,
we investigate if the transformer model can also effectively
capture class-specific attention for more discriminative object localization by learning multiple class tokens within
the transformer. To this end, we propose a Multi-class Token Transformer, termed as MCTformer, which uses multiple class tokens to learn interactions between the class tokens and the patch tokens. The proposed MCTformer can
successfully produce class-discriminative object localization maps from the class-to-patch attentions corresponding
to different class tokens. We also propose to use a patchlevel pairwise affinity, which is extracted from the patchto-patch transformer attention, to further refine the localization maps. Moreover, the proposed framework is shown
to fully complement the Class Activation Mapping (CAM)
method, leading to remarkably superior WSSS results on
the PASCAL VOC and MS COCO datasets. These results
underline the importance of the class token for WSSS. 1

1. Introduction
Weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) aims
to alleviate the reliance on pixel-level ground-truth labels
by using weak supervision. A critical step for this task is
to generate high-quality pseudo segmentation ground-truth
labels by using weak labels. Image-level labels can provide simple weak labels which only indicate the presence
or absence of certain classes without any ground-truth localization information. Previous WSSS methods generally
rely on Class Activation Mapping (CAM) [51] to extract ob1 https://github.com/xulianuwa/MCTformer

(a) V T

Class-specific attention maps

Re ha e

e f-a e

(b) MCTf

e (P

ed)

Figure 1. (a) In previous vision transformers [10], only one class
token (red square) is used to aggregate information from patch tokens (blue square). The learned patch attentions corresponding
to the class token generate a class-agnostic localization map. (b)
In contrast, the proposed MCTformer uses multiple class tokens
to learn interactions between class tokens and patch tokens. The
learned class-to-patch attentions of different class tokens can produce class-specific object localization maps.

ject localization maps from Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs). Despite using complex CAM expansion strategies
or multiple training steps, existing methods still exhibit limited performance in terms of both completeness of the localized objects and accuracy.
Vision Transformer (ViT) [10], as the first transformer
model specifically designed for computer vision, has recently achieved performance breakthroughs on multiple vision tasks [18]. Particularly, ViT has achieved state-of-theart performance for large-scale image recognition, thanks
to its strong capability to model long-range contexts. ViT
splits the input image into non-overlapping patches and
transforms them into a sequence of vectors. ViT also uses
one extra class token to aggregate information from the entire sequence of the patch tokens. Although the class token
has been removed in a number of recent transformer methods [7, 8, 29], this work will underline its importance for
weakly supervised semantic segmentation.
A recent work, DINO [3], revealed that there was explicit
information about the semantic segmentation of an image in
self-supervised ViT features. More specifically, it was ob-

4310

