On the Road to Online Adaptation for Semantic Image Segmentation
Riccardo Volpi

Pau De Jorge

Diane Larlus

Gabriela Csurka

NAVER LABS Europe*

NAVER LABS Europe

NAVER LABS Europe

NAVER LABS Europe

Oxford University

Figure 1. The proposed OASIS benchmark. We formalize a domain adaptation task which requires online, unsupervised adaptation of
semantic segmentation models and propose a novel benchmark to tackle it. It is composed of three steps. Train: A model is trained offline
on simulated data (top-left); Val: Several adaptation strategies are validated on simulated data organized in sequentially shifting domains
(e.g. , sunny-to-rainy, highway-to-city), to mimic deploy (top-right). Deploy: The best validated strategy is applied to the test set (bottom).

Abstract
We propose a new problem formulation and a corresponding evaluation framework to advance research on
unsupervised domain adaptation for semantic image segmentation. The overall goal is fostering the development
of adaptive learning systems that will continuously learn,
without supervision, in ever-changing environments. Typical protocols that study adaptation algorithms for segmentation models are limited to few domains, adaptation happens offline, and human intervention is generally required,
at least to annotate data for hyper-parameter tuning. We argue that such constraints are incompatible with algorithms
that can continuously adapt to different real-world situations. To address this, we propose a protocol where models
need to learn online, from sequences of temporally correlated images, requiring continuous, frame-by-frame adaptation. We accompany this new protocol with a variety of
baselines to tackle the proposed formulation, as well as an
extensive analysis of their behaviors, which can serve as a
starting point for future research.
* https://europe.naverlabs.com

1. Introduction
Machine learning systems will often face unfamiliar conditions when deployed in the real world. A self-driving
car will encounter a new urban environment or unexpected
weather; a domestic robot will be deployed in a new house.
In this regard, semantic image segmentation, a key task
for both examples above, is an important case study. Due
to the extremely high cost of manually annotating segmentation masks, it is very common to train segmentation models on synthetic data [62, 65]; these models can then be
adapted to real environments using domain adaptation techniques [16, 33, 34, 81, 86, 97]. Adaptation methods typically
run offline, require multiple epochs, and generally rely on
an annotated validation set from the target domain. Such
assumptions are reasonable for certain scenarios; for instance, consider the problem of adapting a segmentation
model for MRI from simulated data to real-scanner samples: adaptation can happen offline, and one can ask some
experts to provide at least a few annotated target samples
for hyper-parameter selection.
Unfortunately, such assumptions do not hold for all scenarios. In our initial example of a self-driving car equipped
with a semantic segmentation module, once the car is on the

19184

