Learning Multi-View Aggregation In the Wild
for Large-Scale 3D Semantic Segmentation
Damien Robert1, 2

Bruno Vallet2

Loic Landrieu2

damien.robert@ign.fr

bruno.vallet@ign.fr

loic.landrieu@ign.fr

1

2

CSAI, ENGIE Lab CRIGEN, Stains, France
Univ Gustave Eiffel, ENSG, IGN, LASTIG, F-77454 Marne-la-Vallee, France

Abstract
Recent works on 3D semantic segmentation propose to
exploit the synergy between images and point clouds by processing each modality with a dedicated network and projecting learned 2D features onto 3D points. Merging large-scale
point clouds and images raises several challenges, such as
constructing a mapping between points and pixels, and aggregating features between multiple views. Current methods
require mesh reconstruction or specialized sensors to recover
occlusions, and use heuristics to select and aggregate available images. In contrast, we propose an end-to-end trainable
multi-view aggregation model leveraging the viewing conditions of 3D points to merge features from images taken at arbitrary positions. Our method can combine standard 2D and
3D networks and outperforms both 3D models operating on
colorized point clouds and hybrid 2D/3D networks without
requiring colorization, meshing, or true depth maps. We set a
new state-of-the-art for large-scale indoor/outdoor semantic
segmentation on S3DIS (74.7 mIoU 6-Fold) and on KITTI360 (58.3 mIoU). Our full pipeline is accessible at https:
//github.com/drprojects/DeepViewAgg, and
only requires raw 3D scans and a set of images and poses.

1. Introduction
The fast-paced development of dedicated neural architectures for 3D data has led to significant improvements
in the automated analysis of large 3D scenes [24]. All
top-performing methods operate on colorized point clouds,
which requires either specialized sensors [62], or running a
colorization step which is often closed-source [1–3] and
sensor-dependent [33]. However, while colorized point
clouds carry some radiometric information, images combined with dedicated 2D architectures are better suited for
learning textural and contextual cues. A promising line
of work sets out to leverage the complementarity between
3D point clouds and images by projecting onto 3D points

Figure 1. Combining 2D and 3D Information. We propose to
merge the complementary information between point clouds and a
set of co-registered images. Using a simple visibility model, we can
project 2D features onto the 3D points and use viewing conditions
to select features from the most relevant images. We represent
images at their position with the symbol
and color the 3D
points according to the image they are seen in.

the 2D features learned from real [19, 29, 32] or virtual images [15, 36]
Combining point clouds and images with arbitrary poses
(i.e. in the wild) as represented in Figure 1, involves recovering occlusions and computing a point-pixel mapping, which
is typically done using accurate depth maps from specialized
sensors [12, 56] or a potentially costly meshing step [8]. Furthermore, when a point is seen in different images simultaneously, the 2D features must be merged in a meaningful way.

5575

