An Empirical Study of End-to-End Temporal Action Detection
Xiaolong Liu1 Song Bai2 Xiang Bai1 *
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 2 ByteDance Inc.
{liuxl, xbai}@hust.edu.cn, songbai.site@gmail.com

1. Introduction
With the development of information technology, the
numbers of videos generated and accessed are rapidly increasing, underscoring the need for automatic video understanding, such as human action recognition and temporal
action detection (TAD)1 . Action recognition aims to predict
the action label ( e.g., basketball dunk) of a short, trimmed
video. Differently, TAD aims to determine the label, as well
as the temporal interval of every action instance in a long
untrimmed video. It is more challenging and also practical
* Corresponding author
1 Also known as temporal action localization (TAL).

(a)

T×H×W×3

Time

Temporal action detection (TAD) is an important yet
challenging task in video understanding. It aims to simultaneously predict the semantic label and the temporal interval of every action instance in an untrimmed video. Rather
than end-to-end learning, most existing methods adopt a
head-only learning paradigm, where the video encoder is
pre-trained for action classification, and only the detection head upon the encoder is optimized for TAD. The effect of end-to-end learning is not systematically evaluated.
Besides, there lacks an in-depth study on the efficiencyaccuracy trade-off in end-to-end TAD. In this paper, we
present an empirical study of end-to-end temporal action
detection. We validate the advantage of end-to-end learning over head-only learning and observe up to 11% performance improvement. Besides, we study the effects of multiple design choices that affect the TAD performance and
speed, including detection head, video encoder, and resolution of input videos. Based on the findings, we build a
mid-resolution baseline detector, which achieves the stateof-the-art performance of end-to-end methods while running more than 4× faster. We hope that this paper can
serve as a guide for end-to-end learning and inspire future
research in this field. Code and models are available at
https://github.com/xlliu7/E2E-TAD.

Time

Offline feature extraction

Abstract

(b)
T

T×H×W×3
Input

C

Video Encoder

Feature

Detection Head

Output

Figure 1. Head-only learning (a) vs. end-to-end learning (b) for
temporal action detection. Solid arrows and dashed arrows represent forward pass and the gradient flow of back propagation.

Method

E2E

Flow

FLOPs

Latency

mAP

72s*+2.1s
2472ms
587ms

53.4
52.0
54.2

291ms
63ms

34.39
35.10

THUMOS14
MUSES [25]
AFSD [18]
Ours

✓
✓

✓
✓

17.5T
2780G
475G

ActivityNet
AFSD [18]
Ours

✓
✓

✓

499G
62G

Table 1. Comparison between the baseline detector built in this
work (ours) with state-of-the-art methods. The latency and FLOPs
are measured at the video level. The time of optical flow extraction is not included in latency. *The time cost of I3D [6] feature
extraction. E2E: end-to-end.

in real-world actions, such as security surveillance, sports
analysis, and smart video editing.
Owing to the strong discriminative power of neural networks, deep learning methods have dominated the field
of temporal action detection [20, 48, 49, 53]. As depicted
in Fig. 1, a temporal action detector typically consists of
a video encoder and a detection head, similar to the

20010

