GeoEngine: A Platform for Production-Ready Geospatial Research
Sagar Verma1,2 , Siddharth Gupta2 , Hal Shin2 , Akash Panigrahi2 , Shubham Goswami2 , Shweta Pardeshi2 ,
Natanael Exe2 , Ujwal Dutta2 , Tanka Raj Joshi2 , Nitin Bhojwani2
1

Université Paris-Saclay, CentraleSupélec, Inria, Centre de Vision Numérique
2
Granular AI
{sagar,akash,sid}@granular.ai

Abstract
Geospatial machine learning has seen tremendous academic advancement, but its practical application has been
constrained by difficulties with operationalizing performant
and reliable solutions. Sourcing satellite imagery in realworld settings, handling terabytes of training data, and
managing machine learning artifacts are a few of the challenges that have severely limited downstream innovation.
In this paper we introduce the GeoEngine1 platform for reproducible and production-ready geospatial machine learning research. GeoEngine removes key technical hurdles to
adopting computer vision and deep learning-based geospatial solutions at scale. It is the first end-to-end geospatial
machine learning platform, simplifying access to insights
locked behind petabytes of imagery. Backed by a rigorous research methodology, this geospatial framework empowers researchers with powerful abstractions for image
sourcing, dataset development, model development, large
scale training, and model deployment. In this paper we provide the GeoEngine architecture explaining our design rationale in detail. We provide several real-world use cases of
image sourcing, dataset development, and model building
that have helped different organisations build and deploy
geospatial solutions.

Image Sourcing

Trainable Dataset
7fe5fc5

Annotation

24511e0

e20155f

Model Lifecycle
Management

Model Training
V2 (hash:4cBad3)

V4

V1 (hash:ds3dQ)

V3
WeightsV2

WeightsV1

CodeV1

ParamsV1

DatasetV1

ParamsV2

DatasetV2

CodeV2

V2
V1

Model Auditing
& Benchmarking

Model Serving

Consume

GET /api/segment_house

Passed
Acceptable
95% Confidence

GET /api/classify_property
GET /api/urban_change
GET /api/urban_change

1. Introduction
In order to address many of humanity’s biggest challenges it is imperative that we develop a thorough understanding of our planet and how it is evolving. Satellite and
aerial imagery combined with geospatial machine learning offer an unparalleled source of objective global-scale
data. The past decade has seen a near eight-fold increase
in the number of earth observation satellites deployed to orbit, with similar growth in the availability of commercial
1 https://apps.granular.ai/apps

Figure 1. MLOps pipeline for Geospatial ML.

aerial images obtained via fixed wing planes and balloons.
Moreover, small unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) in both
the retail and commercial markets are generating a plethora
of geospatial data. This recent increase in aerial data (e.g.
multispectral, SAR, LIDAR) as well as non-image geospatial data (e.g. GPS) has radically changed the potential for
downstream applications. As such data becomes cheaper
and more readily available, corporations, governments and

