Ref-NeRF: Structured View-Dependent Appearance for Neural Radiance Fields
Dor Verbin1,2 Peter Hedman2 Ben Mildenhall2
Todd Zickler1 Jonathan T. Barron2 Pratul P. Srinivasan2
1
Harvard University 2 Google Research

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [22] renders compelling
photorealistic images of 3D scenes from novel viewpoints
using a neural volumetric scene representation. Given any
input 3D coordinate in the scene, a “spatial” multilayer perceptron (MLP) outputs the corresponding volume density
at that point, and a “directional” MLP outputs the outgoing radiance at that point along any input viewing direction. Although NeRF’s renderings of view-dependent appearance may appear reasonable at first glance, a close inspection of specular highlights reveals spurious glossy artifacts that fade in and out between rendered views (Figure 1), rather than smoothly moving across surfaces in a
physically-plausible manner.
These artifacts are caused by two fundamental issues
with NeRF (and top-performing extensions such as mipNeRF [2]). First, NeRF’s parameterization of the outgoing
radiance at each point as a function of the viewing direction

Ours

Mip-NeRF [2]

PSNR↑/MAE↓:

35.6dB/11.5◦

30.3dB/59.5◦

Rendering
Rendering
InsetsInsets

Ground Truth

Epipolar
Images
Epipolar
Images

Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) is a popular view synthesis technique that represents a scene as a continuous
volumetric function, parameterized by multilayer perceptrons that provide the volume density and view-dependent
emitted radiance at each location. While NeRF-based techniques excel at representing fine geometric structures with
smoothly varying view-dependent appearance, they often
fail to accurately capture and reproduce the appearance
of glossy surfaces. We address this limitation by introducing Ref-NeRF, which replaces NeRF’s parameterization of
view-dependent outgoing radiance with a representation of
reflected radiance and structures this function using a collection of spatially-varying scene properties. We show that
together with a regularizer on normal vectors, our model
significantly improves the realism and accuracy of specular
reflections. Furthermore, we show that our model’s internal representation of outgoing radiance is interpretable and
useful for scene editing.

Rendering/Normals
Rendering/Normals

Abstract

Figure 1. Ref-NeRF significantly improves normal vectors (top
row) and visual realism (remaining rows) compared to mip-NeRF,
the previous top-performing neural view synthesis model. RefNeRF’s improvements are apparent in rendered frames (Rows 2 &
3), and even more in rendered videos (bottom row epipolar plane
images and supplementary video), where its glossy highlights shift
realistically across views instead of blurring and fading like mipNeRF’s. Image PSNR (higher is better) and surface normal mean
angular error (lower is better) shown as insets.

is poorly-suited for interpolation. Figure 2 illustrates that,
even for a simple toy setup, the scene’s true radiance function varies quickly with view direction, especially around
specular highlights. As a consequence, NeRF is only able
to accurately render the appearance of scene points from

5491

