Safe Self-Refinement for Transformer-based Domain Adaptation
Tao Sun1 , Cheng Lu2 , Tianshuo Zhang2 , Haibin Ling1
1
Stony Brook University, 2 XPeng Motors
{tao,hling}@cs.stonybrook.edu, luc@xiaopeng.com, tonyzhang2035@gmail.com

Abstract
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) aims to leverage a label-rich source domain to solve tasks on a related
unlabeled target domain. It is a challenging problem especially when a large domain gap lies between the source and
target domains. In this paper we propose a novel solution
named SSRT (Safe Self-Refinement for Transformer-based
domain adaptation), which brings improvement from two
aspects. First, encouraged by the success of vision transformers in various vision tasks, we arm SSRT with a transformer backbone. We find that the combination of vision
transformer with simple adversarial adaptation surpasses
best reported Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)-based
results on the challenging DomainNet benchmark, showing its strong transferable feature representation. Second,
to reduce the risk of model collapse and improve the effectiveness of knowledge transfer between domains with large
gaps, we propose a Safe Self-Refinement strategy. Specifically, SSRT utilizes predictions of perturbed target domain
data to refine the model. Since the model capacity of vision transformer is large and predictions in such challenging tasks can be noisy, a safe training mechanism is designed to adaptively adjust learning configuration. Extensive evaluations are conducted on several widely tested
UDA benchmarks and SSRT achieves consistently the best
performances, including 85.43% on Office-Home, 88.76%
on VisDA-2017 and 45.2% on DomainNet.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved impressive performance in a variety of machine learning tasks. However, the success often relies on a large amount of labeled
training data, which can be costly or impractical to obtain. Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) [36] handles this issue by transferring knowledge from a labelrich source domain to a different unlabeled target domain.
Over the past years, many UDA methods have been proposed [4, 12, 14, 24, 44]. Among them, adversarial adaptation [4, 14, 44] that learns domain-invariant feature repre-

sentation using the idea of adversarial learning has been a
prevailing paradigm. Deep UDA methods are usually applied in conjunction with a pretrained Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN, e.g., ResNet [8]) backbone in vision tasks.
On medium-sized classification benchmarks such as OfficeHome [33] and VisDA [20], the reported state-of-the-arts
are very impressive [12]. However, on large-scale datasets
like DomainNet [19], the most recent results in the literature by our submission report a best average accuracy of
33.3% [10], which is far from satisfactory.
With the above observations, we focus our investigation
on challenging cases from two aspects:
• First, from the representation aspect, it is desirable to use
a more powerful backbone network. This directs our attention to the recently popularized vision transformers,
which have been successfully applied to various vision
tasks [2, 3, 42]. Vision transformer processes an image
as a sequence of tokens, and uses global self-attention to
refine this representation. With its long-range dependencies and large-scale pre-training, vision transformer obtains strong feature representation that is ready for downstream tasks. Despite this, its application in UDA is still
under-explored. Hence we propose to integrate vision
transformer to UDA. We find that by simply combining
ViT-B/16 [3] with adversarial adaptation, it can achieve
38.5% average accuracy on DomainNet, better than the
current arts using ResNet-101 [8,10]. This shows that the
feature representation of vision transformer is discriminative as well as transferable across domains.
• Second, from the domain adaptation aspect, a more reliable strategy is needed to protect the learning process
from collapse due to large domain gaps. As strong backbones with large capacity like vision transformer increase
the chance of overfitting to source domain data, a regularization from target domain data is desired. A common
practice in UDA is to utilize model predictions for selftraining or enforce clustering structure on target domain
data [12, 24, 43]. While this helps generally, the supervisions can be noisy when the domain gap is large. Therefore, an adaptation method is expected to be Safe [11]
enough to avoid model collapse.

7191

