Integrative Few-Shot Learning for Classification and Segmentation
Dahyun Kang

Minsu Cho

Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), South Korea
http://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/iFSL

Abstract

Few-shot learning [15,16,30,82,84] is the learning problem where a learner experiences only a limited number
of examples as supervision. In computer vision, it has
been most actively studied for the tasks of image classification [22, 29, 66] and semantic segmentation [6, 41, 48, 59]
among many others [21, 49, 54, 94, 99]. Few-shot classification (FS-C) aims to classify a query image into target classes
when a few support examples are given for each target class.
Few-shot segmentation (FS-S) is to segment out the target
class regions on the query image in a similar setup. While
being closely related to each other [33, 92, 100], these two
few-shot learning problems have so far been treated individually. Furthermore, the conventional setups for the fewshot problems, FS-C and FS-S, are limited and do not reflect realistic scenarios; FS-C [28, 55, 76] presumes that the
query always contains one of the target classes in classification, while FS-S [25,52,63] allows the presence of multiple

2

3

query

1

2

3

✓

✘

✓

infer

1. Introduction

query classification
1

iFSL learner

We introduce the integrative task of few-shot classification and segmentation (FS-CS) that aims to both classify
and segment target objects in a query image when the target classes are given with a few examples. This task combines two conventional few-shot learning problems, fewshot classification and segmentation. FS-CS generalizes
them to more realistic episodes with arbitrary image pairs,
where each target class may or may not be present in the
query. To address the task, we propose the integrative fewshot learning (iFSL) framework for FS-CS, which trains a
learner to construct class-wise foreground maps for multilabel classification and pixel-wise segmentation. We also
develop an effective iFSL model, attentive squeeze network (ASNet), that leverages deep semantic correlation and
global self-attention to produce reliable foreground maps.
In experiments, the proposed method shows promising performance on the FS-CS task and also achieves the state of
the art on standard few-shot segmentation benchmarks.

3-way 1-shot support set

1
3

class-wise foreground maps

query segmentation

support (airplane)

query (bird)

query (bird)

support image
and its mask

false-positive mask
prediction of ASNetFS-S

true-negative mask
prediction of ASNetFS-CS

Figure 1. Top: Integrative few-shot learning framework (iFSL)
for integrative few-shot classification and segmentation (FS-CS).
Bottom: FS-S learners are trained to segment a query image using
a semantically-coupled support set thus often blindly highlight any
salient objects regardless of support semantics. The proposed FSCS learners are trained to predict class presence as well as corresponding masks thus correctly discriminate what to segment based
on the semantic relevance between the query and the support.

classes but does not handle the absence of the target classes
in segmentation. These respective limitations prevent fewshot learning from generalizing to and evaluating on more
realistic cases in the wild. For example, when a query image
without any target class is given as in Fig. 1, FS-S learners
typically segment out arbitrary salient objects in the query.
To address the aforementioned issues, we introduce the
integrative task of few-shot classification and segmentation
(FS-CS) that combines the two few-shot learning problems
into a multi-label and background-aware prediction problem. Given a query image and a few-shot support set for
target classes, FS-CS aims to identify the presence of each
target class and predict its foreground mask from the query.
Unlike FS-C and FS-S, it does not presume either the class
exclusiveness in classification or the presence of all the tar-

9979

