LISA: Learning Implicit Shape and Appearance of Hands
Enric Corona1† Tomas Hodan2 Minh Vo2 Francesc Moreno-Noguer1
Chris Sweeney2 Richard Newcombe2 Lingni Ma2
1

Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial, CSIC-UPC, Barcelona, Spain

2

Reality Labs, Meta

Figure 1. The LISA hand model is defined by an articulated implicit representation learned from multi-view RGB videos annotated with
coarse 3D hand poses (left). The shape, color and pose parameters are disentangled in the model by design, enabling fine control of selected
aspects of the model. In this figure, we animate the pose of a learned LISA model, while keeping the shape and color parameters fixed. The
three rows show the shape shaded by surface normal, the appearance, and the color-coded skinning weights, respectively. The skinning
weights are explicitly predicted and used to combine the per-bone predictions of the Signed Distance Field (SDF) and the surface color.

1. Introduction
Abstract
This paper proposes a do-it-all neural model of human
hands, named LISA. The model can capture accurate hand
shape and appearance, generalize to arbitrary hand subjects, provide dense surface correspondences, be reconstructed from images in the wild, and can be easily animated. We train LISA by minimizing the shape and appearance losses on a large set of multi-view RGB image sequences annotated with coarse 3D poses of the hand skeleton. For a 3D point in the local hand coordinates, our model
predicts the color and the signed distance with respect to
each hand bone independently, and then combines the perbone predictions using the predicted skinning weights. The
shape, color, and pose representations are disentangled by
design, enabling fine control of the selected hand parameters. We experimentally demonstrate that LISA can accurately reconstruct a dynamic hand from monocular or
multi-view sequences, achieving a noticeably higher quality of reconstructed hand shapes compared to baseline approaches. Project page: https:// www.iri.upc.edu/ people/
ecorona/ lisa/ .

† Work performed during internship with Reality Labs, Meta.

Since the thumb opposition enabled grasping around 2
million years ago [25], humans interact with the physical
world mainly with hands. The problems of modeling and
tracking human hands have therefore naturally received a
considerable attention in computer vision [43]. Accurate
and robust solutions to these problems would unlock a wide
range of applications in, e.g., human-robot interaction, prosthetic design, or virtual and augmented reality.
Most research efforts related to modeling and tracking
human hands, e.g., [8, 20, 21, 29, 38, 70], rely on the MANO
hand model [53], which is defined by a polygon mesh that
can be controlled by a set of shape and pose parameters.
Despite being widely used, the MANO model has a low resolution and does not come with texture coordinates, which
makes representing the surface color difficult.
The related field of modeling and tracking human bodies has been relying on parametric meshes as well, with the
most popular model being SMPL [31] which suffers from
similar limitations as the MANO model. Recent approaches
for modeling human bodies, e.g., [1, 4, 10, 15, 34, 54, 61],
rely on articulated models based on implicit representations, such as Neural Radiance Field [35] or Signed Distance Field (SDF) [46]. Such representations are capable of
representing both shape and appearance and able to capture

20533

