3D Moments from Near-Duplicate Photos
Qianqian Wang1,2 Zhengqi Li1 David Salesin1 Noah Snavely1,2 Brian Curless1,3 Janne Kontkanen1
1

Google Research

2

Cornell Tech, Cornell University

Near-duplicate photos

3

University of Washington

Space-time videos

Figure 1. People often take many near-duplicate photos in an attempt to capture the perfect expression. Given a pair of these photos,
taken from nearby viewpoints (left), our proposed approach brings these photos to life as 3D Moments, producing space-time videos with
cinematic camera motions and interpolated scene motion (right). Please refer to the supplementary material to see the videos.

Abstract
We introduce 3D Moments, a new computational photography effect. As input we take a pair of near-duplicate photos,
i.e., photos of moving subjects from similar viewpoints, common in people’s photo collections. As output, we produce
a video that smoothly interpolates the scene motion from
the first photo to the second, while also producing camera
motion with parallax that gives a heightened sense of 3D.
To achieve this effect, we represent the scene as a pair of
feature-based layered depth images augmented with scene
flow. This representation enables motion interpolation along
with independent control of the camera viewpoint. Our system produces photorealistic space-time videos with motion
parallax and scene dynamics, while plausibly recovering
regions occluded in the original views. We conduct extensive experiments demonstrating superior performance over
baselines on public datasets and in-the-wild photos. Project
page: https://3d-moments.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Digital photography enables us to take scores of photos in
order to capture just the right moment. In fact, we often end
up with many near-duplicate photos in our image collections

as we try to capture the best facial expression of a family
member, or the most memorable part of an action. These
near-duplicate photos end up just lying around in digital
storage, unviewed.
In this paper, we aim to utilize such near-duplicate photos
to create a compelling new kind of 3D photo enlivened with
animation. We call this new effect 3D Moments: given a
pair of near-duplicate photos depicting a dynamic scene
from nearby (perhaps indistinguishable) viewpoints, such
as the images in Fig. 1 (left), our goal is to simultaneously
enable cinematic camera motion with 3D parallax (including
novel, extrapolated viewpoints) while faithfully interpolating
scene motion to synthesize short space-time videos like the
one shown in Fig. 1 (right). 3D Moments combine both
camera and scene motion in a compelling way, but involve
very challenging vision problems: we must jointly infer 3D
geometry, scene dynamics, and content that becomes newly
disoccluded during the animation.
Despite great progress towards each of these individual problems, tackling all of them jointly is non-trivial,
especially with image pairs with unknown camera poses
as input. NeRF-based view synthesis methods for dynamic
scenes [15, 27, 28, 49] require many images with known camera poses. Single-photo view synthesis methods (sometimes
called 3D Photos or 3D Ken Burns [11, 25, 38]) can create

3906

