Consistency Learning via Decoding Path Augmentation
for Transformers in Human Object Interaction Detection
Jihwan Park1,2
1

SeungJun Lee1

Hwan Heo1

Hyeong Kyu Choi1

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University

Hyunwoo J. Kim1, *
2

Kakao Brain

{jseven7071, lapal0413, gjghks950, imhgchoi, hyunwoojkim}@korea.ac.kr
{jwan.park}@kakaobrain.com

Abstract
Human-Object Interaction detection is a holistic visual
recognition task that entails object detection as well as interaction classification. Previous works of HOI detection
has been addressed by the various compositions of subset predictions, e.g., Image → HO → I, Image → HI →
O. Recently, transformer based architecture for HOI has
emerged, which directly predicts the HOI triplets in an endto-end fashion (Image → HOI). Motivated by various inference paths for HOI detection, we propose cross-path
consistency learning (CPC), which is a novel end-to-end
learning strategy to improve HOI detection for transformers by leveraging augmented decoding paths. CPC learning
enforces all the possible predictions from permuted inference sequences to be consistent. This simple scheme makes
the model learn consistent representations, thereby improving generalization without increasing model capacity. Our
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method,
and we achieved significant improvement on V-COCO and
HICO-DET compared to the baseline models. Our code is
available at https://github.com/mlvlab/CPChoi.

1. Introduction
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection is a holistic
visual recognition task that includes detecting individual
objects as <human, object>, while properly classifying the type of <interaction>. Previous HOI detectors [15, 31, 49, 52] were mainly built on object detection
models. They commonly extend CNN-based object detectors [34, 42, 45] with an additional head for interaction classification, e.g., humans and objects are detected first, and
their interaction is associated subsequently.
To alleviate the high computation cost of such twostage HOI detection methods, one-stage models [22, 33, 52]
have been proposed for faster detection. These models perform interaction prediction and object detection in
* corresponding author.

(a) cycle consistency

(b) cross-task consistency (c) cross-path consistency

Figure 1. Comparison on the variants of consistencies. The
black line refers to the main task function fX Y , and the red, blue
lines refer to the pair of tasks trained to be consistent with each
other. (a) Cycle consistency enforces the composite function of
fYX ◦ fX Y to be consistent with identity function fX X . (b)
Cross-task consistency requires an auxiliary pretrained network
fYYa , represented in dashed lines, to give consistent outputs across
tasks. (c) Cross-path consistency does not require task-specific
pretrained networks. The output of main task function fX Y should
be consistent with the composition of the outputs from sub-task
functions fX Ys and fYs Y ◦ fX Ys .

parallel. They compensate for their lower performance
with auxiliary predictions for the HOI subsets, i.e., auxiliary predictions for subset <human, interaction>
or <object, interaction> may help HOI prediction through post-processing. However, these works demand different network architectures for each auxiliary prediction, due to strict disciplines for each network’s input.
Hence, to introduce flexibility, transformer-based architectures [6, 23, 46, 48] have recently been adopted for HOI detection. They reformulate the HOI detection problem as a
direct set prediction building on DETR [4].
Motivated by various inference paths in HOI detectors,
we propose a simple yet effective method to train HOI transformers. We augment the decoding paths with respect to
the possible prediction sequences of HOI triplets. Then,
with the cascade structure of transformers, an input query
is sequentially decoded into auxiliary sub-task outputs and
the final output. The stage of each augmented paths stage
shares a decoder, in a multi-task learning fashion. We further improve our method to leverage the augmented decod-

1019

