Spatio-temporal Relation Modeling for Few-shot Action Recognition
Anirudh Thatipelli1 Sanath Narayan2 Salman Khan1,4
Rao Muhammad Anwer1,3 Fahad Shahbaz Khan1,5 Bernard Ghanem6
1

Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
4

Australian National University

5

2

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence

CVL, Linköping University

Abstract
We propose a novel few-shot action recognition framework, STRM, which enhances class-specific feature discriminability while simultaneously learning higher-order temporal representations. The focus of our approach is a novel
spatio-temporal enrichment module that aggregates spatial
and temporal contexts with dedicated local patch-level and
global frame-level feature enrichment sub-modules. Local patch-level enrichment captures the appearance-based
characteristics of actions. On the other hand, global framelevel enrichment explicitly encodes the broad temporal context, thereby capturing the relevant object features over
time. The resulting spatio-temporally enriched representations are then utilized to learn the relational matching between query and support action sub-sequences. We further
introduce a query-class similarity classifier on the patchlevel enriched features to enhance class-specific feature discriminability by reinforcing the feature learning at different
stages in the proposed framework. Experiments are performed on four few-shot action recognition benchmarks:
Kinetics, SSv2, HMDB51 and UCF101. Our extensive ablation study reveals the benefits of the proposed contributions.
Furthermore, our approach sets a new state-of-the-art on
all four benchmarks. On the challenging SSv2 benchmark,
our approach achieves an absolute gain of 3.5% in classification accuracy, as compared to the best existing method
in the literature. Our code and models are available at
https://github.com/Anirudh257/strm.

1. Introduction
Few-shot (FS) action recognition is a challenging computer vision problem, where the task is to classify an unlabelled query video into one of the action categories in the
support set having limited samples per action class. The
problem setting is particularly relevant for fine-grained action recognition [11], since it is challenging to collect sufficient labelled examples [4, 5]. Most existing FS action
recognition methods typically search for either a single sup-

6

3

Aalto University

King Abdullah University of Science & Technology

port video [31] or an average representation of a support
class [2, 3]. However, these approaches utilize only framelevel representations and do not explicitly exploit video subsequences for temporal relationship modeling.
In the context of FS action recognition, modeling temporal relationships between a query video and limited support actions is a major challenge, since actions are typically
performed at various speeds and occur at different time instants (temporal offsets). Further, video representations are
desired to encode the relevant information from multiple
sub-actions that constitute an action for enhanced matching
between query and support videos. Moreover, an effective
representation of spatial and temporal contexts of actions
is crucial to distinguish fine-grained classes requiring temporal relational reasoning, where actions can be performed
with different objects in various backgrounds, e.g., spilling
something behind something.
The aforementioned problem of temporal relationship
modeling is recently explored by Temporal-Relational
CrossTransformers (TRX) [19], which compares the subsequences of query and support videos in a part-based manner to tackle the issue of varying speed and offsets of actions. Additionally, TRX models complex higher-order
temporal relations by representing sub-sequences as tuples
with different cardinalities. However, TRX struggles in the
case of actions performed with different objects and background (see Fig. 1). This is likely due to not explicitly utilizing the available rich spatio-temporal contextual information during temporal relationship modeling. Furthermore,
the tuple representations in TRX are fixed requiring a separate CrossTransformer [7] branch per cardinality, which affects the model flexibility. Here, we set out to collectively
address the above issues while modeling temporal relationships between query and limited support actions.
In this work, we argue that both local patch features in
a frame and global frame features in a video are desirable
cues to effectively enrich the encoding of spatial as well as
temporal contextual information. Such feature enrichment
improves class-specific discriminability, enabling focus on
relevant objects and their corresponding motion in a video.

19958

