Shadows can be Dangerous: Stealthy and Effective Physical-world Adversarial
Attack by Natural Phenomenon

1

Yiqi Zhong1 , Xianming Liu1,2 *, Deming Zhai1 , Junjun Jiang1,2 , Xiangyang Ji3
Harbin Institute of Technology, 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, 3 Tsinghua University

21s003117@stu.hit.edu.cn, {csxm, zhaideming, jiangjunjun}@hit.edu.cn, xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Estimating the risk level of adversarial examples is essential for safely deploying machine learning models in the
real world. One popular approach for physical-world attacks is to adopt the “sticker-pasting” strategy, which however suffers from some limitations, including difficulties in
access to the target or printing by valid colors. A new type
of non-invasive attacks emerged recently, which attempt to
cast perturbation onto the target by optics based tools, such
as laser beam and projector. However, the added optical
patterns are artificial but not natural. Thus, they are still
conspicuous and attention-grabbed, and can be easily noticed by humans. In this paper, we study a new type of optical adversarial examples, in which the perturbations are
generated by a very common natural phenomenon, shadow,
to achieve naturalistic and stealthy physical-world adversarial attack under the black-box setting. We extensively
evaluate the effectiveness of this new attack on both simulated and real-world environments. Experimental results on
traffic sign recognition demonstrate that our algorithm can
generate adversarial examples effectively, reaching 98.23%
and 90.47% success rates on LISA and GTSRB test sets respectively, while continuously misleading a moving camera
over 95% of the time in real-world scenarios. We also offer
discussions about the limitations and the defense mechanism of this attack1 .

1. Introduction
In the past few years, we have witnessed the great success of deep neural networks (DNNs) in a variety of computer vision tasks, such as image classification, object detection, scene segmentation and so on. However, recent
studies have revealed that DNNs based models are vulnerable to adversarial examples, even though the added magnitude of perturbations is small. In safety sensitive scenar* Corresponding author
1 Our code is available at https://github.com/hncszyq/

ShadowAttack.

ios, such as autonomous driving [18] and medical diagnosis [19], adversarial inputs would enforce a machine learning system to produce erroneous decision, leading to unexpected situations that may be potentially dangerous.
Estimating when a machine learning model fails to work
is of great concern to trustworthy AI. Accordingly, it is important to understand the level of risk of various adversarial
examples to the machine learning models. There are numerous attack strategies investigated in the literature, which
can be in the digital domain, where digital images corresponding to a scene are modified; or in the physical domain, where perturbations are physically added to the objects themselves [10].
The adversarial attacks in the physical domain receive
more attention recently, since they are more practical and
challenging. One popular approach for physical-world attacks is to adopt the “sticker-pasting” strategy [10], where
the adversarial perturbation is printed as a sticker and then
attached onto the target object, e.g., a road sign. However, this approach would suffer from a few troubles: 1)
In some cases, it may be impossible to access the target
object; 2) The printing of perturbations is imperfect, i.e.,
some values cannot be reproduced by valid colors in the
real world. Some strategies emerged very recently to remedy these limitations, which explored a new type of adversarial attack—the threats of light—to achieve non-invasive
attack [9, 12, 22, 28]. For instance, Duan et al. [9] propose
to utilize the laser beam as adversarial perturbation directly
rather than crafting adversarial perturbation from scratch,
which has been demonstrated to be an effective physicalworld attack to DNNs. Gnanasambandam et al. [12] propose to project calculated patterns to alter the appearance of
the target objects based on a low-cost projector-camera system. Experimental results shown in [9, 12] demonstrate the
effectiveness of light attacks in both digital- and physicalsettings.
A basic principle in adversarial attack is that the carefully perturbed inputs should cause the network to generate
wrong decision while without introducing a visible change
to humans. However, the added optical patterns in existing

15345

