Non-generative Generalized Zero-shot Learning via Task-correlated
Disentanglement and Controllable Samples Synthesis
Yaogong Feng, Xiaowen Huang*, Pengbo Yang, Jian Yu, Jitao Sang
School of Computer and Information Technology
& Beijing Key Lab of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing Jiaotong University, China
{fengyg18, pengboyang, xwhuang, jianyu, jtsang}@bjtu.edu.cn

Overall Representation

Abstract
Synthesizing pseudo samples is currently the most effective way to solve the Generalized Zero Shot Learning
(GZSL) problem. Most models achieve competitive performance but still suffer from two problems: (1) Feature
confounding, the overall representations confound taskcorrelated and task-independent features, and existing models disentangle them in a generative way, but they are unreasonable to synthesize reliable pseudo samples with limited
samples; (2) Distribution uncertainty, that massive data is
needed when existing models synthesize samples from the
uncertain distribution, which causes poor performance in
limited samples of seen classes. In this paper, we propose
a non-generative model to address these problems correspondingly in two modules: (1) Task-correlated feature disentanglement, to exclude the task-correlated features from
task-independent ones by adversarial learning of domain
adaption towards reasonable synthesis; (2) Controllable
pseudo sample synthesis, to synthesize edge-pseudo and
center-pseudo samples with certain characteristics towards
more diversity generated and intuitive transfer. In addation, to describe the new scene that is the limit seen class
samples in the training process, we further formulate a new
ZSL task named the ‘Few-shot Seen class and Zero-shot Unseen class learning’ (FSZU). Extensive experiments on four
benchmarks verify that the proposed method is competitive
in the GZSL and the FSZU tasks.

1. Introduction
The explosion of data and the rapid development of deep
learning need massive precise but expensive labels. In the
real world, these labels are usually sparse/missing, Zero
Shot Learning (ZSL) techniques offer a good solution to address such problem, which trains on seen classes and tests
on unseen classes (the seen classes and unseen classes are
* Corresponding author.

Horse
(source class)

Class Semantics
longleg
longneck
...

Task-correlated Feature

Disentanglement

Unreasonable
Transfer

Transfer
(+offset)

Zebra
(target class)

Figure 1. An illustration of core idea of our method. Different
classes share class semantics. The images in the right half are
the task-correlated features of the left half. They are excluded
from task-independent features and are more consistent with class
semantics, which is reasonable for the knowledge transfer in the
GZSL task.

independent). In this paper, we focus on the Generalized
ZSL (GZSL) task. It is a realistic setting of ZSL in making predictions on recognizing samples from both classes
simultaneously rather than classifying only samples of the
unseen classes.
At present, the method of synthesizing pseudo samples
for unseen classes has proven to be one of the most effective ways of knowledge transfer to solve the GZSL problem. But there are still two challenging problems: (1) Feature Confounding. Most GZSL models are based on overall representations of samples extracted in pre-trained CNN
(e.g., ResNet101 [13]) while the semantic features are classlevel attributes or class-level sentence embeddings [21, 40].
The former contains more rich information and inconsistent
with human cognition. So it is unreasonable to construct a
mapping from visual features to semantic features directly
and synthesize reliable pseudo samples based on the confounding visual features. Although some models [7, 23]
contribute to extracting more human-consistent-cognition
features, they are related to generative models and hard to

9346

