NeurMiPs: Neural Mixture of Planar Experts for View Synthesis
Zhi-Hao Lin1,2 Wei-Chiu Ma3 Hao-Yu Hsu2 Yu-Chiang Frank Wang2 Shenlong Wang1
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 2 National Taiwan University
3
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Figure 1. Comparison between different 3D representations for neural rendering. Neural implicit surface models accurate surface
geometry but rendering requires expensive sequential sampling. Multi-planar imagery is efficient, but does not reflect true geometry and is
not suitable for extrapolation. While NeRF is flexible, it is not sample-efficient and its learned density field might not reflect true scene
geometry. Our proposed Mixture of Planar Experts is efficient and is able to model complicated surface geometry and appearance.

Abstract
We present Neural Mixtures of Planar Experts (NeurMiPs), a novel planar-based scene representation for modeling geometry and appearance. NeurMiPs leverages a
collection of local planar experts in 3D space as the scene
representation. Each planar expert consists of the parameters of the local rectangular shape representing geometry
and a neural radiance field modeling the color and opacity.
We render novel views by calculating ray-plane intersections
and composite output colors and densities at intersected
points to the image. NeurMiPs blends the efficiency of explicit mesh rendering and flexibility of the neural radiance
field. Experiments demonstrate superior performance and
speed of our proposed method, compared to other 3D representations in novel view synthesis.

1. Introduction
Metaverse is coming. Imagine one day in the future. People can explore the world freely and immersively without
leaving their room. When they move forward, details pop up;
when they move sideways, the occluded regions re-appear.
Whenever people take action, the metaverse will respond
with corresponding visual scenes that look natural, just as
if people are visiting the place in person. While appealing, bringing this vision to reality requires advancement in
multiple domains, one of which is real-time, high-quality,
memory-efficient novel view synthesis. Specifically, given

a set of posed images of the world, an ideal NVS system
has to be able to photo-realistically re-render the scene from
novel viewpoints such that people cannot tell the difference.
The system also needs to be fast and lightweight such that it
can be deployed ubiquitously.
Towards this grand goal, researchers have developed a
plethora of methods to reproduce our visual world. One
promising direction is to explicitly model the geometry of
the scene (e.g. multi-planar imagery [12, 13, 73, 85], point
clouds [1, 39, 53], meshes [31, 51, 52]) and conduct imagebased rendering (IBR) [3, 9, 10, 31, 63]. By adapting visual
features from other existing views, these approaches can
render high-quality images efficiently. Unfortunately, they
are often memory intensive and require good proxy geometry. On the other hand, recent advances in neural radiance
fields [44, 50, 78, 79, 82, 84] have allowed us to synthesize
highly realistic images with low memory footprint. By encoding color and density functions as neural networks, they
can handle complicated geometry and scene effects that are
difficult for conventional methods, e.g., thin structures, specular reflections, and semi-transparent objects. The flexibility
of volume rendering, however, is a double-bladed sword.
Without proper surface modeling, they cannot capture the
scene geometry accurately, resulting in artifacts during viewextrapolation setup.
With these motivations in mind, we aim to find an alternative 3D scene representation that is compact, efficient,
expressive, and generalizable. Specifically, we investigate
planes, one of the simplest geometric primitives yet powerful for representing complicated scenes. Most surfaces

15702

