Stochastic Backpropagation:
A Memory Efficient Strategy for Training Video Models
Feng Cheng1 * Mingze Xu2† Yuanjun Xiong2
1
UNC Chapel Hill

Hao Chen2 Xinyu Li2
2
AWS AI Labs

Wei Li2

Wei Xia2

fengchan@cs.unc.edu, {xumingze,yuanjx,hxen,xxnl,wayl,wxia}@amazon.com

Abstract
Layer 12

We propose a memory efficient method, named Stochastic Backpropagation (SBP), for training deep neural networks on videos. It is based on the finding that gradients from incomplete execution for backpropagation can
still effectively train the models with minimal accuracy loss,
which attributes to the high redundancy of video. SBP keeps
all forward paths but randomly and independently removes
the backward paths for each network layer in each training step. It reduces the GPU memory cost by eliminating the need to cache activation values corresponding to
the dropped backward paths, whose amount can be controlled by an adjustable keep-ratio. Experiments show that
SBP can be applied to a wide range of models for video
tasks, leading to up to 80.0% GPU memory saving and 10%
training speedup with less than 1% accuracy drop on action
recognition and temporal action detection.

1. Introduction
One of the common challenge in training video understanding models is the limited availability of GPU memory.
Although video models, such as those for action recognition [3, 42, 45, 49] and temporal action detection [6, 13], are
known to benefit from capturing context features over the
entire span of a video [49, 50], it is not always feasible to
end-to-end train them while taking as many input frames
(e.g., typically hundreds) as they need. For example, when
training a temporal action detector using ResNet-50 [21] as
feature extractor, 128 frames as inputs, and batch size 4, the
feature extractor itself costs over 40 GB memory that could
exceed the limit of most modern GPUs.
On the other hand, video data is highly redundant, which
suggests opportunity for optimization. We observe that in
video models, the activation maps and gradients of different
frames are similar at the bottom layers but become more and
* The work was done during an Amazon internship.
† Corresponding Author.

Layer 7

Layer 4

Layer 1

(a) activation maps

(b) gradients of activation maps

Video Swin-T
Input

Figure 1. The activations and gradients are obtained from different
layers (e.g., layer 1, 4, 7, and 12) of Video Swin-T [33]. The
activations and gradients between frames are similar at the bottom
layers and are quite different at the top layers, which matches our
assumption that there is much redundancy between the frames at
the bottom layers but less at the top layers.

more different at the top layers. An example of Video SwinT [33] on Kinetics-400 [7] dataset is shown in Fig. 1. During model training, the tiny difference in the seemly similar
features (i.e., fine-grained information) of the bottom layers is crucial for producing the difference in the top layers,
however, they may not make much difference in terms of
updating the parameters of these bottom layers. Thus, we
hypothesize that complete computation is necessary for the
activation maps (forward paths) to extract important semantic information but could be unnecessary for the gradients
(backward paths).
In this paper, we propose a memory saving technique,
named Stochastic Backpropagation (SBP). Different from
previous work that jointly removes the forward and backward paths [1], SBP randomly drops a proportion of the in-

8301

