Style Neophile: Constantly Seeking Novel Styles for Domain Generalization
Juwon Kang1
Sohyun Lee2
Dept. of CSE, POSTECH1 ,

Namyup Kim1
Suha Kwak1,2
Graduate School of AI, POSTECH2

{gjw0917, lshig96, namyup, suha.kwak}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
This paper studies domain generalization via domaininvariant representation learning. Existing methods in
this direction suppose that a domain can be characterized
by styles of its images, and train a network using styleaugmented data so that the network is not biased to particular style distributions. However, these methods are restricted to a finite set of styles since they obtain styles for
augmentation from a fixed set of external images or by interpolating those of training data. To address this limitation
and maximize the benefit of style augmentation, we propose
a new method that synthesizes novel styles constantly during training. Our method manages multiple queues to store
styles that have been observed so far, and synthesizes novel
styles whose distribution is distinct from the distribution of
styles in the queues. The style synthesis process is formulated as a monotone submodular optimization, thus can be
conducted efficiently by a greedy algorithm. Extensive experiments on four public benchmarks demonstrate that the
proposed method is capable of achieving state-of-the-art
domain generalization performance.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have driven remarkable advances in visual recognition for the last decade.
However, their performance is often degraded when training and test data are drawn from different distributions [8,
21, 46]. As such a distribution shift appears frequently and
significantly in the wild, it has been a major obstacle to applying CNNs to real-world applications. The most common
solution to this issue is domain adaptation [8, 30, 41, 42],
which aims at adapting a model trained on source domains
to a known target domain. However, domain adaptation
models in general do not well generalize to unseen domains
since they assume a single target domain.
Domain generalization (DG) [1, 2, 7, 22, 32] has been
studied to resolve this limitation of domain adaptation.
The goal of DG is to improve the generalization capability of a model on arbitrary domains unseen at training

Source Style
Novel Style
Injection
Novel Style
Queue

Style
Space
: Source Style 1
: Source Style 2
: Source Style 3
: Novel Style
: Previous Novel Style

Figure 1. The motivation of our method. We improve the generalization ability of a model by adaptively synthesizing diverse,
plausible, and novel styles that are distinct from both source domain styles and previously synthesized novel styles, then injecting
them into intermediate features of the model during training for
learning style-invariant representation.

time. DG has been achieved by learning domain-invariant
features [14, 24, 26, 39, 48] that capture semantics relevant
to the target task while not being biased towards domainspecific characteristics. In this context, styles of images
have been used to characterize their domains [27, 58]; it has
been demonstrated that reducing model bias towards styles
could improve the generalization ability [5,33]. As a simple
yet effective realization of this idea, style augmentation has
been investigated recently [16, 17, 51, 58]. It allows a model
to be unbiased to particular style distributions by augmenting training images with varying styles. Although they have
been proven to be effective for domain generalization, however, there is still room for further improvement in terms of
the style diversity; existing style augmentation methods obtain styles for augmentation from a restricted set of external
images [17, 51] or by interpolating styles of source domain
images [58], both of which lead to a limited range of styles.
In this paper, we present a novel framework to further
enlarge the benefit of style augmentation. The key idea is to
constantly generate novel and plausible styles and augment
training images with the synthetic styles. Specifically, to

7130

