Object-Relation Reasoning Graph for Action Recognition
Yangjun Ou, Li Mi, Zhenzhong Chen∗
School of Remote Sensing and Information Engineering, Wuhan University, China
{ouyangjun,milirs,zzchen}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Action recognition is a challenging task since the attributes of objects as well as their relationships change constantly in the video. Existing methods mainly use objectlevel graphs or scene graphs to represent the dynamics
of objects and relationships, but ignore modeling the finegrained relationship transitions directly. In this paper, we
propose an Object-Relation Reasoning Graph (OR2 G) for
reasoning about action in videos. By combining an objectlevel graph (OG) and a relation-level graph (RG), the proposed OR2 G catches the attribute transitions of objects and
reasons about the relationship transitions between objects
simultaneously. In addition, a graph aggregating module
(GAM) is investigated by applying the multi-head edge-tonode message passing operation. GAM feeds back the information from the relation node to the object node and enhances the coupling between the object-level graph and the
relation-level graph. Experiments in video action recognition demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach when
compared with the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Action recognition is one of the fundamental tasks in the
field of video understanding [8], and it remains an active
topic in the vision research community. The goal of action
recognition is to identify activities in the video according to
object states. As it is difficult to capture object transitions
by a global representation of the video [2, 25], object-based
action recognition has attracted increasing attention.
Object-based methods [30] mainly represent the objects
as the nodes of a graph and obtain the action category
through graph reasoning at the object-level. However, these
methods often fail to explicitly model the interaction between objects. To consider object interactions in action
recognition, current efforts [14] decompose the objects and
relationships in a video according to the event segmentation theory [18], where events can be divided into consistent
∗ Corresponding author: Zhenzhong Chen.

Figure 1. Illustration of fine-grained relationship transition in the
videos. Two examples of different action labels with same subjectobject pairs but different relationship transitions are presented.

groups or represented as hierarchical structures. However,
these methods represent the dynamics of objects and relationships by aggregating them from the scene graph, and
ignore modeling and reasoning about fine-grained relationship transitions.
Fine-grained relationship transition plays an important
role in distinguishing action categories, especially actions
with similar characteristics. Figure 1 shows two examples
of similar video content. In both cases, the subject is a
person and the objects are a chair and a pillow. However,
there are some slight differences in the relationship transitions between the subject and objects, resulting in different
actions. For the visual relationship between the <personchair> pair, when the transition is ‘sitting on’ → ‘not contacting’, it represents the action of ‘Someone is standing
up from somewhere’. However, when the transition is ‘not
contacting’ → ‘sitting on’, it represents another action of
‘Someone is going from standing to sitting’. For the visual
relationship between the <person-pillow> pair, when the
transition is ‘holding’ → ‘leaning on’, it represents the action of ‘Taking a pillow from somewhere’ and ‘Putting a
pillow somewhere’. However, in the transition of ‘holding’

20133

