Enhancing Adversarial Training with Second-Order Statistics of Weights
Gaojie Jin1 , Xinping Yi2 , Wei Huang1 , Sven Schewe1 , Xiaowei Huang * 1
1

2

Department of Computer Science, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK
Department of Electrical Engineering and Electronics, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK
{g.jin3, xinping.yi, w.huang23, svens, xiaowei.huang}@liverpool.ac.uk

Abstract
Adversarial training has been shown to be one of the
most effective approaches to improve the robustness of deep
neural networks. It is formalized as a min-max optimization over model weights and adversarial perturbations,
where the weights can be optimized through gradient descent methods like SGD. In this paper, we show that treating model weights as random variables allows for enhancing adversarial training through Second-Order Statistics
Optimization (S2 O) with respect to the weights. By relaxing a common (but unrealistic) assumption of previous
PAC-Bayesian frameworks that all weights are statistically
independent, we derive an improved PAC-Bayesian adversarial generalization bound, which suggests that optimizing
second-order statistics of weights can effectively tighten the
bound. In addition to this theoretical insight, we conduct an
extensive set of experiments, which show that S2 O not only
improves the robustness and generalization of the trained
neural networks when used in isolation, but also integrates
easily in state-of-the-art adversarial training techniques
like TRADES, AWP, MART, and AVMixup, leading to a measurable improvement of these techniques. The code is available at https://github.com/Alexkael/S2O.

1. Introduction
It is well known that it is simple to fool convolutional
neural networks – to whom we refer as neural networks in
this paper – to make incorrect predictions with high confidence by adding human-imperceptible perturbations to their
input [27, 50, 72, 80]. Among many different approaches
[4, 44, 57, 75, 82] to detect or reduce such adversarial examples, adversarial training [45, 57] is known to be the most
effective [3].
Adversarial training is formulated as a min-max optimization problem, where the inner maximization is to find
* Corresponding author

the worst-case adversarial perturbations for the training instances, while the outer minimization is to reduce the loss
induced by these adversarial perturbations. While finding
the optimal solution to this min-max optimization is challenging, the current wisdom is to first decompose the minmax problem into a master minimization problem and a
slave maximization problem, and to then solve them via
alternating optimization. Both, the minimization and the
maximization, are typically solved by utilizing the gradients
of the loss function L. In particular, the master minimization updates the weights according to the gradient over the
weight, i.e., ∇W L.
This paper takes a drastically different view: we believe
that adversarial training can benefit from also considering a
second-order statistics over weight. Our study covers both
theoretical and empirical perspectives.
Our theoretical argument is obtained through updating
the PAC-Bayesian framework [22, 48], which only deals
with the model generalization in its original format, by considering adversarial robustness and a second order statistics
over weight. Under Bayesian regime, weights are random
variables, and a model is a sample drawn from an a posteriori distribution. Our update of the framework draws from
two aspects as described in Sec. 3. First, by relaxing the unreasonable assumption that all weights are statistically independent, we introduce a second-order statistics of weights,
i.e., a weight correlation matrix (or normalized covariance
matrix). Second, as in [25], we consider the adversarial robustness in addition to the model generalization.
This updated framework provides a theoretical indication that we may control an adversarial generalization
bound during training – and thus improve both robustness
and generalization of the resulting model – by monitoring
some norms (e.g., singular value, spectral norm, determinant) of the weight correlation matrix. To enable such a
control, we need methods to estimate the weight correlation matrix and conduct training, respectively. As described
in Sec. 4 we employ two methods for the former: one is

15273

