Towards Better Understanding Attribution Methods
Sukrut Rao, Moritz Böhle, Bernt Schiele
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Saarbrücken, Germany
{sukrut.rao,mboehle,schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Fig. 1. Left: Illustration of DiFull and ML-Att. In DiFull, we evaluate models on image grids (col. 1). Crucially, we employ separate
classification heads for each subimage that cannot possibly be influenced by other subimages; this yields ‘ground truths’ for possible and
impossible attributions (col. 2). For ML-Att, we evaluate methods at different network layers; here we show results for Grad-CAM and
IntGrad. Further, we show results after smoothing IntGrad (S-IntGrad), which we find to perform well (Sec. 5.2). Right: Visualisation of
our AggAtt evaluation. By sorting attributions into percentile ranges w.r.t. their performance and aggregating them over many samples, we
obtain a holistic view of a methods’ performance. AggAtt can thus reflect both best and worst case behaviour of an attribution method.

Abstract
Deep neural networks are very successful on many vision
tasks, but hard to interpret due to their black box nature. To
overcome this, various post-hoc attribution methods have
been proposed to identify image regions most influential to
the models’ decisions. Evaluating such methods is challenging since no ground truth attributions exist. We thus
propose three novel evaluation schemes to more reliably
measure the faithfulness of those methods, to make comparisons between them more fair, and to make visual inspection more systematic. To address faithfulness, we propose
a novel evaluation setting (DiFull) in which we carefully
control which parts of the input can influence the output in
order to distinguish possible from impossible attributions.
To address fairness, we note that different methods are applied at different layers, which skews any comparison, and
so evaluate all methods on the same layers (ML-Att) and
discuss how this impacts their performance on quantitative metrics. For more systematic visualizations, we propose a scheme (AggAtt) to qualitatively evaluate the methods on complete datasets. We use these evaluation schemes
to study strengths and shortcomings of some widely used
attribution methods. Finally, we propose a post-processing
smoothing step that significantly improves the performance
of some attribution methods, and discuss its applicability.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are highly successful on
many computer vision tasks. However, their black box nature makes it hard to interpret and thus trust their decisions.
To shed light on the models’ decision-making process, several methods have been proposed that aim to attribute importance values to individual input features (see Sec. 2).
However, given the lack of ground truth importance values,
it has proven difficult to compare and evaluate these attribution methods in a holistic and systematic manner.
In this work, we take a three-pronged approach towards
addressing this issue. In particular, we focus on three important components for such evaluations: reliably measuring the methods’ model-faithfulness, ensuring a fair comparison between methods, and providing a framework that
allows for systematic visual inspections of their attributions.
First, we propose an evaluation scheme (DiFull), which
allows distinguishing possible from impossible importance
attributions. This effectively provides ground truth annotations for whether or not an input feature can possibly have
influenced the model output. As such, it can highlight distinct failure modes of attribution methods (Fig. 1, left).
Second, a fair evaluation requires attribution methods to
be compared on equal footing. However, we observe that
different methods explain DNNs to different depths (e.g.,
full network or classification head only). Thus, some methods in fact solve a much easier problem (i.e., explain a much

10223

