MUSE-VAE: Multi-Scale VAE for Environment-Aware
Long Term Trajectory Prediction
Mihee Lee
Rutgers University

Samuel S. Sohn
Rutgers University

Seonghyeon Moon
Rutgers University

ml1323@rutgers.edu

samuel.sohn@rutgers.edu

sm2062@cs.rutgers.edu

Sejong Yoon
The College of New Jersey

Mubbasir Kapadia
Rutgers University

Vladimir Pavlovic
Rutgers University

yoons@tcnj.edu

mubbasir.kapadia@rutgers.edu

vladimir@cs.rutgers.edu

Abstract
Accurate long-term trajectory prediction in complex
scenes, where multiple agents (e.g., pedestrians or vehicles) interact with each other and the environment while attempting to accomplish diverse and often unknown goals,
is a challenging stochastic forecasting problem. In this
work, we propose MUSE-VAE, a new probabilistic modeling framework based on a cascade of Conditional VAEs,
which tackles the long-term, uncertain trajectory prediction
task using a coarse-to-fine multi-factor forecasting architecture. In its Macro stage, the model learns a joint pixelspace representation of two key factors, the underlying environment and the agent movements, to predict the long and
short term motion goals. Conditioned on them, the Micro
stage learns a fine-grained spatio-temporal representation
for the prediction of individual agent trajectories. The VAE
backbones across the two stages make it possible to naturally account for the joint uncertainty at both levels of
granularity. As a result, MUSE-VAE offers diverse and simultaneously more accurate predictions compared to the
current state-of-the-art. We demonstrate these assertions
through a comprehensive set of experiments on nuScenes
and SDD benchmarks as well as PFSD, a new synthetic
dataset, which challenges the forecasting ability of models
on complex agent-environment interaction scenarios.

1. Introduction
Human behavior forecasting is an essential problem
studied in various research fields such as computer vision [14], computer graphics [15], robotics [10], and cognitive science [44]. The fundamental problem with predicting human motion is the inherent stochasticity stemming
from the fact that human beings use numerous sources of
information to make a wide variety of different decisions at
any given moment, which all impact their future movement.

(a) Intermediate Short-term goals

(b) Full trajectories

Figure 1. (a) The predicted trajectory heatmaps are overlaid in the
semantic map. Ground Truth (GT) long-term goal (LG) and shortterm goals (SG1 and SG2) are marked with ‘x’. (b) Complete
trajectory forecasting based on the predicted LG and SG. Each
sequence of trajectories is obtained from a different pair of LG
and SG predictions.

This movement uncertainty translates beyond the motion of
the humans alone to the movement of objects controlled by
humans, such as vehicles [6].
To embrace the uncertainty, in this paper, we focus on
developing computational models, learned from data, that
can predict a realistic multi-modal distribution of the future
agent (humans, vehicles, etc.) trajectories. The models are
designed in the context of two main factors that drive this
uncertainty: the environment the agents occupy and the task
they are attempting to accomplish.
However, direct forecasting of long-term trajectories is
a challenging task. A person typically plans one’s movement in a coarse-to-fine fashion: with a final destination in mind, through a sequence of intermediate goals or
way-points, the movement is executed to reach those subgoals [8, 34]. State-of-the-Art (SOTA) methods [25, 43, 46]
leverage this intuition to propose goal-conditioned prediction model. However, despite their effectiveness compared
to traditional approaches [1,14,42], these models show limited ability to deal with complex environments [43], par-

2221

