High-resolution Face Swapping via Latent Semantics Disentanglement
Yangyang Xu1,3

Bailin Deng2 Junle Wang3 Yanqing Jing3 Jia Pan4 Shengfeng He1 *
1
South China University of Technology 2 Cardiff University
3
Tencent 4 The University of Hong Kong

(a) Target

(b) Source 1

(c) MegaFS [55]

(d) Ours

(e) Source 2

(f) MegaFS [55]

(g) Ours

Figure 1. We propose a high-resolution (1024×1024) face swapping method by disentangling the latent semantics of a pre-trained GAN
model. Compared with the existing high-resolution method MegaFS [55], our model can preserve target attributes (e.g., skin color and
illumination), meanwhile transferring local details and identity from source faces.

Abstract
We present a novel high-resolution face swapping method
using the inherent prior knowledge of a pre-trained GAN
model. Although previous research can leverage generative
priors to produce high-resolution results, their quality can
suffer from the entangled semantics of the latent space. We
explicitly disentangle the latent semantics by utilizing the
progressive nature of the generator, deriving structure attributes from the shallow layers and appearance attributes
from the deeper ones. Identity and pose information within
the structure attributes are further separated by introducing
a landmark-driven structure transfer latent direction. The
disentangled latent code produces rich generative features
that incorporate feature blending to produce a plausible
swapping result. We further extend our method to video face
swapping by enforcing two spatio-temporal constraints on
the latent space and the image space. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms stateof-the-art image/video face swapping methods in terms of
hallucination quality and consistency. Code can be found at:
https://github.com/cnnlstm/FSLSD_HiRes.

* Corresponding author (hesfe@scut.edu.cn).

1. Introduction
Face swapping aims at transferring the identity from a
source face image to a target face image, while preserving
attributes in the target image such as facial expression, head
pose, illumination and background. It has received extensive
attention in the computer vision and graphics community due
to its wide range of potential applications, such as computer
games, special effects and privacy protection [13, 22, 41, 42].
The main challenge for face swapping is to identify the
highly entangled target facial attributes and source identity
information for a natural-looking swapping. Early works
such as [8] replace the pixels of face regions and rely on
similarities between the source and the target in pose and
illumination. 3D-based approaches [14,28,37] fit a 3D model
to the faces and can handle large pose variation, although the
fitting can be largely influenced by the environment and thus
unstable. Other works introduce the generative adversarial
networks (GANs) for hallucinating target attributes [24, 26,
35] due to its strong generative capability.
Though much progress has been made, many existing
GAN-based approaches do not work well on high-resolution
faces, due to the compressed representation of end-to-end
frameworks [7, 26, 34], the instability of adversarial training [5], and the limitation in GPU memory size. Recently,

7642

