CNN Filter DB: An Empirical Investigation of Trained Convolutional Filters
Paul Gavrikov1 * and Janis Keuper1,2,3 *
1
IMLA, Offenburg University, 2 CC-HPC, Fraunhofer ITWM, 3 Fraunhofer Research Center ML
{first.last}@hs-offenburg.de

Currently, many theoretical as well as practically relevant questions towards the transferability and robustness of
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) remain unsolved.
While ongoing research efforts are engaging these problems
from various angles, in most computer vision related cases
these approaches can be generalized to investigations of the
effects of distribution shifts in image data.
In this context, we propose to study the shifts in the learned
weights of trained CNN models. Here we focus on the properties of the distributions of dominantly used 3 × 3 convolution filter kernels. We collected and publicly provide a
dataset with over 1.4 billion filters from hundreds of trained
CNNs, using a wide range of datasets, architectures, and vision tasks. In a first use case of the proposed dataset, we can
show highly relevant properties of many publicly available
pre-trained models for practical applications: I) We analyze distribution shifts (or the lack thereof) between trained
filters along different axes of meta-parameters, like visual
category of the dataset, task, architecture, or layer depth.
Based on these results, we conclude that model pre-training
can succeed on arbitrary datasets if they meet size and variance conditions. II) We show that many pre-trained models
contain degenerated filters which make them less robust and
less suitable for fine-tuning on target applications.
Data & Project website: https://github.com/
paulgavrikov/cnn-filter-db

1. Introduction
Despite their overwhelming success in the application to
various vision tasks, the practical deployment of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) is still suffering from several inherent drawbacks. Two prominent examples are I)
the dependence on very large amounts of annotated training data [1], which is not available for all target domains
* Funded by the Ministry for Science, Research and Arts, BadenWuerttemberg, Grant 32-7545.20/45/1 (Q-AMeLiA).
The authors also thank Margret Keuper for her support and encouragement
to submit this work.

convolution depth

Abstract

Figure 1. First 3 × 3 filters extracted of each convolution layer in
a ResNet-18 trained on CIFAR-10. The filters show a clear loss of
diversity and increasing sparsity with depth. The colormap range
is determined layer-wise by the absolute peak weight of all filters
in that layer.

and is expensive to generate; and II) still widely unsolved
problems with the robustness and generalization abilities of
CNNs [2] towards shifts of the input data distributions. One
can argue that both problems are strongly related, since a
common practical solution to I) is the fine-tuning [3] of
pre-trained models by small datasets from the actual target domain. This results in the challenge to find suitable
pre-trained models based on data distributions that are “as
close as possible” to the target distributions. Hence, both
cases (I+II) imply the need to model and observe distribution shifts in the contexts of CNNs.
In this paper, we propose not to investigate these shifts in
the input (image) domain, but rather in the 2D filter-kernel
distributions of the CNNs themselves. We argue that e.g.
the distributions of trained convolutional filters in a CNN,
which implicitly reflect the sub-distributions of the input
image data, are more suitable and easier accessible representations for this task. In order to foster systematic investigations of learned filters, we collected and publicly provide a dataset of over 1.4 billion filters with meta data from
hundreds of trained CNNs, using a wide range of data sets,
architectures, and vision tasks. To show the scientific value

19066

