Self-Supervised Keypoint Discovery in Behavioral Videos
Brandon Weissbourd1
John O. Dabiri1
Jennifer J. Sun1 * Serim Ryou1 *† Roni H. Goldshmid1
David J. Anderson1
Ann Kennedy2
Yisong Yue1,3
Pietro Perona1
1

Caltech

2

Northwestern University

3

Argo AI

Code & Project Website: https://sites.google.com/view/b-kind

Figure 1. Self-supervised Behavioral Keypoint Discovery. Intermediate representations in the form of keypoints are frequently used for
behavior analysis. We propose a method to discover keypoints from behavioral videos without the need for manual keypoint or bounding
box annotations. Our method works across a range of organisms (including mice, humans, flies, jellyfish and tree), works with multiple
agents simultaneously (see flies and mice above), does not require bounding boxes (boxes visualized above purely for identifying the
enlarged regions of interest) and achieves state-of-the-art performance on downstream tasks.

Abstract
We propose a method for learning the posture and structure of agents from unlabelled behavioral videos. Starting from the observation that behaving agents are generally the main sources of movement in behavioral videos,
our method, Behavioral Keypoint Discovery (B-KinD), uses
an encoder-decoder architecture with a geometric bottleneck to reconstruct the spatiotemporal difference between
video frames. By focusing only on regions of movement,
our approach works directly on input videos without requiring manual annotations. Experiments on a variety of agent
types (mouse, fly, human, jellyfish, and trees) demonstrate
the generality of our approach and reveal that our discovered keypoints represent semantically meaningful body
parts, which achieve state-of-the-art performance on keypoint regression among self-supervised methods. Additionally, B-KinD achieve comparable performance to super* Equal contribution. Correspondence to jjsun@caltech.edu.
† Current affiliation: Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology

vised keypoints on downstream tasks, such as behavior classification, suggesting that our method can dramatically reduce model training costs vis-a-vis supervised methods.

1. Introduction
Automatic recognition of object structure, for example
in the form of keypoints and skeletons, enables models to
capture the essence of the geometry and movements of objects. Such structural representations are more invariant
to background, lighting, and other nuisance variables and
are much lower-dimensional than raw pixel values, making them good intermediates for downstream tasks, such
as behavior classification [4, 11, 15, 39, 43], video alignment [26, 44], and physics-based modeling [7, 12].
However, obtaining annotations to train supervised pose
detectors can be expensive, especially for applications in
behavior analysis. For example, in behavioral neuroscience [34], datasets are typically small and lab-specific,
and the training of a custom supervised keypoint detector

2171

