Localized Adversarial Domain Generalization
Wei Zhu1,2 * Le Lu3 Jing Xiao4 Mei Han1 Jiebo Luo2 Adam P. Harrison1
1
PAII Inc. 2 University of Rochester 3 Alibaba DAMO Academy 4 PingAn Insurance Group
{zwvews, tiger.lelu, jiebo.luo, adam.p.harrison}@gmail.com
xiaojing661@pingan.com.cn, hanmei613@paii-labs.com

Abstract
Deep learning methods can struggle to handle domain
shifts not seen in training data, which can cause them to not
generalize well to unseen domains. This has led to research
attention on domain generalization (DG), which aims to
the model’s generalization ability to out-of-distribution. Adversarial domain generalization is a popular approach to
DG, but conventional approaches (1) struggle to sufficiently
align features so that local neighborhoods are mixed across
domains; and (2) can suffer from feature space over collapse which can threaten generalization performance. To
address these limitations, we propose localized adversarial domain generalization with space compactness maintenance (LADG) which constitutes two major contributions.
First, we propose an adversarial localized classifier as
the domain discriminator, along with a principled primary
branch. This constructs a min-max game whereby the aim
of the featurizer is to produce locally mixed domains. Second, we propose to use a coding-rate loss to alleviate feature space over collapse. We conduct comprehensive experiments on the Wilds DG benchmark to validate our approach, where LADG outperforms leading competitors on
most datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks can suffer from poor generalization performance on out-of-distribution (OOD) data from
unseen domains, i.e., from domain shift. For this reason,
techniques to improve generalization abilities have gained
increasing attention over the past decade, e.g. domain generalization (DG) and domain adaptation (DA). DA requires
access to data from testing domains during training. In contrast, DG aims to construct a generalized model by exposing
the training process to multiple training domains without
exposure to OOD data from testing domains. As such, DG
can reflect challenges in many real-life applications.
* Work was done while Wei Zhu interned at PAII Inc.

Figure 1. Localized discriminator can align two domains in a more
fine-grained way.

Different DG methods have been proposed, including
empirical risk minimization (ERM)-based methods [40, 52,
59], meta-learning based methods [28], domain-invariant
representation based methods [16, 29, 33, 44], invariant risk
minimization based methods [3, 54], and gradient agreement methods [39, 42]. Among them, domain invariant representation based methods, specifically adversarial domain
generalization (ADG) methods, seem to the most popular
according to recent literature [19, 43]. ADG methods are
inspired by generative adversarial networks [18] and learn
a common feature space by adversarial learning for training domains [16]—the common feature space is expected
to help generalization to unseen domains [16]. Although intuitively reasonable and technically sound, most of these
methods show little performance gain over the baseline
ERM in practice as indicated by recent benchmarks [19,25].
In this work, we argue that two issues limit the performance impact of current ADG methods. First, we find
that ERM feature representations are surprisingly already
roughly aligned, with features clustered class-wisely regardless of their domain labels. The discrepancy between
domains can be observed at local regions where local neighborhoods are not mixed across domains. Since ADG methods operate under the assumption of significant domain
shift, this less obvious domain-level discrepancy challenges

7108

