Single-Domain Generalized Object Detection in Urban Scene
via Cyclic-Disentangled Self-Distillation
Aming Wu, Cheng Deng∗
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
amwu@xidian.edu.cn, chdeng@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract

Training Data
Daytime-sunny

In this paper, we are concerned with enhancing the generalization capability of object detectors. And we consider
a realistic yet challenging scenario, namely Single-Domain
Generalized Object Detection (Single-DGOD), which aims
to learn an object detector that performs well on many
unseen target domains with only one source domain for
training. Towards Single-DGOD, it is important to extract
domain-invariant representations (DIR) containing intrinsical object characteristics, which is beneficial for improving the robustness for unseen domains. Thus, we present
a method, i.e., cyclic-disentangled self-distillation, to disentangle DIR from domain-specific representations without
the supervision of domain-related annotations (e.g., domain
labels). Concretely, a cyclic-disentangled module is first
proposed to cyclically extract DIR from the input visual features. Through the cyclic operation, the disentangled ability
can be promoted without the reliance on domain-related annotations. Then, taking the DIR as the teacher, we design
a self-distillation module to further enhance the generalization ability. In the experiments, our method is evaluated in
urban-scene object detection. Experimental results of five
weather conditions show that our method obtains a significant performance gain over baseline methods. Particularly,
for the night-sunny scene, our method outperforms baselines by 3%, which indicates that our method is instrumental in enhancing generalization ability. Data and code are
available at https://github.com/AmingWu/Single-DGOD.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the rapid development of
deep learning based object detection [2, 6, 37, 43, 45], which
assumes that the training and test data are from the same domain. However, in real applications, when object detectors
trained on source domain data are applied to unseen target
domains, these detectors usually suffer from poor general∗ Corresponding author.

Single-DGOD
Night-sunny

Testing in different weather conditions
Dusk-rainy

Night-rainy

Daytime-foggy

Figure 1. Illustration of Single-Domain Generalized Object Detection (Single-DGOD) with the urban-scene detection dataset. The
dataset contains five domains with different weather conditions:
daytime-sunny, night-sunny, dusk-rainy, night-rainy, and daytimefoggy. Single-DGOD aims to train a detector on one source domain dataset (e.g., the daytime-sunny scene) and generalize well
to multiple target domains. Extracting domain-invariant representations is beneficial for generalizing a detector to unseen domains.

ization, due to the domain-shift impact [8, 34].
To alleviate the domain-shift impact, existing researches
mainly focus on domain adaptation and domain generalization. In general, domain adaptation [4, 11, 36, 46] aims to
align the data distribution from one annotated source domain to that from one target domain without annotations.
During training, the aligned methods often need to access
both source and target domain data, which results in these
methods can not well adapt to other unseen target domains.
Besides, when the target domain is a compound of multiple
different data distributions [27], the generalization ability of
the aligned methods tends to be weak, which attenuates the
performance of object detection.
Domain generalization (DG) [24, 25, 39, 40, 52] aims to
generalize a model to an unseen target domain by learning
from multiple source domains, which is considered to be
more challenging than domain adaptation. Generally, most
DG methods [1, 12, 23, 25] try to learn a shared representation across multiple source domains. However, the performance of these methods highly depends on the number
of source domains [9, 53]. And in the real world, collecting multiple source datasets is time-consuming and laborintensive, which limits the application of DG methods.

847

