Weakly Supervised High-Fidelity Clothing Model Generation
Ruili Feng1 , Cheng Ma2,3 , Chengji Shen2,3 , Xin Gao3 , Zhenjiang Liu3 ,
Xiaobo Li3 , Kairi Ou3 , Deli Zhao3 , Zheng-Jun Zha1 *
1
University of Science and Technology of China, Anhui, China
2
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
3
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
ruilifengustc@gmail.com, {cheng.ma,chengji.shen}@zju.edu.cn,
{zimu.gx,stan.lzj,xiaobo.lixb}@alibaba-inc.com,
{mailokr,zhaodeli}@gmail.com, zhazj@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
The development of online economics arouses the demand
of generating images of models on product clothes, to display new clothes and promote sales. However, the expensive
proprietary model images challenge the existing image virtual try-on methods in this scenario, as most of them need to
be trained on considerable amounts of model images accompanied with paired clothes images. In this paper, we propose
a cheap yet scalable weakly-supervised method called Deep
Generative Projection (DGP) to address this specific scenario. Lying in the heart of the proposed method is to imitate
the process of human predicting the wearing effect, which is
an unsupervised imagination based on life experience rather
than computation rules learned from supervisions. Here a
pretrained StyleGAN is used to capture the practical experience of wearing. Experiments show that projecting the
rough alignment of clothing and body onto the StyleGAN
space can yield photo-realistic wearing results. Experiments
on real scene proprietary model images demonstrate the
superiority of DGP over several state-of-the-art supervised
methods when generating clothing model images.

1. Introduction
Taking pictures of models on product clothes is an essential demand for online apparel retails to display clothes
and promote sales. However, it is highly expensive to hire
models and professional studios to actually take those pictures of wearing each clothing. Thus image virtual tryon [11, 12, 15, 22, 24, 30, 42, 47, 53, 56], the technique that
generates wearing results from clothing and model images,
has rapidly aroused broad academic and industrial interests.
* Corresponding author

Model

Clothing

Synthesis results

Figure 1. Given a set of commercial models with underwear and
different clothing images, the proposed method can generate realistic clothing model results with clear pattern reconstruction.

A practical algorithm, however, must consider the cost
to apply it in industrial scenarios. Existing image virtual
try-on (VTO) methods are highly expensive to train. Most
of them [22, 28, 30, 41, 53, 56] are trained on paired image
data of clothing and a person on that clothing. Such paired
data consume considerable labor cost thus is infeasible to
collect at scale. Also, the testing data of clothing model
generation should be proprietary model images as only they
can be legally used in the final display on e-shop websites.
Those images are highly expensive due to hiring commercial
models and buying all necessary rights. Thus algorithms
should avoid relying on those proprietary model images

3440

