VL-InterpreT: An Interactive Visualization Tool for Interpreting
Vision-Language Transformers
Estelle Aflalo*
Intel Labs

Meng Du*
Intel Labs, UCLA

Shao-Yen Tseng
Intel Labs

estelle.aflalo@intel.com

mengdu@ucla.edu

shao-yen.tseng@intel.com

Yongfei Liu
Microsoft Research

Chenfei Wu
Microsoft Research

Nan Duan
Microsoft Research

liuyf3@shanghaitech.edu.cn

chewu@microsoft.com

nanduan@microsoft.com

Vasudev Lal
Intel Labs
vasudev.lal@intel.com

Abstract
Breakthroughs in transformer-based models have revolutionized not only the NLP field, but also vision and multimodal systems. However, although visualization and interpretability tools have become available for NLP models,
internal mechanisms of vision and multimodal transformers remain largely opaque. With the success of these transformers, it is increasingly critical to understand their inner
workings, as unraveling these black-boxes will lead to more
capable and trustworthy models. To contribute to this quest,
we propose VL-InterpreT, which provides novel interactive
visualizations for interpreting the attentions and hidden
representations in multimodal transformers. VL-InterpreT
is a task agnostic and integrated tool that (1) tracks a variety of statistics in attention heads throughout all layers for
both vision and language components, (2) visualizes crossmodal and intra-modal attentions through easily readable
heatmaps, and (3) plots the hidden representations of vision
and language tokens as they pass through the transformer
layers. In this paper, we demonstrate the functionalities of
VL-InterpreT through the analysis of KD-VLP, an end-toend pretraining vision-language multimodal transformerbased model, in the tasks of Visual Commonsense Reasoning (VCR) and WebQA, two visual question answering
benchmarks. Furthermore, we also present a few interesting findings about multimodal transformer behaviors that
were learned through our tool.

* Equal Contributions

1. Introduction
Since transformers were introduced in Vaswani et al.
[30], not only have they seen massive success in NLP applications, their impact on computer vision and multimodal
problems has also become increasingly disruptive. However, the internal mechanisms of transformers that lead to
such successes are not well understood. Although efforts
have been made to interpret the attentions [8] and hidden
states [22] of transformers for NLP, such as BERT [12], investigations in the mechanisms of vision and multimodal
transformers are relatively scarce, and tools for probing
such transformers are also limited. Given the fast-growing
number of successful vision and multimodal transformers
(e.g., ViT [13] and CLIP [25]), enhanced interpretability of
these models is needed to guide better designs in the future.
Past research has shown the importance of interpreting
the inner mechanisms of transformers. For example, Clark
et al. [8] found certain BERT attention heads specialized in
handling certain syntactic relations, as well as interesting
ways in which BERT attention utilizes special tokens and
punctuation marks. Additionally, Lin et al. [21] showed
that the linguistic information encoded in BERT becomes
increasingly abstract and hierarchical in later layers. These
studies provide valuable insights into the functions of various elements in transformer architecture for NLP, and shed
light on their limitations.
This paper presents VL-InterpreT1 , which is an interactive visualization tool for interpreting the attentions and hid1 A screencast of our application is available at https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=4Rj15Hi_Pdo. Source code and a link to a
live demo: https://github.com/IntelLabs/VL-InterpreT

