Unsupervised Visual Representation Learning by Online Constrained K-Means
Qi Qian1

Yuanhong Xu2 Juhua Hu3 Hao Li2 Rong Jin1
1
Alibaba Group, Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
2
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China
3
School of Engineering and Technology, University of Washington, Tacoma, WA 98402, USA
{qi.qian, yuanhong.xuyh, lihao.lh, jinrong.jr}@alibaba-inc.com, juhuah@uw.edu

epoch: t-1

Abstract
Cluster discrimination is an effective pretext task for unsupervised representation learning, which often consists of
two phases: clustering and discrimination. Clustering is
to assign each instance a pseudo label that will be used
to learn representations in discrimination. The main challenge resides in clustering since prevalent clustering methods (e.g., k-means) have to run in a batch mode. Besides,
there can be a trivial solution consisting of a dominating
cluster. To address these challenges, we first investigate
the objective of clustering-based representation learning.
Based on this, we propose a novel clustering-based pretext task with online Constrained K-means (CoKe). Compared with the balanced clustering that each cluster has exactly the same size, we only constrain the minimal size of
each cluster to flexibly capture the inherent data structure.
More importantly, our online assignment method has a theoretical guarantee to approach the global optimum. By decoupling clustering and discrimination, CoKe can achieve
competitive performance when optimizing with only a single view from each instance. Extensive experiments on ImageNet and other benchmark data sets verify both the efficacy
and efficiency of our proposal.

1. Introduction
Recently, many research efforts have been devoted to unsupervised representation learning that aims to leverage the
massive unlabeled data to obtain applicable models. Different from supervised learning, where labels can provide an
explicit discrimination task for learning, designing an appropriate pretext task is essential for unsupervised representation learning. Many pretext tasks have been proposed,
e.g., instance discrimination [12], cluster discrimination [3],
invariant mapping [9,14], solving jigsaw puzzles [20], patch
inpainting [21], etc. Among them, instance discrimination
that identifies each instance as an individual class [12] is
popular due to its straightforward objective. However, this

epoch: t
classification

labels &
centers

…

CoKe
encoder

image x

labels &
centers
retrieval by
image id

encoder
single view
image x

Figure 1. Illustration of CoKe. When a mini-batch arrives, each
instance will be assigned to a cluster with our online assignment
method. Then, in epoch t, representations from the encoder network are optimized by discrimination using pseudo labels and
cluster centers obtained from epoch t − 1. The pseudo labels from
epoch t − 1 were stored to be retrieved in epoch t using the unique
id for each image.

pretext task can be intractable on large-scale data sets. Consequently, contrastive learning is developed to mitigate the
large-scale challenge [6, 15, 28] with a memory bank [15]
or training with a large mini-batch of instances [6], which
requires additional computation resources.
Besides instance discrimination, cluster discrimination
is also an effective pretext task for unsupervised representation learning [1, 3–5, 18, 30, 31]. Compared with instance discrimination that assigns a unique label to each
instance, cluster discrimination partitions data into a predefined number of groups that is significantly less than the
total number of instances. Therefore, the classification task
after clustering becomes much more feasible for large-scale
data. Furthermore, learning representations with clusters
will push similar instances together, which may help explore potential semantic structures in data. Unfortunately,
the clustering phase often needs to run multiple iterations
over the entire data set, which has to be conducted in a
batch mode to access representations of all instances [3].
Therefore, online clustering is adopted to improve the efficiency, while the collapsing problem (i.e., a dominating

16640

