Learning to Deblur using Light Field Generated and Real Defocus Images
Lingyan Ruan1∗
1
City University of Hong Kong

Bin Chen2∗
Jizhou Li3
Miuling Lam1†
2
Max-Planck-Institut für Informatik 3 Stanford University
http://lyruan.com/Projects/DRBNet

Defocused image

All-in-focus image

Cross correlation

Defocus deblurring is a challenging task due to the spatially varying nature of defocus blur. While deep learning
approach shows great promise in solving image restoration
problems, defocus deblurring demands accurate training
data that consists of all-in-focus and defocus image pairs,
which is difficult to collect. Naive two-shot capturing cannot achieve pixel-wise correspondence between the defocused and all-in-focus image pairs. Synthetic aperture of
light fields is suggested to be a more reliable way to generate accurate image pairs. However, the defocus blur generated from light field data is different from that of the images captured with a traditional digital camera. In this paper, we propose a novel deep defocus deblurring network
that leverages the strength and overcomes the shortcoming
of light fields. We first train the network on a light fieldgenerated dataset for its highly accurate image correspondence. Then, we fine-tune the network using feature loss on
another dataset collected by the two-shot method to alleviate the differences between the defocus blur exists in the two
domains. This strategy is proved to be highly effective and
able to achieve the state-of-the-art performance both quantitatively and qualitatively on multiple test sets. Extensive
ablation studies have been conducted to analyze the effect
of each network module to the final performance.

1. Introduction
The use of large camera aperture can increase the luminous
flux so that the image can be captured with a shorter exposure time. However, this also reduces the depth of field
(DOF) - only points near the focal plane can be captured
sharply, while a point far from the focal plane will cast to the
camera sensor, instead of a single image point, a spot called
the Circle of Confusion (COC) [25] and result in defocus
blur. Shallow DOF is sometimes an aesthetic effect pursued sedulously by the photographer [7, 30], but it may also
∗ denotes equal contribution and † denotes corresponding author.

LFDOF

DPDD

Abstract

Figure 1. Cross correlation between defocused and all-in-focus
image pair in DPDD [2] (top) and LFDOF dataset [29] (bottom).

degrade important visual information. Thus, restoring an
all-in-focus image from its defocused version is highly demanded to reveal the latent information and benefit to artificial intelligence applications such as object detection [26]
and text recognition [19]. Despite its great potential, defocus deblurring remains a challenging problem due to its
spatially varying nature - every point has its own diameter of COC depending on the depth of the corresponding
scene point. Besides, the shape of COC varies with respect
to the relative position from the optical axis. To address
defocus blur, the most intuitive way is to first estimate the
blur kernel for each pixel, then apply non-blind deconvolution [5, 12, 15, 17, 24, 32]. However, both steps have limitations. First, blur kernel estimation is not accurate and is often based on simple Gaussian [12, 15, 24] or disk kernel [5]
assumption. Second, deconvolution tends to introduce ringing artifact on edges due to the Gibbs phenomenon [41]
even if an accurate blur kernel is given.
Recently, researchers have adopted end-to-end deep neural networks to directly restore sharp images from defocus
blur [2, 16, 36], which largely outperform the conventional
two-step approaches in terms of performance and efficiency.
These networks are all trained on a dataset called Dual-Pixel
Defocus Deblurring (DPDD) [2] which is captured sequentially with different aperture sizes to attain defocused and
all-in-focus image pairs. However, it is hardly possible to
capture defocused and all-in-focus pairs with accurate correspondence in two shots, especially for outdoor scenes due
to moving objects (e.g., plants, cars) and illuminance variation. To this end, another dataset LFDOF [29] is built utilizing the benefit of light field refocusing and synthetic aper-

16304

