General Incremental Learning with Domain-aware Categorical Representations
Jiangwei Xie1 * Shipeng Yan1,3,4∗ Xuming He1,2
1
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University
2
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
3
Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{xiejw,yanshp,hexm}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Continual learning is an important problem for achieving human-level intelligence in real-world applications as
an agent must continuously accumulate knowledge in response to streaming data/tasks. In this work, we consider a
general and yet under-explored incremental learning problem in which both the class distribution and class-specific
domain distribution change over time. In addition to the
typical challenges in class incremental learning, this setting
also faces the intra-class stability-plasticity dilemma and
intra-class domain imbalance problems. To address above
issues, we develop a novel domain-aware continual learning method based on the EM framework. Specifically, we
introduce a flexible class representation based on the von
Mises-Fisher mixture model to capture the intra-class structure, using an expansion-and-reduction strategy to dynamically increase the number of components according to the
class complexity. Moreover, we design a bi-level balanced
memory to cope with data imbalances within and across
classes, which combines with a distillation loss to achieve
better inter- and intra-class stability-plasticity trade-off. We
conduct exhaustive experiments on three benchmarks: iDigits, iDomainNet and iCIFAR-20. The results show that our
approach consistently outperforms previous methods by a
significant margin, demonstrating its superiority.

1. Introduction
In order to achieve human-level intelligence, it is indispensable for a learning system to continuously accumulate knowledge over time in an ever-changing environment,
known as continual or incremental learning [5]. To cope
with real-world scenarios, we consider a general incremental learning problem [3, 18], where both the class distribu* Both authors contributed equally. This work was supported by Shanghai Science and Technology Program 21010502700.

tion and class-specific domain distributions of the incoming data continuously change across sequential learning sessions. This requires a model to incrementally learn not only
novel class concepts but also new variants of previouslylearned concepts.
Existing works on the general incremental learning typically focuse on the online class incremental learning setting [3, 18], which has to sacrifice the performance due to
its strict computation/memory constraints. In this work, we
instead aim to tackle the offline incremental learning setting, which has the potential to achieve significantly higher
performance than the online counterpart. We note that, unlike the offline class incremental learning [7], this general
incremental learning problem additionally faces an intraclass stability-plasticity dilemma which refers to the tradeoff between adapting novel examples and preserving current
knowledge of the class, and an intra-class domain imbalance problem, where the model is biased toward incoming
domains due to a limited memory. The intra-class problem
is particularly challenging since the domain labels are usually unknown in practice.
The majority of current research on the class incremental learning either focuses on improving the inter-class
stability-plasticity trade-off and imbalance issue [7, 25] or
mainly attempts to tackle the intra-class stability-plasticity
dilemma [29, 30, 33]. Recent works on the online general class incremental learning [3, 18] typically ignore the
intra-class structure of data distribution. In particular, those
methods usually adopt the same feature representation for
the data from both incoming and existing domains of a
class, which makes it difficult to learn new domains without interference with previously-learned representation of
that class. Such domain-invariant representations sacrifice
the intra-class plasticity, often resulting in a poor intra-class
trade-off between plasticity and stability.
In this work, we develop a novel domain-aware learning
framework for the general incremental learning problem,
which enables us to address both inter-class and intra-class

14351

