Pre-train, Self-train, Distill: A simple recipe for Supersizing 3D Reconstruction
Kalyan Vasudev Alwala1
Abhinav Gupta12
Shubham Tulsiani2
1
2
Meta AI Research
Carnegie Mellon University
https://shubhtuls.github.io/ss3d/

Figure 1. We present an approach to learn a single reconstruction model across diverse object categories. Given an input image depicting
any (segmented) object spanning over 150 categories, this unified reconstruction model can infer its 3D shape.

Abstract
Our work learns a unified model for single-view 3D reconstruction of objects from hundreds of semantic categories. As a scalable alternative to direct 3D supervision,
our work relies on segmented image collections for learning 3D of generic categories. Unlike prior works that use
similar supervision but learn independent category-specific
models from scratch, our approach of learning a unified
model simplifies the training process while also allowing
the model to benefit from the common structure across categories. Using image collections from standard recognition
datasets, we show that our approach allows learning 3D
inference for over 150 object categories. We evaluate using
two datasets and qualitatively and quantitatively show that
our unified reconstruction approach improves over prior
category-specific reconstruction baselines. Our final 3D reconstruction model is also capable of zero-shot inference on
images from unseen object categories and we empirically
show that increasing the number of training categories improves the reconstruction quality.

1. Introduction
We live in a rich, diverse world comprising of a variety
of objects, from naturally occurring birds and bears, to ingeniously engineered cars and airplanes, or the pragmatically
simple cups and vases. While we have made significant advances in semantic understanding of the visual world, developing approaches which can recognize hundreds and thousands of these objects, the state-of-the-art single-view reconstruction systems are only capable of inferring 3D for a
handful among them. Why is that?
The primary reason for success in case of semantic
recognition is the use of supervision. Availability of large
amounts of training data for thousands of categories for
classification [4], detection [26] and even segmentation [9]
has been the key to progress. On the other hand, obtaining
3D supervision for images of generic objects is extremely
hard. Even the biggest 3D datasets contain only tens of categories and even in that case, the images do not reflect the
complexity of the real-world.
To tackle this problem of supervision, a number of recent works have instead investigated learning 3D inference
13773

