S MARTA DAPT:
Multi-branch Object Detection Framework for Videos on Mobiles
Ran Xu1 , Fangzhou Mu2 , Jayoung Lee1 , Preeti Mukherjee1 ,
Somali Chaterji1 , Saurabh Bagchi1 , Yin Li2
1
Purdue University 2 University of Wisconsin-Madison
1

{xu943, lee3716, mukher57, schaterji, sbagchi}@purdue.edu

Abstract
Several recent works seek to create lightweight deep networks for video object detection on mobiles. We observe
that many existing detectors, previously deemed computationally costly for mobiles, intrinsically support adaptive
inference, and offer a multi-branch object detection framework (MBODF). Here, an MBODF is referred to as a solution that has many execution branches and one can dynamically choose from among them at inference time to satisfy varying latency requirements (e.g. by varying resolution
of an input frame). In this paper, we ask, and answer, the
wide-ranging question across all MBODFs: How to expose
the right set of execution branches and then how to schedule the optimal one at inference time? In addition, we uncover the importance of making a content-aware decision
on which branch to run, as the optimal one is conditioned
on the video content. Finally, we explore a content-aware
scheduler, an Oracle one, and then a practical one, leveraging various lightweight feature extractors. Our evaluation
shows that layered on Faster R-CNN-based MBODF, compared to 7 baselines, our S MARTA DAPT achieves a higher
Pareto optimal curve in the accuracy-vs-latency space for
the ILSVRC VID dataset.

1. Introduction
Object detection is arguably one of central problems in
computer vision. Much progress has been made over the
past few years in deep learning based object detectors. Despite their impressive accuracy results on standard benchmarks, these models come at a price of their complexity
and computational cost. This imposes a major barrier to deploy these models under resource-constrained settings with
strict latency requirements, such as real-time detection in
streaming videos on mobile or embedded devices. Several
recent works seek to address this challenge by designing
light-weight models on mobiles [11,14,35,44,58], in partic-

2

{fmu2, yin.li}@wisc.edu

ular, for video object detection [6, 21, 22, 24]. The assumption and the common belief are that the object detectors that
are optimized for accuracy, such as Faster R-CNN with a
ResNet-50 backbone, are too expensive for mobile vision.
Indeed, detectors optimized for accuracy are rather complex, often trained with different input resolutions, and
equipped with multiple stages (e.g. proposal generation).
It is perhaps not surprising that these detectors can adapt
to different settings at inference time. Consider the example of Faster R-CNN [30], one can reduce the input resolution or the number of proposals for a lower latency while
still maintaining a reasonable accuracy. Such combinations of choices of tunable parameters would constitute a
multi-branch object detection framework (MBODF). The
Faster R-CNN detector using a specific input resolution and
a particular number of proposals from our previous example
could be considered as one execution branch.
Our key observation is that if one is allowed to select,
at inference time, from a large set of fine-grained execution branches, the detection accuracy and latency can be
significantly improved (see Figure 1). Then, the key research questions are: How to expose the right set of execution branches in an existing object detector and then how
to schedule the optimal one at inference time?
An ideal scheduler must not only consider the branches
in the model and their properties (accuracy and latency), but
also the input content. For example, if the input video only
contains larger objects, using a lower input resolution for
the detector suffices. Another example is using inexpensive
tracking to replace the costly detector, if the video content
remains mostly stationary. However, the design of such a
scheduler is challenging for streaming videos. This is because the scheduler has to “predict” potential future content
change in order to select the best branch at the current time.
In this paper, we focus on the challenging and practical
task of streaming video object detection on mobile devices,
and present a simple adaptive object detection method. Our
key innovation is to leverage standard existing object detectors (Faster R-CNN, EfficientDet, SSD, YOLO) to con-

2528

