Fine-grained Temporal Contrastive Learning for Weakly-supervised Temporal
Action Localization
Junyu Gao1,2 , Mengyuan Chen1,2 , and Changsheng Xu1,2,3
1
National Lab of Pattern Recognition (NLPR),
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
2
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, ShenZhen, China
{junyu.gao, csxu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn; chenmengyuan2021@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Attention
Mechanism

Action localization is one of the most fundamental tasks
in computer vision, which aims to localize the start and end
timestamps of different actions in an untrimmed video [41,
63, 67, 75]. In the past few years, the performance has gone
through a phenomenal surge under the fully-supervised setting. However, collecting and annotating precise frame19999

…

1. Introduction

…

We target at the task of weakly-supervised action localization (WSAL), where only video-level action labels
are available during model training. Despite the recent
progress, existing methods mainly embrace a localizationby-classiﬁcation paradigm and overlook the fruitful ﬁnegrained temporal distinctions between video sequences,
thus suffering from severe ambiguity in classiﬁcation learning and classiﬁcation-to-localization adaption. This paper
argues that learning by contextually comparing sequenceto-sequence distinctions offers an essential inductive bias in
WSAL and helps identify coherent action instances. Specifically, under a differentiable dynamic programming formulation, two complementary contrastive objectives are designed, including Fine-grained Sequence Distance (FSD)
contrasting and Longest Common Subsequence (LCS) contrasting, where the ﬁrst one considers the relations of various action/background proposals by using match, insert,
and delete operators and the second one mines the longest
common subsequences between two videos. Both contrasting modules can enhance each other and jointly enjoy
the merits of discriminative action-background separation
and alleviated task gap between classiﬁcation and localization. Extensive experiments show that our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance on two popular benchmarks.
Our code is available at https : / / github . com /
MengyuanChen21/CVPR2022-FTCL.

MIL
Formulation

class activation sequence CAS
Temporal Aggregation

Feature extractors

Snippet features

Video-level Classification Loss

Figure 1. Pipeline of the localization-by-classiﬁcation paradigm.
It ﬁrst extracts snippet-level features and adopts attention/MIL
mechanisms for learning CAS under video-level supervisions.

wise information is a bottleneck and consequently limits the
scalability of a fully supervised framework for real-world
scenarios. Therefore, weakly-supervised action localization (WSAL) has been explored [26, 27, 56, 69], where only
video-level category labels are available.
To date in the literature, current approaches mainly
embrace a localization-by-classiﬁcation paradigm [54, 57,
65, 68], which divides each input video into a series of
ﬁxed-size non-overlapping snippets and aims for generating
the temporal Class Activation Sequences (CAS) [56, 71].
Speciﬁcally, as shown in Figure 1, by optimizing a videolevel classiﬁcation loss, most existing WSAL approaches
adopt the multiple instance learning (MIL) formulation [45]
and attention mechanism [56] to train models to assign snippets with different class activations. The ﬁnal action localization results are inferred by thresholding and merging
these activations. To improve the accuracy of learned CAS,
various strategies have been proposed, such as uncertainty
modeling [69], collaborative learning [26, 27], action unit
memory [42], and causal analysis [37], which have obtained
promising performance.
Despite achieving signiﬁcant progress, the above learning pipelines still suffer from severe localization ambi-

