Episodic Memory Question Answering
Samyak Datta
Georgia Tech

Sameer Dharur
Georgia Tech

Vincent Cartillier
Georgia Tech

Mukul Khanna

Dhruv Batra
Georgia Tech, Meta AI Research

Ruta Desai
Meta Reality Labs Research
Devi Parikh
Georgia Tech, Meta AI Research

Abstract
Egocentric augmented reality devices such as wearable
glasses passively capture visual data as a human wearer
tours a home environment. We envision a scenario wherein
the human communicates with an AI agent powering such
a device by asking questions (e.g., “where did you last see
my keys?”). In order to succeed at this task, the egocentric AI assistant must (1) construct semantically rich and
efficient scene memories that encode spatio-temporal information about objects seen during the tour and (2) possess
the ability to understand the question and ground its answer
into the semantic memory representation. Towards that end,
we introduce (1) a new task — Episodic Memory Question
Answering (EMQA) wherein an egocentric AI assistant is
provided with a video sequence (the tour) and a question
as an input and is asked to localize its answer to the question within the tour, (2) a dataset of grounded questions designed to probe the agent’s spatio-temporal understanding
of the tour, and (3) a model for the task that encodes the
scene as an allocentric, top-down semantic feature map and
grounds the question into the map to localize the answer. We
show that our choice of episodic scene memory outperforms
naive, off-the-shelf solutions for the task as well as a host of
very competitive baselines and is robust to noise in depth,
pose as well as camera jitter.

Figure 1. (a) An egocentric AI assistant, assumed to be running
on a pair of augmented reality glasses, is taken on a guided exploratory tour by virtue of its human wearer moving about inside
the environment. (b) The agent passively records an egocentric
stream of RGB-D maps, (c) builds an internal, episodic memory
representation of the scene and (d) exploits this spaito-temporal
memory representation to answer (multiple) post-hoc questions
about the tour.

can act as our own personal egocentric AI assistants.

1. Introduction
Imagine wearing a pair of AI-powered, augmented reality (AR) glasses and walking around your house. Such
smart-glasses will possess the ability to “see” and passively
capture egocentric visual data from the same perspective as
its wearer, organize the surrounding visual information into
its memory, and use this encoded information to communicate with humans by answering questions such as, “where
did you last see my keys?”. In other words, such devices

There has been a rich history of prior work in training navigational agents to answer questions grounded in indoor environments – a task referred to as Embodied Question Answering (EQA) in literature [9, 15, 29, 32]. However, egocentric AI assistants differ from EQA agents in
several important ways. First, such systems passively observe a sequence of egocentric visual frames as a result of
the human wearer’s navigation, as opposed to taking actions in an environment. Second, AI systems for egocentric
assistants would be required to build scene-specific mem-

19119

