Exemplar-based Pattern Synthesis with Implicit Periodic Field Network
Haiwei Chen1,2 , Jiayi Liu1,2 , Weikai Chen3 , Shichen Liu1,2 , Yajie Zhao1,2
1
University of Southern California
2
USC Institute for Creative Technologies
3
Tencent Game AI Research Center
{haiweich,jliu8328}@usc.edu chenwk891@gmail.com {lshichen,zhao}@ict.usc.edu

Abstract
Synthesis of ergodic, stationary visual patterns is widely
applicable in texturing, shape modeling, and digital content creation. The wide applicability of this technique thus
requires the pattern synthesis approaches to be scalable, diverse, and authentic. In this paper, we propose an exemplarbased visual pattern synthesis framework that aims to model
the inner statistics of visual patterns and generate new, versatile patterns that meet the aforementioned requirements.
To this end, we propose an implicit network based on generative adversarial network (GAN) and periodic encoding,
thus calling our network the Implicit Periodic Field Network (IPFN). The design of IPFN ensures scalability: the
implicit formulation directly maps the input coordinates to
features, which enables synthesis of arbitrary size and is
computationally efficient for 3D shape synthesis. Learning with a periodic encoding scheme encourages diversity:
the network is constrained to model the inner statistics of
the exemplar based on spatial latent codes in a periodic
field. Coupled with continuously designed GAN training
procedures, IPFN is shown to synthesize tileable patterns
with smooth transitions and local variations. Last but not
least, thanks to both the adversarial training technique and
the encoded Fourier features, IPFN learns high-frequency
functions that produce authentic, high-quality results. To
validate our approach, we present novel experimental results on various applications in 2D texture synthesis and
3D shape synthesis.

1. Introduction
The synthesis of visual patterns, may that be a wooden
texture for painting, or a simulation of natural cave systems,
is a technique that is applied ubiquitously in computer-aided
design and digital content creation. Visual patterns can be
understood as arts, shapes, or natural textures following certain geometric structures. In an application context, let us
start by defining several characteristics that are desirable for

an algorithm that generates visual patterns:
• Authenticity. Probably the most prioritized quality of
synthesized visual patterns is its visual quality. When
patterns are synthesized from an exemplar, the quality
is determined by whether they faithfully recreate the
source pattern.
• Diversity. It would be undesirable for a synthesizer to
only copy patterns from the source. Diversity is thus an
equally important measurement that evaluates whether
the synthesized patterns vary from the source and each
other. We strive to achieve two different levels of diversity: the patterns should be diversified both within
a generated sample and across samples.
• Scalability. As patterns are usually demanded at different and potentially large scales for many practical
applications, we want a scalable synthesizer to be able
to efficiently generate patterns of arbitrary size. Scalability is particularly valuable when it comes to the synthesis of 3D models, as the extra dimension translates
to a much larger amount of computations.
A scalable design choice leads us to formulate the synthesis problem as generating patterns from a continuous,
real coordinate space. This is generally known as the implicit formulation, where a nonlinear function maps points
defined in R2 or R3 to features that represent the synthesized subjects. In particular, the implicit function has been
shown to be an efficient representation for synthesizing 3D
volumes [12, 22, 24].
Patterns that scale well to an infinitely large space, in
general, possess a stationary property - a shift-invariant
structure that can be expanded by tiling or stacking blocks
of elements. We therefore develop our method by pivoting on the fact that many types of natural and artistic patterns can be analyzed and recreated in a stationary framework. The goal of synthesizing an authentic and diverse

3708

