Coupled Iterative Refinement for 6D Multi-Object Pose Estimation
Lahav Lipson

Zachary Teed Ankit Goyal
Princeton University

Jia Deng

Abstract
We address the task of 6D multi-object pose: given a
set of known 3D objects and an RGB or RGB-D input image, we detect and estimate the 6D pose of each object.
We propose a new approach to 6D object pose estimation
which consists of an end-to-end differentiable architecture
that makes use of geometric knowledge. Our approach iteratively refines both pose and correspondence in a tightly
coupled manner, allowing us to dynamically remove outliers
to improve accuracy. We use a novel differentiable layer to
perform pose refinement by solving an optimization problem
we refer to as Bidirectional Depth-Augmented PerspectiveN-Point (BD-PnP). Our method achieves state-of-the-art
accuracy on standard 6D Object Pose benchmarks. Code
is available at https://github.com/princetonvl/Coupled-Iterative-Refinement.

1. Introduction
Given an RGB or RGB-D image containing a set of object instances of known 3D shapes, 6D multi-object pose is
the task of detecting and estimating the 6D pose—position
and orientation—of each object instance. Accurate poses
are important for robotics tasks such as grasping and augmented reality applications involving shape manipulation.
In the standard 6D multi-object pose setup, we are given
a set of 3D models of known object instances. Given an
RGB or RGB-D input image, the goal is to jointly detect object instances and estimate their 6D object pose. Early work
solved this problem by first estimating correspondences between the 3D model and the image [22], producing a set of
2D-3D correspondences, which are then used to obtain 6D
object pose using Perspective-n-Point (PnP) solvers [16,19]
or iterative algorithms like Levenberg-Marquardt.
While 2D-3D correspondence is sufficient to solve for
6D pose, it is difficult to obtain accurate correspondence in
practice. In many applications, we wish to estimate the pose
of poorly textured objects where local feature matching is
unreliable. Furthermore, problems such as heavy occlusion,
object symmetry, and lighting variation can make detecting
and matching local features near impossible. These prob-

Figure 1. Given an image and collection of 3D models, our method
outputs the position and orientation of each object instance.

lems cause classical systems to be too brittle for many use
cases which require a greater degree of robustness.
Recently, many of these issues have been partially addressed using deep learning. A simple approach is to train
a network to directly regress 6D poses [18, 20, 35]. Direct
pose regression simply learns to map input to output, and
makes no use of the fact that the pixels are a perspective projection of a known 3D object. Although direct pose regression can be quite effective in practice, an intriguing question
is whether there exist better deep learning methods that take
advantage of projective geometry.
Many works on 6D pose have attempted to combine
deep learning and projective geometry. One approach is
to train a deep network to detect keypoints of a known
3D object [12, 26–29, 33], producing a set of 2D-3D correspondences which can serve as input to a Perspectiven-Point (PnP) solver. Another approach is to impose geometric knowledge in the form of implicit or declarative
layers [5, 6]. These works showed that PnP could be implemented as a modular component in end-to-end differentiable architectures. However, both approaches are “oneshot” in the sense that correspondence is predicted once and
then used to solve for pose through a PnP solver (differentiable or not); this makes the approaches sensitive to outliers
and errors in the correspondences.
We propose a new approach to 6D object pose estimation. Our approach consists of an end-to-end differentiable
architecture that makes use of geometric knowledge. The
main novelty of our approach over prior work on 6D pose

6728

