Frequency-driven Imperceptible Adversarial Attack on Semantic Similarity
Cheng Luo* Qinliang Lin* Weicheng Xie† Bizhu Wu Jinheng Xie Linlin Shen
1
Computer Vision Institute, School of Computer Science & Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
2
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence & Robotics for Society
3
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
{luocheng2020, linqinliang2021}@email.szu.edu.cn, {wcxie, llshen}@szu.edu.cn

Abstract
Current adversarial attack research reveals the vulnerability of learning-based classifiers against carefully crafted
perturbations. However, most existing attack methods have
inherent limitations in cross-dataset generalization as they
rely on a classification layer with a closed set of categories.
Furthermore, the perturbations generated by these methods may appear in regions easily perceptible to the human visual system (HVS). To circumvent the former problem, we propose a novel algorithm that attacks semantic
similarity on feature representations. In this way, we are
able to fool classifiers without limiting attacks to a specific dataset. For imperceptibility, we introduce the lowfrequency constraint to limit perturbations within highfrequency components, ensuring perceptual similarity between adversarial examples and originals. Extensive experiments on three datasets (CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and
ImageNet-1K) and three public online platforms indicate
that our attack can yield misleading and transferable adversarial examples across architectures and datasets. Additionally, visualization results and quantitative performance (in terms of four different metrics) show that the
proposed algorithm generates more imperceptible perturbations than the state-of-the-art methods. Code is made
available at https://github.com/LinQinLiang/
SSAH-adversarial-attack.

1. Introduction
With the advent of deep learning, neural network models [10, 12, 16, 32] have demonstrated revolutionary performance in recognition tasks of real-world datasets. Nevertheless, the vulnerability of deep neural networks (DNNs)
to image corruptions and adversarial examples has been unveiled [8, 35]. This problem hinders the applications of

(a)

(b)

(c)

Adversarial Example

Perturbation

Figure 1. Comparison of the adversarial examples and perturbations generated by three different attack methods: (a) C&W, (b)
Our SSA (semantic similarity attack), and (c) Our SSAH (semantic similarity attack on high-frequency components). For the visualization, we regularize the perturbation by taking its absolute
value and multiplying it by 25.

DNNs in security-critical domains and promotes research
on understanding the robustness of DNNs, including adversarial attack [1, 8] and defense [22, 36, 40, 44].
The most intuitive approaches for white-box attacking
are to increase the cost of the classification loss [8] to yield
adversarial examples via gradient descent. Besides, they
further apply ℓp distance to constrain the visual differences
between benign and perturbed images. However, conventional approaches may suffer from the two open problems:

* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding Author

• Inherent limitation in cross-dataset generalization.

15315

