AUV-Net: Learning Aligned UV Maps for Texture Transfer and Synthesis
Zhiqin Chen1,2
NVIDIA1

Kangxue Yin1

Simon Fraser University2

Sanja Fidler1,3,4

University of Toronto3

Vector Institute4

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problem of texture representation for 3D shapes for the challenging and underexplored tasks of texture transfer and synthesis. Previous
works either apply spherical texture maps which may lead
to large distortions, or use continuous texture fields that
yield smooth outputs lacking details. We argue that the traditional way of representing textures with images and linking them to a 3D mesh via UV mapping is more desirable,
since synthesizing 2D images is a well-studied problem. We
propose AUV-Net which learns to embed 3D surfaces into
a 2D aligned UV space, by mapping the corresponding semantic parts of different 3D shapes to the same location
in the UV space. As a result, textures are aligned across
objects, and can thus be easily synthesized by generative
models of images. Texture alignment is learned in an unsupervised manner by a simple yet effective texture alignment module, taking inspiration from traditional works on
linear subspace learning. The learned UV mapping and
aligned texture representations enable a variety of applications including texture transfer, texture synthesis, and textured single view 3D reconstruction. We conduct experiments on multiple datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness
of our method.

1. Introduction
The field of 3D shape reconstruction and synthesis has
witnessed significant advancements in the past few years.
By utilizing the power of deep learning, several works reconstruct 3D shapes from voxels, point clouds, single and
multi-view images, with a variety of output shape representations [12, 14, 15, 20, 24, 30, 51]. 3D generative models have also been proposed to synthesize new shapes
[4, 11, 19, 34, 39], with the aim of democratizing 3D content creation. However, despite the importance of textures
in bringing 3D shapes to life, very few methods have tackled
semantic-aware texture transfer or synthesis for 3D shapes
[5, 10, 18, 22, 35, 36, 50].
Previous work on texture generation mostly relies on
warping a spherical mesh template to the target shape
[5, 10, 22, 35], therefore obtaining a texture map defined on

Figure 1. AUV-Net learns aligned UV maps for a set of 3D shapes,
enabling us to easily transfer textures between shapes.

the sphere’s surface, which can be re-projected into a square
image for the goal of texture synthesis. NeuTex [47] generates 3D shapes with a neural implicit representation for
arbitrary surface topology, yet embeds the surface of the
shape onto a sphere, which also results in a spherical texture map. Spherical texture maps can only support limited
topology, and may introduce severe distortions for thin parts
such as animal limbs [27, 43]. Another line of work uses
implicit texture fields for texture synthesis [32], without relying on explicit texture mapping. Although texture fields
were successfully applied to multi-view image reconstruction [31], they have primarily been used for fitting a single object or scene. Generative models usually suffer from
overly smoothed synthesized textures [37, 48].
In contrast, the traditional UV mapping in computer
graphics handles arbitrary shape topology and avoids heavy
distortions by cutting the surface into pieces and mapping
different pieces to different regions on the 2D UV plane. It
further preserves texture details by storing the texture in a

1465

