Online Continual Learning on a Contaminated Data Stream
with Blurry Task Boundaries
Jihwan Bang1,2 Hyunseo Koh2,3 Seulki Park2,4 Hwanjun Song1,2 Jung-Woo Ha1,2 Jonghyun Choi2,5, *
1

NAVER CLOVA

2

NAVER AI Lab

3

GIST

4

Seoul National University

5

Yonsei University

{jihwan.bang,hwanjun.song,jungwoo.ha}@navercorp.com, hyunseo8157@gm.gist.ac.kr,
seulki.park@snu.ac.kr, jc@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Learning under a continuously changing data distribution with incorrect labels is a desirable real-world problem
yet challenging. A large body of continual learning (CL)
methods, however, assumes data streams with clean labels,
and online learning scenarios under noisy data streams
are yet underexplored. We consider a more practical CL
task setup of an online learning from blurry data stream
with corrupted labels, where existing CL methods struggle. To address the task, we first argue the importance of
both diversity and purity of examples in the episodic memory of continual learning models. To balance diversity and
purity in the episodic memory, we propose a novel strategy to manage and use the memory by a unified approach
of label noise aware diverse sampling and robust learning with semi-supervised learning. Our empirical validations on four real-world or synthetic noise datasets (CIFAR10 and 100, mini-WebVision, and Food-101N) exhibit
that our method significantly outperforms prior arts in this
realistic and challenging continual learning scenario. Code
and data splits are available in https://github.com/
clovaai/puridiver.

1. Introduction
Continual learning (CL) is a practical learning scenario under a continuous and online stream of annotated
data [5,24,27]. Due to continuously changing data distribution, the CL methods are known to suffer from the stabilityplasticity dilemma due to catastrophic interference and resistance to learning new information [12, 25]. In addition,
when the CL model is deployed in real-world such as ecommerce applications, the annotated labels are often unreliable due to less controlled data curation process, e.g.,
crowd-sourcing [36]. Although data labels are likely to be
contaminated in real-world due to human errors, existing
* : corresponding author.

CL studies have largely assumed that the given training data
has no annotation error [19, 27], which might hinder practical usages of many CL methods in real-world applications.
A very recent work [17] relaxes this assumption by
proposing an online CL setup under data stream with less
reliable labels. However, they assume a disjoint class incremental scenario such that there is no class overlapping
between task streams, which is argued as less practical for
real-world applications in the literature [5, 27]. To step forward in addressing continuously changing data distribution
that can be falsely labeled, we first design a novel CL task
of online continual learning on a contaminated data stream
on blurry task boundaries [27] as a more realistic and practical continual learning scenario.
Sample selection strategy is arguably important for
episodic memory-based CL methods [1, 5, 17, 19, 27].
Specifically, diversity-aware sample selection policy is
shown to be effective in the online blurry CL scenarios [5].
However, on the contaminated data stream, diversity-based
memory construction may promote to include many examples with corrupted labels in the episodic memory, leading
to poor performance thanks to very high capacity of deep
models to overly fit all the falsely labeled examples [40].
To address this issue, we propose a unified framework
of memory sampling policy with robust learning with the
episodic memory and semi-supervised learning with unreliable data, named PuriDivER (Purity and Diversity aware
Episode Replay). Fig. 1 illustrates an overview of the proposed method to address the new CL task set-up.
Specifically, for the memory sampling policy, we propose to construct a robust episodic memory that preserves
a set of training examples that are diverse and pure. Unfortunately, maintaining the information diversity and purity is
in trade-off ; clean examples mostly exhibit smaller losses
(less diverse) than noise examples due to the memorization
effect of deep neural networks [4, 33]. Thus, emphasizing
purity in memory sampling does not promote sample diversity and vice versa. To address the dilemma, we define a

9275

