ViM: Out-Of-Distribution with Virtual-logit Matching
Haoqi Wang1 * Zhizhong Li1 * Litong Feng1 Wayne Zhang12†
1
SenseTime Research 2 Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{wanghaoqi,lizz,fenglitong,wayne.zhang}@sensetime.com

95

Most of the existing Out-Of-Distribution (OOD) detection algorithms depend on single input source: the feature,
the logit, or the softmax probability. However, the immense
diversity of the OOD examples makes such methods fragile. There are OOD samples that are easy to identify in the
feature space while hard to distinguish in the logit space
and vice versa. Motivated by this observation, we propose
a novel OOD scoring method named Virtual-logit Matching (ViM), which combines the class-agnostic score from
feature space and the In-Distribution (ID) class-dependent
logits. Specifically, an additional logit representing the virtual OOD class is generated from the residual of the feature against the principal space, and then matched with the
original logits by a constant scaling. The probability of this
virtual logit after softmax is the indicator of OOD-ness.
To facilitate the evaluation of large-scale OOD detection
in academia, we create a new OOD dataset for ImageNet1K, which is human-annotated and is 8.8× the size of existing datasets. We conducted extensive experiments, including CNNs and vision transformers, to demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed ViM score. In particular, using the BiT-S model, our method gets an average AUROC
90.91% on four difficult OOD benchmarks, which is 4%
ahead of the best baseline. Code and dataset are available
at https://github.com/haoqiwang/vim.

1. Introduction
Considering most deep image classification models are
trained in the closed-world setting, the out-of-distribution
(OOD) issue arises and deteriorates customer experience
when the models are deployed in production, facing inputs
coming from the open world [9]. For instance, a model may
wrongly but confidently classify an image of crab into the
clapping class, even though no crab-related concepts appear
in the training set. OOD detection is to decide whether an
input belongs to the training distribution. OOD detection
* These two authors contribute equally to the work.
† Corresponding author: Wayne Zhang.

OpenImage-O (AUROC)

Abstract

ViM (Ours)
MOS

90

KL Matching

ODIN MaxLogit
Energy
MSP

85

Mahalanobis

80

Residual

75
55

60

65

70

75

80

85

ImageNet-O (AUROC)

Figure 1. The AUROC (in percentage) of nine OOD detection algorithms applied to a BiT model trained on ImageNet-1K. The
OOD datasets are ImageNet-O (x-axis) and OpenImage-O (yaxis). Methods marked with box  use the feature space; methods
with triangle 4 use the logit; and methods with diamond ♦ use the
softmax probability. The proposed method ViM (marked with *)
uses information from both features and logits.

complements classification and finds its application in fields
such as autonomous driving [19], medical analysis [30] and
industrial inspection [1]. A comprehensive review of OOD
and related topics including open set recognition, novelty
detection and anomaly detection can be found in [38].
The core of an OOD detector is a scoring function φ that
maps an input feature x to a scalar in R, indicating to what
extent the sample is likely to be OOD. In testing, a threshold
τ is decided, ensuring that the validation set retains at least a
given true-positive rate (TPR), e.g. the typical value of 0.95.
The input example is regarded as OOD if φ(x) > τ and as
ID (i.e., in-distribution) otherwise. In cases where a score
indicating the ID-ness is convenient, we can mentally use
the negative of OOD score as the ID score.
Researchers have designed quite a few scoring functions
by seeking properties that are naturally held by ID examples
and easily violated by OOD examples, or vice versa. Scores
are mainly derived from three sources: (1) the probability,
such as the maximum softmax probabilities [13], the minimum KL-divergence between the softmax and the mean
class-conditional distributions [12]; (2) the logit, such as
the maximum logits [12], the logsumexp function over log-

4921

