PoseKernelLifter: Metric Lifting of 3D Human Pose using Sound
Zhijian Yang1,2∗ , Xiaoran Fan1 , Volkan Isler1,3∗ , Hyun Soo Park1,3∗
1

Samsung AI Center NY, 2 University of Illinois Urbana Champaign, 3 University of Minnesota Twin Cities

1m
1m

(a) Single view image

(b) Audio

(c) Metric 3D reconstruction

Figure 1. We present a new method for metric reconstruction of a human’s pose from a single image along with audio signals transmitted
from consumer-grade speakers. Our method recovers the metric scale by leveraging the fact that sound travels at a constant speed through
a fixed medium.

Abstract
Reconstructing the 3D pose of a person in metric scale
from a single view image is a geometrically ill-posed problem. For example, we can not measure the exact distance
of a person to the camera from a single view image without
additional scene assumptions (e.g., known height). Existing learning based approaches circumvent this issue by reconstructing the 3D pose up to scale. However, there are
many applications such as virtual telepresence, robotics,
and augmented reality that require metric scale reconstruction. In this paper, we show that audio signals recorded
along with an image, provide complementary information
to reconstruct the metric 3D pose of the person. The key
insight is that as the audio signals traverse across the 3D
space, their interactions with the body provide metric information about the body’s pose. Based on this insight,
we introduce a time-invariant transfer function called pose
kernel—the impulse response of audio signals induced by
the body pose. The main properties of the pose kernel are
that (1) its envelope highly correlates with 3D pose, (2) the
time response corresponds to arrival time, indicating the
metric distance to the microphone, and (3) it is invariant
to changes in the scene geometry configurations. Therefore, it is readily generalizable to unseen scenes. We design
a multi-stage 3D CNN that fuses audio and visual signals
* Work performed solely as a member of Samsung AI Center NY
despite some authors being affiliated with universities.

and learns to reconstruct 3D pose in a metric scale. We
show that our multi-modal method produces accurate metric reconstruction in realworld scenes, which is not possible
with state-of-the-art lifting approaches including parametric mesh regression and depth regression.

1. Introduction
Since the projection of the 3D world onto an image loses
scale information, 3D reconstruction of a human’s pose
from a single image is an ill-posed problem. To address this
limitation, human pose priors have been used in existing
lifting approaches [6,20,31,34,43,60,75] to reconstruct the
plausible 3D pose given the 2D detected pose by predicting
relative depths. The resulting reconstruction, nonetheless,
still lacks metric scale, i.e., the metric scale cannot be recovered without making an additional assumption such as
known height or ground plane contact. This fundamental limitation of 3D pose lifting precludes applying it to
realworld downstream tasks, e.g., smart home facilitation,
robotics, and augmented reality, where the precise metric
measurements of human activities are critical, in relation to
the surrounding physical objects.
In this paper, we study a problem of metric human pose
reconstruction from a single view image by incorporating a
new sensing modality—audio signals from consumer-grade
speakers (Figure 1). Our insight is that while traversing a
3D environment, the transmitted audio signals undergo a

13179

