Dense Depth Priors for Neural Radiance Fields from Sparse Input Views
Barbara Roessle1

Jonathan T. Barron2
1

Ben Mildenhall2

Technical University of Munich

Pratul P. Srinivasan2
2

Matthias Nießner1

Google Research

Figure 1. We leverage dense depth priors for recovering neural radiance fields of complete rooms when only a handful of input images
are available. To this end, we first utilize the sparse point cloud reconstructions from SfM preprocessing, which we feed into a depth
completion network. We then impose these depth estimates as constraints to the NeRF optimization according to the estimated uncertainty.
This facilitates novel view synthesis results at significantly higher image quality and lower depth error compared to NeRF.

Abstract
Neural radiance fields (NeRF) encode a scene into a
neural representation that enables photo-realistic rendering
of novel views. However, a successful reconstruction from
RGB images requires a large number of input views taken
under static conditions — typically up to a few hundred
images for room-size scenes. Our method aims to synthesize novel views of whole rooms from an order of magnitude
fewer images. To this end, we leverage dense depth priors in
order to constrain the NeRF optimization. First, we take advantage of the sparse depth data that is freely available from
the structure from motion (SfM) preprocessing step used to
estimate camera poses. Second, we use depth completion
to convert these sparse points into dense depth maps and
uncertainty estimates, which are used to guide NeRF optimization. Our method enables data-efficient novel view
synthesis on challenging indoor scenes, using as few as 18
images for an entire scene.

1. Introduction
Synthesizing realistic views from varying viewpoints is
essential for interactions between humans and virtual environments, hence it is of key importance for many virtual
reality applications. The novel view synthesis task is especially relevant for indoor scenes, where it enables virtual navigation through buildings, tourist destinations, or
game environments. When scaling up such applications, it
is preferable to minimize the amount of input data required
to store and process, as well as its acquisition time and cost.
In addition, a static scene requirement is increasingly difficult to fulfill for a longer capture duration. Thus, our goal is
novel view synthesis at room-scale using few input views.
NeRF [21] represents the radiance field and density distribution of a scene as a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) and
uses volume rendering to synthesize output images. This
approach creates impressive, photo-realistic novel views of
scenes with complex geometry and appearance. Unfortunately, applying NeRF to real-world, room-scale scenes
given only tens of images does not produce desirable re-

12892

