JIFF: Jointly-aligned Implicit Face Function for High Quality
Single View Clothed Human Reconstruction
Yukang Cao1
1

Guanying Chen2

The University of Hong Kong

2

Kai Han1

Wenqi Yang1

Kwan-Yee K. Wong1

The Future Network of Intelligence Institute (FNii), CUHK-Shenzhen

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of single view 3D human reconstruction. Recent implicit function based methods have shown impressive results, but they fail to recover
fine face details in their reconstructions. This largely degrades user experience in applications like 3D telepresence.
In this paper, we focus on improving the quality of face
in the reconstruction and propose a novel Jointly-aligned
Implicit Face Function (JIFF) that combines the merits of
the implicit function based approach and model based approach. We employ a 3D morphable face model as our
shape prior and compute space-aligned 3D features that
capture detailed face geometry information. Such spacealigned 3D features are combined with pixel-aligned 2D
features to jointly predict an implicit face function for high
quality face reconstruction. We further extend our pipeline
and introduce a coarse-to-fine architecture to predict high
quality texture for our detailed face model. Extensive evaluations have been carried out on public datasets and our proposed JIFF has demonstrates superior performance (both
quantitatively and qualitatively) over existing state-of-thearts.

1. Introduction
Under the current social distancing measures of the
COVID-19 pandemic, video conferencing has become the
major form of daily communication. With the increased
popularity of 3D hardware like AR goggles, 3D telepresence [42] will soon likely emerge as the next generation
communication standard. High quality 3D human reconstruction is at the core of this technology and is one of the
current hottest topics. Traditional reconstruction methods
depend on expensive capturing hardware and tedious calibration procedure to produce good looking models [15].
This limits their applications to studio settings with expert
users and greatly hinders the growth of AR/VR applications. It is highly desirable to develop easy-to-use tools that
allow easy creation of high quality 3D human models by

Figure 1. Reconstruction by PIFu [55] and our JIFF. Model reconstructed by JIFF shows much better geometric details and texture
than that by PIFu.

home users using commodity RGB cameras.
With the advance in deep learning techniques, recent
3D human reconstruction methods have achieved impressive results using as few as a single image [29, 55, 74].
These methods can be roughly divided into model based
methods [3, 4, 6, 7] and model-free methods [11, 12, 18,
26, 49, 55]. Model based methods typically fit a parametric
human model (e.g., SMPL [37]) to an image to produce a
naked 3D human model. They have difficulties in recovering high-frequency details such as clothing and hair. Modelfree methods, on the other hand, solve this problem by predicting the occupancy of a discretized volume space. One
very representative model-free method is PIFu [55], which
exploits a Multi Layer Perceptron (MLP) to model an implicit function for predicting the occupancy value of a query
point based on pixel-aligned features extracted from an image. PIFu and its variants [34, 56] have achieved state-ofthe-art results in free-form full body human reconstruction.
However, their reconstructions are often lack of fine face
details (see Fig. 1). Considering the ultra-high-definition
rendering standards (i.e. 4K UHD and 8K UHD) that are
common nowadays, their face reconstruction quality is obviously far from satisfactory and largely degrades user experience in AR/VR applications like 3D telepresence.
To achieve high quality human reconstruction with fine
face details, we propose a novel Jointly-aligned Implicit

2729

