Pseudo-Stereo for Monocular 3D Object Detection in Autonomous Driving
Yi-Nan Chen1 Hang Dai2∗ Yong Ding1∗
1
School of Micro-Nano Electronics, Zhejiang University
2
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
∗

Corresponding authors{hang.dai@mbzuai.ac.ae, dingy@vlsi.zju.edu.cn}.

Abstract
Pseudo-LiDAR 3D detectors have made remarkable
progress in monocular 3D detection by enhancing the capability of perceiving depth with depth estimation networks,
and using LiDAR-based 3D detection architectures. The advanced stereo 3D detectors can also accurately localize 3D
objects. The gap in image-to-image generation for stereo
views is much smaller than that in image-to-LiDAR generation. Motivated by this, we propose a Pseudo-Stereo 3D
detection framework with three novel virtual view generation methods, including image-level generation, featurelevel generation, and feature-clone, for detecting 3D objects
from a single image. Our analysis of depth-aware learning
shows that the depth loss is effective in only feature-level
virtual view generation and the estimated depth map is effective in both image-level and feature-level in our framework. We propose a disparity-wise dynamic convolution
with dynamic kernels sampled from the disparity feature
map to filter the features adaptively from a single image for
generating virtual image features, which eases the feature
degradation caused by the depth estimation errors. Till submission (November 18, 2021), our Pseudo-Stereo 3D detection framework ranks 1st on car, pedestrian, and cyclist
among the monocular 3D detectors with publications on the
KITTI-3D benchmark. The code is released at https:
//github.com/revisitq/Pseudo-Stereo-3D.

1. Introduction
Detecting the 3D objects from monocular image enables
the machine to perceive and understand the 3D real world,
which has a wide applications including virtual reality,
robotics and autonomous driving. Monocular 3D detection
is a challenging task because of the lack of accurate 3D information in a single image. However, the huge potential in
such a cheap and easy-to-deploy solution to 3D detection attracts more and more researchers. Remarkable progress has
been made in Pseudo-LiDAR detectors [11, 29, 34, 43, 52]
that use a pre-trained depth estimation network to generate
Pseudo-LiDAR representations, e.g. pseudo point clouds

Figure 1. Overview of our Pseudo-Stereo 3D detection framework
with novel virtual view generation methods: (a) Image-level to use
the generated disparity map for forward warping the input left image into a virtual right image, (b) Feature-level to convert the left
features into virtual right features. A feature conversion baseline
is to clone the left features as the special case in stereo views.

and pseudo voxels, and then feed them to LiDAR-based
3D detectors. It shows that enhancing the capability of perceiving depth can improve monocular 3D detection performance. However, there is a huge performance gap between
Pseudo-LiDAR and LiDAR-based detectors because of the
errors in image-to-LiDAR generation [32].
Apart from LiDAR-based detectors, the stereo 3D detectors [9,17] can also accurately localize 3D objects. Also, the
gap in image-to-image generation for stereo views is much
smaller than that in image-to-LiDAR generation, which is
a cross-modality conversion. Instead of Pseudo-LiDAR,
we propose a novel Pseudo-Stereo 3D detection framework
for monocular 3D detection. Our Pseudo-Stereo 3D detection framework generates a virtual view from a single input
image to compose Pseudo-Stereo views with the generated
virtual view and the input view. Then, we feed the PseudoStereo views to stereo 3D detectors for detecting 3D objects
from the single input image. We use one of the most advanced stereo 3D detectors, LIGA-Stereo [17], as the base
detection architecture. Thus, the virtual view generation is
the key to our Pseudo-Stereo 3D detection framework.
We take KITTI-3D as an example only to explain how
to generate a virtual view. Note that the virtual view does
not require the ground-truth actual view in the dataset for
training. In KITTI-3D, the monocular 3D detection is performed on the left image from the stereo views. Our aim

887

