SoftCollage: A Differentiable Probabilistic Tree Generator for Image Collage
Jiahao Yu1 , Li Chen1 ,* Mingrui Zhang1 , Mading Li2
1
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Kuaishou Technology, Beijing, China
{yujh21,zmr20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn chenlee@tsinghua.edu.cn limading@kuaishou.com

Abstract

Conventional Tree-Based Collage

Collage
Criterion

Initialize

Image collage task aims to create an informative and
visual-aesthetic visual summarization for an image collection. While several recent works exploit tree-based algorithm to preserve image content better, all of them resort to
hand-crafted adjustment rules to optimize the collage tree
structure, leading to the failure of fully exploring the structure space of collage tree. Our key idea is to soften the
discrete tree structure space into a continuous probability
space. We propose SoftCollage, a novel method that employs a neural-based differentiable probabilistic tree generator to produce the probability distribution of correlationpreserving collage tree conditioned on deep image feature,
aspect ratio and canvas size. The differentiable characteristic allows us to formulate the tree-based collage generation as a differentiable process and directly exploit gradient to optimize the collage layout in the level of probability space in an end-to-end manner. To facilitate image
collage research, we propose AIC, a large-scale publicavailable annotated dataset for image collage evaluation.
Extensive experiments on the introduced dataset demonstrate the superior performance of the proposed method.
Data and codes are available at https://github.
com/ChineseYjh/SoftCollage.

1. Introduction
Image collage aims to create a visual summarization
with rich information and high aesthetic quality for a group
of images. Because this task requires professional collage
knowledge, amateurs have a huge demand for automatic
image collage tools [16]. Therefore, many research efforts
have tried to automate the process of image collage. While
many works [4, 12, 18, 19, 25, 26, 33, 41] have achieved a
certain level of success in improving visual perception of
* Corresponding author. This research was partially supported by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos.61972221,
62021002, 61572274) and Tsinghua-Kuaishou Institute of Future Media
Data. We thank Xingjia Pan for preparing some comparison results.

Hand-crafted adjustment rules

Image collection

Tree probability
distribution 𝜏𝜃

SoftCollage
Tree
Generator
Image collection

Collage tree

Sample
Map

Sampled
collage
set

Criterion
Loss

Back propagation

Figure 1. The optimization paradigms of the conventional methods and the proposed SoftCollage. We formulates the tree-based
collage generation as a differentiable process via softening the discrete tree structure τ into a probability space for the first time. Instead of the hand-crafted adjustment scheme, we directly exploit
the gradient of the criterion loss to optimize the tree probability
distribution τθ , which facilitates the tree structure exploration.

collage results, they brought about image artifacts [18, 25,
26, 41] and image overlapping [19, 33, 36, 40]. To tackle
these defects, some tree-based algorithms [3,8,16,23,37,38]
were developed to preserve image content better. A treebased collage is encoded as a binary tree which leads to a
recursive partition of the canvas as illustrated in Fig. 2. In
the tree, each leaf node corresponds to an image and each
interior node corresponds to a bounding box, whose designation as a horizontal (“H”) or vertical (“V”) cut corresponds to dividing the box into two child boxes [3]. The
existing tree-based methods design a two-stage procedure,
where images are arranged in a standard collage tree in the
first stage and the tree is mapped to the collage via a specific
bijection mapping function in the second stage. Accordingly, the collage layout optimization is cast as an optimal
tree structure search problem.
However, all the existing works only resort to heuristic
hand-crafted adjustment rules when searching the optimal
tree structure, leading to the failure of fully exploring the
structure space of collage tree (Fig. 3). Deep learning provides a promising way to learn a high-quality collage tree.
Unfortunately, the two-stage tree-based collage generation
process is undifferentiable because both stages include dis-

3729

