InOut : Diverse Image Outpainting via GAN Inversion
Yen-Chi Cheng1 , Chieh Hubert Lin2 , Hsin-Ying Lee3 , Jian Ren3 , Sergey Tulyakov3 , Ming-Hsuan Yang2,4,5
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 UC Merced 3 Snap Inc. 4 Yonsei University 5 Google Research
https://yccyenchicheng.github.io/InOut/
Image Space

Latent Space
Diverse Outpainting

?

?
(1) Input

?

(3) Outpainted Result
(Generated Full Image)

Optimal Latent Codes (Multi-Modal)

Categorical Manipulation

(2) Inversion

+ Mountain

+ Tower

+ Sea

+ Tree

+ Tower

+ Mountain

?
?

Outpainting via Inversion

Extend 5 times

Panorama Generation

Extend 3 times
from both sides

Figure 1. (top-left) Given an input image and a trained generator, the proposed algorithm searches for latent codes that can generate images
containing the input image. We can naturally achieve (top-right) diverse image outpainting, (middle-right) categorical manipulation for
outpainting area, and (bottom) generate panorama with rich and complex structure.

Abstract
Image outpainting seeks for a semantically consistent
extension of the input image beyond its available content.
Compared to inpainting — filling in missing pixels in a
way coherent with the neighboring pixels — outpainting
can be achieved in more diverse ways since the problem
is less constrained by the surrounding pixels. Existing image outpainting methods pose the problem as a conditional
image-to-image translation task, often generating repetitive
structures and textures by replicating the content available
in the input image. In this work, we formulate the problem from the perspective of inverting generative adversar-

ial networks. Our generator renders micro-patches conditioned on their joint latent code as well as their individual
positions in the image. To outpaint an image, we seek for
multiple latent codes not only recovering available patches
but also synthesizing diverse outpainting by patch-based
generation. This leads to richer structure and content in
the outpainted regions. Furthermore, our formulation allows for outpainting conditioned on the categorical input,
thereby enabling flexible user controls. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the proposed method performs
favorably against existing in- and outpainting methods, featuring higher visual quality and diversity.

11431

