Mutual Quantization for Cross-Modal Search with Noisy Labels
Erkun Yang1 , Dongren Yao2 , Tongliang Liu3 , Cheng Deng1 *
1
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
2
MEEI and Harvard Medical School, 243 Charles Street, Boston, MA, USA
3
TML Lab, Sydney AI Centre, The University of Sydney, Australia
{erkunyang, chdeng}@gmail.com, dongren yao@meei.harvard.edu,tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Deep cross-modal hashing has become an essential tool
for supervised multimodal search. These models tend to be
optimized with large, curated multimodal datasets, where
most labels have been manually verified. Unfortunately, in
many scenarios, such accurate labeling may not be available. In contrast, datasets with low-quality annotations
may be acquired, which inevitably introduce numerous mistakes or label noise and therefore degrade the search performance. To address the challenge, we present a general
robust cross-modal hashing framework to correlate distinct
modalities and combat noisy labels simultaneously. More
specifically, we propose a proxy-based contrastive (PC)
loss to mitigate the gap between different modalities and
train networks for different modalities jointly with smallloss samples that are selected with the PC loss and a mutual quantization loss. The small-loss sample selection from
such joint loss can help choose confident examples to guide
the model training, and the mutual quantization loss can
maximize the agreement between different modalities and
is beneficial to improve the effectiveness of sample selection. Experiments on three widely-used multimodal datasets
show that our method significantly outperforms existing
state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
By transforming high-dimensional data from multiple
modalities into compact binary hash codes in a common
Hamming space, cross-modal hashing offers remarkable
efficiency for large-scale multi-modal data storage and
search. Recently, supervised deep learning-based crossmodal hashing methods have achieved promising results
and been applied to many multi-modal learning tasks [4–
6, 43, 49]. These models usually rely on a large number
of training instances with clean and intact labels. How* Corresponding author.

ever, noisy labels, which are systematically corrupted, are
ubiquitous and unavoidable in our daily life, such as socialnetwork tagging [7], crowdsourcing [38], medical diagnosis [13], and financial analysis [1]. As deep networks have
large model capacities, they can easily memorize and eventually overfit these noisy labels, which correspondingly degenerates the model generalization [51].
To combat the impact of noisy labels, numerous studies
have been conducted, such as correction method [14], MentorNet [19], Co-teaching [15], and T-revision [40]. These
methods can learn robust continuous representations for
unimodal learning tasks. However, they cannot simultaneously tackle multi-modal inputs, such as real-world multimedia data. Moreover, continuous representations are inefficient for storage and computation, and it is non-trivial
to binarize continuous representations. Improper binarization may introduce large quantization errors and severely
degrade the model performance. Therefore, it is important
to explore how to learn robust binary codes for cross-modal
search with noisy labels. While this is rarely touched in
previous works.
We perform an empirical study on a general deep crossmodal hashing framework trained with noisy labels. Figure 1a illustrates the mean average precision (mAP) values
in different epochs for the training datasets evaluated with
noisy labels. We can see that the performance continues to
increase during the training stage, which suggests that the
model will keep memorizing noisy labels during the whole
training procedure. Figure 1b shows the performance of
testing data evaluated with clean labels, which also demonstrates that the models will fast overfit to noisy labels, thus
degrading the search performance. Furthermore, from Figure 1a, we can see that there exists diversity in the performance of different modalities since representations from
different modalities may exist in entirely different spaces
with heterogeneity, making learning from noisy data more
difficult. Lastly, wrongly labeled data can confuse the discriminative connections across distinct modalities, resulting
in challenges mitigating the heterogeneous gap. Therefore,

7551

