SHIFT: A Synthetic Driving Dataset for Continuous Multi-Task
Domain Adaptation
Tao Sun1⇤ Mattia Segu1 * Janis Postels1 Yuxuan Wang1
Luc Van Gool1 Bernt Schiele2 Federico Tombari3,4 Fisher Yu1
1

ETH Zürich

2

MPI Informatics

3

Google

4

Technical University of Munich

{taosun47, segum, jpostels, yuxuwang}@ethz.ch

vangool@vision.ee.ethz.ch, schiele@mpi-inf.mpg.de, tombari@in.tum.de, i@yf.io

Abstract

Discrete domain shifts

Adapting to a continuously evolving environment
is a safety-critical challenge inevitably faced by all
autonomous-driving systems. Existing image- and videobased driving datasets, however, fall short of capturing the
mutable nature of the real world. In this paper, we introduce the largest multi-task synthetic dataset for autonomous
driving, SHIFT. It presents discrete and continuous shifts in
cloudiness, rain and fog intensity, time of day, and vehicle and pedestrian density. Featuring a comprehensive sensor suite and annotations for several mainstream perception
tasks, SHIFT allows to investigate how a perception systems’ performance degrades at increasing levels of domain
shift, fostering the development of continuous adaptation
strategies to mitigate this problem and assessing the robustness and generality of a model. Our dataset and benchmark
toolkit are publicly available at www.vis.xyz/shift.

urban

village

rural

overcast

rainy

foggy

afternoon

dusk

night

Continuous domain shifts

daytime

night

clear

rainy

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the remarkable progress of
perception systems for autonomous driving. Betting on the
role that autonomous driving will serve for society, industry [5, 7, 18, 29, 31, 52, 76] and academia [10, 17, 45, 50, 94]
have joined forces to collect and release several large-scale
driving datasets, raising hopes for a forthcoming successful
deployment of self-driving cars.
Providing a playground for different techniques to compete and thrive on multiple tasks, large-scale driving
datasets have played a pivotal role in the prosperity of perception algorithms. However, while their accuracy surges,
progress in terms of generalization to unforeseen environmental conditions has been underwhelming [11, 47].
* Equal contribution.

Figure 1. SHIFT provides (a) discrete domain shifts: sequences
are collected using separated domain parameters and random initial states, used for robustness evaluation and domain adaptation;
(b) continuous domain shifts: domain parameters change continuously during driving, used for continuous domain adaptation.

To achieve full autonomy, self-driving cars must adapt to
new environments and identify life-threatening failure cases
to promptly prevent crashes. Examples of domain shifts affecting driving are changes in weather and lighting conditions, scenery, and behavior, appearance, and quantity of
agents on the road. Domain shift [2] is a well-known prob-

21371

