Learning to Find Good Models in RANSAC
Daniel Barath, Luca Cavalli, Marc Pollefeys
Computer Vision and Geometry Group, Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
dbarath@ethz.ch

Model hypothesis h

Abstract

1. Introduction
The RANSAC (RANdom SAmple Consensus) algorithm proposed by Fischler and Bolles [12] in 1981 has become the most widely used robust estimator in computer
vision. RANSAC and its variants have been successfully
applied to a wide range of vision tasks, e.g., short baseline
stereo [40, 42], wide baseline matching [23, 24, 28], motion
segmentation [40], detection of geometric primitives [35],
pose-graph initialization for both incremental and global
structure-from-motion pipelines [3, 33, 34], image mosaicing [14], and to perform [2, 19, 46], or initialize general
multi-model fitting algorithms [17, 27].
In brief, RANSAC repeatedly selects, typically, minimal
subsets of the data points and fits a model, e.g., a 3D plane
to three points, an essential matrix to five 2D point corre-

Error prediction from residuals by network f

Model Error

Sigmoid

Leaky ReLU

Linear (h x 1)

Leaky ReLU

Linear (b x 1)

Batch Normalization

Point-to-model residual (px)

Batch Normalization

n blocks

Residual histogram of h

% points

We propose the Model Quality Network, MQ-Net in
short, for predicting the quality, e.g. the pose error of essential matrices, of models generated inside RANSAC. It
replaces the traditionally used scoring techniques, e.g., inlier counting of RANSAC, truncated loss of MSAC, and
the marginalization-based loss of MAGSAC++. Moreover,
Minimal samples Filtering Network (MF-Net) is proposed
for the early rejection of minimal samples that likely lead
to degenerate models or to ones that are inconsistent with
the scene geometry, e.g., due to the chirality constraint. We
show on 54450 image pairs from public real-world datasets
that the proposed MQ-Net leads to results superior to the
state-of-the-art in terms of accuracy by a large margin. The
proposed MF-Net accelerates the fundamental matrix estimation by five times and significantly reduces the essential matrix estimation time while slightly improving accuracy as well. Also, we show experimentally that consensus maximization, i.e. inlier counting, is not an inherently
good measure of the model quality for relative pose estimation. The code is at https://github.com/danini/
learning-good-models-in-ransac.

Figure 1. MQ-Net: quality prediction of model hypotheses.

spondences, or a 6D pose to three 2D-3D correspondences.
The quality of the model is measured as the cardinality of
its support, i.e., the number of inlier data points. Finally,
the model with the highest quality, polished, e.g., by leastsquares fitting or numerical optimization on all inliers, is
returned. In this paper, first, we focus on improving the
RANSAC scoring by a learning-based approach. Second,
we accelerate the robust estimation by learning to reject
minimal samples that likely lead to degenerate solutions.
Since the publication of RANSAC, a number of modifications have been proposed replacing components of the
original algorithm. To improve the accuracy by better modelling the noise in the data, different model quality calculation techniques have been investigated. For instance, MLESAC [41] estimates the quality by a maximum likelihood
procedure with all its beneficial properties, albeit under
certain assumptions about point distributions. In practice,
MLESAC results often are superior to the inlier counting of
plain RANSAC, and they are less sensitive to the manually
set inlier-outlier threshold. In MSAC [41], the loss is for-

15744

