Spatial-Temporal Space Hand-in-Hand:
Spatial-Temporal Video Super-Resolution via Cycle-Projected Mutual Learning
Mengshun Hu1,2† Kui Jiang1,2†

Liang Liao3

Jing Xiao1,2

Junjun Jiang4

Zheng Wang1,2‡

1

National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial Intelligence, School of
Computer Science, Wuhan University 2 Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering
3
Nanyang Technological University 4 Harbin Institute of Technology

Abstract
Spatial-Temporal Video Super-Resolution (ST-VSR) aims
to generate super-resolved videos with higher resolution
(HR) and higher frame rate (HFR). Quite intuitively, pioneering two-stage based methods complete ST-VSR by
directly combining two sub-tasks: Spatial Video SuperResolution (S-VSR) and Temporal Video Super-Resolution
(T-VSR) but ignore the reciprocal relations among them.
Specifically, 1) T-VSR to S-VSR: temporal correlations help
accurate spatial detail representation with more clues; 2)
S-VSR to T-VSR: abundant spatial information contributes
to the refinement of temporal prediction. To this end, we
propose a one-stage based Cycle-projected Mutual learning network (CycMu-Net) for ST-VSR, which makes full
use of spatial-temporal correlations via the mutual learning between S-VSR and T-VSR. Specifically, we propose
to exploit the mutual information among them via iterative up-and-down projections, where the spatial and temporal features are fully fused and distilled, helping the
high-quality video reconstruction. Besides extensive experiments on benchmark datasets, we also compare our proposed CycMu-Net with S-VSR and T-VSR tasks, demonstrating that our method significantly outperforms state-of-theart methods. Codes are publicly available at: https:
//github.com/hhhhhumengshun/CycMuNet.

1. Introduction
Spatial-temporal video super-resolution (ST-VSR) aims
to produce the high-resolution (HR) and high-frame-rate
(HFR) video sequences from the given low-resolution (LR)
and low-frame-rate (LFR) input. This task has drawn great
attention due to its popular applications [29, 30, 53], including HR slow-motion generation, movie production, highdefinition television upgrades, etc. Great success has been
† Equal Contribution
‡ Corresponding Author

recently achieved in ST-VSR tasks, as illustrated in Figure 1(a), which can be roughly divided into two categories: two-stage and one-stage based methods. The former decomposes it into two sequential sub-tasks: spatial
video super-resolution (S-VSR) and temporal video superresolution (T-VSR), which are individually completed with
image/video super-resolution technologies [19, 51, 58] and
video frame interpolation technologies [28, 40]. However,
more spatial information generated by the S-VSR task can
be used for the refinement of temporal prediction, while
more temporal information predicted by the T-VSR task can
be used to facilitate the reconstruction of spatial details. As
a result, the two-stage based approaches are far from producing satisfied predictions due to lacking the ability to mutually explore the coupled correlations between S-VSR and
T-VSR.
Recently, integrating these two sub-tasks into a unified
framework with a one-stage process becomes more popular. Naturally, based on the parallel or serially processing modes (Figure 1(b) (i) for parallel process and (ii)(iii)
for serial process), diverse and effective schemes have been
developed [7, 8, 29, 30, 53, 55]. Unfortunately, the parallel
methods [29, 30] barely consider the coupled correlations
between the two sub-tasks, while the serial methods [53,55]
fail to fully exploit mutual relations since they only focus
on the unilateral relationship, such as “T-to-S” or “S-to-T”.
In particular, the unilateral learning will accumulate reconstruction errors, which we define as cross-space (spatial and
temporal spaces) errors, consequently leading to obvious
aliasing effect in super-resolved results.
For thorough utilization of spatial and temporal information, we propose to promote the one-stage method with
mutual learning, and devise a novel cycle-projected mutual
learning network (CycMu-Net) for ST-VSR. As shown in
Figure 1(c), the philosophy of CycMu-Net is to explore the
mutual relations and achieve the spatial-temporal fusion to
eliminate the cross-space errors. Specifically, the key part
of CycMu-Net is the iterative up-and-down projection units
between the spatial and temporal embedding spaces, involv-

3574

