Crowd Counting in the Frequency Domain
Weibo Shu1 , Jia Wan1 , Kay Chen Tan2 , Sam Kwong1 , Antoni B. Chan1
1
Dept. of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
2
Dept. of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
weiboshu2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, jiawan1998@gmail.com, kctan@polyu.edu.hk, {cssamk,abchan}@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
This paper investigates crowd counting in the frequency
domain, which is a novel direction compared to the traditional view in the spatial domain. By transforming the density map into the frequency domain and using the properties
of the characteristic function, we propose a novel method
that is simple, effective, and efficient. The solid theoretical analysis ends up as an implementation-friendly loss
function, which requires only standard tensor operations
in the training process. We prove that our loss function
is an upper bound of the pseudo sup norm metric between
the ground truth and the prediction density map (over all
of their sub-regions), and demonstrate its efficacy and efficiency versus other loss functions. The experimental results
also show its competitiveness to the state-of-the-art on five
benchmark data sets: ShanghaiTech A & B, UCF-QNRF,
JHU++, and NWPU. Our codes will be available at: wbshu/Crowd Counting in the Frequency Domain

1. Introduction
The research field of image-based crowd counting has
been flourishing since the density map based method is
proposed [12]. After the Multi-Column Neural Network
(MCNN) shows the power of using the deep Convolution
Neural Network (CNN) to generate the density map [46],
the combination of deep learning and density map learning
has led the state-of-the-art. Among current state-of-the-art,
the Bayesian Loss (BL) distinguishes itself by only changing the loss function in the whole pipeline [21]. The BL
used the ground truth dot map to calculate class conditional
distributions (CCD) for each position rather than generating
a discrete density map as supervision. This elegant method
showed that how to exploit the ground truth to offer proper
supervisory information (i.e., the loss function) has a large
impact on the final performance.
The ground truth dot map in itself has a large amount
of useful information. Therefore, how to fully utilize the
ground truth to provide high-quality supervisory informa-

tion becomes one of the active issues in crowd counting.
This issue has yielded a number of prominent research
works recently. Among them, the Distribution Matching
(DMCount) [37] and the Generalized Loss (GL) [35] used
the optimal transport (OT) distance as the loss function
between predicted density maps and the ground truth dot
maps. When the DNN adjusts one predicted pixel value
according to the pixel-wise L2 loss, it only considers the influence on the same pixel in the ground truth. In contrast,
when the DNN adjusts one predicted pixel value according
to the OT loss, it must consider the influence of all nearby
pixels in the ground-truth according to their distances – the
OT problem is a global optimization problem that jointly
considers the transport of all pixels. Therefore, the family
of OT losses is able to better exploit the position information of the ground truth to provide high-quality supervision.
Another approach that better used the groundtruth’s position information is the Purely Point-Based Framework
(P2PNet) [31], which directly taught the network to predict
people’s head positions in the ground truth. The exact position information in the ground truth was used in training by
calculating a one vs. one match between the prediction and
the ground truth.
However, these SOTA methods also have some flaws.
Firstly, both the OT loss [35, 37] and the P2PNet [31] require inefficient external algorithms to extract the spatial
information from the ground truth in each training step.
For the OT loss, the Sinkhorn algorithm [22] is executed to
obtain the optimal transport matrix, while for P2PNet, the
Hungarian algorithm [11] is required to get the one vs. one
point matches. Both of these algorithms require a number
of iterations and are carried out in each training step, which
makes the OT/P2PNet training less efficient. Furthermore,
the complex logic of the Hungarian algorithm makes it hard
to use the advantage of parallelization in GPU. Indeed the
official codes of P2PNet implemented it in CPU, which further decreases the efficiency compared with methods whose
pipelines are fully implemented in GPU.
Secondly, although the position information is fully used
in OT/P2PNet, the counting information of the ground truth

19618

