Towards Robust Vision Transformer
Xiaofeng Mao1

Gege Qi1

Yuefeng Chen1 Xiaodan Li1 Ranjie Duan2 Shaokai Ye3
Yuan He1 Hui Xue1
1
2
Alibaba Group
Swinburne University of Technology 3 EPFL

{mxf164419,qigege.qgg,yuefeng.chenyf,fiona.lxd}@alibaba-inc.com

86

Abstract

60

84

1. Introduction
Following the popularity of transformers in Natural Language Processing (NLP) applications, e.g., BERT [8] and
GPT [30], there has sparked particular interest in investigating whether transformer can be a primary backbone
for computer vision applications previously dominated by
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). Recently, Vision Transformer (ViT) [10] successfully applies a pure
transformer for classification which achieves an impressive speed-accuracy trade-off by capturing long-range dependencies via self-attention. Base on this seminal work,
numerous variants have been proposed to improve ViTs

50
82
80
78
76

DeiT
ConViT
Swin
PVT
PiT
RVT

74
72
70

0

5

10

FLOPS(G)

15

Robust Accuracy(%)

Standard Accuracy(%)

Recent advances on Vision Transformer (ViT) and its improved variants have shown that self-attention-based networks surpass traditional Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) in most vision tasks. However, existing ViTs focus on the standard accuracy and computation cost, lacking the investigation of the intrinsic influence on model robustness and generalization. In this work, we conduct systematic evaluation on components of ViTs in terms of their
impact on robustness to adversarial examples, common corruptions and distribution shifts. We find some components
can be harmful to robustness. By leveraging robust components as building blocks of ViTs, we propose Robust Vision
Transformer (RVT), which is a new vision transformer and
has superior performance with strong robustness. Inspired
by the findings during the evaluation, we further propose
two new plug-and-play techniques called position-aware attention scaling and patch-wise augmentation to augment
our RVT, which we abbreviate as RVT∗ . The experimental results of RVT on ImageNet and six robustness benchmarks demonstrate its advanced robustness and generalization ability compared with previous ViTs and state-ofthe-art CNNs. Furthermore, RVT-S∗ achieves Top-1 rank
on multiple robustness leaderboards including ImageNet-C,
ImageNet-Sketch and ImageNet-R.

40

30

DeiT
ConViT
Swin
PVT
PiT
RVT

20

10
20

0

5

10

FLOPS(G)

15

20

Figure 1. Comparison between RVT and the baseline transformers. The robust accuracy in figure is recorded under FGSM [11]
adversary.

from different perspectives containing training data efficiency [40], self-attention mechanism [25], introducing
convolution [23,45,50] or pooling layers [20,43], etc. However, these works only focus on the standard accuracy and
computation cost, lacking the investigation of the intrinsic
influence on model robustness and generalization.
In this work, we take initiatives to explore a ViT model
with strong robustness. To this end, we first give an empirical assessment of existing ViT models in Figure 1. Surprisingly, although all ViT variants reproduce the standard
accuracy claimed in the paper, some of their modifications
may bring devastating damages on the model robustness. A
vivid example is PVT [43], which achieves a high standard
accuracy but suffered with large drop of robust accuracy.
We show that PVT-Small obtains only 26.6% robust accuracy, which is 14.1% lower than original DeiT-S in Figure 1.
To demystify the trade-offs between accuracy and robustness, we analyze ViT models with different patch embedding, position embedding, transformer blocks and classification head whose impact on the robustness that has
never been thoroughly studied. Based on the valuable find-

12042

