BokehMe: When Neural Rendering Meets Classical Rendering
Juewen Peng1 , Zhiguo Cao1 , Xianrui Luo1 , Hao Lu1 , Ke Xian1 *, and Jianming Zhang2
1
Key Laboratory of Image Processing and Intelligent Control, Ministry of Education,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Adobe Research
{juewenpeng, zgcao, xianruiluo, hlu, kexian}@hust.edu.cn, jianmzha@adobe.com
https://github.com/JuewenPeng/BokehMe

Figure 1. BokehMe creates photo-realistic and highly controllable bokeh effects from high-resolution images and imperfect disparity maps
predicted by DPT [26]. The first column shows the result with a hexagon aperture shape, and the rest of them use a circular shape.

Abstract
We propose BokehMe, a hybrid bokeh rendering framework that marries a neural renderer with a classical physically motivated renderer. Given a single image and a potentially imperfect disparity map, BokehMe generates highresolution photo-realistic bokeh effects with adjustable blur
size, focal plane, and aperture shape. To this end, we analyze the errors from the classical scattering-based method
and derive a formulation to calculate an error map. Based
on this formulation, we implement the classical renderer by
a scattering-based method and propose a two-stage neural
renderer to fix the erroneous areas from the classical renderer. The neural renderer employs a dynamic multi-scale
scheme to efficiently handle arbitrary blur sizes, and it is
trained to handle imperfect disparity input. Experiments
show that our method compares favorably against previous
methods on both synthetic image data and real image data
with predicted disparity. A user study is further conducted
to validate the advantage of our method.

* Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
Bokeh effect refers to the way the lens renders the outof-focus blur in a photograph (Fig. 1). With different lens
designs and configurations, various bokeh styles can be
created. For example, the shape of the bokeh ball can
be controlled by the aperture. Classical rendering methods [6, 20, 31, 40] can change bokeh styles easily by controlling the shape and size of the blur kernel. However, they
often suffer from artifacts at depth discontinuities. Neural
rendering methods [11,25,32] can address this problem well
by learning from image statistics, but they have difficulty
simulating real bokeh balls and can only produce the bokeh
style from the training data. In addition, previous neural
rendering methods lack a mechanism to produce large blur
size on high-resolution images, because of the fixed receptive field of the neural network and the blur size limit of the
training data.
To produce artifact-free and highly controllable bokeh
effects, we propose a novel hybrid framework, termed
BokehMe, which makes the best of the two worlds by fusing the results from a classical renderer and a neural renderer (Fig. 2). We use the scattering-based method [31]

16283

