Learning Memory-Augmented Unidirectional Metrics
for Cross-modality Person Re-identification

1

Jialun Liu1,2 *, Yifan Sun2 , Feng Zhu2 , Hongbin Pei3 , Yi Yang4 , Wenhui Li1†
Jilin University, 2 Baidu Research, 3 Xi’an Jiaotong University, 4 Zhejiang University
jialun18@mails.jlu.edu.cn

liwh@jlu.edu.cn

The farthest proxy

Abstract
This paper tackles the cross-modality person reidentification (re-ID) problem by suppressing the modality
discrepancy. In cross-modality re-ID, the query and gallery
images are in different modalities. Given a training identity,
the popular deep classification baseline shares the same
proxy (i.e., a weight vector in the last classification layer)
for two modalities. We find that it has considerable tolerance for the modality gap, because the shared proxy acts as
an intermediate relay between two modalities. In response,
we propose a Memory-Augmented Unidirectional Metric
(MAUM) learning method consisting of two novel designs,
i.e., unidirectional metrics, and memory-based augmentation. Specifically, MAUM first learns modality-specific
proxies (MS-Proxies) independently under each modality.
Afterward, MAUM uses the already-learned MS-Proxies as
the static references for pulling close the features in the
counterpart modality. These two unidirectional metrics (IR
image to RGB proxy and RGB image to IR proxy) jointly alleviate the relay effect and benefit cross-modality association. The cross-modality association is further enhanced by
storing the MS-Proxies into memory banks to increase the
reference diversity. Importantly, we show that MAUM improves cross-modality re-ID under the modality-balanced
setting and gains extra robustness against the modalityimbalance problem. Extensive experiments on SYSU-MM01
and RegDB datasets demonstrate the superiority of MAUM
over the state-of-the-art. The code will be available.

A modality-agnostic proxy

Multiple MS-spcific proxy

ID-129
ID-129
ID-303

ID-116
ID-116

ID-303

Obvious modality discrepancy
Blurry modality discrepancy
(b) MAUM
(a) Baseline
, : IR , RGB proxy (up-to-date)
, : IR , RGB feature
: A class cluster
, : IR , RGB proxy (historical)
: Modality boundary
: Modality-agnostic proxy

Figure 1. Comparison between baseline and MAUM. We visualize the embedding space of baseline and MAUM with t-SNE [27],
respectively. (a) In baseline, each identity has a modality-agnostic
proxy for two modalities, which acts as a relay between IR and
RGB features. The relay effect of baseline is revealed in the tSNE visualization, where the modality gap between IR and RGB
features is pretty large. (b) MAUM has two modality-specific
proxies (MS-proxies, the orange solid dot for RGB and the blue
solid dot for IR). Each MS-Proxy is fixed as a static reference for
pulling close the features in the counterpart modality (dotted arrow). Further, MAUM stores historical MS-Proxies (void dot) into
two memory banks, one for IR modality and one for RGB modality. Correspondingly, each identity has multiple IR and RGB proxies. The farthest MS-Proxies from the modality boundary become
hard positive references and thus have a stronger “pulling close”
effect (solid arrow). Consequently, as the visualization shows,
MAUM suppresses the modality discrepancy.

1. Introduction
This paper considers cross-modality person reidentification (re-ID). Re-ID aims to retrieve images
of the person-of-interest from the database. Real-world
re-ID systems sometimes require recognizing the same
person across daytime and night. To this end, they use two
* Work done during an internship at Baidu Research.
† Corresponding author.

different devices, i.e., the RGB camera at daytime and the
Infra-Red (IR) camera at night. When the query and the
gallery images are from different modalities, the significant
modality discrepancy stands out as the most prominent
challenge. In this paper, we try to improve cross-modality
re-ID by addressing the modality discrepancy problem.
From the metric learning viewpoint, the keynote of re-ID
is to learn an embedding space with both within-class com-

19366

