Rethinking Visual Geo-localization for Large-Scale Applications
Gabriele Berton
Politecnico di Torino

Carlo Masone
CINI

Barbara Caputo
Politecnico di Torino

gabriele.berton@polito.it

Abstract
Visual Geo-localization (VG) is the task of estimating
the position where a given photo was taken by comparing it with a large database of images of known locations.
To investigate how existing techniques would perform on a
real-world city-wide VG application, we build San Francisco eXtra Large, a new dataset covering a whole city
and providing a wide range of challenging cases, with a
size 30x bigger than the previous largest dataset for visual
geo-localization. We find that current methods fail to scale
to such large datasets, therefore we design a new highly
scalable training technique, called CosPlace, which casts
the training as a classification problem avoiding the expensive mining needed by the commonly used contrastive
learning. We achieve state-of-the-art performance on a
wide range of datasets and find that CosPlace is robust to
heavy domain changes. Moreover, we show that, compared
to the previous state-of-the-art, CosPlace requires roughly
80% less GPU memory at train time, and it achieves better results with 8x smaller descriptors, paving the way for
city-wide real-world visual geo-localization. Dataset, code
and trained models are available for research purposes at
https://github.com/gmberton/CosPlace.

1. Introduction
Visual geo-localization (VG), also known as visual place
recognition [1] or image localization [30], is a staple of
computer vision [1, 15, 21, 44–46, 52] and robotics research
[9–11, 17, 22, 26] and it is defined as the task of coarsely
recognizing the geographical location where a photo was
taken, usually with a tolerance of few meters [1,5,18,24,27,
30, 48]. This task is commonly approached as an image retrieval problem where the query to be localized is compared
to a database of geo-tagged images: the most similar images retrieved from the database, together with their metadata, represent the hypotheses of the query’s geographical
location. In particular, all recent VG methods are learningbased and use a neural network to project the images into an
embedding space that well represents the similarity of their

Figure 1. Map of various datasets on the city of San Francisco.
Previous datasets only cover a sector of the city (green points) or
are sparse (red points). SF-XL densely covers the whole city and
provides a realistic case-study for large-scale applications.

locations, and that can be used for the retrieval.
So far, research on VG has focused on recognizing the
location of images in moderately sized geographical areas
(e.g., a neighborhood). However, real-world applications of
this technology, such as autonomous driving [15] and assistive devices [12], are posed to operate at a much larger
scale (e.g., cities or metropolitan areas), thus requiring massive databases of geo-tagged images to execute the retrieval.
Having access to such massive databases, it would be advisable to use them also to train the model rather than just for
the execution of the retrieval (inference). This idea requires
us to rethink VG, addressing the two following limitations.
Non-representative datasets. The current datasets for VG
are not representative of realistic large-scale applications,
because they are either too small in the geographical coverage [1,7,19,32,44] or too sparse [2,13,31,48] (see Fig. 1 for
an example of these limitations). Moreover, current datasets
follow the common practice of splitting the collected images into geographically disjoint sets for training and inference. However, this practice does not find a correspondence
in the real world where one would likely opt to use images

4878

