Rotationally Equivariant 3D Object Detection
Hong-Xing Yu
Stanford University

Jiajun Wu
Stanford University

Li Yi
Tsinghua University, Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute

Abstract
Rotation equivariance has recently become a strongly desired property in the 3D deep learning community. Yet most
existing methods focus on equivariance regarding a global
input rotation while ignoring the fact that rotation symmetry has its own spatial support. Specifically, we consider
the object detection problem in 3D scenes, where an object
bounding box should be equivariant regarding the object
pose, independent of the scene motion. This suggests a new
desired property we call object-level rotation equivariance.
To incorporate object-level rotation equivariance into 3D
object detectors, we need a mechanism to extract equivariant
features with local object-level spatial support while being
able to model cross-object context information. To this end,
we propose Equivariant Object detection Network (EON)
with a rotation equivariance suspension design to achieve
object-level equivariance. EON can be applied to modern
point cloud object detectors, such as VoteNet and PointRCNN, enabling them to exploit object rotation symmetry in
scene-scale inputs. Our experiments on both indoor scene
and autonomous driving datasets show that significant improvements are obtained by plugging our EON design into
existing state-of-the-art 3D object detectors. Project website:
https://kovenyu.com/EON/.

1. Introduction
3D object detection is a fundamental problem in various downstream applications including augmented reality,
robotics, and autonomous driving. Research efforts in designing 3D object detection networks have shown great effectiveness for both indoor [17, 27] and outdoor scenes [21, 29].
However, existing 3D object detectors cannot explicitly treat
object rotation equivariance in their designs. Object rotation
equivariance in 3D detection is well-reflected in the rotation
invariance of shape and equivariance of orientation. For
example, no matter how an object is oriented in an input
scene, the detection result (typically represented as an oriented bounding box) associated with the object should orient
in the same way while retaining the same shape. Explicit

Input point cloud

No equivariance

Object-level equivariance

Figure 1. Rotation symmetry in object detection includes the equivariant orientation and invariant shape of the bounding box. The
object-level rotation equivariant detector explicitly models these
strong priors and intrinsically generates oriented bounding box to
rotate following the object, while maintaining the same box shape.
Non-equivariant detectors, however, may suffer from box shape
changes and unaligned variations in box orientation.

modeling of these strong priors save the needs for expensive
data augmentations, and can increase the expressivity and
discriminative power of detection models without heavily
increasing the number of parameters and introducing additional optimization challenges.
A recent trend to explicitly exploit rotation equivariance
is through equivariant networks [4, 25, 26] (EN). The main
idea is that the equivariant geometric features carry both
shape information and orientation information separately by
design. Rotation equivariant networks have been explored
for object classification and pose estimation [2,7,13], but not
yet for 3D object detection. A main challenge is that existing
EN mostly explores rotation equivariance regarding the full
visual input, while equivariance to rotations of a whole scene
is not ideal for object detection, because individual object
orientation can be independent of the scene. Thus, it is
unclear how to achieve object-level rotation equivariance
and how to benefit 3D object detection in cluttered scenes.
We identify two key technical challenges toward objectlevel equivariant model design: how to determine the objectlevel spatial support to extract locally equivariant features,
and how to aggregate context information. The greater con-

1456

