Face Relighting with Geometrically Consistent Shadows
Andrew Hou*,1 , Michel Sarkis2 , Ning Bi2 , Yiying Tong1 , Xiaoming Liu1
1
Michigan State University, 2 Qualcomm Technologies Inc.
{houandr1, ytong, liuxm}@msu.edu, {msarkis, nbi}@qti.qualcomm.com
https://github.com/andrewhou1/GeomConsistentFR

Target Lighting

Abstract
Most face relighting methods are able to handle diffuse
shadows, but struggle to handle hard shadows, such as
those cast by the nose. Methods that propose techniques
for handling hard shadows often do not produce geometrically consistent shadows since they do not directly leverage the estimated face geometry while synthesizing them.
We propose a novel differentiable algorithm for synthesizing
hard shadows based on ray tracing, which we incorporate
into training our face relighting model. Our proposed algorithm directly utilizes the estimated face geometry to synthesize geometrically consistent hard shadows. We demonstrate through quantitative and qualitative experiments on
Multi-PIE and FFHQ that our method produces more geometrically consistent shadows than previous face relighting
methods while also achieving state-of-the-art face relighting performance under directional lighting. In addition, we
demonstrate that our differentiable hard shadow modeling
improves the quality of the estimated face geometry over
diffuse shading models.

1. Introduction
Single image face relighting is a problem of great interest
among the computer vision and computer graphics communities. Relighting consumer photos has been a major driving
factor in motivating the problem given widespread interest
in photo editing. Face relighting also has applications in
other areas such as Augmented Reality (AR) [29], where it
can be used to modify facial illuminations to match the environment lighting, and face recognition [16, 33], where it
can relight images to frontal illuminations. It is thus relevant both for consumer interests and entertainment and for
security applications such as authentication.
Earlier relighting methods [35, 43, 54] tend to make the
simplified assumption that light is naturally scattered by the
environment and thus diffuse in nature, and that human skin
is a lambertian material. While this is sufficient to model
* All of the data mentioned in this paper was downloaded and used at
Michigan State University.

Input Image

a) Input Image

Face Geometry

b) Target Image

Shadow Mask

c) Hou [10]

Relit Image

d) Proposed

Figure 1. Overview. We introduce a novel face relighting method
that produces geometrically consistent shadows. By proposing a
differentiable algorithm based on the principles of ray tracing that
directly uses the face geometry for modeling hard shadows, our
method produces physically correct hard shadows which the stateof-the-art face relighting method, Hou et al. [10], cannot produce.

general lighting directions and soft shadows, it does not account for non-lambertian effects such as hard shadows from
strong directional lights. This is highly problematic since
many light sources in the real world (e.g. the sun) are best
modeled as directional lights. In AR/VR, the environment
lighting is often also set to be directional lights. In order to
enhance photorealism both for in-the-wild consumer photos
and in AR/VR, proper hard shadow modeling is a necessity.
One important problem in face relighting is thus handling hard shadows. Most existing methods do not handle
non-diffuse lighting and are unable to synthesize realistic
hard shadows [35, 43, 54]. They generally use smooth lighting conditions such as low-order Spherical Harmonics (SH)
and train on images with diffuse lighting. While many illumination conditions in the wild are ambient or area-based,
these assumptions do not account for the interactions of
strong directional lights and point lights, which produce
hard shadows. Among current methods that do model hard
shadows [10, 29, 30], none are able to guarantee geometrically consistent cast shadows since they do not directly utilize the estimated face geometry to generate them. Without
using the geometry directly, the shape of the cast shadows,
such as those cast by the nose, may be incorrect.
We introduce a novel differentiable algorithm to estimate

4217

