L2G: A Simple Local-to-Global Knowledge Transfer Framework for
Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation

1

Peng-Tao Jiang1 Yuqi Yang1 Qibin Hou1∗ Yunchao Wei2
TMCC, CS, Nankai University 2 Beijing Jiaotong University
pt.jiang@mail.nankai.edu.cn andrewhoux@gmail.com

1. Introduction
Deep learning algorithms [37, 41, 64] have promoted the
rapid development of the semantic segmentation task in recent years. However, training a deep neural network for semantic segmentation requires a large number of pixel-wise
accurate labels, which consume lots of human labors and resources. Recently, to reduce the reliance on accurate annotations, researchers have attempted to study semantic segmentation based on cheap supervisions, such as bounding
boxes [12,42], scribbles [36,50], points [4], and image-level
labels [23, 53]. Among these weak supervisions, imagelevel labels only provide information on the existence of
the target object categories, making them more popular than
∗ Qibin Hou is the corresponding author.

Global view

Global network

Transfer

Local views

Local network

Attention

dddd

Mining precise class-aware attention maps, a.k.a, class
activation maps, is essential for weakly supervised semantic
segmentation. In this paper, we present L2G, a simple online local-to-global knowledge transfer framework for highquality object attention mining. We observe that classification models can discover object regions with more details when replacing the input image with its local patches.
Taking this into account, we first leverage a local classification network to extract attentions from multiple local
patches randomly cropped from the input image. Then,
we utilize a global network to learn complementary attention knowledge across multiple local attention maps online.
Our framework conducts the global network to learn the
captured rich object detail knowledge from a global view
and thereby produces high-quality attention maps that can
be directly used as pseudo annotations for semantic segmentation networks. Experiments show that our method attains 72.1% and 44.2% mIoU scores on the validation set
of PASCAL VOC 2012 and MS COCO 2014, respectively,
setting new state-of-the-art records. Code is available at
https://github.com/PengtaoJiang/L2G.

dddd

Abstract

dddd

Figure 1. Conceptual working pipeline of the proposed method.
We utilize the attention maps for local views with rich details extracted from the local network to teach the global network. This
enables the global network to learn the rich local details knowledge from the local network online and thereby more integral object attentions.

other supervisions due to the easy way to collect. In this paper, we also focus on weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) based on image-level labels.
Speaking of WSSS, one of the most important components should be the class activation map (CAM) [65] which
contains both semantic and location information about the
target objects and can be used as pseudo pixel-level annotations for training segmentation networks. Since the
quality of CAMs has a great influence on the segmentation results, recently, many strategies have been proposed
to advance the original CAM method, including adversarial erasing [22, 53, 63, 66], online attention accumulation [25, 26], seed region expansion [24, 28], and affinity
learning [1, 2, 57], etc. Despite the good performance, these
works mostly take the whole input image as the sole input
to the model. However, we empirically observe that classification models can discover more discriminative regions
when taking local image patches as input compared to the
whole input image. This suggests a proper way to improve
the quality of attention maps by making use of local image
patches.

16886

