Local Learning Matters: Rethinking Data Heterogeneity in Federated Learning
Matias Mendieta1 , Taojiannan Yang1 , Pu Wang2 , Minwoo Lee2 , Zhengming Ding3 , Chen Chen1
1
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida, USA
2
Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina at Charlotte, USA
3
Department of Computer Science, Tulane University, USA
{mendieta,taoyang1122}@knights.ucf.edu; chen.chen@crcv.ucf.edu
{pu.wang,minwoo.lee}@uncc.edu; zding1@tulane.edu

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) is a promising strategy for performing privacy-preserving, distributed learning with a network of clients (i.e., edge devices). However, the data distribution among clients is often non-IID in nature, making
efficient optimization difficult. To alleviate this issue, many
FL algorithms focus on mitigating the effects of data heterogeneity across clients by introducing a variety of proximal
terms, some incurring considerable compute and/or memory overheads, to restrain local updates with respect to the
global model. Instead, we consider rethinking solutions to
data heterogeneity in FL with a focus on local learning generality rather than proximal restriction. To this end, we first
present a systematic study informed by second-order indicators to better understand algorithm effectiveness in FL.
Interestingly, we find that standard regularization methods
are surprisingly strong performers in mitigating data heterogeneity effects. Based on our findings, we further propose a simple and effective method, FedAlign, to overcome
data heterogeneity and the pitfalls of previous methods.
FedAlign achieves competitive accuracy with state-of-theart FL methods across a variety of settings while minimizing computation and memory overhead. Code is available
at https://github.com/mmendiet/FedAlign.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) [17] enables a large number of
clients to perform collaborative training of machine learning models without compromising data privacy. In the FL
setting, participating clients are typically deployed in a variety of environments or owned by a diverse set of users.
Therefore, the distribution of each client’s local data can
vary considerably (i.e., data heterogeneity). This non-IID
data distribution among participating devices in FL makes
optimization particularly challenging. As each client trains

locally on their own data, they step towards their respective local minimum. However, this local convergence point
may not be well aligned with the objective of the global
model (that is, the model being learned though aggregation at the central server). Therefore, the client model often drifts away from the ideal global optimization point and
overfits to its local objective. When such client drifting occurs, the performance of the central aggregated model is
hindered [9, 14].
One straight-forward solution to this phenomenon is to
simply limit the number of local training epochs performed
between central aggregation steps. However, this severely
hinders the convergence speed of the FL system, and many
communication rounds are required to achieve adequate
performance. The time to convergence and immense communication overhead incurred by such an approach are often
not tolerable for real-world distributed systems. Therefore,
effectively addressing data heterogeneity is of paramount
concern in federated learning.
Many algorithmic solutions to this problem have been
proposed in the literature [1, 10, 15, 23]. These strategies
typically focus on mitigating the effects of data heterogeneity across clients by introducing a variety of proximal terms
to restrain local updates with respect to the global model.
However, by restraining the drift, they also inherently limit
the local convergence potential; less novel information is
gathered per communication round. Consequently, many
current FL algorithms do not provide stable performance
improvements across different non-IID settings in comparison to classic baselines [14, 15], especially on vision tasks
beyond the difficulty of MNIST [13]. Furthermore, existing
methods have paid little attention to the resource constraints
of the client, typically scarce for deployed FL edge devices, and in some cases incur considerable compute and/or
memory overheads on the client in their effort to alleviate client drift. For example, the state-of-the-art (SOTA)
method MOON performs well on federated image tasks, but
to do so incurs a ∼3x overhead in both memory and com-

8397

