PubTables-1M: Towards comprehensive table extraction from unstructured
documents
Brandon Smock

Rohith Pesala
Microsoft
Redmond, WA

Robin Abraham

brsmock,ropesala,robin.abraham@microsoft.com

Abstract
Recently, significant progress has been made applying
machine learning to the problem of table structure inference
and extraction from unstructured documents. However, one
of the greatest challenges remains the creation of datasets
with complete, unambiguous ground truth at scale. To address this, we develop a new, more comprehensive dataset
for table extraction, called PubTables-1M. PubTables-1M
contains nearly one million tables from scientific articles,
supports multiple input modalities, and contains detailed
header and location information for table structures, making it useful for a wide variety of modeling approaches. It
also addresses a significant source of ground truth inconsistency observed in prior datasets called oversegmentation,
using a novel canonicalization procedure. We demonstrate
that these improvements lead to a significant increase in
training performance and a more reliable estimate of model
performance at evaluation for table structure recognition.
Further, we show that transformer-based object detection
models trained on PubTables-1M produce excellent results
for all three tasks of detection, structure recognition, and
functional analysis without the need for any special customization for these tasks. Data and code will be released at
https://github.com/microsoft/table-transformer.

1. Introduction
A table is a compact, structured representation for storing
and communicating data in documents and other manners of
presentation. In its presented form, however, a table, such
as the one in Fig. 1, may not explicitly represent its logical
structure. This is a significant problem as a large amount of
data is communicated through documents, and the absence
of structure information can impede this data’s use.
Inferring a table’s structure from its presentation and
converting it to a structured form is known as table extraction
(TE). TE entails three subtasks [5], which we illustrate in

Figure 1. An example presentation table whose underlying logical
structure is missing and must be inferred.

Fig. 2: table detection (TD), which locates the table; table
structure recognition (TSR), which recognizes a table’s rows,
columns, and cells; and functional analysis (FA), which
recognizes a table’s keys and values. TE is challenging for
automated systems [8, 11, 16, 22] due to the wide variety of
formats, styles, and layouts found in presented tables.
Recently, there has been a shift in the research literature from traditional rule-based methods [3, 10, 17] for TE to
data-driven methods based on deep learning (DL) [13,16,21].
The primary advantage of DL methods is that they can learn
to be more robust to the wide variety of table presentation
formats. However, manually annotating tables for TSR is
a difficult and time-consuming process [6]. To overcome
this, researchers have turned recently to crowd-sourcing to
construct larger datasets [8, 21, 22]. These datasets are assembled from documents created by thousands of authors,
where each table’s structure and content is annotated in a
markup format such as HTML, XML, or LaTeX.
While crowd-sourcing solves the problem of dataset size,
repurposing annotations unintended for TE and automatically converting these to ground truth presents its own challenges with respect to the completeness, consistency, quality,
and explicitness of information. For instance, markup does
not encode spatial coordinates for cells and encodes logical
relationships implicitly through cues such as layout [19].
This lack of explicit information limits not only the range of
potential modeling approaches, but also the quality control
that can be done to verify the annotations’ correctness.

4634

