Unimodal-Concentrated Loss: Fully Adaptive Label Distribution Learning for
Ordinal Regression
Qiang Li∗ , Jingjing Wang∗ , Zhaoliang Yao, Yachun Li,
Pengju Yang, Jingwei Yan, Chunmao Wang, Shiliang Pu†
Hikvision Research Institute, China
{liqiang23,wangjingjing9,yaozhaoliang,liyachun6,yangpengju,
yanjingwei,wangchunmao,pushiliang.hri}@hikvision.com

Abstract

∗ Authors contribute equally to this work.
† Shiliang Pu is the corresponding author.

Probability

Learning from a label distribution has achieved promising results on ordinal regression tasks such as facial age
and head pose estimation wherein, the concept of adaptive
label distribution learning (ALDL) has drawn lots of attention recently for its superiority in theory. However, compared with the methods assuming fixed form label distribution, ALDL methods have not achieved better performance.
We argue that existing ALDL algorithms do not fully exploit the intrinsic properties of ordinal regression. In this
paper, we emphatically summarize that learning an adaptive label distribution on ordinal regression tasks should
follow three principles. First, the probability corresponding to the ground-truth should be the highest in label distribution. Second, the probabilities of neighboring labels
should decrease with the increase of distance away from
the ground-truth, i.e., the distribution is unimodal. Third,
the label distribution should vary with samples changing,
and even be distinct for different instances with the same
label, due to the different levels of difficulty and ambiguity.
Under the premise of these principles, we propose a novel
loss function for fully adaptive label distribution learning,
namely unimodal-concentrated loss. Specifically, the unimodal loss derived from the learning to rank strategy constrains the distribution to be unimodal. Furthermore, the
estimation error and the variance of the predicted distribution for a specific sample are integrated into the proposed
concentrated loss to make the predicted distribution maximize at the ground-truth and vary according to the predicting uncertainty. Extensive experimental results on typical
ordinal regression tasks including age and head pose estimation, show the superiority of our proposed unimodalconcentrated loss compared with existing loss functions.

Mean-Variance
Ours

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4

Multimodal appears
0.2

0

10

20

30

40

50

Age

60

70

80

90

100

Figure 1. Distributions predicted by Mean-Variance method [22]
and ours. Our predictions are optimized to be unimodal and
learned according to specific instances adaptively. On the contrary,
predictions of Mean-Variance are optimized to be concentrated for
all instances and do not ensure unimodal distributions explicitly.

1. Introduction
Ordinal regression solves the challenging problems that
labels are related in a natural or implied order. Many critical
tasks are involved in the ordinal regression problem, e.g.,
facial age estimation, head pose estimation, facial attractiveness computation and movie ratings, which play an important role in many practical applications such as humancomputer interaction, driver monitoring, precise advertising
and video surveillance [10, 32].
Early classic works [11, 17, 20, 24, 37, 38] are based on
ordinary classification or regression, which do not perform
well due to ignoring the ordinal relationship among labels,
and suffering from the ambiguous labeling. In recent years,
ranking based methods [3, 21] are proposed which use multiple binary classifiers to determine the rank order. They
explicitly make use of the ordinal information but they do

20513

