Topology Preserving Local Road Network Estimation from Single Onboard Camera Image
Yigit Baran Can1 Alexander Liniger1 Danda Pani Paudel1 Luc Van Gool1,2
1
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich 2 VISICS, ESAT/PSI, KU Leuven
{yigit.can, alex.liniger, paudel, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
Knowledge of the road network topology is crucial for
autonomous planning and navigation. Yet, recovering such
topology from a single image has only been explored in
part. Furthermore, it needs to refer to the ground plane,
where also the driving actions are taken. This paper aims
at extracting the local road network topology, directly in
the bird’s-eye-view (BEV), all in a complex urban setting. The only input consists of a single onboard, forward looking camera image. We represent the road topology using a set of directed lane curves and their interactions, which are captured using their intersection points.
To better capture topology, we introduce the concept of
minimal cycles and their covers. A minimal cycle is the
smallest cycle formed by the directed curve segments (between two intersections). The cover is a set of curves
whose segments are involved in forming a minimal cycle.
We first show that the covers suffice to uniquely represent
the road topology. The covers are then used to supervise
deep neural networks, along with the lane curve supervision. These learn to predict the road topology from a single input image. The results on the NuScenes and Argoverse benchmarks are significantly better than those obtained with baselines. Code: https://github.com/
ybarancan/TopologicalLaneGraph.

1. Introduction
How would you give directions to a driver? One of the
most intuitive ways is by stating turns, instead of distances.
For example, taking the third right turn is more intuitive and
robust than going straight for 100 meters and turn right.
This observation motivates us to model road networks using the involved lanes and their intersections. We model the
lane intersections ordered in the direction of traffic. Given
a reference centerline L and two lines I1 , I2 intersecting L,
we consider the set of all possible lines intersecting L between the intersection points L − I1 and L − I2 as an equivalence class. Such modelling allows us to supervise the
learning process explicitly using the topological structure of

c)

b)

a)

P
GT

P

P

Equi-loss estimates (Base)

P

P

Equi-loss estimates (Ours)

Figure 1. GT (a), two estimates of base method [6] with similar
loss(b), and two estimates of Ours with similar loss (c). Yellow
dots refer to connections. Our formulation encourages the shaded
(in cyan) region to exist in the prediction, which in turn, ensures
preservation of order of intersections.

the road network. In turn, the topological consistency during inference is improved. Consider a car moving from the
green point P upwards in Fig 1, which needs to take the first
left turn. In the two estimates of [6], the first left leads to
different lanes. While the underlying directed graphs have
the same connectivity in all estimates, they have very different topological structures which play an important role
in decision making.
For autonomous driving, the information contained in
the local road network surrounding the car is vital for the
decision making of the autonomous system. The local road
network is both used to predict the motion of other agents
[15, 23, 36, 45] as well as to plan ego-motion [3, 12]. The
most popular approach to represent the road network is in
terms of lane graph based HD-maps, which contain both
the information about the centerlines and their connectivity.
Most existing methods address the problem of road network
extraction by using offline generated HD-maps in combination with a modular perception stack [10, 24, 29, 35, 39].
However, offline HD-maps based solutions have two major issues: (i) dependency on the precise localization in the
HD-map [29, 43], (ii) requirement to construct and maintain such maps. These requirements severely limit the scalability of autonomous driving to operate in geographically
restricted areas. To avoid offline mapping [6] proposed to
directly estimate the local road network online from just one
onboard image. Inspired by this approach and given the importance of topological consistency for graph based maps
we propose to directly supervise the map generation network to estimate topological consistent road networks.

17263

