OmniFusion: 360 Monocular Depth Estimation via Geometry-Aware Fusion
Yuyan Li1 * Yuliang Guo2∗
1

Zhixin Yan2

University of Missouri

{yl235, duanye}@umsystem.edu

2

Xinyu Huang2

Ye Duan1

Liu Ren2

Bosch Research North America

{yuliang.guo2, zhixin.yan2, xinyu.huang, liu.ren}@us.bosch.com

Abstract
A well-known challenge in applying deep-learning methods to omnidirectional images is spherical distortion. In
dense regression tasks such as depth estimation, where
structural details are required, using a vanilla CNN layer
on the distorted 360 image results in undesired information
loss. In this paper, we propose a 360 monocular depth estimation pipeline, OmniFusion, to tackle the spherical distortion issue. Our pipeline transforms a 360 image into
less-distorted perspective patches (i.e. tangent images) to
obtain patch-wise predictions via CNN, and then merge
the patch-wise results for final output. To handle the discrepancy between patch-wise predictions which is a major issue affecting the merging quality, we propose a new
framework with the following key components. First, we
propose a geometry-aware feature fusion mechanism that
combines 3D geometric features with 2D image features
to compensate for the patch-wise discrepancy. Second, we
employ the self-attention-based transformer architecture to
conduct a global aggregation of patch-wise information,
which further improves the consistency. Last, we introduce an iterative depth refinement mechanism, to further
refine the estimated depth based on the more accurate geometric features. Experiments show that our method greatly
mitigates the distortion issue, and achieves state-of-the-art
performances on several 360 monocular depth estimation
benchmark datasets. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/yuyanli0831/OmniFusion.

1. Introduction
A 360 image provides a comprehensive view of the scene
with its wide field of view (FoV), which is beneficial in
understanding the scene holistically. However, commonly
used 360 image representation format such as the equirectangular projection (ERP) image can introduce geometric
distortions. The distortion factor varies in the vertical direction and may degrade the performance of regular convolutional layers designed for non-distorted perspective images.
* Equal contribution

Figure 1. Our method, Omnifusion, produces high-quality dense
depth (shown as the image on the right) from a monocular ERP input (shown as an image wrapped on a unit sphere on the left). Our
method uses a set of N perspective patches (i.e. tangent images)
to represent the ERP image (top branch), and fuse the image features with 3D geometric features (bottom branch) to improve the
estimation of the merged depth map. The corresponding camera
poses of the tangent images are shown in the middle row.

Many studies have been proposed to address the distortion
issue. [4, 29, 39] proposed distortion-aware convolutions or
spherical customized kernels. However, it remains unclear
how effective such spherical convolutions are, especially in
deeper layers [29,35]. Some spherical CNNs [8,37] defined
convolution in the spectral domain, with potentially heavier
computation overhead. Attempts have also been made to
tackle the ERP distortion via other less-distorted formats.
BiFuse [35] and UniFuse [20] took complementary properties from ERP and cubemap. Several works [7, 30] applied
regular CNNs repeatedly to multiple perspective projections
of the 360 image. Recently, Eder et al. [13] proposed to use
a set of subdivided icosahedron tangent images, and demonstrated that using tangent image representation can facilitate
the network transfer between perspective and 360 images.
It is advantageous to use tangent images [13] as it has
less distortion, and can make good use of the large pool of
pre-trained CNNs developed for perspective imaging. Additionally, the tangent image representation inherits a superior scalability to handle high resolution inputs compared
to those holistically method. However, the vanilla pipeline
[13] has some limitations. First, severe discrepancies occur
between perspective views since the same object may appear differently from multiple views (an example is shown

2801

