M3T: three-dimensional Medical image classifier using Multi-plane and
Multi-slice Transformer
Jinseong Jang
Dosik Hwang*
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University

Abstract
In this study, we propose a three-dimensional Medical
image classifier using Multi-plane and Multi-slice Transformer (M3T) network to classify Alzheimer’s disease (AD)
in 3D MRI images. The proposed network synergically combines 3D CNN, 2D CNN, and Transformer for accurate AD
classification. The 3D CNN is used to perform natively 3D
representation learning, while 2D CNN is used to utilize the
pre-trained weights on large 2D databases and 2D representation learning. It is possible to efficiently extract the locality information for AD-related abnormalities in the local
brain using CNN networks with inductive bias. The transformer network is also used to obtain attention relationships
among multi-plane (axial, coronal, and sagittal) and multislice images after CNN. It is also possible to learn the abnormalities distributed over the wider region in the brain
using the transformer without inductive bias. In this experiment, we used a training dataset from the Alzheimer’s
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) which contains a
total of 4,786 3D T1-weighted MRI images. For the validation data, we used dataset from three different institutions:
The Australian Imaging, Biomarker and Lifestyle Flagship
Study of Ageing (AIBL), The Open Access Series of Imaging Studies (OASIS), and some set of ADNI data independent from the training dataset. Our proposed M3T is compared to conventional 3D classification networks based on
an area under the curve (AUC) and classification accuracy
for AD classification. This study represents that the proposed network M3T achieved the highest performance in
multi-institutional validation database, and demonstrates
the feasibility of the method to efficiently combine CNN and
Transformer for 3D medical images.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) have been established with a dominant performance in the computer
vision field [35]. They have showed high feasibilities in
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. The overall framework of three-dimensional Medical
image classifier using Multi-plane and Multi-slice Transformer
network (M3T)

various computer vision tasks such as image classification
[26, 28, 35, 65], object detection [38, 53, 54], and semantic segmentation [8, 40, 55]. In addition, these CNN-based
architectures have been widely applied to the medical image analysis field [39] in the various modalities such as Xray [27], CT [24], MRI [20, 30], and Ultrasound [12], and
in various dimension signals from 2D to 3D medical images [4, 74]. Especially, to analyze 3D medical images, various approaches have been established based on 2D and 3D
CNN networks [4, 47, 56, 74]. The 2D-based methods have
advantages from a pre-trained model using large-scale 2D
natural images, while the 2D representation learning has a
disadvantage for analysis of 3D image contexts [47, 56, 74].
On the other hand, The 3D-based methods can learn natively 3D representations [13, 44, 57]. However, there are
few publicly available 3D databases for pretraining [61,62].
Furthermore, the 3D model has lacks of ability to build deep
layers because it requires large parameters and computa-

20718

