DR.VIC: Decomposition and Reasoning for Video Individual Counting
Tao Han1† , Lei Bai2† , Junyu Gao1 , Qi Wang1∗ , Wanli Ouyang2
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, P.R. China
2
The University of Sydney, SenseTime Computer Vision Group, Australia
hantao10200@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, {baisanshi, gjy3035, crabwq}@gmail.com,
wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Pedestrian counting is a fundamental tool for understanding pedestrian patterns and crowd flow analysis. Existing works (e.g., image-level pedestrian counting, crossline crowd counting et al.) either only focus on the imagelevel counting or are constrained to the manual annotation
of lines. In this work, we propose to conduct the pedestrian counting from a new perspective - Video Individual
Counting (VIC), which counts the total number of individual pedestrians in the given video (a person is only counted
once). Instead of relying on the Multiple Object Tracking
(MOT) techniques, we propose to solve the problem by decomposing all pedestrians into the initial pedestrians who
existed in the first frame and the new pedestrians with separate identities in each following frame. Then, an endto-end Decomposition and Reasoning Network (DRNet) is
designed to predict the initial pedestrian count with the
density estimation method and reason the new pedestrian’s
count of each frame with the differentiable optimal transport. Extensive experiments are conducted on two datasets
with congested pedestrians and diverse scenes, demonstrating the effectiveness of our method over baselines with great
superiority in counting the individual pedestrians. Code:
https://github.com/taohan10200/DRNet.

1. Introduction
The world population has witnessed rapid growth, along
with the accelerated urbanization. It is expected that around
70% of the world’s population will live in cities [10, 51],
which brings significant challenges in the city management,
such as transport management, public space design, evacuation planning, and public safety. To tackle these challenges,
accurately obtaining the number of pedestrians of any region in a period of time, e.g., the number of people passed
†
*

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

3

1

1

2
4

2
3

t

t+1

Video Individual Counting
Cross-line crowd counting
Single image crowd counting

Figure 1. Illustration of different crowd counting paradigms.
Video t:
Individual
count all pedestrians
1 2 3appearing in the
1 2 Counting
3
video and
each 2 4
person
count ①②③④
5 is
3 only counted once, 2e.g.4
3
t+1:
b)
to get counting result 4. Single Image Crowd
Counting
targets on
DRNet: Id
irrelevant
the image-level. Directly applying it to video individual counting
new track
will cause over-count,Update
e.g., to a
count
pedestrians ①②③ at frame t and
Id irrelevant
MOT
Association
Error: t + 1 getting result 6. Cross-line
②③④
at frame
Crowd Countsame person counted twice
ing targets on the video Nlevel but only focuses on the pedestrians
passed the red virtual line, e.g., count ③ to get result 1.


the intersection in the past 10 minutes, is a basic problem.
Automatically estimating the pedestrian number from
images/videos is a practical solution and attracts attentions
of researchers from different perspectives. Specifically,
Single Image Crowd Counting (SICC) [9, 18, 27, 39, 54]
estimates the crowd number in the image level, which
can reflect the degree of crowdedness at a certain time
point. Video Crowd Counting (VCC) [15,58,59] further enhances SICC by exploring the information from the historical frames to achieve a more accurate and robust counting in
the target frame. Different from SICC and VCC, the crossline crowd counting techniques [11, 38, 63, 64] focuses on
estimating the pedestrians in a period of time from videos.
By manually setting a proper virtual line (e.g., the red line
as illustrated in Fig. 1), cross-line crowd counting discovers the pedestrians passed this line, which could reflect the
crowdness and total crowd number in the video.
Different from the settings of the works discussed above,
this work targets a similar but different task –Video Individual Counting (VIC), which counts the total number of
pedestrians in the given video with separate identities. As
illustrated in Fig. 1, people come from all directions into the

3083

I t 

