Language as Queries for Referring Video Object Segmentation
Jiannan Wu1 ,

Yi Jiang2

Peize Sun1 ,

Zehuan Yuan2 ,

Ping Luo1,3

1

The University of Hong Kong 2 ByteDance
3
HKU-TCL Joint Research Centre for Artificial Intelligence

Abstract
Referring video object segmentation (R-VOS) is an
emerging cross-modal task that aims to segment the target
object referred by a language expression in all video frames.
In this work, we propose a simple and unified framework
built upon Transformer, termed ReferFormer. It views the
language as queries and directly attends to the most relevant regions in the video frames. Concretely, we introduce
a small set of object queries conditioned on the language
as the input to the Transformer. In this manner, all the
queries are obligated to find the referred objects only. They
are eventually transformed into dynamic kernels which capture the crucial object-level information, and play the role
of convolution filters to generate the segmentation masks
from feature maps. The object tracking is achieved naturally by linking the corresponding queries across frames.
This mechanism greatly simplifies the pipeline and the endto-end framework is significantly different from the previous methods. Extensive experiments on Ref-Youtube-VOS,
Ref-DAVIS17, A2D-Sentences and JHMDB-Sentences show
the effectiveness of ReferFormer. On Ref-Youtube-VOS,
ReferFormer achieves 55.6 J &F with a ResNet-50 backbone without bells and whistles, which exceeds the previous state-of-the-art performance by 8.4 points. In addition,
with the strong Video-Swin-Base backbone, ReferFormer
achieves the best J &F of 64.9 among all existing methods. Moreover, we show the impressive results of 55.0 mAP
and 43.7 mAP on A2D-Sentences and JHMDB-Sentences
respectively, which significantly outperforms the previous
methods by a large margin. Code is publicly available at
https://github.com/wjn922/ReferFormer.

1. Introduction
Referring video object segmentation (R-VOS) aims to
segment the target object in a video given a natural language
description. This emerging topic has raised great attention
in the research community and is expected to benefit many
applications in a friendly and interactive way, e.g., video

Figure 1. Comparison of current referring video object segmentation (R-VOS) pipelines. (a) Bottom-up. (b) Top-down. (c) Ours.

editing and video surveillance. R-VOS is more challenging
than the traditional semi-supervised video object segmentation [33, 46], because it does not only lack the ground-truth
mask annotation in the first frame, but also require the comprehensive understanding of the cross-modal sources, i.e.,
vision and language. Therefore, the model should have a
strong ability to infer which object is referred and to perform accurate segmentation.
To accomplish this task, the existing methods can be
mainly categorized into two groups: (1) Bottom-up methods. These methods incorporate the vision and language
features in a early-fusion manner, and then adopt a FCN
[28] as decoder to generate object masks, as shown in Figure 1(a). (2) Top-down methods. These methods tackle the
problem in a top-down perspective and follow a two-stage
pipeline. As illustrated in Figure 1(b), they first employ an
instance segmentation model to find all the objects in each

4974

