Learning to generate line drawings that convey geometry and semantics
Caroline Chan

Frédo Durand

Phillip Isola

{cmchan, fredo, phillipi}@mit.edu

MIT

Figure 1. Given a set of photographs, our method is capable of making line drawings in different styles seen above. Our method only
requires unpaired data during training.

Abstract
This paper presents an unpaired method for creating line
drawings from photographs. Current methods often rely
on high quality paired datasets to generate line drawings.
However, these datasets often have limitations due to the
subjects of the drawings belonging to a specific domain, or
in the amount of data collected. Although recent work in
unsupervised image-to-image translation has shown much
progress, the latest methods still struggle to generate compelling line drawings. We observe that line drawings are encodings of scene information and seek to convey 3D shape
and semantic meaning. We build these observations into
a set of objectives and train an image translation to map
photographs into line drawings. We introduce a geometry
loss which predicts depth information from the image features of a line drawing, and a semantic loss which matches
the CLIP features of a line drawing with its corresponding
photograph. Our approach outperforms state-of-the-art unpaired image translation and line drawing generation methods on creating line drawings from arbitrary photographs.

1. Introduction
Through introspection and experimentation, human
artists have learned to create line drawings that provide

compelling depictions of shape and meaning. A longstanding goal of non-photorealistic rendering is to reproduce
this feat and, given an input image, to automatically generate line drawings that are effective at conveying geometry and identity. Manually instilling these qualities into
computer-generated line drawings is difficult however because the goals are defined in elusive terms of human perception and cognition. Generating line drawings from photographs presents additional challenges: most photographs
lack ground-truth geometry data, and often portray complex
scenes with multiple subjects and interactions. Naturally, it
would make sense to learn from drawings created by humans or to use humans to evaluate automatic line drawing methods. Unfortunately, the creation of such datasets
is challenging and scalability is low.
In this paper, we seek to automatically generate effective
line drawings from photographs without requiring paired
training data and without requiring human judgment of the
implied shape. Our key idea is to view the problem as
an encoding through a line drawing and to maximize the
quality of this encoding through explicit geometry, semantic, and appearance decoding objectives. Our method approaches line drawing generation as an unsupervised image
translation problem which uses various losses to assess the
information communicated in a line drawing. This evalua-

7915

