BoxeR: Box-Attention for 2D and 3D Transformers
Duy-Kien Nguyen1

Jihong Ju2

Olaf Booij2

Martin R. Oswald1

Atlas Lab - 1 University of Amsterdam
{d.k.nguyen, m.r.oswald, cgmsnoek}@uva.nl

1. Introduction
For object detection, instance segmentation, image classification and many other current computer vision challenges,
it may seem a transformer with multi-head self-attention
is all one needs [40]. After its success in natural language
processing, learning long range feature dependencies has
proven an effective tactic in computer vision too, e.g., [1, 7].
Surprisingly, existing transformers for computer vision do
not explicitly consider the inherent regularities of the vision
modality. Importantly, the image features are vectorized in
exactly the same way as language tokens, resulting in the
loss of local connectivity among pixels. Once fed with sufficient data, a traditional transformer may be powerful enough
to compensate for this loss of spatial structure, but in this
paper we rather prefer to equip the transformer with spatial

TomTom

{jihong.ju, olaf.booij}@tomtom.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a simple attention mechanism,
we call Box-Attention. It enables spatial interaction between
grid features, as sampled from boxes of interest, and improves the learning capability of transformers for several
vision tasks. Specifically, we present BoxeR, short for Box
Transformer, which attends to a set of boxes by predicting
their transformation from a reference window on an input
feature map. The BoxeR computes attention weights on these
boxes by considering its grid structure. Notably, BoxeR-2D
naturally reasons about box information within its attention
module, making it suitable for end-to-end instance detection
and segmentation tasks. By learning invariance to rotation
in the box-attention module, BoxeR-3D is capable of generating discriminative information from a bird’s-eye view
plane for 3D end-to-end object detection. Our experiments
demonstrate that the proposed BoxeR-2D achieves state-ofthe-art results on COCO detection and instance segmentation. Besides, BoxeR-3D improves over the end-to-end 3D
object detection baseline and already obtains a compelling
performance for the vehicle category of Waymo Open, without any class-specific optimization. Code is available at
https://github.com/kienduynguyen/BoxeR.

2

Cees G. M. Snoek1

BoxeR-2D
Box-Attention

BoxeR-3D
Figure 1. BoxeR with box-attention for object detection and instance segmentation. BoxeR-2D perceives an image and generates
object bounding boxes and pixel masks. Extended from BoxeR-2D,
BoxeR-3D predicts 3D bounding boxes from point cloud input.

image-awareness by design. Recent evidence [5, 39, 47] reveals that an inductive bias is of crucial importance in both
natural language processing and computer vision, and the
leading works on image recognition [24] and object detection [47] all utilize “spatial information”. Furthermore, a
strong and effective inductive bias enables us to converge
faster and generalize better [39].
A solution is to enrich image features with positional
encoding, which explicitly encodes the position information at the feature level. This is already common practice
when applying multi-head attention to vision tasks. Both
Carion et al. [1] and Zhu et al. [47] convert absolute 2D
positions, while Ramachandran et al. [29] encode relative
2D positions into vectors and sum them up to image features in the attention computation. However, this approach
only acts as a data augmentation to image features. It requires the network to infer the spatial information implicitly
inside its weight, causing a slow convergence rate during
training due to the lack of spatial-awareness in the network
architecture. It is well known that an inductive bias in the
network architecture delivers a strong ability to learn, which
has been proven by well-known architectures such as the
convolutional neural network [19] and the long short-term
memory [13]. In particular, we postulate a better spatial
inductive bias in the transformer’s attention module leads to
a better learned representation of image features.
Motivated by this observation, the first contribution of this
paper is a Box-Attention mechanism for end-to-end vision

4773

