TWIST: Two-Way Inter-label Self-Training
for Semi-supervised 3D Instance Segmentation
Ruihang Chu1
Xiaoqing Ye2
Zhengzhe Liu1
Xiao Tan2
3*
1,4
1,5
Xiaojuan Qi
Chi-Wing Fu
Jiaya Jia
1
2
3
4
CUHK Baidu Inc. HKU SHIAE 5 SmartMore

Abstract
We explore the way to alleviate the label-hungry problem in a semi-supervised setting for 3D instance segmentation. To leverage the unlabeled data to boost model performance, we present a novel Two-Way Inter-label Self-Training
framework named TWIST. It exploits inherent correlations
between semantic understanding and instance information
of a scene. Specifically, we consider two kinds of pseudo
labels for semantic- and instance-level supervision. Our
key design is to provide object-level information for denoising pseudo labels and make use of their correlation for
two-way mutual enhancement, thereby iteratively promoting
the pseudo-label qualities. TWIST attains leading performance on both ScanNet and S3DIS, compared to recent
3D pre-training approaches, and can cooperate with them
to further enhance performance, e.g., +4.4% AP50 on 1%label ScanNet data-efficient benchmark. Code is available
at https:// github.com/ dvlab-research/ TWIST.

1. Introduction
Deep learning methods have achieved great success on
3D point cloud learning. They demand large-scale annotated data. Compared to work on scanning, methods for
annotations consume substantially more manual effort. For
ScanNet [9], 20 people were hired for collecting the RGBD scans. However, it took 500 crowd-based workers, each
using around 22.3 minutes, to label one scan on average.
To alleviate this label-hungry problem, a direction is to
exploit semi-supervised learning (SSL). This setting needs
ground-truth labels only for a small fraction of the training
set. The target is to leverage a large volume of completely
unlabeled data to boost model performance. Contrary to
intensive research on image understanding [1, 14, 26, 27,
38, 39], less [20, 49] was carried out on this setting for 3D
instance segmentation, which is an important task for 3D
perception. Methods of [20, 49] utilize unlabeled data for
* Corresponding Author

(c)
(a)
(b)
Figure 1. Top: Pseudo semantic labels (green means correct and red
means incorrect results) produced on unlabeled point cloud by (a)
confidence thresholding, (b) our method without the re-correction
module, and (c) our full method. Bottom: Pseudo centroids (blue
dots) found by various methods. Orange dots mark the ground truth
(GT) and red boxes mark the blue dots far from GTs. Our TWIST
framework (c) effectively promotes the quality of both semantic
and offset-to-centroid pseudo labels.

model pre-training through a contrastive loss. They, however,
only explore SSL by means of consistency regularization.
In this paper, we address semi-supervised 3D instance
segmentation by designing a new self-training framework,
which is the first of this kind. We aim to generate highquality pseudo labels from unlabeled data to improve model
training. This goal is challenging to achieve. First, the task
requires both semantic- and instance-level understanding of
a 3D scene. These two goals may conflict with each other.
For example, we may want different instances of the same
class to have different instance IDs but the same semantic
ID. Therefore, it is non-trivial to generate high-quality (joint)
pseudo labels for supporting both prediction tasks.
Second, the way to promote consistency among pseudo
labels in the instance-level task has much room to explore.
For instance, pseudo semantic labels within the same instance should be consistent. Otherwise, it could confuse how
points are separated into object instances. Third, an effective
pseudo-label evaluation and selection mechanism is in high

1100

