Speech Driven Tongue Animation
Salvador Medina1, 2 , Denis Tome2 , Carsten Stoll2 , Mark Tiede3 , Kevin Munhall4
Alex Hauptmann1 , Iain Matthews2
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Epic Games, 3 Haskins Laboratories, 4 Queens University
{salvadom, alex}@cs.cmu.edu, tiede@haskins.yale.edu, munhallk@queensu.ca
{denis.tome, carsten.stoll, iain.matthews}@epicgames.com

Abstract
Advances in speech driven animation techniques allow
the creation of convincing animations for virtual characters
solely from audio data. Many existing approaches focus on
facial and lip motion and they often do not provide realistic animation of the inner mouth. This paper addresses the
problem of speech-driven inner mouth animation.
Obtaining performance capture data of the tongue and
jaw from video alone is difficult because the inner mouth is
only partially observable during speech. In this work, we
introduce a large-scale speech and mocap dataset that focuses on capturing tongue, jaw, and lip motion. This dataset
enables research using data-driven techniques to generate
realistic inner mouth animation from speech.
We then propose a deep-learning based method for accurate and generalizable speech to tongue and jaw animation, and evaluate several encoder-decoder network architectures and audio feature encoders. We find that recent
self-supervised deep learning based audio feature encoders
are robust, generalize well to unseen speakers and content,
and work best for our task.
To demonstrate the practical application of our approach, we show animations on high-quality parametric 3D
face models driven by the landmarks generated from our
speech-to-tongue animation method.

1. Introduction
Virtual human characters with strikingly realistic facial
animation are possible through advances in facial performance capture and speech-driven animation. However, virtual characters often lack realistic representation and motion
of the inner mouth, in particular for the tongue. Tongue animation is often subdued and unnatural, breaking the illusion
of realism and contributing to an uncanny valley experience.
Accurately animating the tongue is a challenging task.
Typical optical performance capture approaches fail be-

cause the inner mouth articulators are only partially observable even when the mouth is open. Manually animating the
tongue and jaw requires a skilled artist familiar with speech
articulation, and is time consuming due to the rapid and
complex motions required for speech production. Animating manually is clearly not an option for any real-time or
interactive application. In all cases, a low-latency and realtime automatic animation solution is preferred.
In practice, inner mouth animations for movies and video
games often make use of rule-based or procedural animation approaches. The result is to broadly match the utterance of specific sounds, such as dental consonants, open
mouth vowels, or articulation that moves the tongue from
the mouth floor to the palate and vice-versa. In many cases,
the inner mouth region is simply intentionally poorly lit
while speech articulation is approximated by placing the
tongue in a neutral position.
In this paper we consider the problem of automatic
speech-driven tongue and jaw animation using a data-driven
sequence to sequence approach. Sequence to sequence
models have shown impressive results on a diverse set of
regression and forecasting problems, and they have been
applied in a wide variety of research areas. In our task, the
input is streaming speech audio waveform, and the output is
the temporally corresponding set of 3D landmark locations
of motion captured speech articulators. We recorded and
release a new dataset, comprising over 2.5 hours of labelled
speech, that includes ground truth landmarks tracked using
an Electromagnetic Articulograph (EMA) [5], a specialized
speech motion capture system. The dataset is publicly available for further research1 .
We leverage recent work in deep-learning based speech
audio feature representations and compare ML-based approaches with traditional features based on phonetic or frequency based representations. Our experiments show that
deep learning speech representations greatly improve generalization and resiliency to noise over traditional features.
1 https://salmedina.github.io/tongue-anim

20406

