BANMo: Building Animatable 3D Neural Models from Many Casual Videos
Gengshan Yang2 * Minh Vo3 Natalia Neverova1 Deva Ramanan2 Andrea Vedaldi1 Hanbyul Joo1
1
Meta AI 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 Meta Reality Labs

Color: Skinning weights

BANMo

Pose 1

Pose 2

Bone

Casual Videos of An Object

Canonical Space

View 1

View 2

Canonical Embeddings

Figure 1. Given multiple casual videos capturing a deformable object, BANMo reconstructs an animatable 3D model, including an implicit canonical 3D shape, appearance, skinning weights, and time-varying articulations, without pre-defined shape templates or registered
cameras. Left: Input videos; Middle: 3D shape, bones, and skinning weights (visualized as surface colors) in the canonical space; Right:
Posed reconstruction at each time instance with color and canonical embeddings (correspondences are shown as the same colors).

Abstract
Prior work for articulated 3D shape reconstruction often relies on specialized multi-view and depth sensors or
pre-built deformable 3D models. Such methods do not
scale to diverse sets of objects in the wild. We present
a method that requires neither of them. It aims to create
high-fidelity, articulated 3D models from many casual RGB
videos in a differentiable rendering framework. Our key insight is to merge three schools of thought: (1) classic deformable shape models that make use of articulated bones
and blend skinning, (2) canonical embeddings that establish correspondences between pixels and a canonical 3D
model, and (3) volumetric neural radiance fields (NeRFs)
that are amenable to gradient-based optimization. We introduce neural blend skinning models that allow for differentiable and invertible articulated deformations. When
combined with canonical embeddings, such models allow us
to establish dense correspondences across videos that can
be self-supervised with cycle consistency. On real and synthetic datasets, our method shows higher-fidelity 3D reconstructions than prior works for humans and animals, with
the ability to render realistic images from novel viewpoints.
Project page: https://banmo-www.github.io/.

* Work done when interning at Meta AI

1. Introduction
We are interested in developing tools that can reconstruct
accurate and animatable models of 3D objects from casually collected videos. A representative application is content creation for virtual and augmented reality, where the
goal is to 3D-ify images and videos captured by users for
consumption in a 3D space or creating animatable assets
such as avatars. For rigid scenes, traditional Structure from
Motion (SfM) approaches can be used to leverage large collection of uncontrolled images, such as images downloaded
form the web, to build accurate 3D models of landmarks and
entire cities [1, 42, 43]. However, these approaches do not
generalize to deformable objects such as family members,
friends or pets, which are often the focus of user content.
We are thus interested in reconstructing 3D deformable
objects from casually collected videos. However, individual videos may not contain sufficient information to obtain
good reconstruction of a given subject. Fortunately, we can
expect that users may collect several videos of the same subjects, such as filming a family member or a pet over the span
of several months or years. In this case, we wish our system
to gather information from all available videos into a single
3D model, bridging any time discontinuity.
In this paper, we present BANMo, a Builder of
Animatable 3D Neural Models from multiple casual RGB
videos. By consolidating the 2D cues from thousands of
images into a fixed canonical space, BANMo learns a high-

2863

