Collaborative Learning for Hand and Object Reconstruction with
Attention-guided Graph Convolution
Tze Ho Elden Tse1
1

Kwang In Kim2
Ales̆ Leonardis1
2
University of Birmingham
UNIST

Hyung Jin Chang1

txt994@student.bham.ac.uk, kimki@unist.ac.kr, {a.leonardis, h.j.chang}@bham.ac.uk

Abstract
Estimating the pose and shape of hands and objects under interaction finds numerous applications including augmented and virtual reality. Existing approaches for hand
and object reconstruction require explicitly defined physical
constraints and known objects, which limits its application
domains. Our algorithm is agnostic to object models, and it
learns the physical rules governing hand-object interaction.
This requires automatically inferring the shapes and physical interaction of hands and (potentially unknown) objects.
We seek to approach this challenging problem by proposing a collaborative learning strategy where two-branches
of deep networks are learning from each other. Specifically,
we transfer hand mesh information to the object branch
and vice versa for the hand branch. The resulting optimisation (training) problem can be unstable, and we address
this via two strategies: (i) attention-guided graph convolution which helps identify and focus on mutual occlusion
and (ii) unsupervised associative loss which facilitates the
transfer of information between the branches. Experiments
using four widely-used benchmarks show that our framework achieves beyond state-of-the-art accuracy in 3D pose
estimation, as well as recovers dense 3D hand and object
shapes. Each technical component above contributes meaningfully in the ablation study.

1. Introduction
Understanding human hand and object interaction is fundamental for meaningful interpretation of human action and
behaviour [65, 72]. With the advent of deep learning and
RGB-D sensors, pose estimation of isolated hands has made
significant progress, e.g., depth-based [12,69,74,81,82] and
RGB-based [51, 60, 63, 77, 85] methods. However, despite a
strong link to real applications such as augmented and virtual reality [32, 52, 71], joint reconstruction of hand and object [33, 35] has received relatively less attention. In this
paper, we focus on the problem of hand and object reconstruction from a single RGB image (see Fig. 1).

Figure 1. We propose a collaborative learning framework which allows sharing of mesh information across hand and object branches
iteratively. Our model jointly reconstructs hand and object meshes
from a monocular RGB image.

Joint hand and object pose estimation is a challenging
problem. First, while self-occlusion in hand is a well-known
problem [56, 80], when interacting with objects, hands (and
objects) exhibit even greater occlusion from almost any
point of view mutually [53]. Secondly, first-person-view
(e.g., FHB [24] dataset) often exhibits large degree of erratic camera motion. Recent works [23, 42, 65] have been
able to tackle some major challenges in joint hand-object
pose estimations in colour input. However, in the absence
of physical constraints, and with sparse keypoint detection,
they often lead to erroneous pose estimation or mesh reconstructions (e.g. hands penetrating objects).
To fundamentally understand hand-object interactions,
it is essential to fully recover 3D information, and accordingly, there has been significant improvements towards
hand mesh estimations from single RGB image [3, 4, 10,
19, 25, 41, 50, 83, 84, 86]. Hasson et al. [35] further proposed attraction and repulsion loss terms to generate physically plausible reconstructions. Recent optimisation-based
approaches [14, 34] that rely on these contact terms are
limited to scenarios where hand and object are already in
contact. However, the ability to reason pre-grasp stages are
equally important as it allows robots to infer human in-

1664

