Training-free Transformer Architecture Search
Xiawu Zheng3
Ke Li 2
Qinqin Zhou1∗
Kekai Sheng2 *
Xing Sun2
Yonghong Tian4
Jie Chen4,3
Rongrong Ji1,3,5,6†
1
Media Analytics and Computing Lab, School of Informatics, Xiamen University, 2 Tencent Youtu Lab,
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, 4 School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University,
5
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University, 6 Fujian Engineering Research
Center of Trusted Artificial Intelligence Analysis and Application, Xiamen University

Recently, Vision Transformer (ViT) has achieved remarkable success in several computer vision tasks. The progresses are highly relevant to the architecture design, then it
is worthwhile to propose Transformer Architecture Search
(TAS) to search for better ViTs automatically. However,
current TAS methods are time-consuming and existing zerocost proxies in CNN do not generalize well to the ViT search
space according to our experimental observations. In this
paper, for the first time, we investigate how to conduct TAS
in a training-free manner and devise an effective trainingfree TAS (TF-TAS) scheme. Firstly, we observe that the
properties of multi-head self-attention (MSA) and multilayer perceptron (MLP) in ViTs are quite different and that
the synaptic diversity of MSA affects the performance notably. Secondly, based on the observation, we devise a
modular strategy in TF-TAS that evaluates and ranks ViT
architectures from two theoretical perspectives: synaptic
diversity and synaptic saliency, termed as DSS-indicator.
With DSS-indicator, evaluation results are strongly correlated with the test accuracies of ViT models. Experimental
results demonstrate that our TF-TAS achieves a competitive performance against the state-of-the-art manually or
automatically design ViT architectures, and it promotes the
searching efficiency in ViT search space greatly: from about
24 GPU days to less than 0.5 GPU days. Moreover, the proposed DSS-indicator outperforms the existing cutting-edge
zero-cost approaches (e.g., TE-score and NASWOT).

1. Introduction
Vision Transformer (ViT) [19,38,43] has shown its competitiveness in the computer vision community recently, and
* The first two authors contributed equally. This work was done when
Qinqin Zhou was intern at Tencent Youtu Lab.
† Corresponding author: rrji@xmu.edu.cn.

The Accuracies of ViTs
on ImageNet

Abstract
𝜏 = 0.697

The DSS-indicator scores of ViT architectures
Search
Space
AutoFormer

PiT

Method

#Param
(M)

Top-1
Acc (%)

Cost Time
(GPU Days)

Supernet Pre-Train
+ Evolution Search

5.7

74.7

24

TF-TAS (Ours)

5.9

75.3

0.5

Random Search

4.9

69.7

0.5

TF-TAS (Ours)

4.6

73.7

0.5

Figure 1. Top: The evaluation results from DSS-indicator are positively correlated with the test accuracies of various ViT networks.
Bottom: The design and computation cost of existing methods,
i.e., AutoFormer [4] and PiT [17], and the proposed TF-TAS.

has been an important research hot-spot. With the emergence of manually-designed advanced ViT models [11, 37,
46], Transformer Architecture Search (TAS) [3,4,34,35,41]
makes its grand debut and aims at searching multiple configurations of ViT architecture in an automated way. Although the one-shot NAS scheme [9,13,47,48] is leveraged
in TAS, it still demands a high computational cost (e.g.,
larger than 24 GPU days) to train a supernet for reliable
performance estimations on various ViT architectures. Furthermore, since the magnitude of ViT search spaces (e.g.,
∼ 1030 in GLiT [3]) far exceeds the magnitude of CNN
search spaces (e.g., ∼ 1018 in DARTS [26]) and ViT models
usually require more training epochs (e.g., 300), the search
efficiency of one-shot based TAS is still unsatisfying.
Recall that, to promote the searching efficiency on

10894

