Exploring Set Similarity for Dense Self-supervised Representation Learning
Zhaoqing Wang1 Qiang Li2, * Guoxin Zhang2 Pengfei Wan2
Wen Zheng2 Nannan Wang3 Mingming Gong4 Tongliang Liu1
1

University of Sydney

2

Kuaishou Technology

3

Xidian University

4

University of Melbourne

derrickwang005@gmail.com; {liqiang03,zhangguoxin,wanpengfei,zhengwen}@kuaishou.com
nnwang@xidian.edu.cn; mingming.gong@unimelb.edu.au; tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
By considering the spatial correspondence, dense selfsupervised representation learning has achieved superior
performance on various dense prediction tasks. However,
the pixel-level correspondence tends to be noisy because
of many similar misleading pixels, e.g., backgrounds. To
address this issue, in this paper, we propose to explore set
similarity (SetSim) for dense self-supervised representation
learning. We generalize pixel-wise similarity learning to
set-wise one to improve the robustness because sets contain
more semantic and structure information. Specifically, by
resorting to attentional features of views, we establish the
corresponding set, thus filtering out noisy backgrounds that
may cause incorrect correspondences. Meanwhile, these attentional features can keep the coherence of the same image
across different views to alleviate semantic inconsistency.
We further search the cross-view nearest neighbours of sets
and employ the structured neighbourhood information to
enhance the robustness. Empirical evaluations demonstrate
that SetSim surpasses or is on par with state-of-the-art methods on object detection, keypoint detection, instance segmentation, and semantic segmentation.

1. Introduction
Pretraining has become a widely-used paradigm in various computer vision tasks. Generally, models are first pretrained on large-scale datasets (e.g., ImageNet [11]) and
fine-tuned on the specific tasks. Recently, self-supervised
pretraining has broken the dominance of the supervised ImageNet [11] pretraining on almost all downstream tasks including image classification [21], object detection [34], semantic
segmentation [14, 15], etc. In particular, state-of-the-art
self-supervised representation learning methods [3, 5, 8, 17]
mainly adopt the instance discrimination formulation as their
pretext task to obtain transfer learning ability for downstream
* Corresponding author.

View1
𝑡~𝑇

Image
View2
𝑡% ~ 𝑇
(a) Pixel

(b) Geometry

(c) Set

Figure 1. The comparison of existing pixel-wise correspondence
with our proposed method. (a) Pixel-based: compare all combinations of pixel-wise features and maximize the most similar pairs. (b)
Geometry-based: force features in overlapping regions to remain
constant and distinguish features from different locations. (c) Setbased: considering misleading features and semantic inconsistency
in the former methods, we propose to explore set similarity across
two views for dense self-supervised representation learning. By
resorting to attentional features, SetSim constructs corresponding
sets across two views (blue point & green point), which can filter
out misleading features and keep the coherence of the same image
across views. Furthermore, SetSim searches the cross-view nearest
neighbours (blue point with red circle) to enhance the structured
neighbourhood information.

tasks. The main idea of these methods is to maximize the
similarity of two data-augmented views of the same image,
while minimizing the similarity of views generated from
different images.
Since most of the self-supervised methods are designed
for image-level tasks like image classification, they are suboptimal for dense prediction tasks, e.g., object detection
and semantic segmentation. To narrow this performance
gap, dense self-supervised learning has been explored recently [32, 40, 46]. A popular way is to leverage intrinsic
spatial information that a matching pair of pixel-wise features should remain constant over different viewing condi-

16590

