Depth Estimation by Combining Binocular Stereo and Monocular
Structured-Light
Yuhua Xu1,2, *, Xiaoli Yang2 , Yushan Yu2 , Wei Jia1 , Zhaobi Chu1 , Yulan Guo3
1
Hefei University of Technology, 2 Orbbec, 3 Sun Yat-sen University
xyh nudt@163.com

Abstract
It is well known that the passive stereo system cannot
adapt well to weak texture objects, e.g., white walls. However, these weak texture targets are very common in indoor
environments. In this paper, we present a novel stereo system, which consists of two cameras (an RGB camera and an
IR camera) and an IR speckle projector. The RGB camera is
used both for depth estimation and texture acquisition. The
IR camera and the speckle projector can form a monocular structured-light (MSL) subsystem, while the two cameras can form a binocular stereo subsystem. The depth map
generated by the MSL subsystem can provide external guidance for the stereo matching networks, which can improve
the matching accuracy significantly. In order to verify the
effectiveness of the proposed system, we build a prototype
and collect a test dataset in indoor scenes. The evaluation
results show that the Bad 2.0 error of the proposed system is
28.2% of the passive stereo system when the network RAFT
is used. The dataset and trained models are available at
https://github.com/YuhuaXu/MonoStereoFusion.

1. Introduction
Depth estimation is a fundamental problem in computer
vision, which has numerous applications in the fields of 3D
modeling, robotics, UAVs, augmented realities (AR), and
autonomous driving [1, 10, 31]. Depth estimation methods
can be divided into active structured-light, binocular stereo
vision, time-of-flight (TOF), and monocular depth estimation.
Since Microsoft Kinect [48] was released in 2010,
consumer-grade depth sensors have been widely used.
Kinect is based on the monocular structured-light method,
which was also used in iPhone X released in 2017. However, it may fail to obtain depth measurements for distant
objects, or outdoor scenes under strong light. The binocular
stereo vision system has a larger measurement range than
* Corresponding author

the structured-light system, and it can also work in outdoor
environment with strong sunlight, but it is easily affected
by the surface texture of the objects. In recent years, stereo
matching methods based on deep learning have achieved
remarkable progress. However, these methods may still fail
on scenes with weak texture (e.g., white walls). And this
kind of weak texture objects are very common in indoor
environment. The binocular active structured-light system
(e.g., Intel D435 [14]) relies on two IR cameras and an IR
projector for depth estimation, which has good adaptability
in both indoor and outdoor situations. To acquire texture, a
third camera (i.e. RGB camera) is required. Since there is
a baseline between the RGB camera and IR camera, a coordinate system conversion step is required to make the depth
image aligned with the RGB image. Due to the noise of
the depth map and the error of the calibration parameters,
it is difficult to accurately align the RGB image and depth
map. In terms of hardware, three cameras and one projector
are required, which is not compact. TOF has poor adaptability to objects with low reflectivity and distant objects.
In addition, TOF suffers from multipath interference [30].
The monocular depth estimation methods cannot obtain the
depth maps with a certain scale [11].
In this work, we seek a compact depth sensing solution that can integrate the advantages of the monocular
structured-light and binocular stereo vision.
The main contributions of this work are:
(1) We propose a novel stereo vision system, which consists of an RGB camera, an IR camera and an IR speckle
projector. Especially, the IR camera is not attached with a
filter. Thus the IR camera can receive IR light (invisible to
human eyes) and ambient light (visible to human eyes) simultaneously. The IR camera and IR projector can form a
monocular active structured-light system as Kinect, while
the IR camera and the RGB camera can form a binocular
stereo system. These two types of stereo systems have complementary advantages. We can obtain a robust stereo system by fusing the initial depth map obtained by the active
structured-light system in the cost volume of stereo matching network.

1746

