Aesthetic Text Logo Synthesis via Content-aware Layout Inferring
Yizhi Wang1 ,* Guo Pu1 , Wenhan Luo2 , Yexin Wang2 , Pengfei Xiong2 , Hongwen Kang2 , Zhouhui Lian1†
1
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, China
2
PCG, Tencent

Abstract
Text logo design heavily relies on the creativity and expertise of professional designers, in which arranging element layouts is one of the most important procedures. However, few attention has been paid to this task which needs
to take many factors (e.g., fonts, linguistics, topics, etc.)
into consideration. In this paper, we propose a contentaware layout generation network which takes glyph images
and their corresponding text as input and synthesizes aesthetic layouts for them automatically. Specifically, we develop a dual-discriminator module, including a sequence
discriminator and an image discriminator, to evaluate both
the character placing trajectories and rendered shapes of
synthesized text logos, respectively. Furthermore, we fuse
the information of linguistics from texts and visual semantics from glyphs to guide layout prediction, which both play
important roles in professional layout design. To train and
evaluate our approach, we construct a dataset named as
TextLogo3K, consisting of about 3,500 text logo images and
their pixel-level annotations. Experimental studies on this
dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach for
synthesizing visually-pleasing text logos and verify its superiority against the state of the art.

1. Introduction
Creative AI has attracted considerable interests in recent
years. Automatic layout design is a promising and valuable technique, which is quite helpful to facilitate the tasks
of designers and improve the efficiency of creating media
content. One intuitive way to achieve this goal is to generate layouts by defining specific easy-to-execute rules, but
the results are typically plain and without design aesthetics.
Therefore, various methods [1, 5, 6, 11, 15–17, 35, 38] based
on deep generative models (such as GAN [4] and VAE [12])
have been proposed recently to synthesize graphic layouts
by learning from human-designed data. Text logo design is
a challenging task because many factors need to be taken

Newline
Scaling
Trans.
Rotation
/Affine
Trans.

Figure 1. Examples of some commonly seen layout types for text
logos. “Trans.” denotes transformation. Yellow boxes denote the
bounding boxes of characters/words.

into consideration, such as fonts, layouts, and textures. As
we know, the layout of a text logo is closely related to the
logo’s text and the selected font styles. However, existing
approaches [5, 16, 17, 38] exploit only the visual, category,
and topic (keyword) information of elements, or combine
some of them to generate the layouts. In fact, the semantics of texts are also very important to determine the layout design. As shown in Figure 1, in a desired layout, the
Chinese character “爱” (“love”) is a verb and the key character in the text logo, so it is emphasized by a larger font
size than other characters such as “如果” (“if”), which is
a less-important conjunction word. Moreover, the synthesized layouts need to take fine-grained details into consideration, such as avoiding the collision of strokes of different
glyphs. In addition, the placing trajectories of characters
should follow a correct order for reading (e.g., left to right
and up to bottom for English) and possess diverse styles
at the same time, which cannot be easily handled by nonsequence generation models.
In this paper, we cast the layout synthesis of text logos
as a sequence generation problem and employ a GAN-based
model1 to solve it. In our approach, a dual-modality fusion
scheme is proposed to encode both the visual and linguistic cues of the input glyphs/text as the condition of GAN.
It is widely acknowledged that using GAN to generate discrete sequences is difficult. However, the geometric parameters of design elements are continuous in our task, making GAN training on the sequence of geometric parameters

* This work was partly done when Yizhi Wang was an intern in Tencent
† Corresponding author. E-mail: lianzhouhui@pku.edu.cn

1 Code and dataset: https://github.com/yizhiwang96/TextLogoLayout

2436

