Active Learning by Feature Mixing
Amin Parvaneh1
Ehsan Abbasnejad1
Anton van den Hengel1,4
1

Damien Teney1,2
Javen Qinfeng Shi1

Reza Haffari3

Australian Institute for Machine Learning, University of Adelaide
3
4
Idiap Research Institute
Monash University
Amazon

2

{amin.parvaneh, ehsan.abbasnejad,javen.shi, anton.vandenhengel}@adelaide.edu.au
damien.teney@idiap.ch

gholamreza.haffari@monash.edu

Abstract

1 The code is available at https : / / github . com /
aminparvaneh/alpha_mix_active_learning

Dog
?
Cat

Neural Net

The success of machine learning applications depends
on the quality and volume of the annotated datasets. High
quality data annotations can be slow and expensive. Active learning (AL) aims to actively select the most valuable
samples to be labelled in the training process iteratively, to
boost the predictive performance. A popular setting called
batch AL [34] fixes a budget on the size of the batch of
instances to be sent to an oracle for labelling. The process
is repeated over multiple rounds, allowing the model to be
updated iteratively. The core challenge is therefore to identify the most valuable instances to be included in this batch
at each round, depending on the current model.

Interpolation

Novel
features

Classifier

Dog

Dog
Neural Net

1. Introduction

Representation
Neural Net

The promise of active learning (AL) is to reduce labelling
costs by selecting the most valuable examples to annotate
from a pool of unlabelled data. Identifying these examples
is especially challenging with high-dimensional data (e.g.
images, videos) and in low-data regimes. In this paper, we
propose a novel method for batch AL called ALFA-Mix. We
identify unlabelled instances with sufficiently-distinct features by seeking inconsistencies in predictions resulting from
interventions on their representations. We construct interpolations between representations of labelled and unlabelled
instances then examine the predicted labels. We show that
inconsistencies in these predictions help discovering features
that the model is unable to recognise in the unlabelled instances. We derive an efficient implementation based on a
closed-form solution to the optimal interpolation causing
changes in predictions. Our method outperforms all recent
AL approaches in 30 different settings on 12 benchmarks of
images, videos, and non-visual data. The improvements are
especially significant in low-data regimes and on self-trained
vision transformers, where ALFA-Mix outperforms the stateof-the-art in 59% and 43% of the experiments respectively1 .

Input

Cat
Cat
Inconsistency
Add to
Candidate Set
Query label

Figure 1. We propose to form linear combinations (i.e. interpolations or mixing) of the features of an unlabelled instance (middle
image) and of labelled ones (top and bottom images). The interpolated features are passed through the current classifier. We
show that inconsistencies in the predicted labels indicate that the
unlabelled instance may have novel features to learn from.

Various AL strategies have been proposed differing in
predicting (1) how informative a particular unlabelled instance will be (i.e. uncertainty estimation [12, 15, 31, 38]) or
(2) how varied a set of instances will be (i.e. diversity estimation [33, 39]), or both [2, 17, 19]. Recent deep learning based
AL techniques include, for example, the use of an auxiliary
network to estimate the loss of unlabelled instances [40],
the use of generative models like VAEs to capture distributional differences [20,35], and the use of graph convolutional
networks to relate unlabelled and labelled instances [5].
Despite much progress made, current AL methods still
struggle when applied to deep neural networks, with highdimensional data, and in a low-data regime. We hypothesised that the representations learned within deep neural
networks may be leveraged to reason about the model’s uncertainty while alleviating the challenges associated with
high-dimensional data. Some existing methods only consider the model’s output, but we believe that this cannot
convey a complete picture of the model’s current state. Assessing the uncertainty in the model is particularly important
in a low-data regime since the number of available training

12237

