Human Instance Matting via Mutual Guidance and Multi-Instance Refinement
Yanan Sun1,2
1

HKUST

Chi-Keung Tang1
Yu-Wing Tai2
2
Kuaishou Technology

{now.syn, yuwing}@gmail.com

cktang@cs.ust.hk

Abstract
This paper introduces a new matting task called human
instance matting (HIM), which requires the pertinent model
to automatically predict a precise alpha matte for each human instance. Straightforward combination of closely related techniques, namely, instance segmentation, soft segmentation and human/conventional matting, will easily fail
in complex cases requiring disentangling mingled colors
belonging to multiple instances along hairy and thin boundary structures. To tackle these technical challenges, we
propose a human instance matting framework, called InstMatt, where a novel mutual guidance strategy working in
tandem with a multi-instance refinement module is used,
for delineating multi-instance relationship among humans
with complex and overlapping boundaries if present. A
new instance matting metric called instance matting quality (IMQ) is proposed, which addresses the absence of a
unified and fair means of evaluation emphasizing both instance recognition and matting quality. Finally, we construct a HIM benchmark for evaluation, which comprises
of both synthetic and natural benchmark images. In addition to thorough experimental results on complex cases with
multiple and overlapping human instances each has intricate boundaries, preliminary results are presented on general instance matting. Code and benchmark are available
in https://github.com/nowsyn/InstMatt.

1. Introduction
Fast development of mobile internet technology has triggered the rapid growth of multimedia industry especially
we-media, where users are heavily engaged in editing tools
to beautify or re-create their image and video contents. As
one of the primary techniques for efficient image editing,
image matting has achieved significant improvement with
the wide adoption of deep neural networks in the task. However, existing matting methods still fail or else are not easy
to use in many scenarios, such as extracting the foreground
This work was done when Yanan Sun was a student intern at Kuaishou
Technology, which was supported by Kuaishou Technology and the Research Grant Council of the Hong Kong SAR under grant no. 16201420.

Image

Instance Segmentation
(MaskRCNN)

Soft Segmentation (SSS)

Human Matting
(RVM)

Human Matting
(Ours)

Human Instance Matting (Ours)

Figure 1. Comparisons with related tasks, including soft segmentation results from SSS [5], instance segmentation results from
MaskRCNN [22], human matting results from RVM [36] as well
as ours, and human instance matting results from ours.

human while removing background humans, or instancelevel editing as shown in Figure 1: what if we want to independently extract and edit each human instance?
Similar to semantic versus instance segmentation, existing matting methods, which focus on a region based on a
given trimap or a known object class, are unable to differentiate instances. To address this issue, we propose a new
task called human instance matting (HIM), which aims to
automatically extract precise alpha matte for each human
instance in a given image. HIM shares similarities to the
following conventional tasks while embodying fundamental
differences making it a problem on its own: 1) instance segmentation aims at distinguishing instances, but it can only
produce sharp object boundary without semi-transparency
consideration; 2) recent soft segmentation [5] is capable of
generating soft segments for multiple instances of different
classes with instance-aware features, but cannot deal with
instances of the same class; 3) conventional matting aims at
extracting precise alpha matte, but it lacks instance awareness. Overall, human instance matting is a unified task
encompassing the characteristics of the aforementioned related tasks while introducing new technical challenges.
Conventional matting is based on the image compositing

2647

