VISTA: Boosting 3D Object Detection via Dual Cross-VIew SpaTial Attention

1. Introduction
LiDAR is one of the prominent sensors which is widely
used in autonomous driving to provide precise 3D informa* indicates equal contribution.
† Correspondence to Kui Jia <kuijia@scut.edu.cn>.

Input LiDAR Point Cloud

Bounding box Head
Predicted Bounding Boxes

(a) Single-view

Bounding box Head

VISTA

RV Features
RV Neck

Input LiDAR Point Cloud

BEV Neck

BEV Features

3D Backbone

Detecting objects from LiDAR point clouds is of tremendous significance in autonomous driving. In spite of good
progress, accurate and reliable 3D detection is yet to be
achieved due to the sparsity and irregularity of LiDAR point
clouds. Among existing strategies, multi-view methods have
shown great promise by leveraging the more comprehensive information from both bird’s eye view (BEV) and range
view (RV). These multi-view methods either refine the proposals predicted from single view via fused features, or
fuse the features without considering the global spatial context; their performance is limited consequently. In this paper, we propose to adaptively fuse multi-view features in a
global spatial context via Dual Cross-VIew SpaTial Attention (VISTA). The proposed VISTA is a novel plug-and-play
fusion module, wherein the multi-layer perceptron widely
adopted in standard attention modules is replaced with a
convolutional one. Thanks to the learned attention mechanism, VISTA can produce fused features of high quality for
prediction of proposals. We decouple the classification and
regression tasks in VISTA, and an additional constraint of
attention variance is applied that enables the attention module to focus on specific targets instead of generic points.
We conduct thorough experiments on the benchmarks of
nuScenes and Waymo; results confirm the efficacy of our
designs. At the time of submission, our method achieves
63.0% in overall mAP and 69.8% in NDS on the nuScenes
benchmark, outperforming all published methods by up to
24% in safety-crucial categories such as cyclist.

Proposals

Abstract

BEV Features
Neck

3D Backbone

Shengheng Deng1,* , Zhihao Liang1,3,* , Lin Sun2 and Kui Jia1,4,†
1
South China University of Technology, 2 Magic Leap, Sunnyvale, CA
3
DexForce Technology Co., Ltd., 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory
{eedsh, eezhihaoliang}@mail.scut.edu.cn, kuijia@scut.edu.cn, lsun@magicleap.com

Predicted Bounding Boxes

(b) Proposed VISTA-based multi-view fusion

Figure 1. Comparison between the single-view detection and the
proposed VISTA-based multi-view fusion. (a) shows the singleview detection pipeline. (b) illustrates the proposed VISTA-based
multi-view fusion. The BEV and RV features which are extracted
by a shared 3D backbone are passed into individual necks, and
pass through the VISTA to output high quality fused features.

tion of the objects. Therefore, LiDAR based 3D object detection has attracted a lot of attention. Many 3D object detection algorithms [19, 29, 32] apply the convolutional neural networks to 3D point clouds by voxelizing the unordered
and irregular point clouds into volumetric grids. Nevertheless, the 3D convolutional operator is computationally inefficient and memory-consuming. To mitigate these issues, a
line of works [6, 28] utilize sparse 3D convolutions [9–11]
in the network backbones to extract features. As illustrated
in the Figure 1 (a), these works project the 3D feature maps
into the bird’s eye view (BEV) or range view (RV), and the
object proposals are produced from these 2D feature maps
using proposal methods.
Different views have their own advantages and drawbacks to consider. In BEV, objects do not overlap with
each other and the size of each object is invariant to the
distance from the ego-vehicle. RV is the native representation of LiDAR point clouds, therefore, it can produce
compact and dense features. However, projection would
inevitably impair the integrity of spatial information conveyed in the 3D space no matter which of BEV or RV is
chosen. For example, due to the self-occlusion and the

8448

