Global Convergence of MAML and Theory-Inspired Neural Architecture Search
for Few-Shot Learning
Haoxiang Wang* Yite Wang* Ruoyu Sun Bo Li
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{hwang264,yitew2,ruoyus,lbo}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) and its variants
have become popular approaches for few-shot learning.
However, due to the non-convexity of deep neural nets
(DNNs) and the bi-level formulation of MAML, the theoretical properties of MAML with DNNs remain largely unknown. In this paper, we first prove that MAML with overparameterized DNNs is guaranteed to converge to global
optima at a linear rate. Our convergence analysis indicates
that MAML with over-parameterized DNNs is equivalent
to kernel regression with a novel class of kernels, which
we name as Meta Neural Tangent Kernels (MetaNTK).
Then, we propose MetaNTK-NAS, a new training-free neural architecture search (NAS) method for few-shot learning that uses MetaNTK to rank and select architectures.
Empirically, we compare our MetaNTK-NAS with previous NAS methods on two popular few-shot learning benchmarks, miniImageNet, and tieredImageNet. We show that
the performance of MetaNTK-NAS is comparable or better than the state-of-the-art NAS method designed for fewshot learning while enjoying more than 100x speedup. We
believe the efficiency of MetaNTK-NAS makes itself more
practical for many real-world tasks. Our code is released
at github.com/YiteWang/MetaNTK-NAS.

1. Introduction
Meta-learning, or learning-to-learn (LTL) [59], has received much attention due to its applicability in few-shot
image classification [23, 69], meta reinforcement learning
[18, 23, 62], and other domains such as natural language
processing [8, 78] and computational biology [43]. The primary motivation for meta-learning is to fast learn a new task
from a small amount of data, with prior experience on similar but different tasks. There are a few meta learning approaches designed for few shot image classification, such
as metric-based [57, 63], model-based [45, 56], optimizerbased [39,52]. Model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) is a
* equal contribution

popular gradient-based meta-learning approach, due to its
simplicity and good performance in many meta-learning
tasks [18, 19]. MAML formulates a bi-level optimization problem, where the inner-level objective represents the
adaption to a given task, and the outer-level objective is
the meta-training loss. There are many variants of MAML,
[20, 21, 31, 46, 51], and they are almost always applied together with deep neural networks (DNNs) in practice.
Even though MAML with DNNs is empirically successful, this approach still lacks a thorough theoretical understanding. For example, the most common practice is to use
gradient descent approach (e.g., SGD or Adam [34]) to train
MAML with DNNs, and the optimization can usually obtain almost zero training loss and 100% training accuracy
(i.e., global convergence) with suitable hyper-parameters
[3, 19]. However, prior theoretical works could not account
for the global convergence of MAML trained with gradient
descent on non-linear neural nets of more than two layers.
Hence, a crucial question that remains unknown for MAML
optimization is:
Can MAML with DNNs converge to global minima?
This question motivates us to analyze the optimization
properties of MAML with DNNs, and we provide a positive answer with rigorous theoretical analysis. Briefly, for
over-parameterized DNNs, we analyze the optimization trajectory of MAML with square loss and prove that the training loss is guaranteed to converge to zero at a linear rate.
Additionally, in this convergence analysis, we find the DNN
trained by MAML can be described by a kernel regression,
with a novel class of kernels that we name as Meta Neural
Tangent Kernels (MetaNTK).
One may wonder whether our theory has any practical
implications. Intuitively, our theory reveals that MetaNTK
is closely related to the performance of MAML. To demonstrate the practical value of our theory, we provide a concrete use case of MetaNTK: MetaNTK can help us efficiently find neural net architecture for few-shot learning.
Most meta-learning algorithms adopt standard network
structures such as ConvNets [36], ResNets [22] and Wide
ResNets [79] for few-shot image classification, the most

9797

