Meta Convolutional Neural Networks for Single Domain Generalization
Chaoqun Wan1 , Xu Shen1 , Yonggang Zhang2 , Zhiheng Yin3 , Xinmei Tian2 ,*
Feng Gao4 , Jianqiang Huang1 , Xian-Sheng Hua1 *
1
Alibaba Cloud Computing Ltd,
2
University of Science and Technology of China, 3 University of Michigan, 4 Zhejiang Lab
{qionglong.wcq,shenxu.sx,jianqiang.hjq,xiansheng.hxs}@alibaba-inc.com,
yonggang@mail.ustc.edu.cn, yzhiheng@umich.edu, xinmei@ustc.edu.cn, gaof@zhejianglab.com

Abstract
…

In single domain generalization, models trained with
data from only one domain are required to perform well
on many unseen domains. In this paper, we propose a new
model, termed meta convolutional neural network, to solve
the single domain generalization problem in image recognition. The key idea is to decompose the convolutional
features of images into meta features. Acting as “visual
words”, meta features are defined as universal and basic
visual elements for image representations (like words for
documents in language). Taking meta features as reference,
we propose compositional operations to eliminate irrelevant features of local convolutional features by an addressing process and then to reformulate the convolutional feature maps as a composition of related meta features. In this
way, images are universally coded without biased information from the unseen domain, which can be processed by
following modules trained in the source domain. The compositional operations adopt a regression analysis technique
to learn the meta features in an online batch learning manner. Extensive experiments on multiple benchmark datasets
verify the superiority of the proposed model in improving
single domain generalization ability.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models are widely used for vision tasks in
recent years [11, 13, 19, 36, 38], with the assumption that
training data and testing data are from the same or similar distributions. However, when applied to unseen or outof-distribution (OOD) test domains, the performance of the
model trained on the source domain can be significantly degraded. In practice, domain shift problem is very common
because of the change of illuminations, object appearance,
or background [4, 30]. To solve this problem, many do-

Histogram
Constitution

Local Feature
Extraction

…

…

Quantizing

Visual
Words

(a) Bag of Visual Words (BoVW)
−𝟎. 𝟑
𝟎. 𝟓
−𝟏. 𝟐

Local Feature
De-Composition

𝟏. 𝟎

Addressing

Meta Feature
Composition

Meta
Features

(b) Bag of Meta Features (BoMF)

Figure 1. Bag of visual words and the proposed bag of meta features. Both follow a three-step process to construct general representations for the input. (a) Local features are firstly extracted
by SIFT [24], and then quantized into visual words. A frequency
histogram of visual words is constituted as the final representation. (b) Input features are firstly decomposed into local features
through a sliding window. Then, the addressing operation selects
meta features which are related to these local features. Finally, a
linear regression model is adopted to compose the output representation based on the selected meta features.

main adaptation [2, 4, 23, 42] and domain generalization
[3, 5, 14, 33, 41, 45, 46, 49] methods have been proposed.
These methods differ in strategies of transferring knowledge
from multiple source domains to the target domain. However, it is more plausible to consider a more realistic scenario where only one single domain is available for training,
and the trained models are required to perform well on multiple unseen domains, i.e., single domain generalization.
Single domain generalization is an important and chal-

* Corresponding author.

4682

