LAVT: Language-Aware Vision Transformer for
Referring Image Segmentation
Zhao Yang1*, Jiaqi Wang2 *, Yansong Tang5,1†, Kai Chen2,4 , Hengshuang Zhao3,1 , Philip H.S. Torr1
1
University of Oxford, 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory, 3 The University of Hong Kong,
4
SenseTime Research, 5 Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University

Abstract
Referring image segmentation is a fundamental visionlanguage task that aims to segment out an object referred
to by a natural language expression from an image. One
of the key challenges behind this task is leveraging the referring expression for highlighting relevant positions in the
image. A paradigm for tackling this problem is to leverage a
powerful vision-language (“cross-modal”) decoder to fuse
features independently extracted from a vision encoder and
a language encoder. Recent methods have made remarkable
advancements in this paradigm by exploiting Transformers
as cross-modal decoders, concurrent to the Transformer’s
overwhelming success in many other vision-language tasks.
Adopting a different approach in this work, we show that
significantly better cross-modal alignments can be achieved
through the early fusion of linguistic and visual features in
intermediate layers of a vision Transformer encoder network. By conducting cross-modal feature fusion in the
visual feature encoding stage, we can leverage the wellproven correlation modeling power of a Transformer encoder for excavating helpful multi-modal context. This way,
accurate segmentation results are readily harvested with a
light-weight mask predictor. Without bells and whistles, our
method surpasses the previous state-of-the-art methods on
RefCOCO, RefCOCO+, and G-Ref by large margins.

1. Introduction
Given an image and a text description of the target
object, referring image segmentation aims at predicting a
pixel-wise mask that delineates that object [8, 18]. It yields
great value for various applications such as language-based
human-robot interaction [55] and image editing [5]. In contrast to conventional single-modality visual segmentation
tasks based on fixed category conditions [30, 65], referring
image segmentation has to deal with the much richer vocabularies and syntactic varieties of human natural languages.
* Equal contribution.

† Corresponding author.

(a) A paradigm of previous state-of-the-art methods
Vision Encoder
Transformer Decoder
“pink doughnut
with frosting”

Language Encoder

(b) LAVT (ours)
Vision Transformer

“pink doughnut
with frosting”

Language Encoder

Figure 1. The task of referring image segmentation takes one image and one text description as inputs, and predicts a mask delineating the object specified in the description. (a) The previous state-of-the-art method (i.e., VLT [12]) leverages a visionlanguage Transformer decoder for cross-modal feature fusion. (b)
Conversely, we propose to directly integrate linguistic information into visual features at intermediate levels of a vision Transformer network, where beneficial vision-language cues are jointly
exploited. A light-weight mask predictor can thus readily replace
the complicated cross-modal decoder in previous counterparts.

In this task, the target object is inferred from a free-form expression, which includes words and phrases presenting the
concepts of entities, actions, attributes, positions, etc., organized by syntactic rules. Therefore, the key challenge of
this task is to exploit visual features that are relevant to the
given text conditions.
There have been growing efforts devoted to referring image segmentation over the past few years. A widely adopted
paradigm is to first independently extract vision and language features from different encoder networks, and then
fuse them together to make predictions with a cross-modal
decoder. Concretely, the fusion strategies include recurrent
interaction [28, 31], cross-modal attention [4, 20, 48], multi-

18155

