End-to-End Referring Video Object Segmentation with Multimodal
Transformers
Adam Botach, Evgenii Zheltonozhskii, Chaim Baskin
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
{botach, evgeniizh}@campus.technion.ac.il

Query: A hand giving a yellow ball to a dog

Abstract
The referring video object segmentation task (RVOS) involves segmentation of a text-referred object instance in
the frames of a given video. Due to the complex nature of
this multimodal task, which combines text reasoning, video
understanding, instance segmentation and tracking, existing approaches typically rely on sophisticated pipelines
in order to tackle it. In this paper, we propose a simple Transformer-based approach to RVOS. Our framework,
termed Multimodal Tracking Transformer (MTTR), models the RVOS task as a sequence prediction problem. Following recent advancements in computer vision and natural language processing, MTTR is based on the realization that video and text can be processed together effectively and elegantly by a single multimodal Transformer
model. MTTR is end-to-end trainable, free of text-related
inductive bias components and requires no additional maskrefinement post-processing steps. As such, it simplifies the
RVOS pipeline considerably compared to existing methods. Evaluation on standard benchmarks reveals that MTTR
significantly outperforms previous art across multiple metrics. In particular, MTTR shows impressive +5.7 and +5.0
mAP gains on the A2D-Sentences and JHMDB-Sentences
datasets respectively, while processing 76 frames per second. In addition, we report strong results on the public
validation set of Refer-YouTube-VOS, a more challenging
RVOS dataset that has yet to receive the attention of researchers. The code to reproduce our experiments is available at https://github.com/mttr2021/MTTR.

1. Introduction
Attention-based [41] deep neural networks exhibit impressive performance on various tasks across different fields,
from computer vision [10, 27] to natural language processing
[3, 8]. These advancements make networks of this sort, such
as the Transformer [41], particularly interesting candidates
for solving multimodal problems. By relying on the self-

chaimbaskin@cs.technion.ac.il

Spatio-Temporal Feature Extraction + Text Encoding

Multimodal Transformer
Frame 1

Frame 2

Frame 3

referred?

Figure 1. Given a text query and a sequence of video frames,
the proposed model outputs prediction sequences for all object
instances in the video prior to determining the referred instance.
Here predictions with the same color and shape belong to the same
sequence and attend to the same object instance in different frames.
Note that the order of instance predictions for different frames
remains the same. Best viewed in color.

attention mechanism, which allows each token in a sequence
to globally aggregate information from every other token,
Transformers excel at modeling global dependencies and
have become the cornerstone in most NLP tasks [3, 8, 35, 50].
Transformers have also started showing promise in solving
computer vision tasks, from recognition [10] to object detection [4] and even outperforming the long-used CNNs as
general-purpose vision backbones [27].
The referring video object segmentation task (RVOS)
involves the segmentation of a text-referred object instance
in the frames of a given video. Compared with the referring
image segmentation task (RIS) [29, 52], in which objects are
mainly referred to by their appearance, in RVOS objects can

4985

