Multi-Scale Memory-Based Video Deblurring
Bo Ji
Angela Yao
National University of Singapore
{jibo,ayao}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Video deblurring has achieved remarkable progress
thanks to the success of deep neural networks. Most methods solve for the deblurring end-to-end with limited information propagation from the video sequence. However, different frame regions exhibit different characteristics and should be provided with corresponding relevant
information. To achieve fine-grained deblurring, we designed a memory branch to memorize the blurry-sharp feature pairs in the memory bank, thus providing useful information for the blurry query input. To enrich the memory
of our memory bank, we further designed a bidirectional
recurrency and multi-scale strategy based on the memory
bank. Experimental results demonstrate that our model outperforms other state-of-the-art methods while keeping the
model complexity and inference time low. The code is available at https://github.com/jibo27/MemDeblur.

1. Introduction
Video deblurring is a core restoration and enhancement
task aiming to recover a sharp video from a blurry input
video. Blur in videos arises from various sources, e.g. object motion, camera shake, and depth of field. Video deblurring is a highly ill-posed problem as multiple sharp sources
may correspond to a single blurred result. The problem
becomes especially pertinent as more and more videos are
captured by smartphones.
Video deblurring distinguishes itself from the image deblurring task in that it is critical to use the information from
the entire sequence of frames effectively. To do so, windowbased models [17,22,23,27] feed consecutive blurry frames
to an encoder-decoder to directly restore a sharp frame. Recurrent models [6, 15, 30, 35, 36] on the other hand maintain
a hidden state across the frames to sequentially propagate
features from the first frame to the last. However, these
methods cannot utilize the information from all the frames
in the video sequence. Moreover, neighbouring frames are
often used in simplistic manners, e.g. via an alignment.
An underexplored aspect in video-deblurring is that blurring occurs from non-uniform blur kernels. The blur artifacts differ not only for the same object across different

(a) Frame 0

(b) Frame 16

(c) Frame 20

(d) Frame 86

Figure 1. Different image regions have different blurry artifacts.

frames but also for different objects or regions in the same
frame. As shown in Fig. 1, the same flower in different
frames of a sequence exhibits different extents of blur (compare the blue sample in frame 16 and 86 vs. 0 and 20). Different flowers in the same frame (see frames 16, 20) also
have various blur distortions due to object motion. This
makes spatio-temporal information aggregation difficult as
it is necessary to provide the appropriate information to different regions of a frame.
To remedy this problem, we adopt the principle of memory networks [2, 12, 16, 24]. Memory networks were originally developed for language modeling [24] and are currently popular in vision for video object segmentation [2,
16]. In segmentation, the memory encodes high-level semantics like objects, but they have not been explored in the
context of low-level enhancement tasks like deblurring. The
memory networks used in our model record blurry-sharp
feature pairs. We compute a spatio-temporal attention between each location of the memory features and that of a
query frame region to find helpful sharp information. The
implicit advantage is that even if the blur kernel is unknown,
we can still extract the corresponding sharp information
simply by matching the queried region with memorized features.
Different from previous works using memory networks,
we use memory to supplement information to the deblurring backbone. The core deblurring branch is still responsible for recovering low-level details. To enrich the features

1919

