FLAVA: A Foundational Language And Vision Alignment Model
Amanpreet Singh* Ronghang Hu* Vedanuj Goswami*
Guillaume Couairon Wojciech Galuba Marcus Rohrbach Douwe Kiela
Facebook AI Research (FAIR)
multimodal and unimodal pretraining data

Abstract
State-of-the-art vision and vision-and-language models
rely on large-scale visio-linguistic pretraining for obtaining
good performance on a variety of downstream tasks. Generally, such models are often either cross-modal (contrastive)
or multi-modal (with earlier fusion) but not both; and they
often only target specific modalities or tasks. A promising
direction would be to use a single holistic universal model,
as a “foundation”, that targets all modalities at once—a
true vision and language foundation model should be good
at vision tasks, language tasks, and cross- and multi-modal
vision and language tasks. We introduce FLAVA as such a
model and demonstrate impressive performance on a wide
range of 35 tasks spanning these target modalities.

1. Introduction
Large-scale pre-training of vision and language transformers has led to impressive performance gains in a wide
variety of downstream tasks. In particular, contrastive methods such as CLIP [82] and ALIGN [50] have shown that
natural language supervision can lead to very high quality
visual models for transfer learning.
Purely contrastive methods, however, also have important shortcomings. Their cross-modal nature does not make
them easily usable on multimodal problems that require
dealing with both modalities at the same time. They require large corpora, which for both CLIP and ALIGN have
not been made accessible to the research community and
the details of which remain shrouded in mystery, notwithstanding well-known issues with the construction of such
datasets [9].
In contrast, the recent literature is rich with transformer
models that explicitly target the multimodal vision-andlanguage domain by having earlier fusion and shared selfattention across modalities. For those cases, however, the
unimodal vision-only or language-only performance of the
model is often either glossed over or ignored completely.
If the future of our field lies in generalized “foundation
models” [10] or “universal” transformers [72] with many
* Equal contribution.

image-text
pairs

unpaired
images

unpaired
text

FLAVA for multi-domain joint pretraining
（global contrastive, MMM, MIM, MLM, …)

visual
recognition
(e.g. ImageNet)

language
understanding
(e.g. GLUE)

multimodal
reasoning
(e.g. VQA)

Figure 1. We present FLAVA, a language and vision alignment
model that learns strong representations from multimodal (imagetext pairs) and unimodal data (unpaired images and text) and can
be applied to target a broad scope of tasks from three domains
(visual recognition, language understanding, and multimodal reasoning) under a common transformer model architecture.

different capabilities, then the following limitation should
be overcome: a true foundation model in the vision and language space should not only be good at vision, or language,
or vision-and-language problems–it should be good at all
three, at the same time.
Combining information from different modalities into
one universal architecture holds promise not only because it
is similar to how humans make sense of the world, but also
because it may lead to better sample efficiency and much
richer representations.
In this work, we introduce FLAVA, a foundational language and vision alignment model that explicitly targets
vision, language, and their multimodal combination all at
once. FLAVA learns strong representations through joint
pretraining on both unimodal and multimodal data while encompassing cross-modal “alignment” objectives and multimodal “fusion” objectives. We validate FLAVA by applying
it to 35 tasks across vision, NLP, and multimodal domains
and show impressive performance. An important advantage
of our approach is that it was trained on a corpus of openly
available datasets that is an order of magnitude smaller than
datasets used in comparable models. Our models and code
are available in https://flava-model.github.io/.

15638

