Which Model to Transfer? Finding the Needle in the Growing Haystack
Cedric Renggli*
ETH Zurich

André Susano Pinto
Google Research

Carlos Riquelme
Google Research

Luka Rimanic
ETH Zurich

Ce Zhang
ETH Zurich

Abstract
Transfer learning has been recently popularized as a
data-efficient alternative to training models from scratch,
in particular for computer vision tasks where it provides a
remarkably solid baseline. The emergence of rich model
repositories, such as TensorFlow Hub, enables the practitioners and researchers to unleash the potential of these
models across a wide range of downstream tasks. As these
repositories keep growing exponentially, efficiently selecting a good model for the task at hand becomes paramount.
We provide a formalization of this problem through a familiar notion of regret and introduce the predominant strategies, namely task-agnostic (e.g. ranking models by their
ImageNet performance) and task-aware search strategies
(such as linear or kNN evaluation). We conduct a largescale empirical study and show that both task-agnostic and
task-aware methods can yield high regret. We then propose
a simple and computationally efficient hybrid search strategy which outperforms the existing approaches. We highlight the practical benefits of the proposed solution on a set
of 19 diverse vision tasks.

1. Introduction
Services such as TensorFlow Hub or PyTorch Hub1 offer
a plethora of pre-trained models that often achieve state-ofthe-art performance on specific tasks in the vision domain.
The predominant approach, namely choosing a pre-trained
model and fine-tuning it to the downstream task, is an effective and data efficient approach [12, 13, 18, 23, 33, 35].
Perhaps surprisingly, this approach is also effective when
the pre-training task is significantly different from the target
task, such as when applying an ImageNet pre-trained model
to diabetic retinopathy classification [20]. Fine-tuning often entails adding several more layers to the pre-trained
deep network and tuning all the parameters using a limited
* Work done while interning at Google Research. Correspondence to C.
Renggli (cedric.renggli@inf.ethz.ch) and M. Lucic (lucic@google.com).
1 https://tfhub.dev and https://pytorch.org/hub

Joan Puigcerver
Google Research

Mario Lucic
Google Research

amount of downstream data. Due to the fact that all parameters are being updated, this process can be extremely
costly in terms of compute [35]. Fine-tuning all models to
find the best performing one is becoming computationally
infeasible. A more efficient alternative is to simply train
a cheap classifier on top of the learned representation (e.g.
pre-logits). However, the performance gap with respect to
fine-tuning can be rather large [13, 14].
This raises a very practical question: Given a new task,
how to pick the best model to fine-tune? This question was
intensively studied in recent years and existing approaches
can be divided into two groups: (a) task-agnostic model
search strategies, which rank pre-trained models independently of the downstream task (e.g. ranking the models by
ImageNet accuracy, if available) [14], and (b) task-aware
model search strategies, which make use of the downstream
dataset in order to rank models (e.g. kNN classifier accuracy as a proxy for fine-tuning accuracy, or using the metalearned Task2Vec representations) [1, 16, 22]. Most of the
prior work attempts to answer this question by using a homogeneous sets of pre-trained models whereby the models
share the same architecture or they were trained on the same
dataset. However, this does not reflect the current landscape
of models available in online repositories.
As a result, several practically relevant questions remained open. Firstly, how do existing methods compare
in the presence of both “generalist models” (e.g. models
trained on a relatively diverse distribution such as ImageNet) and “expert models” (e.g. trained on domain-specific
datasets such as plants), across a diverse collection of
datasets? Secondly, is there a method which strikes a good
balance between computational cost and performance?
Our contributions. In this paper, we provide a largescale, systematic empirical study of these questions. (i) We
define and motivate the model search problem through a notion of regret. We conduct the first study of this problem in
a realistic setting focusing on heterogeneous model pools.
(ii) We consider 19 downstream tasks on a heterogeneous
set of 46 models grouped into 5 representative sets. (iii) We
highlight the dependence of the performance of each strat-

9205

