LAS-AT: Adversarial Training with Learnable Attack Strategy
Xiaojun Jia1,2,† *, Yong Zhang3,∗ , Baoyuan Wu4,5,‡ , Ke Ma6 , Jue Wang3 , Xiaochun Cao1,2,‡
1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Cyberspace Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Tencent, AI Lab, Shenzhen, China
4
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China
5
Secure Computing Lab of Big Data, Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, Shenzhen, China
6
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
jiaxiaojun@iie.ac.cn; zhangyong201303@gmail.com; wubaoyuan@cuhk.edu.cn;

1. Introduction
Although deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved
great success in academia and industry, they could be easily
* The ﬁrst two authors contribute equally to this work. † Work done
during an internship at Tencent AI Lab. ‡ Correspondence to: Baoyuan Wu
(wubaoyuan@cuhk.edu.cn) and Xiaochun Cao (caoxiaochun@iie.ac.cn).

13398

training

(a) Conventional AT

training

࢞ࢉ࢒ࢋࢇ࢔

Target Net

Automatic
Attack Strategy

࢞ࢇࢊ࢜

Target Net

Strategy Net

AE Generator

Adversarial training (AT) is always formulated as a minimax problem, of which the performance depends on the
inner optimization that involves the generation of adversarial examples (AEs). Most previous methods adopt Projected Gradient Decent (PGD) with manually specifying attack parameters for AE generation. A combination of the
attack parameters can be referred to as an attack strategy.
Several works have revealed that using a ﬁxed attack strategy to generate AEs during the whole training phase limits the model robustness and propose to exploit different attack strategies at different training stages to improve robustness. But those multi-stage hand-crafted attack strategies
need much domain expertise, and the robustness improvement is limited. In this paper, we propose a novel framework for adversarial training by introducing the concept of
“learnable attack strategy”, dubbed LAS-AT, which learns
to automatically produce attack strategies to improve the
model robustness. Our framework is composed of a target network that uses AEs for training to improve robustness, and a strategy network that produces attack strategies to control the AE generation. Experimental evaluations on three benchmark databases demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method. The code is released at
https://github.com/jiaxiaojunQAQ/LAS-AT.

࢞ࢉ࢒ࢋࢇ࢔

Hand-crafted
Attack Strategy

࢞ࢇࢊ࢜

Abstract

AE Generator

make@ucas.ac.cn; arphid@gmail.com; caoxiaochun@iie.ac.cn

(b) LAS-AT

Figure 1. The difference between conventional AT and LAS-AT.
(a) Conventional AT methods use a hand-crafted attack strategy to
generate AEs. (b) The proposed LAS-AT uses a strategy network
to automatically produce sample-dependent attack strategies.

fooled by adversarial examples (AEs) [15,44] generated via
adding indistinguishable perturbations to benign images.
Recently, many studies [2, 3, 12, 13, 19, 25, 32, 47] focus on
generating AEs. It has been proven that many real-world
applications [14, 30] of DNNs are vulnerable to AEs, such
as image classiﬁcation [15, 22], object detection [26, 50],
neural machine translation [23, 62], etc. The vulnerability
of DNNs makes people pay attention to the safety of artiﬁcial intelligence and brings new challenges to the application of deep learning [17,18,54,55,61]. Adversarial training
(AT) [33, 35, 43, 52] is considered as one of the most effective defense methods to improve adversarial robustness by
injecting AEs into the training procedure through a minimax formulation. Under the minimax framework, the generation of AEs plays a key role in determining robustness.
Several recent works improve the standard AT method
from different perspectives. Although existing methods [4,
9,10,16,27,39] have made signiﬁcant progress in improving
robustness, they rarely explore the impact of attack strategy
on adversarial training. First, as shown in Fig. 1a, most
existing methods leverage a hand-crafted attack strategy to
generate AEs by manually specifying the attack parameters,
e.g., PGD attack with the maximal perturbation of 8, iteration of 10, and step size of 2. A hand-crafted attack strategy

