Undoing the Damage of Label Shift for Cross-domain Semantic Segmentation
Yahao Liu Jinhong Deng Jiale Tao Tong Chu Lixin Duan Wen Li*
School of Computer Science and Engineering & Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{lyhaolive, jhdeng1997, jialetao.std, uestcchutong, lxduan, liwenbnu }@gmail.com

Abstract
Existing works typically treat cross-domain semantic
segmentation (CDSS) as a data distribution mismatch problem and focus on aligning the marginal distribution or conditional distribution. However, the label shift issue is unfortunately overlooked, which actually commonly exists in
the CDSS task, and often causes a classifier bias in the
learnt model. In this paper, we give an in-depth analysis
and show that the damage of label shift can be overcome
by aligning the data conditional distribution and correcting
the posterior probability. To this end, we propose a novel
approach to undo the damage of the label shift problem
in CDSS. In implementation, we adopt class-level feature
alignment for conditional distribution alignment, as well
as two simple yet effective methods to rectify the classifier
bias from source to target by remolding the classifier predictions. We conduct extensive experiments on the benchmark
datasets of urban scenes, including GTA5 to Cityscapes
and SYNTHIA to Cityscapes, where our proposed approach
outperforms previous methods by a large margin. For
instance, our model equipped with a self-training strategy reaches 59.3% mIoU on GTA5 to Cityscapes, pushing to a new state-of-the-art. The code will be available
at https://github.com/manmanjun/Undoing UDA.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation aims to classify every pixel in a
given image. As a fundamental visual perception problem,
it is the basic module of many visual applications, such as
autonomous driving systems. Remarkable progress in semantic segmentation has been made in recent years, driven
by large-scale annotated datasets [5, 13, 53]. However, the
massive and high-quality annotation, especially for semantic segmentation, can be costly and labor-intensive. Thus
it is not always realistic to collect a sufficient number of
well-annotated images for a new environment. Fortunately,
* The corresponding author

we can obtain synthetic images with accurate pixel-level
annotations rendered from the computer by a physical engine [36, 38]. However, the model trained with a synthetic
domain often suffers from performance degradation since
synthetic images (source domain) and testing images (target
domain) are drawn from different distributions. This phenomenon commonly exists in cross-domain semantic segmentation (CDSS) tasks, and many unsupervised domain
adaptation models have been proposed to address this issue
by transferring the knowledge from a label-rich source domain to the unlabeled target domain.
Most existing CDSS methods [11, 18, 29, 34, 42, 44]
seek to learn domain-invariant representations via adversarial training to align marginal distributions (p(x)) or conditional distributions (p(x|y)). However, they ignore the label
shift problem, which commonly exists in CDSS tasks, since
the label distribution is often different across domains. As
shown in Fig. 1, taking the GTA5 [36] to Cityscapes [13]
as an example, the frequency of “truck” and “wall” in the
source domain is higher than that in the target domain, and
the frequency of “bicycle” is much lower than that in the
target domain.
Therefore, in this work, we propose a novel approach to
undo the damage of label shift in CDSS. First, we give an
in-depth analysis and show that the classifier bias is the critical factor leading to the poor generalization ability of the
learnt semantic segmentation model on the target domain
when a label shift problem exists. It is inevitable that the
classifier will be biased towards the source domain because
the supervision signal comes only from it. At the same time,
we show that the damage of label shift can be overcome by
aligning the data conditional distribution and correcting the
posterior probability.
Then we adopt class-level feature alignment for conditional distribution alignment and propose two simple yet effective methods to rectify the classifier bias from source to
target by remolding the classifier predictions. In particular,
after aligning the conditional distribution, we adjust the predictions of the classifier either in the training stage or the inference stage using the source and target label distribution.

7042

