HEAT: Holistic Edge Attention Transformer for Structured Reconstruction
Jiacheng Chen1
1

Yiming Qian2

Simon Fraser University

2

Yasutaka Furukawa1
University of Manitoba

Outdoor Architecture Reconstruction

Indoor Floorplan Reconstruction

HEAT

HEAT

Input image

Output planar graph

Input image

Output planar graph

Figure 1. HEAT takes a 2D raster image as an input and reconstructs a planar graph by an end-to-end transformer based neural architecture,
for example, from a satellite image to an outdoor building architecture, or from a point-density image to an indoor floorplan.

Abstract
This paper presents a novel attention-based neural network for structured reconstruction, which takes a 2D raster
image as an input and reconstructs a planar graph depicting
an underlying geometric structure. The approach detects
corners and classifies edge candidates between corners in an
end-to-end manner. Our contribution is a holistic edge classification architecture, which 1) initializes the feature of an
edge candidate by a trigonometric positional encoding of its
end-points; 2) fuses image feature to each edge candidate by
deformable attention; 3) employs two weight-sharing Transformer decoders to learn holistic structural patterns over
the graph edge candidates; and 4) is trained with a masked
learning strategy. The corner detector is a variant of the
edge classification architecture, adapted to operate on pixels
as corner candidates. We conduct experiments on two structured reconstruction tasks: outdoor building architecture
and indoor floorplan planar graph reconstruction. Extensive qualitative and quantitative evaluations demonstrate the
superiority of our approach over the state of the art. Code
and pre-trained models are available at https://heatstructured-reconstruction.github.io/

1. Introduction
Human vision has a remarkable capability in holistic
structure reasoning. Looking at the building in Figure 1,
we can effortlessly identify the structural primitives (e.g.,

building corners and edges) and their relationships. A fundamental challenge in computer vision research is to acquire
such human-level perceptual capability and ultimately reconstruct holistic geometric structures from an image, which
would have tremendous impacts on broader domains such as
visual effects, construction, manufacturing, and robotics.
Ever since the emergence of deep neural networks
(DNNs), geometry reconstruction has seen a breakthrough in
low-level primitive detection tasks (e.g., corners and edges)
by training DNNs on large annotated datasets [24, 25, 29, 31].
However, holistic structure reasoning (e.g., graph inference
from corner candidates) is still a challenge for end-to-end
neural architectures. The performance is far below that of
human-vision [26] and inferior to classical optimization or
search methods [4, 17, 22].
This paper seeks to push the frontier of end-to-end neural
architecture for structured reconstruction, in particular, we
focus on inferring an outdoor building architecture or an
indoor floorplan as a 2D planar graph from raster sensor data.
Our approach resembles state-of-the-art Transformer based
architectures DETR/LETR for object/edge detection [3, 24].
They extract image information by a ConvNet and pass to the
“dummy query nodes” in a Transformer decoder by crossattention. Our experiments reveal that they do not effectively
learn structural regularities of target objects/edges.
Our idea is similar and simple, yet yields much more
powerful holistic structural reasoning. For edge detection,
instead of creating “dummy query nodes” as placeholders for
regressing answers, we 1) create a node for every edge candidate and initialize the feature by a trigonometric positional

3866

