Weakly Supervised Rotation-Invariant Aerial Object Detection Network
Xiaoxu Feng Xiwen Yao∗ Gong Cheng Junwei Han
School of Automation, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
fengxiaox@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, yaoxiwen517@gmail.com, {gcheng,jhan}@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Object rotation is among long-standing, yet still unexplored, hard issues encountered in the task of weakly supervised object detection (WSOD) from aerial images. Existing predominant WSOD approaches built on regular CNNs
which are not inherently designed to tackle object rotations without corresponding constraints, thereby leading to
rotation-sensitive object detector. Meanwhile, current solutions have been prone to fall into the issue with unstable detectors, as they ignore lower-scored instances and
may regard them as backgrounds. To address these issues, in this paper, we construct a novel end-to-end weakly
supervised Rotation-Invariant aerial object detection Network (RINet). It is implemented with a flexible multibranch online detector refinement, to be naturally more
rotation-perceptive against oriented objects. Specifically,
RINet first performs label propagating from the predicted
instances to their rotated ones in a progressive refinement
manner. Meanwhile, we propose to couple the predicted instance labels among different rotation-perceptive branches
for generating rotation-consistent supervision and meanwhile pursuing all possible instances. With the rotationconsistent supervisions, RINet enforces and encourages
consistent yet complementary feature learning for WSOD
without additional annotations and hyper-parameters. On
the challenging NWPU VHR-10.v2 and DIOR datasets,
extensive experiments clearly demonstrate that we significantly boost existing WSOD methods to a new stateof-the-art performance. The code will be available at:
https://github.com/XiaoxFeng/RINet.

1. Introduction
Object detection is an indispensable task in both computer vision and earth vision with many applications. Recent impressive progress in object detection has been
boosted by the boom of powerful deep Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and the availability of abundant datasets
with subtle annotations. However, collecting such subtle
annotations is time-consuming and even infeasible, which
∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Typical issues and our solutions for WSOD in aerial
images. (a) The image and its rotated image produce inconsistent
detection results. (b) Existing WSOD methods incline to detect
salient objects or object parts, leading to instances missing.

has seriously impeded the applications of object detection
in the real-world. To alleviate the heavy label cost, WSOD,
which requires only incomplete image-level annotations to
learn the precise object detection model, has been extensively explored and achieved impressive results.
As far as we know, almost all predominated WSOD
methods [5,7,8,10,14,17,19,24,27,30,31,33–35,39,45,47]
are built on the Weakly Supervised Deep Detection Network (WSDDN) [14] and formulate WSOD as multiple
instance learning problems. Based on it, a constructive
work, named Online Instance Classifier Refinement (OICR)
[31], is proposed to iteratively refine instance classifier in
a unified network. More recently, some advanced works
[9, 17, 19, 24, 25, 27, 30, 33, 34, 43] are proposed to boost the
development of WSOD via adopting novel training strategies [19, 27, 33, 34, 44, 46], contextual information [17] or
extra segmentation networks [9, 24, 38].
The typical WSOD approaches [7, 36, 37, 42] in aerial
images are mainly inspired by the object detection algorithms developed for natural scenes and endeavor to address
the sub-optimal problem. Despite their successes, such illposed solution ignores the property of aerial images, that
is, many object instances with the same category in aerial

14146

