Self-Supervised Image Representation Learning with Geometric Set Consistency
Nenglun Chen* 1,2 , Lei Chu2 , Hao Pan2 , Yan Lu2 , and Wenping Wang3
1

The University of Hong Kong 2 Microsoft Research Asia
3
Texas A&M University

Abstract

Pre-training with Geometric Set Consistency

We propose a method for self-supervised image representation learning under the guidance of 3D geometric consistency. Our intuition is that 3D geometric consistency priors
such as smooth regions and surface discontinuities may imply consistent semantics or object boundaries, and can act
as strong cues to guide the learning of 2D image representations without semantic labels. Specifically, we introduce
3D geometric consistency into a contrastive learning framework to enforce the feature consistency within image views.
We propose to use geometric consistency sets as constraints
and adapt the InfoNCE loss accordingly. We show that our
learned image representations are general. By fine-tuning
our pre-trained representations for various 2D image-based
downstream tasks, including semantic segmentation, object
detection, and instance segmentation on real-world indoor
scene datasets, we achieve superior performance compared
with state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised image representation learning is an important problem in the field of computer vision and has
been rapidly developed in recent years. Existing works in
this area mainly focus on designing various pretext tasks to
learn general and intrinsic image features in self-supervised
manners [14, 18, 37]. Those pretext tasks are usually lowlevel and can capture general image properties that favor
many downstream tasks, like image classification, semantic
segmentation, object detection, instance segmentation, etc.
Due to its ability to learn from a large amount of unlabeled
data, self-supervised representation learning has already become a standard training regime in many real-world applications [2, 3, 15, 55].
Recently, researchers have started to use 3D data, usually
* This work was done when Nenglun Chen was an intern at Microsoft
Research Asia.

Object Detection

Instance Segmentation Semantic Segmentation

Figure 1. We introduce geometric consistency set to enforce the
consistency within images for self-supervised image representation learning. We show that, the image representations pre-trained
in this way can improve the performance of some 2D downstream
tasks including semantic segmentation, object detection and instance segmentation.

represented by point clouds, meshes, or voxel grids, as guidance for learning image representations [18, 30]. Compared
with 2D images, 3D data has complementary advantages
for learning discriminative image features. Since 3D data is
usually acquired by real-world scanning and reconstruction,
and has the same dimension as the real-world scenes, learning geometric structures from 3D data is much easier than
2D images. Moreover, complex occlusions, as well as the
texture of objects will also affect the performance of image
perception methods. Meanwhile, 3D data is occlusion-free,
and geometric cues like smooth regions and sharp edges can
be strong priors for semantic understanding. Thus it is natural to use 3D geometric cues to favor the learning of image

19292

