Unpaired Cartoon Image Synthesis via Gated Cycle Mapping
Yifang Men1 , Yuan Yao1 , Miaomiao Cui1 , Zhouhui Lian2 , Xuansong Xie1 , Xian-Sheng Hua1
1
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
2
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, China
Exemplar

Exemplar

Source

Source

Figure 1. The proposed unpaired cartoon image synthesis method is able to convert diverse source photos (portrait in left, scene in right)
into cartoon images with controllable cartoon styles as the corresponding exemplars. Source face credits: FFHQ [15] and Seeprettyface [2].

Abstract
In this paper, we present a general-purpose solution to
cartoon image synthesis with unpaired training data. In
contrast to previous works learning pre-defined cartoon
styles for specified usage scenarios (portrait or scene), we
aim to train a common cartoon translator which can not
only simultaneously render exaggerated anime faces and
realistic cartoon scenes, but also provide flexible user controls for desired cartoon styles. It is challenging due to the
complexity of the task and the absence of paired data. The
core idea of the proposed method is to introduce gated cycle mapping, that utilizes a novel gated mapping unit to
produce the category-specific style code and embeds this
code into cycle networks to control the translation process.
For the concept of category, we classify images into different categories (e.g., 4 types: photo/cartoon portrait/scene)
and learn finer-grained category translations rather than
overall mappings between two domains (e.g., photo and
cartoon). Furthermore, the proposed method can be easily extended to cartoon video generation with an auxiliary
dataset and a new adaptive style loss. Experimental results
demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method over the
state of the art and validate its effectiveness in the brandnew task of general cartoon image synthesis.

1. Introduction
Cartoon is a popular art form that can be widely used
in diverse scenes such as advertising, animation production,
and the creation of virtual characters. Artists aim to build
a vivid cartoon world in a simplified or exaggerated way
based on real-world persons and scenarios. However, manually recreating the real world in cartoon styles is labor intensive and requires substantial professional skills.
Recently, inspired by the power of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [10] in image-to-image translation tasks, a series of GAN-based methods have been proposed to achieve photo-to-cartoon (P2C) translation. These
methods can be roughly categorized as scene cartoonization [6, 7, 31] and portrait cartoonization [26, 28, 33, 34],
which are tailored to different use cases. For the former,
the main idea is to introduce specialized losses or preextracted representations to sharpen edges and smooth surfaces, thus learning an abstract conversion between photo
and cartoon images. However, they are incapable of generating vivid cartoon faces with exaggerated geometry transform, such as delicate big eyes and simplified mouths.
Portrait cartoonization methods are proposed to produce
manga [28, 33, 34] or caricature [5, 26] faces with large geometric changes. Yet, they heavily depend on facial characteristics (e.g., decomposed facial components or guided
facial landmarks) and are not suitable for common scenes.

3501

