Keypoint Transformer: Solving Joint Identification in
Challenging Hands and Object Interactions for Accurate 3D Pose Estimation
Shreyas Hampali(1) , Sayan Deb Sarkar(1) , Mahdi Rad(1) , Vincent Lepetit(2,1)
(1)

Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision, Graz University of Technology, Graz, Austria
(2)
LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, Marne-la-Vallée, France
{<firstname>.<lastname>}@icg.tugraz.at, vincent.lepetit@enpc.fr

Abstract
We propose a robust and accurate method for estimating the 3D poses of two hands in close interaction from a
single color image. This is a very challenging problem, as
large occlusions and many confusions between the joints
may happen. State-of-the-art methods solve this problem by
regressing a heatmap for each joint, which requires solving two problems simultaneously: localizing the joints and
recognizing them. In this work, we propose to separate
these tasks by relying on a CNN to first localize joints as 2D
keypoints, and on self-attention between the CNN features
at these keypoints to associate them with the corresponding hand joint. The resulting architecture, which we call
“Keypoint Transformer”, is highly efficient as it achieves
state-of-the-art performance with roughly half the number
of model parameters on the InterHand2.6M dataset. We
also show it can be easily extended to estimate the 3D pose
of an object manipulated by one or two hands with high
performance. Moreover, we created a new dataset of more
than 75,000 images of two hands manipulating an object
fully annotated in 3D and will make it publicly available.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Our approach accurately predicts 3D hand and object
poses from a single RGB image in challenging scenarios including
complex hand interactions (top) and 2 hands interacting with an
object where the hands can be severely occluded (bottom). The
bottom example is from the H2 O-3D dataset we also introduce in
this paper, which contains challenging, fully and accurately 3Dannotated, video sequences of two hands manipulating objects.

3D hand pose estimation has the potential to make virtual reality, augmented reality, and interaction with computers and robots much more intuitive. Recently, significant progress has been made for single-hand pose estimation using depth maps and even single RGB images. Being able to deal with RGB images is particularly attractive as it does not require a power-hungry active sensor.
Many approaches have been proposed, mostly based on direct prediction with different convolutional network architectures [15, 18, 29, 36, 44, 49, 61] of the 3D joint locations
or angles, or relying on rendering for fine pose estimation
and tracking [2, 12, 32, 40, 50].
In contrast to single-hand pose estimation, two-hand

pose estimation has received much less attention. This
problem is indeed significantly harder: The appearance similarities between the joints of the two hands make their identification extremely challenging. Moreover, in close interaction, some of the joints of a hand are likely to be occluded
by the other hand or itself. Thus, first detecting the left
and right hands and then independently predicting their 3D
poses [13, 36] performs poorly in close interaction scenarios. Bottom-up approaches [30,54] directly estimate the 2D
joint locations and their depths using one heatmap per joint.
However, as shown in Fig. 2, the similarity in appearances
of the joints and severe occlusions degrade the quality of
heatmaps failing to localize the joints accurately. More re-

11090

