Exploring Dual-task Correlation for Pose Guided Person Image Generation
Pengze Zhang1 , Lingxiao Yang1 , Jianhuang Lai1,2,3 and Xiaohua Xie1,2,3*
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University, China
2
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
zhangpz3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {yanglx9, stsljh, xiexiaoh6}@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Pose Guided Person Image Generation (PGPIG) is the
task of transforming a person image from the source pose
to a given target pose. Most of the existing methods only
focus on the ill-posed source-to-target task and fail to capture reasonable texture mapping. To address this problem,
we propose a novel Dual-task Pose Transformer Network
(DPTN), which introduces an auxiliary task (i.e., source-tosource task) and exploits the dual-task correlation to promote the performance of PGPIG. The DPTN is of a Siamese
structure, containing a source-to-source self-reconstruction
branch, and a transformation branch for source-to-target
generation. By sharing partial weights between them, the
knowledge learned by the source-to-source task can effectively assist the source-to-target learning. Furthermore,
we bridge the two branches with a proposed Pose Transformer Module (PTM) to adaptively explore the correlation between features from dual tasks. Such correlation
can establish the fine-grained mapping of all the pixels between the sources and the targets, and promote the source
texture transmission to enhance the details of the generated target images. Extensive experiments show that
our DPTN outperforms state-of-the-arts in terms of both
PSNR and LPIPS. In addition, our DPTN only contains
9.79 million parameters, which is significantly smaller than
other approaches. Our code is available at: https://
github.com/PangzeCheung/Dual-task-PoseTransformer-Network.

1. Introduction
Pose Guided Person Image Generation (PGPIG) aims to
generate person images with arbitrary given poses. It has
various applications such as e-commerce, film special effects, person re-identification [5–7, 19, 34, 35, 40, 41], etc.
Due to the significant changes in texture and geometry dur* Corresponding Author

漏a漐
Source
image

(b)
Target
image

(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Vanilla CNN
Attention
Optical flow Parsing map
based method based method based method based method

(g)
Our
method

Figure 1. Visual comparison of our method with other approaches,
including vanilla CNN based [22], attention based [45], optical
flow based [24], and parsing map based [21] method. Compared
with other methods, our model can generate more realistic images.

ing the pose transfer, PGPIG is still a challenging task.
Driven by the improvement of generative models, e.g.,
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [8] and Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [17], PGPIG has made great
progress. However, early works [4, 22] are built on vanilla
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), which lack the capability to perform complex geometry transformations [13]
(see Fig. 1 (c)). To tackle this problem, attention mechanisms [30, 45] and optical flow [18, 24, 29] are applied
to improve spatial transformation abilities. Some methods [21,39] introduce additional labels such as human parsing maps to provide semantic guidance for pose variations.
However, the above mentioned methods solely focus on
training the generator G on the Source-to-Target Task that
transforms the source image xs from the source pose ps
to the target pose pt : G(xs , ps , pt ) = x̃t . This is an illposed problem, making it arduous to train a robust generator. Moreover, the existing methods cannot well capture the
reasonable texture mapping between the source and target

7713

