Class-Incremental Learning with Strong Pre-trained Models
Tz-Ying Wu1,2 Gurumurthy Swaminathan1 Zhizhong Li1
Avinash Ravichandran1 Nuno Vasconcelos2 Rahul Bhotika1 Stefano Soatto1
1
2
AWS AI Labs
UC San Diego
{gurumurs,lzhizhon,ravinash,bhotikar,soattos}@amazon.com

{tzw001,nuno}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Y𝒃

Class-incremental learning (CIL) has been widely studied under the setting of starting from a small number of
classes (base classes). Instead, we explore an understudied real-world setting of CIL that starts with a strong model
pre-trained on a large number of base classes. We hypothesize that a strong base model can provide a good representation for novel classes and incremental learning can be
done with small adaptations. We propose a 2-stage training scheme, i) feature augmentation – cloning part of the
backbone and fine-tuning it on the novel data, and ii) fusion
– combining the base and novel classifiers into a unified
classifier. Experiments show that the proposed method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art CIL methods on the
large-scale ImageNet dataset (e.g. +10% overall accuracy
than the best). We also propose and analyze understudied
practical CIL scenarios, such as base-novel overlap with
distribution shift. Our proposed method is robust and generalizes to all analyzed CIL settings.

1. Introduction
As deep classifiers become more popular for real-world
applications, the need for incrementally learning novel
classes (novel data) becomes more prevalent. Training
a classifier with both old and novel data is not optimal
when old data can become unavailable over time [6, 13,
15, 18, 19, 23, 24, 32]. Fewer old data leads to a high imbalance between the old and novel data, and simply finetuning the model causes catastrophic forgetting for the old
classes [15].
Class-incremental learning (CIL) methods [5,6,8,11,23,
29,34] learn to categorize more and more classes over time.
However, they typically start their incremental training with
a small number of base classes (e.g. only 50), and add an
equally small number of new classes at a time. In many
practical scenarios, having a large number of base classes
can be a more useful starting point for building an applica-

Base Class
Novel Class
Overlapping Class

Old Data

Y𝒏

Large Pretrained Classifier w/ Label Set Y𝒃

New Data
w/ Label Set Y𝒏

Updated Classifier w/ Label Set Y𝒃 ∪ Y𝒏

Figure 1. We study the problem of CIL in the setting where there
are a large number of base classes. Classes between splits can
have overlaps, and data can be sampled from the same or different
distributions (e.g. different styles, poses).

tion. For example, a strong model could have been developed to identify different dog breeds, and a small set of additional breeds needs to be added for model update. Moreover, base and novel classes may overlap but may distribute
differently, such as a guitar class present in both base and
novel classes, with only acoustic guitars in base samples
while electric guitars in novel ones.
Some CIL methods use a static model and typically
fine-tune the existing parameters with some constraints imposed on parameter changes [3, 13, 32], gradients [17], features [8, 11], or activations [6, 15, 23]. These methods modify the well-trained network weights and risk performance
degradation. On the other hand, methods based on dynamic
models learn separate parameters for novel tasks, either by
expanding the model [24], or introducing a parameter gating function [18,19]. However, almost all dynamic methods
focus on task-incremental learning (TIL). TIL assumes that
which task a sample belongs to is known at inference time,
and different tasks are inferred individually. This assumption is not realistic if the application needs to distinguish
between base and novel classes. A recent work DER [30]

9601

