Semantic-shape Adaptive Feature Modulation for Semantic Image Synthesis
Zhengyao Lv1 , Xiaoming Li2 , Zhenxing Niu3 , Bing Cao4 , Wangmeng Zuo2,5( )
1
Tomorrow Advancing Life 2 Harbin Institute of Technology
3
Machine Intelligence Lab, Alibaba Group 4 Tianjin University 5 Peng Cheng Laboratory
{cszy98, hit.xmshr}@gmail.com wmzuo@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed substantial progress in semantic image synthesis, it is still challenging in synthesizing photo-realistic images with rich details. Most previous methods focus on exploiting the given semantic map,
which just captures an object-level layout for an image.
Obviously, a fine-grained part-level semantic layout will
benefit object details generation, and it can be roughly inferred from an object’s shape. In order to exploit the partlevel layouts, we propose a Shape-aware Position Descriptor (SPD) to describe each pixel’s positional feature, where
object shape is explicitly encoded into the SPD feature. Furthermore, a Semantic-shape Adaptive Feature Modulation
(SAFM) block is proposed to combine the given semantic
map and our positional features to produce adaptively modulated features. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the
proposed SPD and SAFM significantly improve the generation of objects with rich details. Moreover, our method
performs favorably against the SOTA methods in terms of
quantitative and qualitative evaluation. The source code
and model are available at SAFM.

1. Introduction
Semantic image synthesis is a kind of conditional image generation task, which aims to generate semantically
aligned and photo-realistic images with the given semantic maps. Compared to unconditional image generation, it
has significant flexibility in image generation since we can
flexibly control the generated image content by drawing or
editing the input semantic maps. Semantic image synthesis has been widely used in many practical scenarios, e.g.,
content creation and image editing [7, 28, 33, 42].
Recently, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [10]
are broadly adopted to solve this problem and achieve impressive results. Most works attempt to model the mapping between different semantic classes and visual appearances. Park et al. [28] propose to use spatially-adaptive
transformations (SPADE) learned from the input semantic layouts to modulate the activations in the generator.

Figure 1. The given semantic map only provides an object-level
layout, which is too coarse for generating images with rich details.
The part-level semantic layout is implied in the shape/contour of
an object instance. By encoding object shape into the proposed
SPD feature, we can effectively exploit such part-level layouts for
better image details generation.

CC-FPSE [21] subsequently extends SPADE by predicting
spatially-varying conditional convolution kernels from the
semantic layouts. Most recently, SC-GAN [36] exploits
the learned semantic vectors to get spatially-variant and
appearance-correlated convolution kernels and normalization parameters for the semantic stylization.
A semantic map has not only semantic labels but also
a spatial layout. Such a spatial layout can be used to regularize the semantic image synthesis. Generally, one object instance is composed of some object parts, and pixels
from the same object part should have a similar appearance
while pixels from distinct object parts should not. For instance, an object ‘car’ is composed of ‘window’, ‘wheel’,
etc. Thus, the pixels from the ‘window’ should look different from those from the ‘wheel’. In contrast, two pixels both
from the ‘window’ should look similar to each other. By exploiting such a spatial layout, we can suppress artifacts and
generate coherent image details.
Semantic layouts have been effectively exploited to improve image synthesis in previous methods. However, the
given semantic map just captures an object-level layout for
an image, which describes whether two pixels belong to the
same object instance or not. It is too coarse to capture the
11214

