Look Outside the Room: Synthesizing A Consistent Long-Term 3D Scene Video
from A Single Image
Xuanchi Ren
HKUST

Xiaolong Wang
UC San Diego

Input

Outputs

Figure 1. Using a single image and a camera trajectory as inputs, our method synthesizes perceptual consistent novel views, which form a
long-term video. The top two rows are test images from the Matterport dataset [6], and the bottom two rows are from the RealEstate10K
dataset [73]. Our model is able to synthesize with large camera changes and even walk outside a room to look into another room.

Abstract
Novel view synthesis from a single image has recently
attracted a lot of attention, and it has been primarily advanced by 3D deep learning and rendering techniques.
However, most work is still limited by synthesizing new
views within relatively small camera motions. In this paper, we propose a novel approach to synthesize a consistent
long-term video given a single scene image and a trajectory of large camera motions. Our approach utilizes an
autoregressive Transformer to perform sequential modeling of multiple frames, which reasons the relations between
multiple frames and the corresponding cameras to predict
the next frame. To facilitate learning and ensure consistency among generated frames, we introduce a locality con-

straint based on the input cameras to guide self-attention
among a large number of patches across space and time.
Our method outperforms state-of-the-art view synthesis approaches by a large margin, especially when synthesizing
long-term future in indoor 3D scenes. Project page at
https://xrenaa.github.io/look-outside-room/.

1. Introduction
Single-image view synthesis has attracted a lot of attention in computer vision and computer graphics. It brings a
photo to life by extrapolating beyond the input pixels and
generating new pixels following the geometric structure of
the scene. At the same time, the generated pixels need to be
semantically coherent with the existing pixels. Current view
13563

