A Simple Data Mixing Prior for Improving Self-Supervised Learning
Sucheng Ren1

Huiyu Wang2 Zhengqi Gao3 Shengfeng He1∗ Alan Yuille2
Yuyin Zhou4 Cihang Xie4 *
1
South China University of Technology 2 Johns Hopkins University
3
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 4 UC Santa Cruz
Abstract

1. Introduction
Data mixing is one of the key ingredients for improving
recognition models. The concept of data mixing is firstly
introduced in Mixup [47], which trains models on convex
combinations of pairs of images and their labels. This idea
subsequently inspires several follow-ups, including mixing images and cropped patches [45], mixing images and
thumbnails [44], and mixing among cropped patches [4,38].
However, interestingly, data mixing plays little role in
the recent surge of self-supervised learning. For instance,
while naı̈vely replacing original images with their mixed
counterparts substantially improves Vision Transformers
(ViTs) in the supervised setting [39], it cannot improve
ViTs under the self-supervised setting. Though many efforts [27, 31, 42] have been made recently by developing
more sophisticated training strategies in data mixing, they
* Corresponding authors: Shengfeng He (hesfe@scut.edu.cn), Cihang
Xie (cixie@ucsc.edu)

Positive Pair

Data mixing (e.g., Mixup, Cutmix, ResizeMix) is an essential component for advancing recognition models. In
this paper, we focus on studying its effectiveness in the
self-supervised setting. By noticing the mixed images that
share the same source images are intrinsically related to
each other, we hereby propose SDMP, short for Simple Data
Mixing Prior, to capture this straightforward yet essential
prior, and position such mixed images as additional positive
pairs to facilitate self-supervised representation learning.
Our experiments verify that the proposed SDMP enables
data mixing to help a set of self-supervised learning frameworks (e.g., MoCo) achieve better accuracy and out-ofdistribution robustness. More notably, our SDMP is the first
method that successfully leverages data mixing to improve
(rather than hurt) the performance of Vision Transformers
in the self-supervised setting. Code is publicly available
at https://github.com/OliverRensu/SDMP.

Data
Mixing

Source Images

Mixed Images

Figure 1. For the mixed images that share the same source (e.g., a
cat image and a dog image), they are semantically related and can
be treated as additional positive pairs in self-supervised learning.

are exclusively focusing on Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs). As shown in Table 1 in Section 4, all these methods still fail to help (or even hurt) ViTs [16].
In this paper, we aim to develop a generic training strategy in data mixing that can improve the self-supervised representation learning of both CNNs and ViTs. By taking
a closer look at the popular data mixing implementation
where an image is mixed with another image that sampled
from the same batch but with the flipped order1 , we observe
such created mixed samples are inherently related in pairs
(e.g., an example is provided in Figure 1). This indicates
that, now for one mixed image, there exist three related samples (i.e., a pair of source images and a mixed image created with a different mixing parameter) in the same training
batch. This intrinsic relationship qualifies the pair of mixed
images to be treated as additional positive samples in selfsupervised learning to facilitate representation learning.
1 The traditional data mixing implementation randomly samples two
batches and then mixes them with each other; while this instantiation of
data mixing only samples one batch and then mixes pairs of images from
the same batch. It generally will not hurt performance, and is very popular
in many libraries (e.g., timm [43]), due to its faster computational speed.

14595

