High-Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Models
Robin Rombach1 ∗
1

Andreas Blattmann1 ∗

Dominik Lorenz1

Björn Ommer1

Patrick Esser

Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich & IWR, Heidelberg University, Germany

Runway ML

https://github.com/CompVis/latent-diffusion

Abstract
By decomposing the image formation process into a sequential application of denoising autoencoders, diffusion
models (DMs) achieve state-of-the-art synthesis results on
image data and beyond. Additionally, their formulation allows for a guiding mechanism to control the image generation process without retraining. However, since these
models typically operate directly in pixel space, optimization of powerful DMs often consumes hundreds of GPU
days and inference is expensive due to sequential evaluations. To enable DM training on limited computational
resources while retaining their quality and flexibility, we
apply them in the latent space of powerful pretrained autoencoders. In contrast to previous work, training diffusion
models on such a representation allows for the first time
to reach a near-optimal point between complexity reduction and detail preservation, greatly boosting visual fidelity.
By introducing cross-attention layers into the model architecture, we turn diffusion models into powerful and flexible generators for general conditioning inputs such as text
or bounding boxes and high-resolution synthesis becomes
possible in a convolutional manner. Our latent diffusion
models (LDMs) achieve new state of the art scores for image inpainting and class-conditional image synthesis and
highly competitive performance on various tasks, including unconditional image generation, text-to-image synthesis, and super-resolution, while significantly reducing computational requirements compared to pixel-based DMs.

1. Introduction
Image synthesis is one of the computer vision fields with
the most spectacular recent development, but also among
those with the greatest computational demands. Especially high-resolution synthesis of complex, natural scenes
is presently dominated by scaling up likelihood-based models, potentially containing billions of parameters in autoregressive (AR) transformers [64,65]. In contrast, the promising results of GANs [3, 26, 39] have been revealed to be
mostly confined to data with comparably limited variability
as their adversarial learning procedure does not easily scale
to modeling complex, multi-modal distributions. Recently,
diffusion models [79], which are built from a hierarchy of
denoising autoencoders, have shown to achieve impressive
∗ The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

Input

ours (f = 4)

DALL-E (f = 8)

VQGAN (f = 16)

PSNR: 27.4 R-FID: 0.58

PSNR: 22.8 R-FID: 32.01

PSNR: 19.9 R-FID: 4.98

Figure 1. Boosting the upper bound on achievable quality with
less agressive downsampling. Since diffusion models offer excellent inductive biases for spatial data, we do not need the heavy spatial downsampling of related generative models in latent space, but
can still greatly reduce the dimensionality of the data via suitable
autoencoding models, see Sec. 3. Images are from the DIV2K [1]
validation set, evaluated at 5122 px. We denote the spatial downsampling factor by f . Reconstruction FIDs [28] and PSNR are
calculated on ImageNet-val. [12]; see also Tab. 8.

results in image synthesis [29,82] and beyond [7,44,47,56],
and define the state-of-the-art in class-conditional image
synthesis [15,30] and super-resolution [70]. Moreover, even
unconditional DMs can readily be applied to tasks such
as inpainting and colorization [82] or stroke-based synthesis [52], in contrast to other types of generative models [19, 45, 67]. Being likelihood-based models, they do not
exhibit mode-collapse and training instabilities as GANs
and, by heavily exploiting parameter sharing, they can
model highly complex distributions of natural images without involving billions of parameters as in AR models [65].
Democratizing High-Resolution Image Synthesis DMs
belong to the class of likelihood-based models, whose
mode-covering behavior makes them prone to spend excessive amounts of capacity (and thus compute resources)
on modeling imperceptible details of the data [16, 71]. Although the reweighted variational objective [29] aims to address this by undersampling the initial denoising steps, DMs
are still computationally demanding, since training and
evaluating such a model requires repeated function evaluations (and gradient computations) in the high-dimensional
space of RGB images. As an example, training the most
powerful DMs often takes hundreds of GPU days (e.g. 150 1000 V100 days in [15]) and repeated evaluations on a noisy
version of the input space render also inference expensive,

10684

