StylizedNeRF: Consistent 3D Scene Stylization as Stylized NeRF via 2D-3D Mutual Learning
Yi-Hua Huang1,2 Yue He1,2 Yu-Jie Yuan1,2 Yu-Kun Lai3 Lin Gao1,2*
1
Beijing Key Laboratory of Mobile Computing and Pervasive Device,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Computer and Control Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Computer Science & Informatics, Cardiff University
{huangyihua20g, heyue19s, yuanyujie, gaolin}@ict.ac.cn

LaiY4@cardiff.ac.uk

Figure 1. Results of consistent 3D stylization by our method. Given a set of real photographs (a) and a style image (b), our model is
capable of generating stylized novel views (c), which are consistent in 3D space by learning a stylized NeRF.

Abstract
3D scene stylization aims at generating stylized images
of the scene from arbitrary novel views following a given
set of style examples, while ensuring consistency when rendered from different views. Directly applying methods for
image or video stylization to 3D scenes cannot achieve such
consistency. Thanks to recently proposed neural radiance
fields (NeRF), we are able to represent a 3D scene in a consistent way. Consistent 3D scene stylization can be effectively achieved by stylizing the corresponding NeRF. However, there is a significant domain gap between style examples which are 2D images and NeRF which is an implicit
volumetric representation. To address this problem, we propose a novel mutual learning framework for 3D scene stylization that combines a 2D image stylization network and
NeRF to fuse the stylization ability of 2D stylization network with the 3D consistency of NeRF. We first pre-train a
standard NeRF of the 3D scene to be stylized and replace
its color prediction module with a style network to obtain
*Corresponding Author is Lin Gao (gaolin@ict.ac.cn).

a stylized NeRF. It is followed by distilling the prior knowledge of spatial consistency from NeRF to the 2D stylization
network through an introduced consistency loss. We also introduce a mimic loss to supervise the mutual learning of the
NeRF style module and fine-tune the 2D stylization decoder.
In order to further make our model handle ambiguities of
2D stylization results, we introduce learnable latent codes
that obey the probability distributions conditioned on the
style. They are attached to training samples as conditional
inputs to better learn the style module in our novel stylized
NeRF. Experimental results demonstrate that our method is
superior to existing approaches in both visual quality and
long-range consistency.

1. Introduction
Controlling the appearance of complex 3D real scenes
has attracted increasing attention in recent years. Numerous works have made great effort to this task, such as texture
synthesis [10, 22, 55] and semantic view synthesis [16, 18].

18342

