tree
beside
girl

throw

frisbee
throw
girl

on

on
grass

Scene Graph Expansion for Semantics-Guided Image Outpainting
Chiao-An Yang1 , Cheng-Yo Tan1 , Wan-Cyuan Fan1 , Cheng-Fu Yang1
Meng-Lin Wu2 , Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1
1
National Taiwan University, 2 Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.
joeyang@ntu.edu.tw, {cy.ugo.tan, christine5200312, joeyy5588}@gmail.com
menglinw@qti.qualcomm.com, ycwang@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
In this paper, we address the task of semantics-guided
image outpainting, which is to complete an image by generating semantically practical content. Different from most
existing image outpainting works, we approach the above
task by understanding and completing image semantics at
the scene graph level. In particular, we propose a novel
network of Scene Graph Transformer (SGT), which is designed to take node and edge features as inputs for modeling the associated structural information. To better understand and process graph-based inputs, our SGT uniquely
performs feature attention at both node and edge levels.
While the former views edges as relationship regularization,
the latter observes the co-occurrence of nodes for guiding
the attention process. We demonstrate that, given a partial
input image with its layout and scene graph, our SGT can
be applied for scene graph expansion and its conversion
to a complete layout. Following state-of-the-art layout-toimage conversions works, the task of image outpainting can
be completed with sufficient and practical semantics introduced. Extensive experiments are conducted on the datasets
of MS-COCO and Visual Genome, which quantitatively and
qualitatively confirm the effectiveness of our proposed SGT
and outpainting frameworks.

1. Introduction
Given an incomplete image or a partial image input, humans generally are able to picture the context of the corresponding complete version. Such reasoning skill is largely
based on our prior experience and knowledge observed
from diverse images and their semantics. In the scope of
machine learning, the objective is typically applied for the
task of image completion, aiming to generate or predict reasonable missing image regions based on the observed input. In the areas of computer vision and image processing,
several content creation applications such as object removal
editing [21], image panorama creation [30], texture cre-

(a) SGE

(b) G2L

(c) L2I

tree
beside
girl

throw

frisbee

on

throw
girl

on
grass

Figure 1. Illustration of semantics-guided image outpainting.
Our work can be divided into stages of (a) Scene Graph Expansion
(SGE), (b) Scene Graph to Layout (G2L), and (c) Layout to Image
(L2I) conversions. The blue node and red edges in the scene graph
indicate the generated objects and relationship, respectively.

ation [24], and view expansion [29] are closely related to
the aforementioned task.
Depending on where the missing parts are to be recovered, the task of image completion is typically divided
into two categories, image inpainting (also known as image
hole-filling) and outpainting (also known as image extrapolation). Compared to image inpainting, image outpainting
needs to synthesize unknown regions in single-sided fashions and thus is considered to be more challenging. Based
on image inpainting works [8,16,18,27,31], researchers advance local and global GAN [8], Partial Convolution [16],
Gated Convolution [31] and edge information [18] for outpainting tasks [11, 17, 20, 23, 26, 29]. However, despite impressive performances, most existing approaches are not designed to predict novel semantic regions in the output images. That is, they mainly focus on extending the surrounding texture or completing the fractional objects, resulting
in extrapolated image regions with repeating structures or
patterns. It is not clear how to introduce novel semantics
with reasonable relationships with the existing ones during
outpainting. As a result, we choose to approach this chal-

15617

