Deep Saliency Prior for Reducing Visual Distraction
Kfir Aberman∗

Junfeng He∗
Kai Kohlhoff

Yossi Gandelsman
Yael Pritch
Google Research

Inbar Mosseri
David E. Jacobs
Michael Rubinstein

(a) Learned deep conv operator (Camouﬂage)

Input (image + mask)

(b) GAN operator (Semantic editing)

Input

Output

Input Saliency Map

(c) Warp operator (Inpainting)

Input

Output

Output Saliency Map

(d) Recoloring operator (Harmonization)

Output

Input

Output

Figure 1. Given an input image and a mask of the region(s) to edit (top row, left), our method back-propagates through a visual saliency
prediction model to solve for an image such that the saliency level in the region of interest is modified (top row, right). We explore a
set of differentiable operators, the parameters of which are all guided by the saliency model, resulting in a variety of effects such as (a)
camouflaging (b) semantic editing (c) inpainting, and (d) color harmonization.

Abstract
Using only a model that was trained to predict where
people look at images, and no additional training data, we
can produce a range of powerful editing effects for reducing
distraction in images. Given an image and a mask specifying
the region to edit, we backpropagate through a state-of-theart saliency model to parameterize a differentiable editing
operator, such that the saliency within the masked region is
reduced. We demonstrate several operators, including: a
recoloring operator, which learns to apply a color transform
that camouflages and blends distractors into their surroundings; a warping operator, which warps less salient image
regions to cover distractors, gradually collapsing objects
into themselves and effectively removing them (an effect
akin to inpainting); a GAN operator, which uses a semantic prior to fully replace image regions with plausible, less
salient alternatives. The resulting effects are consistent with
cognitive research on the human visual system (e.g., since
color mismatch is salient, the recoloring operator learns to
harmonize objects’ colors with their surrounding to reduce
their saliency). And importantly, all effects are achieved

under a zero-shot learning scenario, solely through the guidance of the pretrained saliency model, with no supervised
data of the effects. We present results on a variety of natural images and conduct a perceptual study to evaluate
and validate the changes in viewers’ eye-gaze between the
original images and our edited results. Project Webpage:
https://deep-saliency-prior.github.io/

1. Introduction
Studying and modeling human attention – how and where
people look at images – has been widely researched and explored. In the deep learning era, saliency models trained on
eye-gaze data are now able to predict human visual attention
to high accuracy. However, while the research community
has so far focused on developing models for predicting where
people look, almost no attention has been given to utilizing
the knowledge embedded in such recent, deep saliency models to actually drive and direct editing of images and videos,
so as to tweak the attention drawn to different regions in
them. A few recent attempts [15, 34] have focused on subtle
effects designed to make minimal modifications to the image,

19851

