ART-Point: Improving Rotation Robustness of Point Cloud Classifiers via
Adversarial Rotation

1

Ruibin Wang1 , Yibo Yang2, *, Dacheng Tao2
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
2
JD Explore Academy, China
{robin wang, ibo}@pku.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract
Point cloud classifiers with rotation robustness have
been widely discussed in the 3D deep learning community.
Most proposed methods either use rotation invariant descriptors as inputs or try to design rotation equivariant networks. However, robust models generated by these methods have limited performance under clean aligned datasets
due to modifications on the original classifiers or input
space. In this study, for the first time, we show that the
rotation robustness of point cloud classifiers can also be
acquired via adversarial training with better performance
on both rotated and clean datasets. Specifically, our proposed framework named ART-Point regards the rotation of
the point cloud as an attack and improves rotation robustness by training the classifier on inputs with Adversarial
RoTations. We contribute an axis-wise rotation attack that
uses back-propagated gradients of the pre-trained model to
effectively find the adversarial rotations. To avoid model
over-fitting on adversarial inputs, we construct rotation
pools that leverage the transferability of adversarial rotations among samples to increase the diversity of training
data. Moreover, we propose a fast one-step optimization to
efficiently reach the final robust model. Experiments show
that our proposed rotation attack achieves a high success
rate and ART-Point can be used on most existing classifiers
to improve the rotation robustness while showing better performance on clean datasets than state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
A very basic requirement for point cloud classification
is expecting the network to obtain stable predictions on inputs undergoing rigid transformations since such transformations do not change the shape of the object, let alone
change its semantic meanings. This basic requirement is
even more important in practical applications. For exam* Corresponding author.

ple, when a robot is identifying and picking up an object,
the object is usually in an unknown pose. However, many
studies [7,17,51] have shown that most existing point cloud
classifiers can be easily attacked by simply rotating the inputs. To use these classifiers we require to align all input
objects which is a very expensive and time-consuming process. To this end, how to improve the robustness of point
cloud classifiers to arbitrary rotations, becomes a very popular and necessary research topic.
In order to make the network robust to rotated inputs,
most existing works can be classified into three categories:
(1) Rotation Augmentation Methods attempt to augment
the training data using rotations and have been widely used
in the earlier point cloud classifiers [29, 30, 39]. However, data augmentation can hardly be applied to improve
model robustness to arbitrary rotations due to the astronomical number of rotated data [49]. (2) Rotation-Invariance
Methods propose to convert the input point clouds into geometric descriptors that are invariant to rotations. Typical invariant descriptors can be the distance and angles between local point pairs [4, 8, 47, 48] or point norms [17, 49]
and principal directions [47] calculated from global coordinates. (3) Rotation-Equivariance Methods try to solve
the rotation problem from the perspective of model architectures. For example, [5, 27, 37, 40] use convolution with
steerable kernel bases to construct rotation-equivariant networks and [7, 34, 50] modify existing networks with equivariant operations. While both methods (2) and (3) can effectively improve model robustness to arbitrary rotations, they
either require time-consuming pre-processing on inputs or
need complex architectural modifications, which will result
in limited performance on clean aligned datasets.
In this paper, we try to explore a new technical route
for the rotation robustness problem in point clouds. Our
method is inspired by adversarial training [22], a typical
defense method to improve model robustness to attacks.
The idea of adversarial training is straightforward: it augments training data with adversarial examples in each training loop. Thus adversarially trained models behave more

14371

