DIVeR: Real-time and Accurate Neural Radiance Fields
with Deterministic Integration for Volume Rendering
Liwen Wu

Jae Yong Lee
Anand Bhattad
Yu-Xiong Wang
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

David Forsyth

{liwenwu2, lee896, bhattad2, yxw, daf}@illinois.edu

Abstract
DIVeR builds on the key ideas of NeRF and its variants –
density models and volume rendering – to learn 3D object
models that can be rendered realistically from small numbers of images. In contrast to all previous NeRF methods,
DIVeR uses deterministic rather than stochastic estimates
of the volume rendering integral. DIVeR’s representation
is a voxel based field of features. To compute the volume
rendering integral, a ray is broken into intervals, one per
voxel; components of the volume rendering integral are estimated from the features for each interval using an MLP,
and the components are aggregated. As a result, DIVeR can
render thin translucent structures that are missed by other
integrators. Furthermore, DIVeR’s representation has semantics that is relatively exposed compared to other such
methods – moving feature vectors around in the voxel space
results in natural edits. Extensive qualitative and quantitative comparisons to current state-of-the-art methods show
that DIVeR produces models that (1) render at or above stateof-the-art quality, (2) are very small without being baked,
(3) render very fast without being baked, and (4) can be
edited in natural ways. Our real-time code is available at:
https://github.com/lwwu2/diver-rt

1. Introduction
Turning a small set of images into a renderable model of
a scene is an important step in scene generation, appearance
modeling, relighting, and computational photography. The
task is well-established and widely studied; what form the
model should take is still very much open, with models ranging from explicit representations of geometry and material
through plenoptic function models [1]. Plenoptic functions
are hard to smooth, but neural radiance field (NeRF) [25]
demonstrates that a Multi Layer Perceptron (MLP) with positional encoding is an exceptionally good smoother, resulting
in an explosion of variants (details in related work). All use
one key trick: the scene is modeled as density and color
functions, rendered using stochastic estimates of volume
rendering integrals. We describe an alternative approach, deterministic integration for volume rendering (DIVeR), which
is competitive in speed and accuracy with the state of the art.

NeRF

PlenOctrees

DIVeR (Ours)

Ground Truth

Figure 1. Monte Carlo vs. feature integration. Methods like
NeRF [25] and PlenOctrees [55] that use Monte Carlo (stochastic)
integrators fail to render the translucent drumhead; it is thin, and
so is hit by few samples. NeRF’s estimator will not model it
with practical numbers of samples. In contrast, our method uses
a deterministic integrator which directly estimates the section of
volume rendering integral near the drum plane through feature
integration (Sec. 4.2); this uses fewer calls to the integrator and still
successfully models the transparency.

We use a deterministic integrator because stochastic estimates of integrals present problems. Samples may miss
important effects (Fig. 1). Fixing this by increasing the sampling rate is costly: accuracy improves slowly in the number
of samples N , √
(for Monte Carlo methods, standard deviation goes as 1/ N [4]), but the cost of computation grows
linearly. In contrast, our integrator combines per-voxel estimates of the volume rendering integral into a single estimate
using alpha blending (Sec. 4.2).
Like NSVF [21], we use a voxel based representation of
the color and density. Rather than represent functions, we
provide a feature vector at each voxel vertex. The feature
vectors at the vertices of a given voxel are used by an MLP to
compute the deterministic integrator estimate for the section
of any ray passing through the voxel. Mainly, a model is

16200

