Learning from All Vehicles
Dian Chen

Philipp Krähenbühl
UT Austin

Abstract
In this paper, we present a system to train driving policies
from experiences collected not just from the ego-vehicle, but
all vehicles that it observes. This system uses the behaviors of other agents to create more diverse driving scenarios
without collecting additional data. The main difficulty in
learning from other vehicles is that there is no sensor information. We use a set of supervisory tasks to learn an
intermediate representation that is invariant to the viewpoint
of the controlling vehicle. This not only provides a richer signal at training time but also allows more complex reasoning
during inference. Learning how all vehicles drive helps predict their behavior at test time and can avoid collisions. We
evaluate this system in closed-loop driving simulations. Our
system outperforms all prior methods on the public CARLA
Leaderboard by a wide margin, improving driving score by
25 and route completion rate by 24 points.

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving has been one of the most anticipated
technologies since the advent of modern-day artificial intelligence. However, even after decades of exploration, we
have yet to see self-driving cars deployed at scale. One
main reason is the generalization. The world and its drivers
are more diverse than current planning approaches can handle. Hand-designed classical planning [3, 16, 29, 45] does
not generalize gracefully to unseen or unfamiliar scenarios.
Learning based methods [4, 9, 11, 14, 37] fare better, but
suffer from a long tail of driving scenarios. The majority
of driving data consist of easy and uninteresting behaviors.
After all, humans drive thousands of hours before observing
a traffic accident [43], especially when driving an expensive
autonomous test vehicle. How do we tame the long-tail of
driving scenes? While many approaches rely on carefully
crafted safety-critical scenarios in simulation [33, 36, 42], or
collect massive data in the real world [4, 41], in this paper
we focus on an orthogonal direction.
We observe that, although many of us have not experienced traffic accidents ourselves, everyone has at least observed several accidents throughout our driving career. The

?

Left
Straight

?

Change
Lane Right

Figure 1. We present LAV, a mapless, learning-based end-to-end
driving system. LAV takes as input multi-modal sensor readings
and learns from all nearby vehicles in the scene for both perception
and planning. At test time, LAV predicts multi-modal future trajectories for all detected vehicles, including the ego-vehicle. Picture
credit – Waymo open dataset [41].

same applies to safety-critical driving scenarios: While the
data-collecting ego-vehicle might not experience accidentprone situations itself, it is likely its driving logs contain
states that are interesting or safety-critical, but experienced
by other vehicles. Training on other vehicles’ trajectories
helps not only with sample efficiency, but also greatly increase the chance that the model sees interesting scenarios.
Moreover, knowing other vehicles’ future trajectories helps
the ego-vehicle avoid collisions.
The main challenge with training on all vehicles lies in
the partial observability of other vehicles. Unlike the egovehicle, other vehicles have only partially observed motion
trajectories, exposing no control commands or higher-level
goals. This makes direct training [10, 11, 12, 14, 38] on
other vehicles’ traces close to impossible. More importantly,
other vehicles have no accessible sensors. To learn from
other vehicles, a model has to infer their surrounding state
using the ego-vehicle’s sensors.
Our framework, Learning from All Vehicles (LAV), handles the partial observability of both perception and motion
in one joint recognition, prediction, and planning stack. We
decouple the partial observability challenge of perception
and action using a privileged distillation approach [11]. LAV
first learns a perception model that outputs a viewpoint invariant representation using auxiliary supervision from 3D
detection and segmentation tasks. By definition, this auxil-

17222

