Everything at Once – Multi-modal Fusion Transformer for Video Retrieval
Nina Shvetsova 1 Brian Chen 2 Andrew Rouditchenko3 Samuel Thomas4,5
Brian Kingsbury4,5 Rogerio Feris4,5 David Harwath6 James Glass3 Hilde Kuehne1,5
1

Goethe University Frankfurt, 2 Columbia University, 3 MIT CSAIL 4 IBM Research AI, 5 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, 6 UT Austin
shvetsov@uni-frankfurt.de

Abstract
Video

Multi-modal learning from video data has seen increased
attention recently as it allows training of semantically meaningful embeddings without human annotation, enabling tasks
like zero-shot retrieval and action localization. In this work,
we present a multi-modal, modality agnostic fusion transformer that learns to exchange information between multiple
modalities, such as video, audio, and text, and integrate
them into a fused representation in a joined multi-modal
embedding space. We propose to train the system with a
combinatorial loss on everything at once – any combination of input modalities, such as single modalities as well as
pairs of modalities, explicitly leaving out any add-ons such
as position or modality encoding. At test time, the resulting
model can process and fuse any number of input modalities.
Moreover, the implicit properties of the transformer allow to
process inputs of different lengths. To evaluate the proposed
approach, we train the model on the large scale HowTo100M
dataset and evaluate the resulting embedding space on four
challenging benchmark datasets obtaining state-of-the-art
results in zero-shot video retrieval and zero-shot video action
localization. Our code for this work is also available.1

1. Introduction
Humans capture their world in various ways, combining different sensory input modalities such as vision, sound,
touch, and more, to make sense of their environment. Video
data approximates this type of input by combining visual
and audio information as two coherent and complementary
signals that can be further enhanced with a text description. Recent research has therefore started to explore how
the information of those different modalities can be leveraged to learn meaningful representations from this kind of
content. Such systems can be used for representation learning, for example, to learn multi-modal embedding spaces
on video data [1, 2], where the input of one modality such
1 https://github.com/ninatu/everything at once

Fusion Transformer & Projection
video
tokens

video

Combinatorial Loss

video-audio

Audio

audio
tokens

audio

video
videoaudio

videotext

audio

text

audio-text

Text
two stitches on
two

text
tokens

text
video-text

audiotext
– contrasive loss

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed approach for self-supervised
learning of multi-modal embedding space. The fusion transformer
is able to process any combination of input modalities. Internally,
the transformer allows each modality to attend to each other. The
proposed architecture is trained with a combinatorial contrastive
loss considering each possible combination of input modalities.

as text, can be matched to one or more other modalities
such as video and audio, enabling tasks such as nearestneighbor based zero-shot classification or video retrieval
[20, 37, 44]. Our work in this paper focuses on the later
problem, namely the learning of meaningful multi-modal
embedding spaces. Current approaches in this area usually
learn encodings for different modalities by projecting inputs
to a common space and applying contrastive loss to bring
embeddings from co-occurred modalities together. Such approaches can be based on classical neural network elements
to learn those encodings [4, 12, 35, 37, 44], i.e. convolutional
neural networks backbones and non-linear projections [37],
multiple instance learning [35], or clustering [12]. More
recently transformer based methods have also been proposed [1, 10, 20, 32]. To generate the final embedding space,
they use multiple independent single-modality self-attention
transformer blocks [10,21,32], or a single transformer model
for all modalities [20], or a single modality-agnostic transformer [1]. In the last approach, modalities are still processed independently and one-by-one forwarded to achieve
a single-modality embedding. But so far, none of these transformers allow for adaption to any given number of input

20020

