Recurring the Transformer for Video Action Recognition
Jiewen Yang1 Xingbo Dong1,2 * Liujun Liu1 * Chao Zhang1
Jiajun Shen1 Dahai Yu1
1
TCL Corporate Research (HK) Co., Ltd, 2 Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea
{jiewen.yang,liujun.liu,chao46.zhang,sjj,dahai.yu}@tcl.com, xingbo.dong@yonsei.ac.kr

Figure 1. The overview of the recurrent transformer working pipeline. The input frame x(t) and hidden state h(t−1) jointly determine
the current hidden state h(t) and output O(t) . The hidden state contains attention information which can be transferred to next frame.

Abstract
Existing video understanding approaches, such as 3D
convolutional neural networks and Transformer-Based
methods, usually process the videos in a clip-wise manner; hence huge GPU memory is needed and fixed-length
video clips are usually required. To alleviate those issues,
we introduce a novel Recurrent Vision Transformer (RViT)
framework based on spatial-temporal representation learning to achieve the video action recognition task. Specifically, the proposed RViT is equipped with an attention gate
to build interaction between current frame input and previous hidden state, thus aggregating the global level interframe features through the hidden state temporally. RViT is
executed recurrently to process a video by giving the current frame and previous hidden state. The RViT can capture
both spatial and temporal features because of the attention
gate and recurrent execution. Besides, the proposed RViT
can work on variant-length video clips properly without requiring large GPU memory thanks to the frame by frame
processing flow. Our experiment results demonstrate that
RViT can achieve state-of-the-art performance on various
datasets for the video recognition task. Specifically, RViT
can achieve a top-1 accuracy of 81.5% on Kinetics-400,
92.31% on Jester, 67.9% on Something-Something-V2, and
an mAP accuracy of 66.1% on Charades.
* Work done while interning at TCL Corporate Research (HK) Co., Ltd.
and equal contribution

1. Introduction
Existing video understanding works, such as [6, 17, 18,
21, 27, 57], usually utilize the 3D-CNNs network to achieve
the spatial-temporal features extraction. With the successful
adaptation of the Visual Transformer [11] for vision tasks,
Transformer-based methods become a hot topic for video
understanding tasks. TimeSformer [3], ViViT [1], VTN
[40], Mformer [41] and MViT [15] are typical representatives. Though Transformer-based methods on computer vision task can achieve significant performance, tremendous
computing memory is needed for those methods, which hinder the deployment of such schemes.
On the other hand, some studies [23, 42, 59] show that
human visual attention in a video is driven by prior knowledge. For example, [59] points out that human often focuses
on user-interested regions of videos, and prominent actions
draw more attention than their surrounding neighbours at
the initial sight. In the video understanding pipeline of humans, information from the previous frame usually can help
determine the attention in the subsequent frame of the video
in a recurrent manner.
From the human attention perspective, we reason that
there are two categories of information contained in a video:
(i) spatial (single frame), (ii) temporal (inter-frames). Both
the spatial feature in the current frame and the temporal
feature aggregated from prior frames play a crucial role in
video understanding tasks. Meanwhile, the temporal features from adjacent frames usually show high similarity.

14063

