TransEditor: Transformer-Based Dual-Space GAN for
Highly Controllable Facial Editing
Yanbo Xu1,4∗
Yueqin Yin1∗
Liming Jiang2
Qianyi Wu5
Chengyao Zheng3
Chen Change Loy2 Bo Dai2
Wayne Wu1,3
1
Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 3 SenseTime Research
4
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 5 Monash University
yxubu@connect.ust.hk

yinyueqin0314@gmail.com

{liming002, ccloy, bo.dai}@ntu.edu.sg

qianyi.wu@monash.edu

zhengchengyao@sensetime.com

wuwenyan0503@gmail.com

Gender

Pose + Smile

Wavy Hair

Pose

Source

Figure 1. Diverse editing examples by TransEditor. Images on the fourth column are the sampled source images, which are semantically
interpolated to the left and right sides. With our proposed dual latent spaces, namely P-space and Z-space, different attributes can be
edited in one space alone or in dual spaces simultaneously, demonstrating the flexibility of our method. Head pose (the first row) and wavy
hair (the second row) are edited via the P-space alone. Disentangled dual spaces enable the editing of pose and smile simultaneously (the
third row) by editing pose in the P-space and smile in the Z-space. The Cross-Space Interaction allows the cooperated editing of complex
attributes like gender (the last row).

Abstract
Recent advances like StyleGAN have promoted the
growth of controllable facial editing. To address its core
challenge of attribute decoupling in a single latent space,
attempts have been made to adopt dual-space GAN for better disentanglement of style and content representations.
Nonetheless, these methods are still incompetent to obtain plausible editing results with high controllability, especially for complicated attributes. In this study, we highlight the importance of interaction in a dual-space GAN for
more controllable editing. We propose TransEditor, a novel

Transformer-based framework to enhance such interaction.
Besides, we develop a new dual-space editing and inversion
strategy to provide additional editing flexibility. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the superiority of the proposed
framework in image quality and editing capability, suggesting the effectiveness of TransEditor for highly controllable
facial editing. Code and models are publicly available at
https://github.com/BillyXYB/TransEditor.
∗ Two authors have equal contributions, ordered alphabetically. This
work was done during an internship at Shanghai AI Laboratory.

7683

