Weakly Paired Associative Learning
for Sound and Image Representations via Bimodal Associative Memory
Sangmin Lee1 Hyung-Il Kim2 Yong Man Ro1∗
Image and Video Systems Lab, KAIST 2 ETRI

1

{sangmin.lee,ymro}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Data representation learning without labels has attracted increasing attention due to its nature that does not
require human annotation. Recently, representation learning has been extended to bimodal data, especially sound
and image which are closely related to basic human senses.
Existing sound and image representation learning methods
necessarily require a large number of sound and image with
corresponding pairs. Therefore, it is difficult to ensure the
effectiveness of the methods in the weakly paired condition,
which lacks paired bimodal data. In fact, according to human cognitive studies, the cognitive functions in the human
brain for a certain modality can be enhanced by receiving
other modalities, even not directly paired ones. Based on
the observation, we propose a new problem to deal with
the weakly paired condition: How to boost a certain modal
representation even by using other unpaired modal data. To
address the issue, we introduce a novel bimodal associative memory (BMA-Memory) with key-value switching. It
enables to build sound-image association with small paired
bimodal data and to boost the built association with the easily obtainable large amount of unpaired data. Through the
proposed associative learning, it is possible to reinforce the
representation of a certain modality (e.g., sound) even by
using other unpaired modal data (e.g., images).

1. Introduction
Data representation learning without labels is to learn
general features from unlabeled data by exploiting automatically generated supervisory signals within the data. Since
it is highly time-consuming and labor-intensive for people
to annotate large-scale data manually, such representation
learning methods have received increasing attention in industry and research fields. In this context, representation
learning has been applied to various areas such as computer
vision [10, 15, 17], natural language processing [7, 12], and
∗ Corresponding author

hikim@etri.re.kr

Abundant representation from input and associated modalities

Bimodal Associative Memory
(BMA-Memory)
Sound Mem.

Image Mem.

Input Image

Key-Value Switching

Input Sound

Associated Sound

Associated Image

Boosting association
even with unpaired data
Unpaired Image Data
Unpaired Sound Data
or

Figure 1. Concept of the proposed framework. The model can
associate one modality (e.g., sound) with a different modality (e.g.,
image) through BMA-Memory to obtain abundant representations.
Unpaired modality can boost the association between modalities.

sound signal processing [4, 39].
Recently, as data samples are acquired in various multisensory environments, representation learning methods for
bimodal data have been proposed. They aimed to learn
feature representation from exploiting correspondence between bimodal data. In particular, many bimodal representation learning methods investigated the correspondence
between auditory and vision which are closely related to
basic human senses. These methods mainly attempted to
learn bimodal representations from audio-video [26, 31] or
sound-image [34, 38] data without labels. However, existing bimodal representation learning methods require a large
number of data with corresponding pairs. Therefore, it is
difficult to ensure the effectiveness of the methods in the
weakly paired condition, which lacks paired bimodal data.
According to neurobiological studies, the cognitive functions related to a certain modality can be enhanced by re-

10534

