Learning to Detect Mobile Objects from LiDAR Scans Without Labels
Yurong You*†,1 Katie Luo*,1 Cheng Perng Phoo1 Wei-Lun Chao2
Wen Sun1 Bharath Hariharan1 Mark Campbell1 Kilian Q. Weinberger1
1
Cornell University 2 The Ohio State University
Abstract
Current 3D object detectors for autonomous driving are
almost entirely trained on human-annotated data. Although
of high quality, the generation of such data is laborious and
costly, restricting them to a few specific locations and object
types. This paper proposes an alternative approach entirely
based on unlabeled data, which can be collected cheaply
and in abundance almost everywhere on earth. Our approach leverages several simple common sense heuristics
to create an initial set of approximate seed labels. For example, relevant traffic participants are generally not persistent across multiple traversals of the same route, do
not fly, and are never under ground. We demonstrate that
these seed labels are highly effective to bootstrap a surprisingly accurate detector through repeated self-training without a single human annotated label. Code is available at
https:// github.com/ YurongYou/ MODEST.

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving promises to revolutionize how we
transport goods, travel, and interact with our environment.
To safely plan a route, a self-driving vehicle must first
perceive and localize mobile traffic participants such as
other vehicles and pedestrians in 3D. Current state-of-theart 3D object detectors are all based on deep neural networks [45, 48, 49, 61] and can yield up to 80 average precision on benchmark datasets [21, 22].
However, as with all deep learning approaches, these
techniques have an insatiable need for labeled-data. Specifically, to train a 3D object detector that takes LiDAR scans
as input, one typically needs to first come up with a list
of objects of interest and annotate each of them with tight
bounding boxes in the 3D point cloud space. Such a data
annotation process is laborious and costly, but worst of all,
the resulting detectors only achieve high accuracy when the
training and test data distributions match [58]. In other
words, their accuracy deteriorates over time and space, as
* Denotes equal contribution.
† All correspondence could be directed to yy785@cornell.edu

looks and shapes of cars, vegetation, and background objects change. To guarantee good performance, one has to
collect labeled training data for specific geo-fenced areas
and re-label data constantly, greatly limiting the applicability and development of self-driving vehicles.
These problems motivate the question: Can we learn a
3D object detector from unlabeled LiDAR data? Here, we
focus on “mobile” objects, i.e., objects that might move,
which cover a wide range of traffic participants. At first
glance, this seems insurmountably challenging. After all,
how could a detector know just from the LiDAR point cloud
that a pedestrian is a traffic participant and a tree is not? We
tackle this problem with the help of two important insights:
1) we can use simple heuristics that, even without labeling,
can occasionally distinguish traffic participants from background objects more or less reliably; 2) if data is noisy but
diverse, neural networks excel at identifying the common
patterns, allowing us to repeatedly self-label the remaining
objects, starting from a small set of seed labels.
Weak labels through heuristics. We build upon a simple
yet highly generalizable concept to discover mobile objects
— mobile objects are unlikely to stay persistent at the same
location over time. While this requires unlabeled data at
multiple timestamps for the same locations, collecting them
is arguably cheaper than annotating them. After all, many
of us drive through the same routes every day (e.g., to and
from work or school). Even when going to new places, the
new routes for us are likely frequent for the local residents.
Concretely, whenever we discover multiple traversals of
one route, we calculate a simple ephemerality statistic [3]
for each LiDAR point, which characterizes the change of
its local neighborhood across traversals. We cluster LiDAR points according to their coordinates and ephemerality
statistics. Resulting clusters with high ephemerality statistics, and located on the ground, are considered as mobile
objects and are further fitted with upright bounding boxes.
Self-training (ST). While this initial seed set of mobile objects is not exhaustive (e.g., parked cars may be missed)
and somewhat noisy in shape, we demonstrate that an object detector trained upon them can already learn the underlying object patterns and is able to output more and higher-

1130

