SemanticStyleGAN: Learning Compositional Generative Priors
for Controllable Image Synthesis and Editing
Yichun Shi

Xiao Yang

Yangyue Wan

Xiaohui Shen

{yichun.shi,yangxiao.0,wanyangyue,shenxiaohui.kevin}@bytedance.com

ByteDance Inc., USA
https://SemanticStyleGAN.github.io
Coarse Structure

Background

Face

Eyes

Eyebrows

Mouth

Hair

Figure 1. SemanticStyleGAN factorizes its latent space based on semantic regions. Here, we show the results of style mixing by swapping
local latent codes. Note that our models also disentangles shape and texture but we are simultaneously changing both here.

Abstract
Recent studies have shown that StyleGANs provide
promising prior models for downstream tasks on image synthesis and editing. However, since the latent codes of StyleGANs are designed to control global styles, it is hard to
achieve a fine-grained control over synthesized images. We
present SemanticStyleGAN, where a generator is trained to
model local semantic parts separately and synthesizes images in a compositional way. The structure and texture of
different local parts are controlled by corresponding latent
codes. Experimental results demonstrate that our model
provides a strong disentanglement between different spatial
areas. When combined with editing methods designed for
StyleGANs, it can achieve a more fine-grained control to
edit synthesized or real images. The model can also be extended to other domains via transfer learning. Thus, as a
generic prior model with built-in disentanglement, it could
facilitate the development of GAN-based applications and
enable more potential downstream tasks.

1. Introduction
Recent studies on Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) have made impressive progress on image synthesis,
where photo-realistic images can be generated from random
codes in a latent space [11, 35–37]. These models provide
powerful generative priors for downstream tasks by serving
as neural renderers. However, their synthesis procedure is
usually stochastic and no user control is naturally promised.
Thus, it is still a challenging problem to achieve controllable
image synthesis and editing utilizing generative priors.
One of the most famous work among such generative
priors is the StyleGAN series [35–37], where each generated image is conditioned on a set of coarse-to-fine latent
codes (See Fig. 2). However, the meanings of these latent codes are still relatively ambiguous. Thus, a plethora
of studies have attempted to further investigate into the
latent space of StyleGAN to improve controllability. It
is shown that by learning a linear boundary or a neu-

11254

