Topology-Preserving Shape Reconstruction and Registration via Neural
Diffeomorphic Flow
Shanlin Sun, Kun Han, Deying Kong, Hao Tang, Xiangyi Yan, Xiaohui Xie
University of California, Irvine
{shanlins, khan7, deyingk, htang6, xiangyy4, xhx}@uci.edu

Abstract
Deep Implicit Functions (DIFs) represent 3D geometry
with continuous signed distance functions learned through
deep neural nets. Recently DIFs-based methods have
been proposed to handle shape reconstruction and dense
point correspondences simultaneously, capturing semantic
relationships across shapes of the same class by learning a DIFs-modeled shape template. These methods provide great flexibility and accuracy in reconstructing 3D
shapes and inferring correspondences. However, the point
correspondences built from these methods do not intrinsically preserve the topology of the shapes, unlike meshbased template matching methods. This limits their applications on 3D geometries where underlying topological structures exist and matter, such as anatomical structures in medical images. In this paper, we propose a
new model called Neural Diffeomorphic Flow (NDF) to
learn deep implicit shape templates, representing shapes
as conditional diffeomorphic deformations of templates, intrinsically preserving shape topologies. The diffeomorphic deformation is realized by an auto-decoder consisting of Neural Ordinary Differential Equation (NODE)
blocks that progressively map shapes to implicit templates. We conduct extensive experiments on several
medical image organ segmentation datasets to evaluate
the effectiveness of NDF on reconstructing and aligning
shapes. NDF achieves consistently state-of-the-art organ
shape reconstruction and registration results in both accuracy and quality. The source code is publicly available
at https : / / github . com / Siwensun / Neural _
Diffeomorphic_Flow--NDF.

1. Introduction
3D geometry representation is fundamental to many
downstream tasks in computer vision such as 3D model
understanding, reconstruction, and matching. In particular, shape representation is of vital importance to many

Figure 1. Our model deforms back and forth between shape instances and learned templates through neural diffeomorphic flow,
in a invertible and progressive manner. Colors on the shape surface
show the correspondences and edges show the topologies.

medical image applications such as organ segmentation
[10, 44, 45, 51, 53, 56, 57], medical image reconstruction
[52, 54, 55], shape abnormality detection and surgical navigation [31, 43].
Recently deep implicit functions (DIFs) have emerged
as an effective and efficient tool for modeling 3D objects
[12, 36, 40, 42, 50]. Compared to traditional representations such as voxel grids, point clouds, and polygon meshes,
DIF-based 3D representations have the advantages of being
compact while at the same time enjoying strong representation power, making it more suitable for modeling complex shapes with fine geometric details. However, DIFs do
come with a strong drawback - it is difficult to establish
correspondences between two shapes, unlike the traditional
method such as meshes. This drawback limits the application of DIFs for shape analysis, especially in many medical
image applications, where being able to map and compare
210845

