The Wanderings of Odysseus in 3D Scenes
Yan Zhang Siyu Tang
ETH Zürich
{yan.zhang,siyu.tang}@inf.ethz.ch

Figure 1. We propose GAMMA, an automatic and scalable solution to populate the 3D scene with digital humans, which have 1) varied
body shapes, 2) plausible body-ground contact, and 3) realistic and perpetual motions to reach goals (e.g. rings in the middle figure), with
the off-the-shelf path-finding algorithm.

Abstract
Our goal is to populate digital environments, in which
digital humans have diverse body shapes, move perpetually, and have plausible body-scene contact. The core challenge is to generate realistic, controllable, and infinitely
long motions for diverse 3D bodies. To this end, we propose generative motion primitives via body surface markers, or GAMMA in short. In our solution, we decompose
the long-term motion into a time sequence of motion primitives. We exploit body surface markers and conditional
variational autoencoder to model each motion primitive,
and generate long-term motion by implementing the generative model recursively. To control the motion to reach
a goal, we apply a policy network to explore the generative model’s latent space and use a tree-based search to
preserve the motion quality during testing. Experiments
show that our method can produce more realistic and controllable motion than state-of-the-art data-driven methods.
With conventional path-finding algorithms, the generated
human bodies can realistically move long distances for a
long period of time in the scene. Code is released for research purposes at: https://yz-cnsdqz.github.
io/eigenmotion/GAMMA/

1. Introduction
In recent years, the rapid development of 3D technologies has accelerated the creation of a digital replica of the

real world and initiated new ways that people interact with
the world and communicate with each other. However, there
is no existing solution to automatically populate the digital
world with realistic virtual humans, which move and act
like real ones. This work aims to enable virtual humans to
cruise within a 3D digital environment, similar to Odysseus,
who arrived home after wandering and hazards. The virtual humans follow randomized routes, pass individual waypoints, and reach the destination, while retaining realistic
body shape, pose, and body-scene contact. Such technology
can considerably enrich AR/VR user experiences and has
many downstream applications. For example, having virtual humans strolling inside the digital model of a medieval
city can make the experience more vivid, which allows real
users to follow their guidance for better sightseeing. Beyond AR/VR, virtual humans can provide architects with a
blueprint, enabling better foresight into design functionalities and defects.
This is particularly relevant to character animation in
graphics, foremost in the gaming industry. Conventionally,
a set of 3D characters are pre-designed, and a motion dataset
is pre-recorded. To let characters respond to user inputs
or background events, motions from the dataset are created
via motion graph [34] or motion matching [13]. Although
current AAA games demonstrate highly realistic character
motion, this conventional technology cannot easily handle a
massive number of characters with different behaviors [26].
Motion generalization across diverse characters usually requires extra motion re-targeting procedures [5]. Moreover,
the generated motions are often deterministic, close to the

20481

