PoseTrack21: A Dataset for Person Search, Multi-Object Tracking and
Multi-Person Pose Tracking
Andreas Doering* 1
1

University of Bonn

Di Chen∗ 2,3
2

Shanshan Zhang 2

Nanjing University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Current research evaluates person search, multi-object
tracking and multi-person pose estimation as separate tasks
and on different datasets although these tasks are very
akin to each other and comprise similar sub-tasks, e.g.
person detection or appearance-based association of detected persons. Consequently, approaches on these respective tasks are eligible to complement each other. Therefore,
we introduce PoseTrack21, a large-scale dataset for person
search, multi-object tracking and multi-person pose tracking in real-world scenarios with a high diversity of poses.
The dataset provides rich annotations like human pose annotations including annotations of joint occlusions, bounding box annotations even for small persons, and person-ids
within and across video sequences. The dataset allows to
evaluate multi-object tracking and multi-person pose tracking jointly with person re-identification or exploit structural
knowledge of human poses to improve person search and
tracking, particularly in the context of severe occlusions.
With PoseTrack21, we want to encourage researchers to
work on joint approaches that perform reasonably well on
all three tasks.

1. Introduction
Multi-person pose tracking [30, 34, 36, 39, 43, 44], multiobject tracking [4, 5, 10, 37, 45, 50], and person search
[7–9, 23, 41, 42] are very active research areas in computer
vision and relevant for many applications like sports, autonomous driving, and security. Although these research areas share very common sub-tasks, they are currently studied
independently and the progress in one area does not necessary yield a progress in the other areas. For instance, person
search aims at re-identifying a query person within a set
of target images or video frames. In contrast to person reidentification, person search also requires the detection of
* equal contribution

Bernt Schiele 3
3

Juergen Gall 1

MPI for Informatics

all persons in an image and it is more difficult due to inaccurate detections, missed detections, or false positives. Person search is thus a related sub-task of multi-object tracking
where persons need to be detected in all frames and associated across frames for tracking. If a person is occluded for
several frames, the association problem is similar to person
search. Approaches for multi-object tracking thus often use
a person re-identification module [17, 18, 27, 48, 49]. Multiobject tracking, however, considers only the identities of
a person within a video sequence, but not across videos.
In contrast, person search aims at identifying persons even
across videos. Finally, multi-person pose tracking is related
to multi-object tracking, but instead of estimating bounding
boxes for each person the full pose needs to be estimated,
including which joints are visible or not.
The reason why multi-person pose tracking, multi-object
tracking, and person search are studied independently is the
lack of a dataset that allows to evaluate all three tasks jointly
on real video sequences. Datasets for multi-object tracking [11, 22, 29, 32] contain track-ids and bounding boxes,
but no ground-truth for human poses and person-ids across
videos. Datasets for multi-person pose tracking [1, 19] do
not contain person-ids across video sequences either, but
they also do not contain bounding boxes. While it is possible to compute bounding boxes from human poses, they
are not accurate and reliable due to occlusions and truncations that occur highly frequently in these datasets. Synthetic datasets [13, 14] that are generated using the computer game engine GTA are an exception, but they are intended for training and cannot be used for evaluating the
performance of approaches on real-world data. Furthermore, they lack the pose diversity of real videos, which
also include diverse sport sequences. In this work, we close
this gap and propose PoseTrack21, a large-scale dataset
for multi-person pose tracking, multi-object tracking, and
person search. It is based on the extended set of videos
from the PoseTrack 2018 training and validation set [1],
but the videos are completely re-annotated. Besides the
refined human poses, the dataset contains accurate anno-

20963

