TemporalUV: Capturing Loose Clothing with
Temporally Coherent UV Coordinates
You Xie† , Huiqi Mao‡ , Angela Yao‡ , Nils Thuerey†
Department of Informatics, Technical University of Munich
‡
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
†

{you.xie, nils.thuerey}@tum.de, huiqi.mao@u.nus.edu, ayao@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
We propose a novel approach to generate temporally coherent UV coordinates for loose clothing. Our method is
not constrained by human body outlines and can capture
loose garments and hair. We implemented a differentiable
pipeline to learn UV mapping between a sequence of RGB
inputs and textures via UV coordinates. Instead of treating
the UV coordinates of each frame separately, our data generation approach connects all UV coordinates via feature
matching for temporal stability. Subsequently, a generative
model is trained to balance the spatial quality and temporal stability. It is driven by supervised and unsupervised
losses in both UV and image spaces. Our experiments show
that the trained models output high-quality UV coordinates
and generalize to new poses. Once a sequence of UV coordinates has been inferred by our model, it can be used
to flexibly synthesize new looks and modified visual styles.
Compared to existing methods, our approach reduces the
computational workload to animate new outfits by several
orders of magnitude.

1. Introduction
In image or video generation tasks [37, 44] that involve
people, it is crucial to obtain accurate representations of
the 3D human shape and appearance to efficiently generate
modified content. In this context, UV coordinates are a popular 2D representation that establish dense correspondences
between 2D images and 3D surface-based representations
of the human body. UV coordinates go beyond skeleton
landmarks to encode human pose and shape, and are widely
used in image/video editing, augmented reality, and humancomputer interaction [12, 14, 15]. In this paper, we tackle
video generation of people, with a focus on efficiency and
capturing loose clothing. Unlike previous works [33,40,42]
which use large networks to capture motion and appearance,
we train a model to generate temporally coherent UV coor-

dinates. We use a single, fixed texture to store appearance
information so that our model can solely focus on learning
UV dynamics.
Human body UV coordinates can be derived indirectly
from estimates of 3D shape models [6, 19, 26, 29] like
SMPL [23]. Alternatively, direct estimation methods like
DensePose [2] and UltraPose [43] bypass intermediate 3D
models to directly output UV coordinates from a single
RGB image. The convenience of direct methods has led
to DensePose being widely used in animation and editing
applications [25, 27, 28, 49]. Nevertheless, the UV coordinates obtained from SMPL and DensePose approximate
only human body silhouettes in tight clothing. They do not
capture loose clothing, such as long skirts or wide pants
(see comparisons in Figure 6 and 7). In addition, the methods for UV estimation work only on individual images. For
video inputs, they are applied frame-by-frame [32,47] without considering the temporal relationship between frames.
As such, the UV coordinates are inconsistent over time, so
any re-targeted sequences will shift and jitter.
In this paper, we focus on improving the spatial coverage
and temporal coherence of UV coordinates generated from
a sequence of 2D images. We target the ability to retain
the full body plus clothing silhouette for arbitrary styles of
clothing. Our approach is agnostic to the UV source, which
we demonstrate via inputs from both DensePose [2] and
SMPL model estimates [19]. For temporal coherence, we
aim at achieving the point-to-point correspondences among
different frames via UV coordinate maps, so that video sequences can be generated with one fixed texture.
A core challenge of learning a model for extended and
temporally coherent UV coordinates lies in the lack of data
for direct supervision. Hence, we propose a novel learning
scheme that combines both supervised and unsupervised
components. We first pre-process a sequence of UV coordinates obtained from DensePose or SMPL via spatial extension and temporal stabilization to obtain training data for
an initial training stage. We then shift the learning gradually from supervised, with the pre-processed data, to unsu-

3450

