DTFD-MIL: Double-Tier Feature Distillation Multiple Instance Learning for
Histopathology Whole Slide Image Classification
Hongrun Zhang1 , Yanda Meng1 , Yitian Zhao2 , Yihong Qiao3 , Xiaoyun Yang4 , Sarah E. Coupland1
Yalin Zheng1
1
University of Liverpool, 2 Cixi Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
China Science IntelliCloud Technology Co., Ltd, 4 Remark AI UK Limited, London
{hongrun.zhang, yanda.meng, S.E.Coupland, yalin.zheng}@liverpool.ac.uk
yitian.zhao@nimte.ac.cn, yihong.qiao@intellicloud.ai, xyang@remarkholdings.com

Abstract
Multiple instance learning (MIL) has been increasingly
used in the classification of histopathology whole slide images (WSIs). However, MIL approaches for this specific
classification problem still face unique challenges, particularly those related to small sample cohorts. In these, there
are limited number of WSI slides (bags), while the resolution of a single WSI is huge, which leads to a large number
of patches (instances) cropped from this slide. To address
this issue, we propose to virtually enlarge the number of
bags by introducing the concept of pseudo-bags, on which
a double-tier MIL framework is built to effectively use the
intrinsic features. Besides, we also contribute to deriving
the instance probability under the framework of attentionbased MIL, and utilize the derivation to help construct and
analyze the proposed framework. The proposed method outperforms other latest methods on the CAMELYON-16 by
substantially large margins, and is also better in performance on the TCGA lung cancer dataset. The proposed
framework is ready to be extended for wider MIL applications. The code is available at: https://github.
com/hrzhang1123/DTFD-MIL

1. Introduction
The automation of whole slide images (WSIs) poses a
significant challenge to the field of computer vision. The
increasing use of WSIs in histopathology results in digital
pathology providing huge improvements in workflow and
diagnosis decision-making by pathologists [7,21,24,29,31],
but it also stimulates the need for intelligent or automatic
analytical tools of WSIs [11, 20, 36, 40, 44, 48, 49]. WSIs
have enormous sizes, ranging from 100M pixels to 10G pixels, and this unique characteristic makes it almost infeasible
to directly transfer existing machine learning techniques to

Figure 1. Illustration of the difference between conventional MIL
models and the proposed double-tier MIL model.

their applications, since these existing techniques were initially intended for natural images or medical images with
much smaller sizes. When it comes to deep learning based
models, large scale datasets and high quality annotations are
the primary yet crucial conditions to train a high capacity
model. However, the enormous sizes of WSIs bring along
substantial burden for pixel-level annotation. This problem in turn encourages researchers to develop deep learning
based models trained with limited annotations, termed as
“Weakly Supervised” or “Semi-Supervised” [22,26,35,41].
A large proportion of existing weakly supervised works for
WSI classification are characterized as “multiple instance
learning” (MIL) [1, 5, 8, 25]. Under the framework of MIL,
a slide (or WSI), acting as a bag, constitutes multiple instances that are hundreds or thousands of patches cropped
from the slide. With at least one instance being disease positive, the slide is marked as positive, or otherwise negative.
There exist some successful attempts to solve the MIL
problem in various computer vision tasks [19,27,28,30,32].
The innate characteristics of WSIs, however, make it less
straightforward to develop MIL solution for WSI classification than the counterparts in other computer vision subfields, as the only direct guidance information for training

18802

