A variational Bayesian method for similarity learning in non-rigid image
registration
Daniel Grzech1 , Mohammad Farid Azampour1,2,3 ,
Ben Glocker , Julia Schnabel3,4 , Nassir Navab3,5 , Bernhard Kainz1,6 , Loı̈c Le Folgoc1
1
Imperial College London, 2 Sharif University of Technology,
3
Technische Universität München, 4 King’s College London, 5 Johns Hopkins University,
6
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg
1

Abstract
We propose a novel variational Bayesian formulation
for diffeomorphic non-rigid registration of medical images,
which learns in an unsupervised way a data-specific similarity metric. The proposed framework is general and
may be used together with many existing image registration models. We evaluate it on brain MRI scans from the
UK Biobank and show that use of the learnt similarity metric, which is parametrised as a neural network, leads to
more accurate results than use of traditional functions, e.g.
SSD and LCC, to which we initialise the model, without a
negative impact on image registration speed or transformation smoothness. In addition, the method estimates the
uncertainty associated with the transformation. The code
and the trained models are available in a public repository:
https://github.com/dgrzech/learnsim.

1. Introduction
Image registration attempts to align images so that corresponding locations contain the same semantic information. It is a necessary pre-processing step for the statistical
analysis of clinical imaging data, computer-aided diagnosis,
and computer-assisted intervention. In order to calculate
the transformation, traditional image registration methods
minimise an energy function which consists of task-specific
similarity and regularisation terms, e.g. [4, 27, 38]. The algorithm needs to be run independently for every pair of images to be aligned and optimisation of the energy function
is performed in an iterative manner.
Traditional image registration methods minimise an energy function, which is similar to the training of neural networks by the minimisation of loss functions. However, using deep learning for medical image registration is difficult
due to the lack of ground truth transformations. DLIR [15]
and VoxelMorph (VXM) [5, 6, 13, 14] both use neural net-

works in order to learn in an unsupervised way a function
that outputs a deformation field given a pair of input images,
instead of optimising an energy function independently for
each image pair. The calculation of transformations by evaluation of the neural network in a single forward pass speeds
up the process by several orders of magnitude and maintains
an accuracy comparable to traditional methods. The claim
that deep learning models for image registration are limited
to self- and unsupervised learning was recently countered
by training a generative model exclusively on synthetic images and segmentations [25].
In this work, we present a new model for atlas-based
diffeomorphic non-rigid image registration which, given a
dataset of images, learns in an unsupervised way a suitable similarity metric for the task. The model implements
the similarity metric as a neural network that takes as input two three-dimensional images and outputs the value of
a function which needs to be minimised to align them. The
few existing approaches for unsupervised similarity learning rely either on feature extraction used together with classical similarity metrics [12, 44, 45] or ad-hoc adversarial
training [17, 18, 36]. In contrast to them, we refine the
similarity metric itself, working within a rigorous Bayesian
framework. The choice of a Bayesian model makes it possible to learn a data-specific similarity metric with relatively
little data, improves robustness by proxy of the approximate
variational posterior of the transformation parameters, and
allows to quantify the uncertainty associated with the output. The following are the main contributions of our work:
1. We propose a novel variational Bayesian method for
unsupervised similarity learning in atlas-based nonrigid medical image registration;
2. We show that the learnt metric outperforms traditional
similarity metrics used in image registration on the examples of SSD and LCC, to which we initialise the
model;

119

