M2I: From Factored Marginal Trajectory Prediction to Interactive Prediction
Qiao Sun1 * Xin Huang2 ∗† Junru Gu1 Brian C. Williams2 Hang Zhao1‡
1
IIIS, Tsinghua University 2 CSAIL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Abstract
Predicting future motions of road participants is an important task for driving autonomously in urban scenes. Existing models excel at predicting marginal trajectories for
single agents, yet it remains an open question to jointly
predict scene compliant trajectories over multiple agents.
The challenge is due to exponentially increasing prediction space as a function of the number of agents. In this
work, we exploit the underlying relations between interacting agents and decouple the joint prediction problem into
marginal prediction problems. Our proposed approach M2I
first classifies interacting agents as pairs of influencers and
reactors, and then leverages a marginal prediction model
and a conditional prediction model to predict trajectories
for the influencers and reactors, respectively. The predictions from interacting agents are combined and selected according to their joint likelihoods. Experiments show that
our simple but effective approach achieves state-of-the-art
performance on the Waymo Open Motion Dataset interactive prediction benchmark.

1. Introduction
Trajectory prediction is widely used by intelligent driving systems to infer future motions of nearby agents and
identify risky scenarios to enable safe driving. Recent advances have shown great success in predicting accurate
trajectories by learning from real-world driving examples.
Many existing trajectory prediction works [5, 12, 15, 26, 28,
38] focus on generating marginal prediction samples of future trajectories over individual agents, failing to reason
about their interactions in the future. As a result, the prediction samples over multiple agents may overlap with each
other and result in sub-optimal performance.
We present a motivating example in Fig. 1, in which a
marginal predictor produces a set of prediction samples separately for two interacting agents, as visualized in the top
left figure. While the predictions for each agent are rea* Denotes equal contribution.
Code and demo available at paper
website: https://tsinghua- mars- lab.github.io/M2I/
alan.qiao.sun@gmail.com, xhuang@csail.mit.edu.
† X. Huang was supported in part by Qualcomm Innovation Fellowship.
‡ Corresponding at: hangzhao@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn.

Figure 1. A motivating example of M2I. Top: Traditional marginal
predictor often produces scene inconsistent trajectory predictions
that collide with each other. Even for non-colliding predictions, it
ignores the potential interaction between agent futures and may
predict unrealistic behaviors. Bottom: Our proposed approach
M2I predicts scene compliant trajectories by first identifying an
influencer reactor pair in the scene. It then predicts marginal trajectories for the influencer and reactive trajectories for the reactor.

sonable without considering the presence of the other, some
trajectory pairs will collide when considering them jointly.
For instance, it is unlikely that the red agent turns left while
the blue agent goes forward, as indicated in the top middle
example in Fig. 1. Therefore, it is necessary to predict scene
compliant trajectories with the existence of multiple agents
to support better prediction accuracy.
To generate scene compliant trajectories, one can learn
a joint predictor to predict trajectories in a joint space over
multiple agents; however, it suffers from an exponentially
increasing prediction space as the number of agents increases. As investigated by [15], while it is feasible to predict a set of goals for a single agent, the goal space increases
exponentially with the number of agents and becomes unmanageable for even two agents with a few hundred goal
candidates for each agent. A more computationally efficient alternative to producing scene compliant trajectories
is to post-process marginal prediction samples by pruning
colliding ones; however, such an ad-hoc approach fails to
take into account potential agent interactions in the future
and may ignore other conflicts which are hard to prune by
heuristics. For instance, although the prediction sample in
the top right figure in Fig. 1 is collision-free, the red agent
may slow down when turning left to keep a safe distance
from the blue agent. Such an interactive behavior is hard to

6543

