AutoGPart: Intermediate Supervision Search
for Generalizable 3D Part Segmentation

1

Xueyi Liu1
Tsinghua University

Xiaomeng Xu1
Anyi Rao2
Chuang Gan3
Li Yi1,4
2
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
4
Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute

Abstract
Training a generalizable 3D part segmentation network
is quite challenging but of great importance in real-world
applications. To tackle this problem, some works design
task-specific solutions by translating human understanding
of the task to machine’s learning process, which faces
the risk of missing the optimal strategy since machines
do not necessarily understand in the exact human way.
Others try to use conventional task-agnostic approaches
designed for domain generalization problems with no task
prior knowledge considered. To solve the above issues,
we propose AutoGPart, a generic method enabling training
generalizable 3D part segmentation networks with the
task prior considered. AutoGPart builds a supervision
space with geometric prior knowledge encoded, and lets
the machine to search for the optimal supervisions from
the space for a specific segmentation task automatically.
Extensive experiments on three generalizable 3D part
segmentation tasks are conducted to demonstrate the
effectiveness and versatility of AutoGPart. We demonstrate
that the performance of segmentation networks using simple
backbones can be significantly improved when trained with
supervisions searched by our method.

1. Introduction
Humans parse objects into parts for a deeper
understanding of semantics, functionality, mobility as
well as the fabrication process. It is natural to consider
equipping machines with such part-level understanding.
Over the past few years, there has been an increasing
interest in 3D part segmentation tasks to support various
applications [14, 23, 32, 46] in vision, graphics, and
robotics. Thanks to the availability of large-scale 3D
part datasets [32, 48] and the development of 3D deep
learning techniques, these methods achieve impressive part
segmentation results when a test shape comes from the
same distribution as the training set. However, they usually

Figure 1. AutoGPart automatically finds real part cues for different
segmentation tasks and supports simple point cloud processing backbones
(e.g. PointNet++ [35]) to successfully parse shapes from novel categories.

suffer from a huge performance drop when it comes to
parsing 3D shapes from a novel distribution, e.g. from a
different semantic category.
In this work, we focus on generalizable 3D part
segmentation tasks. The goal is to learn the essence of
parts on some training sets and to be able to generalize
well to shapes from novel distributions. A main challenge
comes from the versatile cues defining parts. Shape parts
can be defined via many cues like geometric primitive
fitting [14, 23, 46], rigid motions [12, 13, 47], and semantic
prior [27, 29, 32]. The same shape can be segmented into
different parts based upon different cues for the seek of
various applications. Therefore for a specific application,
other than understanding input shapes, a network also needs
to figure out the exact cues defining parts from the training
data. This is where it becomes tricky. Some of these
cues are more salient than others, making them easier to be
captured. When these cues heavily correlate with the real
part cue in the training domain, they could easily become
shortcut features [7,8,15] biasing the network and hindering
the generalizability, as observed in [29].
To cope with the above challenges, existing
works usually focus on a specific type of parts and
incorporate part-type priors towards generalizable 3D part
segmentation. For example, a modularized design has been
adopted to explicitly extract motion flow and the rigid

11624

