Multi-Granularity Alignment Domain Adaptation for Object Detection
Wenzhang Zhou1 , Dawei Du2 , Libo Zhang1,3 ,* Tiejian Luo1 , Yanjun Wu3
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
Kitware, Inc., NY, USA
3
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
https://github.com/tiankongzhang/MGADA

Abstract
Domain adaptive object detection is challenging due to
distinctive data distribution between source domain and
target domain. In this paper, we propose a unified multigranularity alignment based object detection framework towards domain-invariant feature learning. To this end, we
encode the dependencies across different granularity perspectives including pixel-, instance-, and category-levels simultaneously to align two domains. Based on pixel-level
feature maps from the backbone network, we first develop
the omni-scale gated fusion module to aggregate discriminative representations of instances by scale-aware convolutions, leading to robust multi-scale object detection. Meanwhile, the multi-granularity discriminators are proposed
to identify which domain different granularities of samples
(i.e., pixels, instances, and categories) come from. Notably,
we leverage not only the instance discriminability in different categories but also the category consistency between
two domains. Extensive experiments are carried out on multiple domain adaptation scenarios, demonstrating the effectiveness of our framework over state-of-the-art algorithms
on top of anchor-free FCOS and anchor-based Faster RCNN detectors with different backbones.

1. Introduction
Owing to the emergence of deep learning [41], modern object detection methods [19, 23, 24, 27, 34] have
achieved remarkable progress based on large-scale annotated datasets. However, such domain constrained models
often fail in new environments without labeled training data.
To tackle this problem, a feasible solution is to reduce
the disparity between label-rich source domain and labelagnostic target domain by unsupervised domain adaptation
in an adversarial manner [8]. Specifically, the domain discriminator is introduced to identify whether the image is
* Corresponding author (libo@iscas.ac.cn)

Figure 1. Our framework to encode dependencies across multiple
granularities including pixel-, instance-, category-level.

from source domain or target domain; while the object detector learns domain-invariant features to confuse the discriminator [29]. However, classic domain adaptation frameworks suffer from scale variations in cluttered background,
resulting in limited performance. Due to convolution layers
with fixed kernels in the network, it is difficult to capture
accurate features of objects with various scales and aspect
ratios. For small objects, the features are convolved from a
large region with too much background; for large objects,
convolutions cover a small part and lack global structural
information.
On the other hand, for better adaptation in target domain,
some researchers employ various feature alignment strategies from different granularity perspectives, i.e., instance-,
pixel- and category-level. Instance-level alignment [3, 20]
relies on pooled features of detection proposals to help train
the domain discriminator. However, instance-level pooling operation may distort the features of objects with various scales and aspect ratios. In contrast, pixel-level alignment [14, 18] focuses on aligning lower-level features that
account for each pixel to handle cross-domain variations
of objects and the background. However, there exists a
large gap between pixel-level features for different scales
of objects with the same category. Recently, category-level
alignment [39, 40] leverages the categorical discriminability in two domains to deal with the hard aligned instances.

9581

