RigidFlow: Self-Supervised Scene Flow Learning on Point Clouds by
Local Rigidity Prior
Ruibo Li1,2 , Chi Zhang2 , Guosheng Lin1,2 *, Zhe Wang3 , Chunhua Shen4
1
S-Lab for Advanced Intelligence, Nanyang Technological University
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
3
SenseTime Research 4 Zhejiang University
E-mail: ruibo001@e.ntu.edu.sg , gslin@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
In this work, we focus on scene flow learning on point
clouds in a self-supervised manner. A real-world scene can
be well modeled as a collection of rigidly moving parts,
therefore its scene flow can be represented as a combination of rigid motion of each part. Inspired by this observation, we propose to generate pseudo scene flow for selfsupervised learning based on piecewise rigid motion estimation, in which the source point cloud is decomposed
into a set of local regions and each region is treated as
rigid. By rigidly aligning each region with its potential
counterpart in the target point cloud, we obtain a regionspecific rigid transformation to represent the flow, which
together constitutes the pseudo scene flow labels of the entire scene to enable network training. Compared with most
existing approaches relying on point-wise similarities for
scene flow approximation, our method explicitly enforces
region-wise rigid alignments, yielding locally rigid pseudo
scene flow labels. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
self-supervised learning method on FlyingThings3D and
KITTI datasets. Comprehensive experiments show that our
method achieves new state-of-the-art performance in selfsupervised scene flow learning, without any ground truth
scene flow for supervision, even outperforming some supervised counterparts.

1. Introduction
Scene flow [35] is a 3D motion field to describe the motion of every point between two time steps. As an essential representation of dynamics, scene flow can be applied
in numerous downstream applications, such as robotics and
autonomous driving, for dynamic scene understanding. Due
to the wide applications of 3D sensors, scene flow estimation with point clouds as input has attracted broad inter* Corresponding author: G. Lin. (e-mail: gslin@ntu.edu.sg )

(a) Input point clouds from two frames

(b) Pseudo labels by nearest search

(c) Pseudo labels by our method

Figure 1. Comparison of the pseudo scene flow labels produced by
nearest neighbor search and our proposed method. (a) Input point
clouds from two consecutive frames; (b) Pseudo labels generated
by the point matching with per-point nearness as a measure; (c)
Pseudo labels generated by our proposed method. Green line represents the correct pseudo label with absolute error less than 0.1m
or relative error less than 10%. Red line represents the incorrect
pseudo label.

est. However, scene flow data is difficult to collect [25],
which makes supervised learning approaches suffer from
a shortage of real-world training samples. To overcome
the reliance on scene flow data, scene flow learning in a
self-supervised manner is proposed as a promising solution,
which is the focus of our work here.
To enable deep network training under the selfsupervised setting, it is crucial to approximate the scene
flow labels given unlabelled point cloud data. To do so,

16959

