MogFace: Towards a Deeper Appreciation on Face Detection
Yang Liu 1

Fei Wang 1 Jiankang Deng 2 Zhipeng Zhou 1 Baigui Sun 1
1
2
Alibaba Group
Imperial College London

Abstract
Benefiting from the pioneering design of generic object detectors, significant achievements have been made in
the field of face detection. Typically, the architectures of
the backbone, feature pyramid layer, and detection head
module within the face detector all assimilate the excellent experience from general object detectors. However,
several effective methods, including label assignment and
scale-level data augmentation strategy, fail to maintain consistent superiority when applying on the face detector directly. Concretely, the former strategy involves a vast body
of hyper-parameters and the latter one suffers from the
challenge of scale distribution bias between different detection tasks, which both limit their generalization abilities.
Furthermore, in order to provide accurate face bounding
boxes for facial down-stream tasks, the face detector imperatively requires the elimination of false alarms. As a
result, practical solutions on label assignment, scale-level
data augmentation, and reducing false alarms are necessary for advancing face detectors. In this paper, we focus on resolving three aforementioned challenges that exiting methods are difficult to finish off and present a novel
face detector, termed MogFace. In our Mogface, three key
components, Adaptive Online Incremental Anchor Mining
Strategy, Selective Scale Enhancement Strategy and Hierarchical Context-Aware Module, are separately proposed to
boost the performance of face detectors. Finally, to the best
of our knowledge, our MogFace is the best face detector
on the Wider Face leader-board, achieving all champions
across different testing scenarios. The code is available at
https://github.com/damo-cv/MogFace.

1. Introduction
Face detector, predicting location coordinates of face
boxes, serves as the fundamental step for many facial downstream tasks, including face alignment [1], face recogni* Corresponding Author.
Email: ly261666@alibaba-inc.com

Hao Li * 1

tion [5] [28] and face attribute analysis [24]. In the past
few years, we have witnessed the quick development on the
general object detectors, deriving from the Fast-RCNN [8]
and SSD [18] to Retinanet [16] and DERT [3]. Motivated by
this, state-of-the-art face detectors adopt the great architecture designs from general object detectors, such as Feature
Pyramid Network [15] and One-stage Single-Shot framework [16].
However, label assignment and scale-level data augmentation strategy 1 , achieving great superiority on the task of
generic object detection, bring rare gains on face detectors . On the one hand , the designation of former strategy involves a vast body of hyper-parameters (e.g. K in
ATSS [34], α in OTA [7] ) , which limits its generalization
ability. On the other hand, as shown in Fig. 1(b), compared with generic object detector, face detector confronts
more severe scale variance challenge. Uniform sampling
based scale-level data augmentation strategies (e.g. multiscale training and random square crop [18]), serving as the
main scale enhancement methods on generic object detectors [16, 23, 34], fail to provide effective scale information
for face detector (more analysis can be seen in the supplementary material). Furthermore, the face detector is a realworld application that emphasizes reducing the number of
false alarms urgently. Therefore, how to distinguish false
alarms away from true positive faces is an another distinctive challenge on the task of face detection.
Based on the above analysis, we discover that label assignment strategy, scale-level data augmentation strategy
and eliminating false alarms have a huge potential for constructing a high-performance face detector. Then we perform a systematically quantitative and qualitative analysis
on 3 aforementioned perspectives to provide some intrinsic
insights.
Label Assignment. Label assignment strategies adopt predefined rules to match ground-truth (gt) or background for
each anchor. As shown in the Fig. 1(a), the designation
of predefined rules highly depends on offline and online information. Offline information contains Intersection-overUnion (IoU) and Center Point Distance (CPD) between gt
1 enriches the scale distribution of the training data to resolve scale variance challenge.

4093

