Deep Hybrid Models for Out-of-Distribution Detection
Senqi Cao, Zhongfei Zhang
State University of New York at Binghamton
scao16@binghamton.edu, zhongfei@cs.binghamton.edu

Abstract
We propose a principled and practical method for outof-distribution (OoD) detection with deep hybrid models
(DHMs), which model the joint density p(x, y) of features
and labels with a single forward pass. By factorizing the
joint density p(x, y) into three sources of uncertainty, we
show that our approach has the ability to identify samples
semantically different from the training data. To ensure
computational scalability, we add a weight normalization
step during training, which enables us to plug in state-ofthe-art (SoTA) deep neural network (DNN) architectures for
approximately modeling and inferring expressive probability distributions. Our method provides an efficient, general,
and flexible framework for predictive uncertainty estimation with promising results and theoretical support. To our
knowledge, this is the first work to reach 100% in OoD detection tasks on both vision and language datasets, especially on notably difficult dataset pairs such as CIFAR-10
vs. SVHN and CIFAR-100 vs. CIFAR-10. This work is a
step towards enabling DNNs in real-world deployment for
safety-critical applications.

1. Introduction
One significant obstacle to deploying DNN models in
real-world applications is that deep learning systems often
break down in novel situations. Specifically, DNNs tend to
yield unreliable predictive uncertainty estimates and make
high-confident yet incorrect predictions when exposed to
inputs drawn from unfamiliar distributions. Therefore, accurate quantification of predictive uncertainty of DNNs is
critical in high-stake applications such as medical diagnosis [16, 87], self-driving vehicles [20, 45], and financial
decision-making [65], where silent mistakes can lead to
catastrophic consequences.
Suppose that the training data come from the distribution p(y, x), where y denotes labels and x denotes features.
The majority of the literature uses DNNs to model the conditional distribution p(y|x), which has achieved impressive
performance when the test data are restricted to p(y, x)

Figure 1. The histograms of log p(x) for both in-distributional
(CIFAR-10) and OoD datasets (CIFAR-100 and SVHN).

[12, 24, 99, 100]. However, when faced with OoD test samples x* drawn from a different distribution, p(y|x*) often
yields incorrect predictions with low uncertainties, resulting in silent failures. The main reason for this phenomenon
is that p(y|x*) does not fit a probability distribution over
the whole (x, y) space. This motivates the need for a family of models endowed with a meaningful notion of probability over (x, y): deep hybrid models (DHMs), which aim
to learn the joint distribution p(y, x) = p(y|x)p(x). Since
p(y, x) is a probability distribution which integrates to one
over its support, p(y, x*) is automatically decreased after
maximizing the probability of the in-distributional (ID) data
during training. As a result, even though p(y|x*) might
yield an incorrect label, p(y|x*)p(x*) should be a small
value suggesting a high predictive uncertainty and an alarming signal for potentially wrong predictions.
This paper aims to construct a family of DHMs that are
computationally efficient and practically effective for detecting OoD samples. However, we face two main challenges. The first challenge is the model’s expressibility and
computational scalability. Constructing a DHM usually requires modeling p(y|x) and p(x) with two DNNs sharing a
subset of their parameters [8, 44, 47, 50, 53, 69, 76, 77, 85].
Training a high-fidelity DHM on high dimensional data is
difficult typically because p(x) often underfits, and probabilistic inference for flexible p(x) is usually computation-

4733

