HyperStyle: StyleGAN Inversion with HyperNetworks for Real Image Editing
Yuval Alaluf∗

Omer Tov∗

Ron Mokady

Rinon Gal

Amit Bermano

Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University
Abstract
The inversion of real images into StyleGAN’s latent
space is a well-studied problem. Nevertheless, applying existing approaches to real-world scenarios remains an open
challenge, due to an inherent trade-off between reconstruction and editability: latent space regions which can accurately represent real images typically suffer from degraded
semantic control. Recent work proposes to mitigate this
trade-off by fine-tuning the generator to add the target image to well-behaved, editable regions of the latent space.
While promising, this fine-tuning scheme is impractical for
prevalent use as it requires a lengthy training phase for each
new image. In this work, we introduce this approach into the
realm of encoder-based inversion. We propose HyperStyle,
a hypernetwork that learns to modulate StyleGAN’s weights
to faithfully express a given image in editable regions of
the latent space. A naive modulation approach would require training a hypernetwork with over three billion parameters. Through careful network design, we reduce this
to be in line with existing encoders. HyperStyle yields
reconstructions comparable to those of optimization techniques with the near real-time inference capabilities of encoders. Lastly, we demonstrate HyperStyle’s effectiveness
on several applications beyond the inversion task, including the editing of out-of-domain images which were never
seen during training. Code is available on our project page:

Input

Inversion

Hair Style

Age

Figure 1. Given a desired input image, our hypernetworks learn
to modulate a pre-trained StyleGAN network to achieve accurate
image reconstructions in editable regions of the latent space. Doing so enables one to effectively apply techniques such as StyleCLIP [48] and InterFaceGAN [56] for editing real images.

https://yuval- alaluf.github.io/hyperstyle/.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [20], and in
particular StyleGAN [32–35] have become the gold standard for image synthesis. Thanks to their semantically rich
latent representations, many works have utilized these models to facilitate diverse and expressive editing through latent
space manipulations [4, 6, 9, 12, 24, 38, 44, 48, 56]. Yet, a
significant challenge in adopting these approaches for realworld applications is the ability to edit real images. For
editing a real photo, one must first find its corresponding
latent representation via a process commonly referred to as
GAN inversion [74]. While the inversion process is a wellstudied problem, it remains an open challenge.
Recent works [2, 61, 73, 75] have demonstrated the ex* Denotes equal contribution

istence of a distortion-editability trade-off: one may invert
an image into well-behaved [75] regions of StyleGAN’s latent space and attain good editability. However, these regions are typically less expressive, resulting in reconstructions that are less faithful to the original image. Recently,
Roich et al. [54] showed that one may side-step this tradeoff by considering a different approach to inversion. Rather
than searching for a latent code that most accurately reconstructs the input image, they fine-tune the generator in order
to insert a target identity into well-behaved regions of the
latent space. In doing so, they demonstrate state-of-the-art
reconstructions while retaining a high level of editability.
Yet, this approach relies on a costly per-image optimization
of the generator, requiring up to a minute per image.
A similar time-accuracy trade-off can be observed in
classical inversion approaches. On one end of the spectrum, latent vector optimization approaches [1, 2, 14, 35, 40]

18511

