Local Attention Pyramid for Scene Image Generation
Sang-Heon Shim, Sangeek Hyun, DaeHyun Bae, Jae-Pil Heo*
Sungkyunkwan University
Abstract

scene image generation, the generator tends to ﬁrst synthesize big and frequently appeared object classes since it can
be a shortcut to reduce a discrepancy between real and fake
distributions. This leads the generator to become just an
expert at drawing the dominant objects in the scene. It can
cause a signiﬁcant class-wise visual quality imbalance problem, especially low qualities for the object classes with small
scales or low appearance frequencies. Let us denote those
object classes as non-dominant objects throughout this paper.
To support the above raised argument, we ﬁrst conduct
preliminary study in the scene image generation with the
state-of-the-art GANs (i.e. StyleGAN [13]). We measure the
class-wise quality scores based on the segmentation results
(Sec. 3 and Fig. 1). The pilot study shows that GANs tend
to produce non-dominant objects in lower quality. This
empirical evidence motivates us to develop a way to ensure
balanced quality over diverse object classes.
To mitigate the aforementioned problem, we propose
a simple yet effective attention module, Local Attention
Pyramid (LAP) tailored for the scene generation, that spreads
attentions over the entire image regions and drives high
local attentions in various scales. Speciﬁcally, our LAP
module receives feature maps as its input and ﬁrst determine
coarse locations of each object class by employing depthwise
convolution layers. Since depthwise convolution has no
intervention between channels, we can infer the feature maps
that maintain feature representations of each channel which
is highly related to parts of the object [1]. We then divide
feature maps into several feature patches and perform an
instance normalization for each patch, before feeding them
into the sigmoid function. By doing this, LAP ampliﬁes the
locally high activation scores in each patch. Thus, it spreads
high attentions to diverse regions that can encourage the
features of various objects scattered in image. To handle the
diversity of object scales, our LAP module infers multiple
attention maps with various patch sizes based on the feature
map pyramid.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:

In this paper, we ﬁrst investigate the class-wise visual
quality imbalance problem of scene images generated by
GANs. The tendency is empirically found that the class-wise
visual qualities are highly correlated with the dominance of
object classes in the training data in terms of their scales
and appearance frequencies. Speciﬁcally, the synthesized
qualities of small and less frequent object classes tend to be
low. To address this, we propose a novel attention module,
Local Attention Pyramid (LAP) module tailored for scene
image synthesis, that encourages GANs to generate diverse
object classes in a high quality by explicit spread of high attention scores to local regions, since objects in scene images
are scattered over the entire images. Moreover, our LAP assigns attention scores in a multiple scale to reﬂect the scale
diversity of various objects. The experimental evaluations
on three different datasets show consistent improvements in
Frechet Inception Distance (FID) and Frechet Segmentation
Distance (FSD) over the state-of-the-art baselines. Furthermore, we apply our LAP module to various GANs methods
to demonstrate a wide applicability of our LAP module.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [7] has lead
the remarkable progress in image generation tasks. Its recent
advances have reached to generate images nearly indistinguishable from real-world images even on the large-scale
benchmarks [15,16]. Nonetheless, generating diverse objects
in a scene image has not been received sufﬁcient attention
in the ﬁeld. The datasets which most approaches have been
focusing on usually have a single object centered at the image such as human faces. However, the real-world scene
images have various objects in diverse regions, as all we
know. In this aspect, we raise a question “can the GANs
produce scene images including diverse objects in a high
quality?”.
In the GANs framework, the generator learns to produce
high-quality samples to deceive the discriminator. In the

• We highlight that GANs suffer from the class-wise image quality imbalance problem in the scene synthesis
task. In its empirical investigation, we found that GANs
more concentrate on generating big and frequently ap-

* Corresponding author

7774

