Beyond Semantic to Instance Segmentation: Weakly-Supervised Instance
Segmentation via Semantic Knowledge Transfer and Self-Refinement
Beomyoung Kim1
NAVER CLOVA1

Youngjoon Yoo1,2

Chae Eun Rhee3

NAVER AI Lab2

Abstract

Inha University3

1. Introduction
The recent line of weakly-supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) approaches [21,28,29,45] have achieved impressive performance enhancement, with commonly using
class activation maps (CAMs) [46] to obtain class-wise localization maps from image-level labels. However, weakly-

KAIST4

(1) Dependency on off-the-shelf proposal technique
Input image

Weakly-supervised instance segmentation (WSIS) has
been considered as a more challenging task than weaklysupervised semantic segmentation (WSSS). Compared to
WSSS, WSIS requires instance-wise localization, which is
difficult to extract from image-level labels. To tackle the
problem, most WSIS approaches use off-the-shelf proposal
techniques that require pre-training with instance or object level labels, deviating the fundamental definition of the
fully-image-level supervised setting. In this paper, we propose a novel approach including two innovative components. First, we propose a semantic knowledge transfer to
obtain pseudo instance labels by transferring the knowledge
of WSSS to WSIS while eliminating the need for the offthe-shelf proposals. Second, we propose a self-refinement
method to refine the pseudo instance labels in a selfsupervised scheme and to use the refined labels for training in an online manner. Here, we discover an erroneous
phenomenon, semantic drift, that occurred by the missing
instances in pseudo instance labels categorized as background class. This semantic drift occurs confusion between
background and instance in training and consequently degrades the segmentation performance. We term this problem as semantic drift problem and show that our proposed
self-refinement method eliminates the semantic drift problem. The extensive experiments on PASCAL VOC 2012 and
MS COCO demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach,
and we achieve a considerable performance without off-theshelf proposal techniques. The code is available at https:
//github.com/clovaai/BESTIE.

Junmo Kim4

Pre-trained proposal technique

0

cow (Image-level label)

Previous
Method

(2) Semantic drift problem
Pseudo label

…
Cow
Background
Missing instance
(= Background)

Figure 1. Two limitations of previous WSIS methods: (1) dependency on off-the-shelf proposal technique that requires pretraining with high-level labels including object or instance information. (2) semantic drift problem caused by the missing instances
in the pseudo label guided as background class. Our proposed
BESTIE aims to solve the two problems simultaneously.

supervised instance segmentation (WSIS) using imagelevel labels is still an open task because the CAM does not
provide instance-wise localization maps.
To extract the instance-wise information, most WSIS
methods use off-the-shelf proposal techniques. PRM [47]
takes suitable instance masks from segment proposals generated by MCG [38] and generates pseudo instance labels.
Also, LIID [33] utilizes a pre-trained salient instance segmentor [12] which produces class-agnostic instance-level
masks. We note that MCG and salient instance segmentor
used in each method require pre-training with object boundary labels and class-agnostic instance masks, respectively.
However, the proposal-guided WSIS methods have two
limitations as shown in Figure 1. First, their dependency on
the off-the-shelf proposal techniques is considerably high,
and it makes the methods difficult to apply to other specific
domains such as medical images since the proposal techniques mostly target general objects. Furthermore, in a strict
sense, the use of the proposal techniques trained by object or instance level information deviates from the definition of fully-image-level supervised segmentation. Second,
these methods cannot cope with the performance degradation caused by noisy pseudo-labels containing missing instances (i.e., false-negatives). As shown in Figure 1, the
left two missing cows are guided to the background class

4278

