Robust Region Feature Synthesizer for Zero-Shot Object Detection
Peiliang Huang1 , Junwei Han1 ,* De Cheng2 , Dingwen Zhang1 *
1
Brain and Artificial Intelligence Lab, School of Automation, Northwestern Polytechnical University
2
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, School of Telecommunications Engineering,
Xidian University
{peilianghuang2017, junweihan2010, zhangdingwen2006yyy}@gmail.com, dcheng@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Zero-shot object detection aims at incorporating class
semantic vectors to realize the detection of (both seen and)
unseen classes given an unconstrained test image. In this
study, we reveal the core challenges in this research area:
how to synthesize robust region features (for unseen objects) that are as intra-class diverse and inter-class separable as the real samples, so that strong unseen object detectors can be trained upon them. To address these challenges, we build a novel zero-shot object detection framework that contains an Intra-class Semantic Diverging component and an Inter-class Structure Preserving component.
The former is used to realize the one-to-more mapping to
obtain diverse visual features from each class semantic vector, preventing miss-classifying the real unseen objects as
image backgrounds. While the latter is used to avoid the
synthesized features too scattered to mix up the inter-class
and foreground-background relationship. To demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed approach, comprehensive
experiments on PASCAL VOC, COCO, and DIOR datasets
are conducted. Notably, our approach achieves the new
state-of-the-art performance on PASCAL VOC and COCO
and it is the first study to carry out zero-shot object detection in remote sensing imagery.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of the deep learning technologies, such as CNN [14, 34, 48] and Transformer [6, 26],
great progresses have been made in the research field
of object detection. Although the detection performance
achieved by existing methods looks promising and encouraging, it exists a hidden drawback for applying them in realworld scenarios—The mainstream detection approaches
have the strict constraint on the category to detect. Once
the model is trained, it can only recognize objects that appear in the training data, whereas other objects appearing
in the test images but unseen during training would confuse

the model dramatically, leading to avoidless faults in detection results. To address this problem, the task of zero-shot
object detection (ZSD) [4, 17, 33, 51] was raised in recent
years. The goal is to enable the detection models to predict unseen objects which are without any available samples
during training.
Earlier efforts on zero-shot object detection (ZSD) [4,33]
focus on mapping function-based methods, which learn
mapping functions from the visual space to the semantic
space. With the learned mapping functions, unseen object
categories can be predicted by mapping their visual features into the semantic space and then performing the nearest neighbor search in the semantic space. However, due to
that the mapping functions are learned all upon the seen categories provided by the training data, the models would get
significantly biased towards the seen categories when dealing with the visual features in testing [17]. Recently, generative model-based methods [17, 51] are presented as an
alternative solution. Usually, these methods utilize generative models to synthesize visual features from the provided
semantic embeddings [2, 30] corresponding to each object
category. The synthesized visual features can then be used
for training a standard detector for unseen classes. Generative model-based methods show stronger performance compared with mapping function-based methods in solving the
bias problem as, although the samples corresponding to the
unseen objects are still absent, the detectors are trained with
synthesized visual features for the unseen objects.
However, the current generative model-based methods
mainly follow the ideas presented in zero-short classification frameworks, such as [31, 41], where the synthesized
visual features may perform well in the less complex classification scenarios but are not robust enough to obtain satisfying results in the complicated detection scenarios. To our
best knowledge, there are two-fold challenges for synthesizing visual features for detection scenarios:
• Intra-class diversity: Objects in real-world detection
scenarios present high variation in pose, shape, texture, etc., and one object instance may be covered by

* Corresponding author.

7622

