Acquiring a Dynamic Light Field through a Single-Shot Coded Image
Ryoya Mizuno† , Keita Takahashi† , Michitaka Yoshida‡ , Chihiro Tsutake† , Toshiaki Fujii† , Hajime Nagahara‡
† Nagoya University, Japan, ‡ Osaka University, Japan

Abstract
We propose a method for compressively acquiring a
dynamic light field (a 5-D volume) through a single-shot
coded image (a 2-D measurement). We designed an imaging model that synchronously applies aperture coding and
pixel-wise exposure coding within a single exposure time.
This coding scheme enables us to effectively embed the original information into a single observed image. The observed image is then fed to a convolutional neural network
(CNN) for light-field reconstruction, which is jointly trained
with the camera-side coding patterns. We also developed a
hardware prototype to capture a real 3-D scene moving over
time. We succeeded in acquiring a dynamic light field with
5×5 viewpoints over 4 temporal sub-frames (100 views in
total) from a single observed image. Repeating capture and
reconstruction processes over time, we can acquire a dynamic light field at 4× the frame rate of the camera. To
our knowledge, our method is the first to achieve a finer
temporal resolution than the camera itself in compressive
light-field acquisition. Our software is available from our
project webpage.1

1. Introduction
A light field is represented as a set of multi-view images, where dozens of views are aligned on a 2-D grid with
tiny viewpoint intervals. This representation contains rich
visual information of a target scene and thus can be used
for various applications such as 3-D display [14, 38], view
synthesis [20,58], depth estimation [34,51], synthetic refocusing [13, 25], and object recognition [17, 45]. The scope
of applications will further expand if the target scene is able
to move over time. However, a light field varying over time,
i.e., a dynamic light field, is challenging to acquire due to
the huge data rate, which is proportional to both the number
of views and frame rate.
Several approaches to acquire light fields have been investigated as summarized in Fig. 1. The most straightforward approach is to construct an array of cameras [5,37,49],
which requires bulky and costly hardware. The second ap1 https://www.fujii.nuee.nagoya-u.ac.jp/Research/CompCam2

Temporal
res.

Ours

Coded exposure
camera

Camera array

Spatial
res.

Lens array
camera

Coded aperture
camera

Angular res.

Figure 1. Our achievement compared with representative previous
works (camera array [49], lens-array camera [24], coded-aperture
camera [12], and coded exposure camera [54]). Axes are in relative scales w.r.t. camera’s spatial resolution and frame rate.

proach is to insert a micro-lens array in front of an image
sensor [1, 2, 24, 25, 29, 46], which enables us to capture a
light field in a single-shot image. However, the spatial resolution of each viewpoint image is sacrificed for the angular
resolution (number of views). In the above two approaches,
the frame rate of the acquired light field is at most equivalent to that of the cameras. Moreover, the data rate is not
compressed because each light ray is sampled individually.
The third approach aims to acquire a light field compressively by using a single camera equipped with a coded mask
or aperture [3, 6, 7, 12, 16, 18, 22, 23, 39, 41, 43]. This kind
of camera was used to obtain a small number of coded images, from which a light field with the full-sensor spatial
resolution can be reconstructed. For static scenes, taking
more images with different coding patterns is beneficial to
achieve higher reconstruction quality. However, for moving
scenes, the use of multiple coded images involves additional
complexities related to scene motions. Hajisharif et al. [8]
used a high dimensional light-field dictionary that spanned
several temporal frames. However, their dictionary-based
light-field reconstruction required a prohibitively long computation time. Sakai et al. [31] handled scene motions by
alternating two coding patterns over time and by training
their CNN-based algorithm on dynamic scenes. However,
the light field was reconstructed only for every two temporal

19830

