FedDC: Federated Learning with Non-IID Data
via Local Drift Decoupling and Correction
Liang Gao1
1

Huazhu Fu2

Li Li3,§ Yingwen Chen1,§ Ming Xu1

National University of Defense Technology, China.

2

IHPC, ASTAR, Singapore.

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) allows multiple clients to collectively train a high-performance global model without
sharing their private data. However, the key challenge in
federated learning is that the clients have significant statistical heterogeneity among their local data distributions,
which would cause inconsistent optimized local models on
the client-side. To address this fundamental dilemma, we
propose a novel federated learning algorithm with local
drift decoupling and correction (FedDC). Our FedDC only
introduces lightweight modifications in the local training
phase, in which each client utilizes an auxiliary local drift
variable to track the gap between the local model parameter
and the global model parameters. The key idea of FedDC is
to utilize this learned local drift variable to bridge the gap,
i.e., conducting consistency in parameter-level. The experiment results and analysis demonstrate that FedDC yields
expediting convergence and better performance on various
image classification tasks, robust in partial participation
settings, non-iid data, and heterogeneous clients.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is an emerging distributed machine learning paradigm that leverages decentralized data
from multiple clients to jointly train a shared global model
under the coordination of a central server, without sharing
the individuals’ raw data [4, 8, 19, 20, 31]. This makes FL
surpass traditional parallel optimization to avoid systemic
privacy risk [5, 7, 15, 16, 24]. FedAvg [19] is a widely used
FL aggregation algorithm, in which each client executes
multiple stochastic gradient descent (SGD) steps in each
communication round to minimize the local empirical risk.
After that, a central server updates the parameters of the
global model with the updates returned by the clients. However, recent researches [9, 17, 18] demonstrate that FedAvg
could not converge well with heterogeneous data (non-iid).
§ Li Li (LLiLi@um.edu.mo) and Yingwen Chen (ywch@nudt.edu.cn)
are corresponding authors.

3

Cheng-Zhong Xu3

University of Macau, IOTSC, China.

The data distribution of clients in FL can be highly differential because clients independently collect the local data
with their own preferences and sampling space. The noniid distributed data leads to inconsistency in clients’ local
objective functions and optimization directions. The studies in [9, 10] prove that the data heterogeneity introduces
drift in clients’ local updates, which slows down the convergence speed. The parameter drift between an FL model
and a centralized learning model comes from two parts: the
residual parameter drift in the last round, and the gradient
drift in the current round [30]. Due to the difference in data
distribution, there is a fundamental contradiction between
minimizing local empirical loss and reducing global empirical loss. Therefore, in a highly heterogeneous environment,
FedAvg lacks a convergence guarantee, which only obtains
compromised convergence speed and model performance.
To address this client drift, some methods have been proposed to reduce the variance of local updates [9, 17]. For
example, FedProx [17] adds a proximal term to force reduction of model differences between local and the global
model. However, the proximal term hinders the global
model from moving towards the global stationary point.
Scaffold [9] corrects client-drift with a control gradient variate. However, it only approximately reduces the gradient
drift in each round but it is not able to eliminate it. The
residual deviation would be accumulatively amplified during training according to the research of [30], which is the
primary factor that slows down the convergence speed and
causes lower performance. In fact, most of the previous
FL methods force the local models to be consistent to the
global model. They finally get a model that neglects the inconsistency between local objectives and global objectives.
They have a certain effect by reducing gradient drift, but the
gradually enlarged parameter deviation persists.
We admit the fact that the local optimal points of clients
are fundamentally inconsistent with the global optimal
point in the heterogeneous FL setup. The local stationary
points of clients can be arbitrarily different from the global
stationary point. Based on this observation, we propose a
new federated learning algorithm with local drift decoupling and correction (FedDC), to handle the inconsistent

10112

