ESCNet: Gaze Target Detection with the Understanding of 3D Scenes
Jun Bao1
Buyu Liu2
Jun Yu1 *
1
Hangzhou Dianzi University 2 NEC Laboratories America

Abstract
This paper aims to address the single image gaze target
detection problem. Conventional methods either focus on
2D visual cues or exploit additional depth information in
a very coarse manner. In this work, we propose to explicitly and effectively model 3D geometry under challenging
scenario where only 2D annotations are available. We first
obtain 3D point clouds of given scene with estimated depth
and reference objects. Then we figure out the front-most
points in all possible 3D directions of given person. These
points are later leveraged in our ESCNet model. Specifically, ESCNet consists of geometry and scene parsing modules. The former produces an initial heatmap inferring the
probability that each front-most point has been looking at
according to estimated 3D gaze direction. And the latter
further explores scene contextual cues to regulate detection results. We validate our idea on two publicly available
dataset, GazeFollow and VideoAttentionTarget, and demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance. Our method also
beats the human in terms of AUC on GazeFollow. Our code
can be found here https://github.com/bjj9/ESCNet.

1. Introduction
Gaze target detection is important to understand human’s
intention. Therefore, it plays an important role in applications such as human computer interface [26] and social
awareness tracking [27]. Though physical equipment such
as wearable eye trackers [10] is available to perform gaze
estimation, they are not desired due to location or calibration limitations. A more general setting takes third person
view image as well as a given person in this scene as input
and aims to locate where this person is looking in 2D image
space [31]. Conventional methods typically leverage 2D visual cues to regulate gaze predictions by not only salient
objects but also estimated gaze orientation [6, 31]. More recent approach [9] proposes to incorporate 3D gaze estimation and depth cues. Though demonstrating advanced performance,it requires additional human annotations [18] to
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. We propose to explicitly model 3D geometry in 2D gaze
target detection task. We propose to reconstruct the scene with 3D
point cloud in single-image setting in (1) and demonstrate that our
ESCNet is able to effectively exploit such information in (2).

explicitly model 3D gaze and due to coarse depth representation, it lacks the ability to handle more general scenarios,
e.g. multiple salient objects lie in the same depth layer and
field of view. To this end, we propose to perform gaze target
detection by complete understanding and explicit modelling
of 3D scenes, with 2D gaze annotations only.
Promising as it sounds, lacking of 3D information in existing dataset makes our task hard. Also, effectively representing such information remains a vital problem.
We address these challenges through two key insights.
Firstly, 3D geometry can be reconstructed by absolute depth
and camera parameters, which can be estimated with relative depth and certain assumptions of reference objects.
Specifically, we use ”person” as our reference category as
humans occur most frequently in images collected for gaze
estimation task and their sizes are of certain distributions.
With the assumption of human sizes, we can estimate the
absolute depth and focal length of each image, leading to
3D point clouds (See (1) in Fig. 1). Second, occlusion plays
an important role in gaze estimation given the fact that one
cannot see through occluders. Such fact provides strong pri-

14126

