FIBA: Frequency-Injection based Backdoor Attack in Medical Image Analysis
∗

†

Yu Feng1* Benteng Ma1 Jing Zhang2 Shanshan Zhao3 Yong Xia1 Dacheng Tao3,2
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
2
The University of Sydney, Australia, 3 JD Explore Academy, China
{fengy,mabenteng} @mail.nwpu.edu.cn,jing.zhang1@sydney.edu.au
sshan.zhao00@gmail.com, yxia@nwpu.edu.cn,dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract
In recent years, the security of AI systems has drawn increasing research attention, especially in the medical imaging realm. To develop a secure medical image analysis
(MIA) system, it is a must to study possible backdoor attacks (BAs), which can embed hidden malicious behaviors
into the system. However, designing a unified BA method
that can be applied to various MIA systems is challenging
due to the diversity of imaging modalities (e.g., X-Ray, CT,
and MRI) and analysis tasks (e.g., classification, detection,
and segmentation). Most existing BA methods are designed
to attack natural image classification models, which apply
spatial triggers to training images and inevitably corrupt
the semantics of poisoned pixels, leading to the failures
of attacking dense prediction models. To address this issue, we propose a novel Frequency-Injection based Backdoor Attack method (FIBA) that is capable of delivering attacks in various MIA tasks. Specifically, FIBA leverages
a trigger function in the frequency domain that can inject
the low-frequency information of a trigger image into the
poisoned image by linearly combining the spectral amplitude of both images. Since it preserves the semantics of the
poisoned image pixels, FIBA can perform attacks on both
classification and dense prediction models. Experiments on
three benchmarks in MIA (i.e., ISIC-2019 [4] for skin lesion
classification, KiTS-19 [17] for kidney tumor segmentation,
and EAD-2019 [1] for endoscopic artifact detection), validate the effectiveness of FIBA and its superiority over stateof-the-art methods in attacking MIA models and bypassing

* Equal contribution. This work was done during an internship at JD
Explore Academy.
† Yong Xia is the corresponding author. This work was supported in
part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants
62171377, in part by the Shaanxi Provincial Key Research and Development Program under Grant 2022GY-084, and in part by the Natural Science
Foundation of Ningbo City, China, under Grant 2021J052. Dr Jing Zhang
is supported by ARC FL-170100117.

backdoor defense. Source code will be available at code.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are increasingly deployed in computer-aided diagnosis (CAD) systems and
have achieved diagnostic parity with medical professionals
on radiology, pathology, dermatology, and ophthalmology
tasks [52]. However, recent studies have shown that DNNs
are vulnerable to various attacks during the model’s training
and inference [8, 14, 23, 38]. Typically, attacks in the inference stage take the form of the adversarial samples [10, 45]
and attempt to fool a trained model by manipulating the input. Backdoor attacks, in contrast, seek to maliciously alter the model in the training phase [3, 11, 35]. Although
the research on adversarial samples has experienced rapid
development recently, backdoor attacks have received less
attention, especially in medical image analysis (MIA).
In general, backdoor attacks aim to embed a hidden
backdoor trigger into DNNs so that the injected model performs well on benign testing samples when the backdoor is
not activated, however, once the backdoor is activated by
the attacker, the prediction will be changed to the target label as attackers expected [3, 11, 35]. Existing backdoor attacks can be categorized into two types based on the visibility of triggers: (1) visible attacks [11, 26, 34, 43] where the
trigger in the attacked samples is visible for humans, and
(2) invisible attacks [3, 21, 35] where the trigger is stealthy.
However, no matter whether they are visible to human beings or not, these backdoor attack methods rely on spatial
triggers which may corrupt inevitably the semantics of poisoned pixels in the training images. Thus, they are easy to
fail on dense prediction tasks as the local structure around
the poisoned pixels may be changed, i.e., resulting in inconsistent semantics with the original image.
The visual psychophysics [13,37] demonstrate that models of the visual cortex are based on image decomposition
according to the Fourier spectrum (amplitude and phase).

20876

