Energy-based Latent Aligner for Incremental Learning
K J Joseph†‡

Salman Khan‡⋆ Fahad Shahbaz Khan‡⋄
Vineeth N Balasubramanian†

Rao Muhammad Anwer‡¶

†

⋆

Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, India ‡ Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI, UAE
Australian National University, Australia ⋄ Linköping University, Sweden ¶ Aalto University, Finland
{cs17m18p100001, vineethnb}@iith.ac.in, {salman.khan, fahad.khan, rao.anwer}@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
Deep learning models tend to forget their earlier knowledge while incrementally learning new tasks. This behavior
emerges because the parameter updates optimized for the
new tasks may not align well with the updates suitable for
older tasks. The resulting latent representation mismatch
causes forgetting. In this work, we propose ELI: Energybased Latent Aligner for Incremental Learning, which first
learns an energy manifold for the latent representations
such that previous task latents will have low energy and the
current task latents have high energy values. This learned
manifold is used to counter the representational shift that
happens during incremental learning. The implicit regularization that is offered by our proposed methodology can
be used as a plug-and-play module in existing incremental
learning methodologies. We validate this through extensive
evaluation on CIFAR-100, ImageNet subset, ImageNet 1k
and Pascal VOC datasets. We observe consistent improvement when ELI is added to three prominent methodologies
in class-incremental learning, across multiple incremental
settings. Further, when added to the state-of-the-art incremental object detector, ELI provides over 5% improvement
in detection accuracy, corroborating its effectiveness and
complementary advantage to the existing art. Code is available at: https:// github.com/ JosephKJ/ ELI .

1. Introduction
Learning experiences are dynamic in the real-world, requiring models to incrementally learn new capabilities over
time. Incremental Learning (also called continual learning) is a paradigm that learns a model MTt at time step
t, such that it is competent in solving a continuum of
tasks Tt = {τ1 , τ2 , · · · , τt } introduced to it during its lifetime. Each task τi contains instances from a disjoint set of
classes. Importantly, the training data for the previous tasks
{τ1 , · · · , τt−1 } cannot be accessed while learning τt , due to
privacy, memory and/or computational constraints.
We can represent an incremental model MTt , as a composition of a latent feature extractor FθTt and a trailing network FϕTt that solves the task using the extracted features:

Figure 1. We illustrate an Incremental Learning model trained on a
continuum of tasks in the top part of the figure. While learning the
current task τt (zoomed-in), the latent representation of Task τt−1
data gets disturbed, as shown by red arrows. ELI learns an energy
manifold, and uses it to counteract this inherent representational
shift, as illustrated by green arrows, thereby alleviating forgetting.

MTt (x) = (FϕTt ◦ FθTt )(x); where x ∈ Tt . A naive approach for learning incrementally would be to use data samples from the current task τt to finetune the model trained
until the previous task MTt−1 . Doing so will bias the internal representations of the network to perform well on τt , inturn significantly degrading the performance on old tasks.
This phenomenon is called catastrophic forgetting [13, 35].
The incremental learning problem requires accumulating knowledge over a long range of learning tasks without catastrophic forgetting. The main challenge is how to
consolidate conflicting implicit representations across different training episodes to learn a generalized model applicable to all the learning experiences. To this end, existing approaches investigate regularization-based methods
[2, 23, 24, 29, 40, 55] that constrain θ and ϕ such that the
model performs well on all the tasks. Exemplar replaybased methods [7, 8, 21, 33, 41] retain a subset of datapoints from each task, and rehearse them to learn a continual model. Dynamically expanding models [34, 44, 45],
enlarge θ and ϕ while learning incrementally.
Complementary to the existing methodologies, we introduce a novel approach which minimizes the representational shift in the latent space of an incremental model,
using a learned energy manifold. The energy modeling offers a natural mechanism to deal with catastrophic forget-

7452

