Practical Evaluation of Adversarial Robustness via Adaptive Auto Attack
Ye Liu1 , Yaya Cheng1 , Lianli Gao1 , Xianglong Liu2 , Qilong Zhang1 , Jingkuan Song1 *
1
Center for Future Media and School of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
2
Beihang University, China
liuye66a@gmail.com, yaya.cheng@hotmail.com, lianli.gao@uestc.edu.cn
xlliu@buaa.edu.cn, qilong.zhang@std.uestc.edu.cn, jingkuan.song@gmail.com

Abstract
Defense models against adversarial attacks have grown
significantly, but the lack of practical evaluation methods
has hindered progress. Evaluation can be defined as looking for defense models’ lower bound of robustness given a
budget number of iterations and a test dataset. A practical
evaluation method should be convenient (i.e., parameterfree), efficient (i.e., fewer iterations) and reliable (i.e., approaching the lower bound of robustness). Towards this target, we propose a parameter-free Adaptive Auto Attack (A3 )
evaluation method which addresses the efficiency and reliability in a test-time-training fashion. Specifically, by observing that adversarial examples to a specific defense model
follow some regularities in their starting points, we design
an Adaptive Direction Initialization strategy to speed up the
evaluation. Furthermore, to approach the lower bound of
robustness under the budget number of iterations, we propose an online statistics-based discarding strategy that automatically identifies and abandons hard-to-attack images.
Extensive experiments on nearly 50 widely-used defense
models demonstrate the effectiveness of our A3 . By consuming much fewer iterations than existing methods, i.e., 1/10
on average (10× speed up), we achieve lower robust accuracy in all cases. Notably, we won first place out of 1681
teams in CVPR 2021 White-box Adversarial Attacks on Defense Models competitions with this method. Code is available at: https://github.com/liuye6666/adaptive auto attack

1. Introduction
Despite the breakthroughs for a wide range of fields,
deep neural networks (DNNs) [21, 23, 42, 52, 57] have been
shown high vulnerabilities to adversarial examples. For
instance, inputs added with human-imperceptible pertur* Corresponding author

bations can deceive DNNs to output unreasonable predictions [4, 11, 14–16, 30, 33, 50, 60–62]. To tackle this issue,
various adversarial defense methods [9,17,18,49] have been
proposed to resist against malicious perturbations. Unfortunately, these defense methods could be broken by more advanced attack methods [7, 12, 44, 45], making it difficult to
identify the state-of-the-art. Therefore, we urgently need a
practical evaluation method to judge the adversarial robustness of different defense strategies.
Robustness evaluation can be defined as looking for defense models’ lower bound of robustness given a budget
number of iterations and a test dataset [7]. White-box
adversarial attacks on defense models are crucial for testing adversarial robustness. Among these methods, widelyused random sampling has been proven effective in generating diverse starting points for attacks in a large-scale
study [7, 20, 31, 43]. In general, there are two kinds of
random sampling strategies. From the perspective of input space, given an original image x of label y and a random perturbation ζ sampled from uniform distributions, the
starting point is xst = x + ζ, e.g., Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) [31]. From the perspective of output space,
given a classifier f and a randomly sampled direction of
diversification wd , evaluators generate starting points by
maximizing the change of output, i.e., wd⊺ f (x). Intuitively,
random sampling strategy is sub-optimal since it is modelagnostic.
Comprehensive statistics on random sampling are conducted to verify whether it is sub-optimal. In other words,
we want to study whether adversarial examples, i.e., images that successfully fooling the victim’s models, to a specific defense model follow some regularities in their starting points. Statistic results on input space show that adversarial examples’ starting points are actually random. This
is reasonable because starting points are highly dependent
on their corresponding input images, and input images are
randomly distributed in high-dimensional space. Different
from input space, statistics results in output space show

15105

