Semi-Weakly-Supervised Learning of Complex Actions from
Instructional Task Videos
Yuhan Shen
Northeastern University

Ehsan Elhamifar
Northeastern University

shen.yuh@northeastern.edu

e.elhamifar@northeastern.edu

Abstract
We address the problem of action segmentation in
instructional task videos with a small number of weaklylabeled training videos and a large number of unlabeled
videos, which we refer to as Semi-Weakly-Supervised
Learning (SWSL) of actions. We propose a general
SWSL framework that can efficiently learn from both
types of videos and can leverage any of the existing
weakly-supervised action segmentation methods. Our key
observation is that the distance between the transcript of
an unlabeled video and those of the weakly-labeled videos
from the same task is small yet often nonzero. Therefore, we
develop a Soft Restricted Edit (SRE) loss to encourage small
variations between the predicted transcripts of unlabeled
videos and ground-truth transcripts of the weakly-labeled
videos of the same task. To compute the SRE loss, we
develop a flexible transcript prediction (FTP) method that
uses the output of the action classifier to find both the length
of the transcript and the sequence of actions occurring
in an unlabeled video. We propose an efficient learning
scheme in which we alternate between minimizing our proposed loss and generating pseudo-transcripts for unlabeled
videos. By experiments on two benchmark datasets, we
demonstrate that our approach can significantly improve
the performance by using unlabeled videos, especially when
the number of weakly-labeled videos is small.1 .

1. Introduction
Many of humans everyday tasks are procedural, where a
task consists of a sequence of actions that must be followed
to achieve the desired goal. Therefore, there has been
an explosion of instructional videos on the web, teaching
how to perform tasks, such as cooking recipes, repairing
devices, assembling furnitures, performing emergency first
aid, etc. [1, 10, 15, 23, 38, 56, 66, 67]. Automatic learning
of procedural tasks from instructional videos has important
applications, such as teaching intelligent agents to perform
1 Code available at https://github.com/Yuhan-Shen/SWSL.

…

take cup

pour coffee

pour milk

spoon sugar

pour sugar

stir coffee

stir tea

add teabag

pour water

butter pan

pour oil

crack egg

fry egg

add salt & pepper

Make Coffee

…

take plate

Make Tea

put egg to plate

…

Make Fried-Egg

Figure 1. Transcript variation within each task for three different tasks.

complex tasks, constructing large knowledge bases of compact instructions, and automatic performance evaluation for
executing tasks. Over the past several years, we have
seen great advances on different aspects of learning from
instructions [1, 4, 8, 15, 19, 20, 33, 35–37, 49, 50, 56, 66, 67].
A major challenge in learning from instructional videos
is that videos are long and have many actions, therefore
annotation is costly and complex. This poses a major
challenge for scaling the learning to a large number of
tasks and videos. Therefore, while a few fully-supervised
methods have studied learning from densely-annotated
videos [24,27,45,49,51,53,64,66], the majority of existing
works have focused on using less supervision. Specifically,
weakly-supervised methods assume that each training video
is accompanied with its transcript (ordered list of actions)
[5, 7, 12, 30, 35, 44, 67] or action-set (unordered list of
actions) [16, 31, 32, 36, 43]. While using weak supervision
reduces the annotation cost by removing the need for
specifying temporal boundaries of actions, it still requires
annotators to watch entire videos. On the other hand,
unsupervised methods remove the need for annotation by
using unlabeled videos and leveraging the similarity of
videos of the same task. However, existing similarity
constraints, e.g., videos following the same sequence of
actions or the same pairwise action ordering, are limiting
and often violated in videos (see Figure 1). This has led to
performance of unsupervised methods significantly lagging
behind that of the weakly-supervised algorithms.
Paper Contributions. Motivated by the above discussion,
we study a new action segmentation problem in which we
assume having access to a small number of weakly-labeled

3344

