Learning Transferable Human-Object Interaction Detector with Natural
Language Supervision

1

Suchen Wang1 , Yueqi Duan2 , Henghui Ding1 , Yap-Peng Tan1 , Kim-Hui Yap1 , Junsong Yuan3
Nanyang Technological University 2 Tsinghua University 3 State University of New York at Buffalo

{wang.sc,ding0093,ekhyap,eyptan}@ntu.edu.sg, duanyueqi@tsinghua.edu.cn, jsyuan@buffalo.edu

Abstract

hoi.

1. Introduction
Human-object interaction (HOI) detection plays a vital role in human-centric visual analysis tasks and provides deeper understanding of human intentions and behaviors [6, 10, 24, 31, 37, 41, 42]. It aims to localize the interacting humans and objects and then recognize their interactions. The interaction can be treated as a pair of human
actions and objects, e.g., riding bicycle. Given its combinatorial nature, it is impractical to create a data collection
to include all possible HOIs, especially when the action
and object category space becomes large (e.g., 400 actions

<latexit sha1_base64="NLWCbeED3DOjSAgEgMXMoJOg+cU=">AAAB8HicbVDLSgNBEOyNrxhfUY9eBhPBU9gNoh6DXjxGMA9JljA7mU2GzGOZmRVCyFd48aCIVz/Hm3/jJNmDJhY0FFXddHdFCWfG+v63l1tb39jcym8Xdnb39g+Kh0dNo1JNaIMornQ7woZyJmnDMstpO9EUi4jTVjS6nfmtJ6oNU/LBjhMaCjyQLGYEWyc9lrsCJ8aqcq9Y8iv+HGiVBBkpQYZ6r/jV7SuSCiot4diYTuAnNpxgbRnhdFropoYmmIzwgHYclVhQE07mB0/RmVP6KFbalbRorv6emGBhzFhErlNgOzTL3kz8z+ukNr4OJ0wmqaWSLBbFKUdWodn3qM80JZaPHcFEM3crIkOsMbEuo4ILIVh+eZU0q5XgsnJxXy3VbrI48nACp3AOAVxBDe6gDg0gIOAZXuHN096L9+59LFpzXjZzDH/gff4AR8CQEw==</latexit>

HOIs

Discrete Labels

Seen HOIs

[1, 0, 0, 0]

(ride, horse)

[0, 1, 0, 0]

(ride, bicycle)

[0, 0, 1, 0]

(wash, tiger)

[0, 0, 0, 1]

(wash, horse)

Predeterminate

Unseen HOIs
(wash, bicycle)

Visual
Encoder

7!
Text
Encoder

It is difficult to construct a data collection including all
possible combinations of human actions and interacting objects due to the combinatorial nature of human-object interactions (HOI). In this work, we aim to develop a transferable HOI detector for unseen interactions. Existing HOI detectors often treat interactions as discrete labels and learn
a classifier according to a predetermined category space.
This is inherently inapt for detecting unseen interactions
which are out of the predefined categories. Conversely, we
treat independent HOI labels as the natural language supervision of interactions and embed them into a joint visualand-text space to capture their correlations. More specifically, we propose a new HOI visual encoder to detect the
interacting humans and objects, and map them to a joint
feature space to perform interaction recognition. Our visual encoder is instantiated as a Vision Transformer with
new learnable HOI tokens and a sequence parser to generate unique HOI predictions. It distills and leverages the
transferable knowledge from the pretrained CLIP model to
perform the zero-shot interaction detection. Experiments on
two datasets, SWIG-HOI and HICO-DET, validate that our
proposed method can achieve a notable mAP improvement
on detecting both seen and unseen HOIs. Our code is available at https://github.com/scwangdyd/promting_

(a) HOI Detector with Pre-defined Interaction Categories

(b) HOI Detector with Joint Visual-and-Text Modeling

Figure 1. (a) Most existing HOI detectors classify the novel interactions in a predetermined manner. They are difficult to handle
novel interactions that are out of the predefined list. (b) We aim to
develop a transferable HOI detector via joint visual-and-text modeling which is more suitable to handle unseen interactions. Given
an image, the visual encoder detects the interacting humans and
objects and maps them into the joint space (e.g., the blue square).
We then conduct the nearest search among text features (triangles)
for HOI recognition.

and 1000 objects in SWIG-HOI [47]). This motivates us
to study a transferable HOI detector which can be readily
extended to numerous potential unseen interactions.
Recent works [2, 15, 17, 21] have used compositional
learning to enhance the generalization ability of HOI detectors on unseen interactions. Their core idea is to decompose the interaction into an action and an object, and
conduct data augmentation to generate new combinations
of actions and objects [15–17]. However, there is a basic
assumption - the list of unseen interactions is available, so
that specific samples of interactions can be generated from
existing ones accordingly. However, it is still an open problem how to automatically determine the validity of the generated interactions without any given priors. In this sense,
existing methods are only suitable for predetermined cases
but not transferable to other unseen interactions.
In this paper, we aim to train a transferable HOI detector without assuming any priors for the unseen interactions.

939

