LC-FDNet: Learned Lossless Image Compression with Frequency
Decomposition Network

1

Hochang Rhee1 , Yeong Il Jang1 , Seyun Kim2 , Nam Ik Cho1
Department of ECE, INMC, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
2
Gauss Labs Inc.

hochang,jyicu@ispl.snu.ac.kr, seyun.kim@gausslabs.ai, nicho@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
LFC

Recent learning-based lossless image compression methods encode an image in the unit of subimages and achieve
comparable performances to conventional non-learning algorithms. However, these methods do not consider the performance drop in the high-frequency region, giving equal
consideration to the low and high-frequency areas. In
this paper, we propose a new lossless image compression
method that proceeds the encoding in a coarse-to-fine manner to separate and process low and high-frequency regions
differently. We initially compress the low-frequency components and then use them as additional input for encoding the
remaining high-frequency region. The low-frequency components act as a strong prior in this case, which leads to improved estimation in the high-frequency area. In addition,
we design the frequency decomposition process to be adaptive to color channel, spatial location, and image characteristics. As a result, our method derives an image-specific
optimal ratio of low/high-frequency components. Experiments show that the proposed method achieves state-of-theart performance for benchmark high-resolution datasets.

1. Introduction
As the need for high-quality images is increasing,
the importance of image compression is growing accordingly. Driven by the development of deep neural networks
(DNNs), there has been remarkable progress in computer
vision and image processing, including lossy [3,4,8,10–17,
21, 23–25, 27, 28, 30, 32–34, 40, 44–48, 53, 54] and lossless
image compression [3,9,18,19,29,31,35,38,39,41,42,49].
Although lossy compression is generally preferred, lossless compression is also necessary for many applications.
Lossless compression is especially required for medical images, scientific images, technical drawings, and artistic photos. While methods such as JPEG2000 (lossless mode) [37]
employ transform coding with discrete wavelet transform

Current Subimage

AFD

Low Frequency

HFC

Previous Subimages

High Frequency

Figure 1. Our LC-FDNet consists of Adaptive Frequency Decomposition (AFD), Low-Frequency Compressor (LFC), and HighFrequency Compressor (HFC). The current subimage is split into
low/high-frequency regions through the AFD. The LFC first compresses the low-frequency region, and then the HFC compresses
the high-frequency area using the low-frequency as strong prior.

(DWT), most of the standard/non-standard lossless compression methods [2, 5, 7, 51] use predictive coding. The
standard predictive coding scheme uses a closed-loop prediction where the current pixel is estimated and compressed
using the previously encoded samples.
In this sense, early learning-based lossless compression
algorithms [29, 31, 35, 38, 41, 49] design DNNs as autoregressive models. They rely on the strong power of DNNs in
estimating the probability distribution of a pixel conditioned
on the previous samples. For example, PixelRNN [49], PixelCNN [35], and PixelCNN++ [41] compress each pixel sequentially, where the probability distribution is predicted
conditioned on all previous pixels. However, these methods require neural network computations for the number of
whole pixels, leading to an impractical inference time.
To achieve practicality, recent works [29, 31, 38] process the encoding in the unit of an entire image or subimages rather than individual pixels. These methods derive the probability distribution of a subimage conditioned
on the previously encoded subimages, or the distribution
of a whole image conditioned on the lossy compressed
image. They show reduced and practical computation

6033

