Improving the Transferability of Targeted Adversarial Examples through
Object-Based Diverse Input
Junyoung Byun Seungju Cho Myung-Joon Kwon Hee-Seon Kim Changick Kim
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{bjyoung, joyga, kwon19, hskim98, changick}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
The transferability of adversarial examples allows the
deception on black-box models, and transfer-based targeted
attacks have attracted a lot of interest due to their practical applicability. To maximize the transfer success rate,
adversarial examples should avoid overfitting to the source
model, and image augmentation is one of the primary approaches for this. However, prior works utilize simple image transformations such as resizing, which limits input diversity. To tackle this limitation, we propose the objectbased diverse input (ODI) method that draws an adversarial image on a 3D object and induces the rendered image to be classified as the target class. Our motivation
comes from the humans’ superior perception of an image
printed on a 3D object. If the image is clear enough, humans can recognize the image content in a variety of viewing conditions. Likewise, if an adversarial example looks
like the target class to the model, the model should also
classify the rendered image of the 3D object as the target class. The ODI method effectively diversifies the input by leveraging an ensemble of multiple source objects
and randomizing viewing conditions. In our experimental
results on the ImageNet-Compatible dataset, this method
boosts the average targeted attack success rate from 28.3%
to 47.0% compared to the state-of-the-art methods. We also
demonstrate the applicability of the ODI method to adversarial examples on the face verification task and its superior performance improvement. Our code is available at
https://github.com/dreamflake/ODI.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models have demonstrated outstanding
performance in a variety of fields and have permeated our
daily lives [6, 10, 13]. However, adversarial examples show
that these models are vulnerable to maliciously crafted
small input perturbations [7, 35]. Interestingly, an adversarial example that is generated to attack a network is likely to
disturb other networks as well. This intriguing property of

Figure 1. Illustrations of our motivation. If a targeted adversarial example really looks like the target class to the model, the
model should also classify the adversarial examples projected on
the 3D objects as the target class.

Figure 2. The framework of targeted adversarial attacks with
the proposed object-based diverse input (ODI) method. Please
note that the ODI method exploits 3D adversarial objects in the
generating phase only. It finally improves the transferability of 2D
adversarial examples.

adversarial examples is known as transferability [21,26,37].
This property allows an adversary to attack a black-box target model without knowing its interior.
On black-box models, targeted attacks are significantly
more challenging compared to non-targeted attacks which
simply induce the victim models to malfunction without
specifying a target class [21, 43]. Targeted attacks demand further exploration since they can cause more serious
problems by deceiving models into predicting a designated
harmful target class. Research on these transfer-based targeted attacks is important since it can help service providers
prepare their models against these potential threats and assess the robustness of their models.

15244

