What to look at and where: Semantic and Spatial Refined Transformer
for detecting human-object interactions
A S M Iftekhar*†, Hao Chen*‡ , Kaustav Kundu‡ , Xinyu Li‡ , Joseph Tighe‡ , Davide Modolo‡
‡
AWS AI Labs; † University of California, Santa Barbara
{hxen,kaustavk,-,tighej,dmodolo}@amazon.com; iftekhar@ucsb.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel one-stage Transformer-based semantic and spatial refined transformer (SSRT) to solve the
Human-Object Interaction detection task, which requires
to localize humans and objects, and predicts their interactions. Differently from previous Transformer-based HOI approaches, which mostly focus at improving the design of the
decoder outputs for the final detection, SSRT introduces two
new modules to help select the most relevant object-action
pairs within an image and refine the queries’ representation
using rich semantic and spatial features. These enhancements lead to state-of-the-art results on the two most popular HOI benchmarks: V-COCO and HICO-DET.

1. Introduction
Human-object interaction (HOI) detection is an important building block for complex visual reasoning,
such as scene understanding [11, 51] and action recognition [50, 55], and its goal is to detect all HOI triplets
⟨human, object, action⟩ in each image. Fig. 1 shows an
example of a HOI detection, where the person (i.e., the human) is denoted with a red bounding box, the sports ball
(i.e., the object) with a yellow bounding box, and the action
kick is what that human is performing with that object.
The HOI literature can be divided into two-stage and one
stage approaches. Two-stage approaches [12–14, 18, 19, 27,
30, 31, 33, 34, 39, 43, 46–48, 53, 54, 56] first use off-the-shelf
detectors to localize all instances of people and objects independently. For each person and object bounding box pair,
an interaction class is then predicted in the second stage.
This sequential process has two main drawbacks [7, 25, 26]:
(1) off-the-shelf object detectors are agnostic to the concept
of interactions; and (2) enumerating over all pairs of person
and object bounding boxes to predict an interaction class
is time-consuming and expensive. In contrast, one-stage
* Equal contribution.
† Work done during an internship at Amazon.

Figure 1. Conceptual workflow of SSRT. Instead of just feeding the
encoded image to the decoder, we pre-select object-action (OA)
prediction candidates and encode them to semantic and spatial
features. These features then refine the learnt queries in decoding
to enable them to attend to more relevant HOI predictions.

approaches detect all the components of an HOI triplet directly in an end-to-end fashion. Some earlier one-stage approaches used intermediate representations based on interaction points [32, 49] and union boxes [25] to predict these.
However, such methods fail when the interacting human
and object are far away from each other and when multiple interactions overlap (e.g., crowd scenes) [7, 42].
More recently, a new trend of one-stage approaches [7,
26, 42, 58] based on Transformer architectures [5, 10, 35]
have been proposed to overcome these problems and improve the HOI detection performance. This paper belongs
to this category of works (Fig. 1). At a high-level, these approaches first use a CNN backbone to extract image features
and then feed them into an encoder-decoder architecture.
Some approaches use two decoders to detect instances and
interactions in parallel [7, 26]. while others follow a simpler design that directly predicts all the elements of an HOI
triplet with a single decoder [42, 58]. While successful, this
design suffers from two limitations: (i) not all object-action
pairs are meaningful (e.g., a person cannot be ‘cutting a
pizza’ when the pizza is far away from the person’s location; and it is unusual for a person to be ‘cutting a football’),

5353

