Affine Medical Image Registration with Coarse-to-Fine Vision Transformer
Tony C. W. Mok, Albert C. S. Chung
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
cwmokab@connect.ust.hk, achung@cse.ust.hk

Abstract

1. Introduction
Rigid and affine registration is crucial in a variety of
medical imaging studies and has been a topic of active research for decades. In a comprehensive image registration
framework, the target image pair is often pre-aligned based
on a rigid or affine transformation before using deformable
(non-rigid) registration, eliminating the possible linear and
large spatial misalignment between the target image pair.
Solid structures such as bones can be aligned well with
rigid and affine registration [29, 37]. In conventional image registration approaches, inaccurate pre-alignment of the

Convolutional Patch
Embedding

Transformer Encoder

Convolutional Layers

Affine registration is indispensable in a comprehensive
medical image registration pipeline. However, only a few
studies focus on fast and robust affine registration algorithms. Most of these studies utilize convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) to learn joint affine and non-parametric
registration, while the standalone performance of the affine
subnetwork is less explored. Moreover, existing CNN-based
affine registration approaches focus either on the local misalignment or the global orientation and position of the input to predict the affine transformation matrix, which are
sensitive to spatial initialization and exhibit limited generalizability apart from the training dataset. In this paper, we
present a fast and robust learning-based algorithm, Coarseto-Fine Vision Transformer (C2FViT), for 3D affine medical image registration. Our method naturally leverages the
global connectivity and locality of the convolutional vision
transformer and the multi-resolution strategy to learn the
global affine registration. We evaluate our method on 3D
brain atlas registration and template-matching normalization. Comprehensive results demonstrate that our method
is superior to the existing CNNs-based affine registration
methods in terms of registration accuracy, robustness and
generalizability while preserving the runtime advantage of
the learning-based methods. The source code is available
at https://github.com/cwmok/C2FViT.

MLP

Global average pooling
MLP

𝒜𝒜

(a) Concatenation

𝒜𝒜

(b) Siamese Network

𝑸𝑸

𝑲𝑲

Multi-Head
Attention

𝑽𝑽

Transformer Encoder
Convolutional
Feed-Forward

× 𝑵𝑵

MLP Head

𝒜𝒜

(c) C2FViT

Figure 1. Comparisons of different architectures for affine registration. The concatenation-based (VTN-Affine [46]) and Siamese
network (ConvNet-Affine [11]) approaches are based on convolutional neural networks, while our proposed C2FViT is based on vision transformers. For brevity, we illustrate 1-level C2FViT only.
Local and global operations are in green and purple, respectively.

image pair may impair the registration accuracy or impede
the convergence of the optimization algorithm, resulting in
sub-optimal solutions [47]. The success of recent learningbased deformable image registration approaches has largely
been fueled [3,9,11,17,19,20,34–36] by accurate affine initialization using conventional image registration methods.
While the conventional approaches excel in registration performance, the registration time is dependent on the degree
of misalignment between the input images and can be timeconsuming with high-resolution 3D image volumes. To facilitate real-time automated image registration, a few studies [21, 22, 40, 46] have been proposed to learn joint affine
and non-parametric registration with convolutional neural
networks (CNNs). However, the standalone performance of

20835

