Improving GAN Equilibrium by Raising Spatial Awareness
Jianyuan Wang1,2 Ceyuan Yang1 Yinghao Xu1 Yujun Shen1 Hongdong Li2 Bolei Zhou3
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 The Australian National University
3
University of California, Los Angeles

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) has made huge
progress toward image synthesis [3, 9, 15, 16, 21]. GAN is
formulated as a two-player game between a generator (G)
and a discriminator (D) [9], where G targets at reproducing
the distribution of observed data through synthesizing new
samples, and D competes with G by distinguishing the
generated images from the real ones. In principle, they are
expected to reach an equilibrium where D cannot tell the
real and fake images apart [1, 9].
In practice, it turns out to be difficult to achieve such
an equilibrium when training modern GAN variants [3,

1.5

Equilibrium

0

-1.5

Fake

The success of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
is largely built upon the adversarial training between a
generator (G) and a discriminator (D). They are expected
to reach a certain equilibrium where D cannot distinguish
the generated images from the real ones. However, such an
equilibrium is rarely achieved in practical GAN training,
instead, D almost always surpasses G. We attribute one
of its sources to the information asymmetry between D and
G. We observe that D learns its own visual attention when
determining whether an image is real or fake, but G has no
explicit clue on which regions to focus on for a particular
synthesis. To alleviate the issue of D dominating the
competition in GANs, we aim to raise the spatial awareness
of G. Randomly sampled multi-level heatmaps are encoded
into the intermediate layers of G as an inductive bias. Thus
G can purposefully improve the synthesis of certain image
regions. We further propose to align the spatial awareness
of G with the attention map induced from D. Through this
way we effectively lessen the information gap between D
and G. Extensive results show that our method pushes the
two-player game in GANs closer to the equilibrium, leading
to a better synthesis performance. As a byproduct, the introduced spatial awareness facilitates interactive editing over
the output synthesis. Demo video and code are available at
https://genforce.github.io/eqgan-sa/.

Real

Abstract

0M

Images shown to Discriminator

25M

Figure 1. Discriminator’s output scores for real and generated
samples during training. A higher number indicates more
realistic. We use StyleGAN2 [16] as the baseline and implement
the proposed method over it on the LSUN Cat dataset. For a clear
comparison, we report the minimum of the scores for real samples
and the maximum for generated samples, which are supposed to
be close to each other. However, the curve for the real is always
above the curve for the generated. Our method can reduce the gap
toward the equilibrium as well as improve the synthesis quality.

14–16], despite their appealing synthesis quality. Taking
StyleGAN2 [16] as an example, D almost always assigns a
higher score to real images than to fake ones throughout the
entire training process, as the blue lines shown in Fig. 1.
It suggests that D can easily beat G in the competition.
Increasing the model capacity of G barely helps mitigate
this issue [3]. From this point of view, we can hold that
G fails to fool D even after the model converges, leaving a
gap between the real and synthesized distributions. Such a
disequilibrium remains much less explored in recent years,
in spite of the rapid development of new GAN models.
To investigate the source of the aforementioned disequilibrium, we analyze the behaviour of D to figure out
its advantage over G. With the help of GradCAM [23]
as a neural network interpretation tool, we visualize the
intermediate feature maps produced by D. As shown in
Fig. 2, given a target image, either real or generated, D
holds its own visual attention, even it is merely learned

11285

