PhysFormer: Facial Video-based Physiological Measurement with
Temporal Difference Transformer
Zitong Yu1 , Yuming Shen2 , Jingang Shi3 , Hengshuang Zhao4,2 , Philip Torr2 , Guoying Zhao1*
1
2
CMVS, University of Oulu
TVG, University of Oxford
3
4
Xi’an Jiaotong University
The University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Remote photoplethysmography (rPPG), which aims at
measuring heart activities and physiological signals from
facial video without any contact, has great potential in
many applications. Recent deep learning approaches focus on mining subtle rPPG clues using convolutional neural networks with limited spatio-temporal receptive fields,
which neglect the long-range spatio-temporal perception
and interaction for rPPG modeling. In this paper, we
propose the PhysFormer, an end-to-end video transformer
based architecture, to adaptively aggregate both local and
global spatio-temporal features for rPPG representation
enhancement. As key modules in PhysFormer, the temporal difference transformers first enhance the quasi-periodic
rPPG features with temporal difference guided global attention, and then refine the local spatio-temporal representation against interference. Furthermore, we also propose
the label distribution learning and a curriculum learning
inspired dynamic constraint in frequency domain, which
provide elaborate supervisions for PhysFormer and alleviate overfitting. Comprehensive experiments are performed on four benchmark datasets to show our superior performance on both intra- and cross-dataset testings.
One highlight is that, unlike most transformer networks
needed pretraining from large-scale datasets, the proposed
PhysFormer can be easily trained from scratch on rPPG
datasets, which makes it promising as a novel transformer
baseline for the rPPG community. The codes are available
at https://github.com/ZitongYu/PhysFormer.

1. Introduction
Physiological signals such as heart rate (HR), respiration
frequency (RF), and heart rate variability (HRV) are important vital signs to be measured in many circumstances, especially for healthcare or medical purposes. Traditionally,
the Electrocardiography (ECG) and Photoplethysmograph
(PPG) are the two most common ways for measuring heart
* Corresponding author

direction
rPPG signals

t1

t2

t3

Figure 1. The trajectories of rPPG signals around t1, t2, and t3
share similar properties (e.g., trends with rising edge first then
falling edge later, and relatively high magnitudes) induced by skin
color changes. It inspires the long-range spatio-temporal attention
(e.g., blue tube around t1 interacted with red tubes from intra- and
inter-frames) according to their local temporal difference features
for quasi-periodic rPPG enhancement. Here ‘tube’ indicates the
same regions across short-time consecutive frames.

activities and corresponding physiological signals. However, both ECG and PPG sensors need to be attached to
body parts, which may cause discomfort and are inconvenient for long-term monitoring. To counter for this issue,
remote photoplethysmography (rPPG) [12, 36, 66] methods
are developing fast in recent years, which aim to measure
heart activity remotely without any contact.
In earlier studies of facial rPPG measurement, most
methods analyze subtle color changes on facial regions
of interest (ROI) with classical signal processing approaches [30, 49, 50, 55, 57]. Besides, there are a few
color subspace transformation methods [13, 59] which utilize all skin pixels for rPPG measurement. Based on the
prior knowledge from traditional methods, a few learning
based approaches [25, 44, 45, 51] are designed as non-endto-end fashions. ROI based preprocessed signal representations (e.g., time-frequency map [25] and spatio-temporal
map [44, 45]) are generated first, and then learnable models could capture rPPG features from these maps. However,
these methods need the strict preprocessing procedure and
neglect the global contextual clues outside the pre-defined
ROIs. Meanwhile, more and more end-to-end deep learning based rPPG methods [11, 34, 53, 65, 67] are developed,

4186

