HairMapper: Removing Hair from Portraits Using GANs
Yiqian Wu1,2
Yong-Liang Yang3
Xiaogang Jin1,2 *
1
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
2
ZJU-Tencent Game and Intelligent Graphics Innovation Technology Joint Lab
3
University of Bath
onethousand@zju.edu.cn, y.yang@cs.bath.ac.uk, jin@cad.zju.edu.cn

(
a
)

(
b)

(
d)

(
c
)

(
e
)

(
f
)

Figure 1. Given portrait images with their faces partially occluded by hair (a), our method is able to generate portraits without hair while
preserving facial identity (b). After removing the effects of hair, the resulting portrait images can be well employed in hair design by
simply blending the clean face with some hairstyle templates (c and d) without the interference from existing hair. Our results can also
benefit 3D face reconstruction [12] by using the clean face textures (e, f) generated by our method (rows 2 and 4) in contrast to the results
of the original images (rows 1 and 3).

Abstract
Removing hair from portrait images is challenging due
to the complex occlusions between hair and face, as well
as the lack of paired portrait data with/without hair. To
this end, we present a dataset and a baseline method for
removing hair from portrait images using generative adversarial networks (GANs). Our core idea is to train a fully
connected network HairM apper to find the direction of
hair removal in the latent space of StyleGAN for the training stage. We develop a new separation boundary and diffuse method to generate paired training data for males, and
a novel “female-male-bald” pipeline for paired data of females. Experiments show that our method can naturally
deal with portrait images with variations on gender, age,
etc. We validate the superior performance of our method
* Corresponding author.

by comparing it to state-of-the-art methods through extensive experiments and user studies. We also demonstrate its
applications in hair design and 3D face reconstruction.

1. Introduction
Hair is not only an important component of the human
body, but also a key element of personality and fashion.
However, the presence of hair in a portrait image poses significant challenges for digital hair design and 3D face reconstruction. Regarding hair design, a direct overlay of the
new hair can easily cause problems due to mixing up with
the old hair, while replacing the old hair with the new hair
requires error-prone matting and inpainting techniques [38].
For 3D face reconstruction, most existing methods cannot
handle the hair in front of the face and it remains in the
texture [10, 23], resulting in noticeable artifacts of the re-

4227

