Multi-grained Spatio-Temporal Features Perceived Network
for Event-based Lip-Reading
Ganchao Tan1 *, Yang Wang1 *, Han Han1 , Yang Cao12 , Feng Wu1 , Zheng-Jun Zha1†
1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{tgc1997, hanh}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {ywang120, forrest, fengwu, zhazj}@ustc.edu.cn
Project page:

https://sites.google.com/view/event-based-lipreading

1. Introduction
Automatic lip-reading (ALR), also known as visual language recognition, aims to decode the text content through
the visual information of the speaker’s lip movements. ALR
has great applications in biometric identification [2], improved hearing aids [40], speech recognition in noisy environments [29], so that it has attracted much attention in
* Co-first author. † Corresponding author.

t-SNE

200 FPS

Automatic lip-reading (ALR) aims to recognize words using visual information from the speaker’s lip movements.
In this work, we introduce a novel type of sensing device, event cameras, for the task of ALR. Event cameras
have both technical and application advantages over conventional cameras for the ALR task because they have
higher temporal resolution, less redundant visual information, and lower power consumption. To recognize words
from the event data, we propose a novel Multi-grained
Spatio-Temporal Features Perceived Network (MSTP) to
perceive fine-grained spatio-temporal features from microsecond time-resolved event data. Specifically, a multibranch network architecture is designed, in which different grained spatio-temporal features are learned by operating at different frame rates. The branch operating on
the low frame rate can perceive spatial complete but temporal coarse features. While the branch operating on the
high frame rate can perceive spatial coarse but temporal
refinement features. And a message flow module is devised
to integrate the features from different branches, leading
to perceiving more discriminative spatio-temporal features.
In addition, we present the first event-based lip-reading
dataset (DVS-Lip) captured by the event camera. Experimental results demonstrated the superiority of the proposed
model compared to the state-of-the-art event-based action
recognition models and video-based lip-reading models.

25 FPS

Abstract

t

Figure 1. Visualization of event frames of different temporal resolutions (25FPS and 200FPS, respectively) and their corresponding
feature maps and feature points that have been dimensionally reduced by t-SNE [41]. The low-rate event frames contain complete
spatial features but coarse temporal features, while the high-rate
event frames contain fine temporal features but incomplete spatial
features.

the field of computer vision and pattern recognition over a
long period.
In this paper, we introduce a novel type of optical sensor, event cameras [18], to tackle automatic lip-reading
problem. Event cameras are biologically inspired optical
sensors. Unlike conventional cameras that capture images
at a fixed rate, event cameras capture per-pixel brightness
changes asynchronously in the microsecond level. For the
ALR task that requires the perception of fine-grained spatiotemporal features, event cameras have significant advantages over conventional cameras in terms of technology and
applications: 1) the high temporal resolution of event cameras allow them to record finer-grained movements; 2) their
output does not contain much redundant visual information
since only brightness changes of the scene are recorded; 3)
they are low-power and can work on challenging lighting
conditions which are essential in real-world applications.

20094

