SPAMs: Structured Implicit Parametric Models

1

Nikolaos Sarafianos2
2

Technical University of Munich

t0

Angela Dai1

Meta Reality Labs Research, Sausalito, USA

Part Prediction on Input

Input Depth Sequence

t0

Tony Tung2

t1

Reconstruction and Tracking

Frontal Views

Pablo Palafox1∗

t2

Lateral Views

Part Space

t1

t2

t0

t1

t2

Figure 1. We propose to represent deforming shapes with a structural decomposition into part-based disentangled spaces characterizing of
shape and pose, as Structured-implicit PArametric Models (SPAMs). SPAMs learn optimizable local shape and pose spaces, which we can
traverse at test time to fit to depth sequence observations of an unseen deforming object. Our structured part decompositions facilitate lowdimensional coarse motion correspondence through part-to-part correlation, which guides a robust joint optimization over the part-based
shape and pose spaces for globally consistent, accurate tracking under complex motion sequences.

Abstract
Parametric 3D models have formed a fundamental role
in modeling deformable objects, such as human bodies,
faces, and hands; however, the construction of such parametric models requires significant manual intervention and
domain expertise. Recently, neural implicit 3D representations have shown great expressibility in capturing 3D
shape geometry. We observe that deformable object motion is often semantically structured, and thus propose to
learn Structured-implicit PArametric Models (SPAMs) as a
deformable object representation that structurally decomposes non-rigid object motion into part-based disentangled
representations of shape and pose, with each being represented by deep implicit functions. This enables a structured
characterization of object movement, with part decomposition characterizing a lower-dimensional space in which we
can establish coarse motion correspondence. In particular, we can leverage the part decompositions at test time to

fit to new depth sequences of unobserved shapes, by establishing part correspondences between the input observation
and our learned part spaces; this guides a robust joint optimization between the shape and pose of all parts, even under dramatic motion sequences. Experiments demonstrate
that our part-aware shape and pose understanding lead to
state-of-the-art performance in reconstruction and tracking
of depth sequences of complex deforming object motion.

1. Introduction
Understanding non-rigidly deforming shapes is essential for perception, as we live in a 4D world where humans,
animals, and other 3D objects move in a non-rigid fashion. Dynamic tracking and reconstruction remains a notable
challenge, and while significant advances have been made
in 4D reconstruction and tracking, they often require complex multi-view setups [5] or build on a domain-specific,
*This work was conducted during an internship at Meta RL Research.

12851

