EMOCA: Emotion Driven Monocular Face Capture and Animation
Radek Daněček

Michael Black

Timo Bolkart

rdanecek@tue.mpg.de

black@tue.mpg.de

tbolkart@tue.mpg.de

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany

Figure 1. EMOCA regresses 3D faces from images with facial geometry that captures the original emotional content. Top row: images of
people with challenging expressions. Middle row: coarse shape reconstruction. Bottom row: reconstruction with detailed displacements.

Abstract
As 3D facial avatars become more widely used for communication, it is critical that they faithfully convey emotion. Unfortunately, the best recent methods that regress
parametric 3D face models from monocular images are
unable to capture the full spectrum of facial expression,
such as subtle or extreme emotions. We find the standard reconstruction metrics used for training (landmark reprojection error, photometric error, and face recognition
loss) are insufficient to capture high-fidelity expressions.
The result is facial geometries that do not match the emotional content of the input image. We address this with
EMOCA (EMOtion Capture and Animation), by introducing a novel deep perceptual emotion consistency loss during training, which helps ensure that the reconstructed 3D
expression matches the expression depicted in the input image. While EMOCA achieves 3D reconstruction errors that
are on par with the current best methods, it significantly outperforms them in terms of the quality of the reconstructed
expression and the perceived emotional content. We also directly regress levels of valence and arousal and classify basic expressions from the estimated 3D face parameters. On
the task of in-the-wild emotion recognition, our purely geometric approach is on par with the best image-based methods, highlighting the value of 3D geometry in analyzing human behavior. The model and code are publicly available
at https://emoca.is.tue.mpg.de.

1. Introduction
Teaching computers to see humans and understand their
behavior is a long-standing goal of computer vision. To accomplish this, computers need to understand how humans
look, how they move, and what they feel. Faces and their
emotional expressions provide an important source of information about a person’s internal emotional state. To support automated analysis of emotional state, we capture a
person’s face, including its 3D shape, pose, and facial expression, given a single RGB image. To do so, we go beyond prior work to extract 3D geometry that carries rich
emotional content. We focus on parametric methods (i.e.,
animatable and model-based) due to their wide applicability
for 3D avatar creation [36], image synthesis [32, 81], video
editing [41, 84] and face recognition [9, 68].
The field of 3D face reconstruction has rapidly advanced
over the last two decades; see Egger et al. [22] for a review.
Existing methods that estimate 3D face models struggle to
capture facial expressions in detail and often produce 3D
shapes that do not carry the emotional content of the input
image. This has several causes. First, some 3D face models
lack sufficient expressiveness to capture subtle or extreme
expressions. Second, reconstruction metrics like landmark
reprojection loss [8], photometric loss [10], face recognition loss [30], or multi-image consistency losses [73, 80],
are either not affected by facial expressions, or require perfect image alignment to capture subtle cues. Subtle changes

20311

