CREAM: Weakly Supervised Object Localization via
Class RE-Activation Mapping
Jilan Xu1 Junlin Hou1 Yuejie Zhang1 * Rui Feng1∗ Rui-Wei Zhao2
Tao Zhang3 Xuequan Lu4 Shang Gao4
1
School of Computer Science, Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing,
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing, Fudan University
2
Academy for Engineer and Technology, Fudan University
3
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics 4 Deakin University
{jilanxu18,jlhou18,yjzhang,fengrui,rwzhao}@fudan.edu.cn, taozhang@mail.shufe.edu.cn,
{xuequan.lu,shang}@deakin.edu.au

Abstract
IOU at different thresholds 𝜏
Foreground activations

1. Introduction
Weakly Supervised Object Localization (WSOL) aims to
localize objects only belonging to one class in each image
* Corresponding author

CAM

Background activations

mixup
activations

IOU at different thresholds 𝜏
Foreground activations
Background activations

Ours

Weakly Supervised Object Localization (WSOL) aims
to localize objects with image-level supervision. Existing
works mainly rely on Class Activation Mapping (CAM) derived from a classification model. However, CAM-based
methods usually focus on the most discriminative parts of an
object (i.e., incomplete localization problem). In this paper,
we empirically prove that this problem is associated with
the mixup of the activation values between less discriminative foreground regions and the background. To address
it, we propose Class RE-Activation Mapping (CREAM),
a novel clustering-based approach to boost the activation
values of the integral object regions. To this end, we introduce class-specific foreground and background context
embeddings as cluster centroids. A CAM-guided momentum preservation strategy is developed to learn the context embeddings during training. At the inference stage,
the re-activation mapping is formulated as a parameter estimation problem under Gaussian Mixture Model, which
can be solved by deriving an unsupervised ExpectationMaximization based soft-clustering algorithm. By simply
integrating CREAM into various WSOL approaches, our
method significantly improves their performance. CREAM
achieves the state-of-the-art performance on CUB, ILSVRC
and OpenImages benchmark datasets. Code will be available at https://github.com/Jazzcharles/CREAM.

after re -activation

Figure 1. Histograms of the activation values in CAM and our proposed CREAM. The red curves show the IOU between the groundtruth box and the predicted box when τ varies from 0.1 to 0.5.

using image-level supervision [6, 33, 34, 38]. WSOL alleviates massive efforts in obtaining fine annotations.
Prior works mainly follow the pipeline of training a classification network then deriving the Class Activation Mapping (CAM) [38] for WSOL. The foreground region is
determined by the CAM values larger than the threshold.
However, CAM only highlights the most discriminative regions (i.e., incomplete localization). Existing works seek to
discover the complete object via adversarial erasing [22,34],
spatial regularization [15, 19] or attention mechanism [6].
Most of them still acquire the activation maps via a classification pipeline like CAM to answer “which pixels contribute to the class prediction”.
In this paper, we argue that the incomplete localization

9437

