TubeFormer-DeepLab: Video Mask Transformer
Dahun Kim1,3∗ Jun Xie3 Huiyu Wang2 Siyuan Qiao3 Qihang Yu2
Hong-Seok Kim3
Hartwig Adam3
In So Kweon1
Liang-Chieh Chen3
1
2
KAIST
Johns Hopkins University 3 Google Research

Abstract
We present TubeFormer-DeepLab, the first attempt to
tackle multiple core video segmentation tasks in a unified
manner. Different video segmentation tasks (e.g., video semantic/instance/panoptic segmentation) are usually considered as distinct problems. State-of-the-art models adopted
in the separate communities have diverged, and radically
different approaches dominate in each task. By contrast, we
make a crucial observation that video segmentation tasks
could be generally formulated as the problem of assigning different predicted labels to video tubes (where a tube
is obtained by linking segmentation masks along the time
axis) and the labels may encode different values depending on the target task. The observation motivates us to develop TubeFormer-DeepLab, a simple and effective video
mask transformer model that is widely applicable to multiple video segmentation tasks. TubeFormer-DeepLab directly predicts video tubes with task-specific labels (either
pure semantic categories, or both semantic categories and
instance identities), which not only significantly simplifies
video segmentation models, but also advances state-of-theart results on multiple video segmentation benchmarks.

video

∗ Work done during an internship at Google.

segmentation

N tube
predictions

+
N class
predictions

TubeFormer-DeepLab
video input

Figure 1. Video segmentation tasks can be formulated as partitioning video frames (e.g., a clip) into tubes (i.e., segmentation masks
linked along time) with different labels. TubeFormer-DeepLab directly predicts class-labeled tubes, providing a simple and general
solution to Video Semantic Segmentation (VSS), Video Instance
Segmentation (VIS), and Video Panoptic Segmentation (VPS).

VSS

1. Introduction
We observe that video segmentation tasks could be formulated as partitioning video frames into tubes with different predicted labels, where a tube contains segmentation
masks linked along the time axis. Based on the target task,
the predicted labels may encode only semantic categories
(e.g., Video Semantic Segmentation (VSS) [7, 58]), or both
semantic categories and instance identities (e.g., Video Instance Segmentation (VIS) [68, 77] for only foreground
‘things’, or Video Panoptic Segmentation (VPS) [41,73] for
both foreground ‘things’ and background ‘stuff’) (Fig. 1).
However, the underlying similarity of several video segmentation tasks (i.e., assigning tubes with predicted labels)
has been long overlooked, and thus models developed for
video semantic, instance, and panoptic segmentation have

semantic
instance
panoptic

VIS

VPS

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 2. Our proposed hierarchical dual-path transformer performs attention on three consecutive input frames (a) for VSS,
VIS, and VPS tasks. While the global memory learns the spatiotemporally clustered attention for individual tube regions (b), our
latent memory learns task-specific attention (c).

13914

