A Large-scale Comprehensive Dataset and Copy-overlap Aware Evaluation
Protocol for Segment-level Video Copy Detection
Sifeng He∗, Xudong Yang∗ , Chen Jiang∗ , Gang Liang, Wei Zhang, Tan Pan, Qing Wang, Furong Xu,
Chunguang Li, Jingxiong Liu, Hui Xu, Kaiming Huang, Yuan Cheng, Feng Qian†, Xiaobo Zhang† , Lei Yang

Ant Group
{sifeng.hsf∗ , jiegang.yxd∗ , qichen.jc∗ , youzhi.qf† , ayou.zxb† }@antgroup.com

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce VCSL (Video Copy Segment
Localization), a new comprehensive segment-level annotated video copy dataset. Compared with existing copy detection datasets restricted by either video-level annotation
or small-scale, VCSL not only has two orders of magnitude
more segment-level labelled data, with 160k realistic video
copy pairs containing more than 280k localized copied segment pairs, but also covers a variety of video categories
and a wide range of video duration. All the copied segments inside each collected video pair are manually extracted and accompanied by precisely annotated starting
and ending timestamps. Alongside the dataset, we also
propose a novel evaluation protocol that better measures
the prediction accuracy of copy overlapping segments between a video pair and shows improved adaptability in different scenarios. By benchmarking several baseline and
state-of-the-art segment-level video copy detection methods
with the proposed dataset and evaluation metric, we provide a comprehensive analysis that uncovers the strengths
and weaknesses of current approaches, hoping to open up
promising directions for future works. The VCSL dataset,
metric and benchmark codes are all publicly available at
https://github.com/alipay/VCSL.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the wide spread of pirated multimedia
has attracted attention from both users and platforms all
over the world. The dramatic rise of pirated content has
been fueled by the large amounts of user-generated content (UGC) and professionally-generated content (PGC) uploaded to content sharing market, e.g., over 500 hours of
video are uploaded to YouTube every minute [1] , the average monthly paying users of Bilibili have increased by
∗ These authors contributed equally to this research.
† Corresponding author.

62% in one year alone [2]. These videos can generate significant advertising revenue, providing strong incentive for
unscrupulous individuals that wish to capitalize on this bonanza by skillful copyright infringement [3]. Some video
editing specialists even design methods to evade infringement detection algorithms by cropping, melting, and merging short clips from popular videos which make accurate
copy detection even more challenging. Given the escalating adversarial relation between the platform algorithm
and evolved piracy, comprehensive datasets with real partial video infringement become increasingly essential.
Besides copyright protection, a video copy detection
(VCD) system is important in applications like video classification, tracking, filtering and recommendation [4–6]. In
most cases, video-level copy detection results alone are not
sufficient as the detected videos are usually displayed and
interacted with system users for downstream tasks. Hence,
designing an approach that can locate the copied segments
is preferred and has already attracted lots of attentions in
recent works [7–11].
However, manually annotating copied segments between
videos is time-consuming and costly. Some datasets for
copy detection, e.g., CCWEB [12], FIVR [13] and SVD
[14] provide only video-level annotation indicating whether
two videos contain copied parts or not, which is coarsegrained and incapable of evaluating segment-level copy
detection methods. Other datasets, e.g., MUSCLE-VCD
[15] and TRECVID [16], produce automatically segmentlevel labels by generating simulated copied segments with
pre-defined transformations, which may not be representative for real-world data [11]. The only manually-labelled
segment-level dataset, VCDB [11] released in 2014, contains only 6k labelled videos pairs with 9k segment pairs,
and over 70% of copy durations are less than 1minute. The
annotation quantity and video diversity of existing datasets
are not sufficient to develop segment-level video copy detection algorithms that need training data and labels.
To address these issues, we present a comprehensive
dataset, VCSL, specifically designed for segment-level

21086

