Task-specific Inconsistency Alignment for Domain Adaptive Object Detection
Liang Zhao
Limin Wang
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
liangzhao@smail.nju.edu.cn, lmwang@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Detectors trained with massive labeled data often exhibit
dramatic performance degradation in some particular scenarios with data distribution gap. To alleviate this problem
of domain shift, conventional wisdom typically concentrates
solely on reducing the discrepancy between the source and
target domains via attached domain classifiers, yet ignoring
the difficulty of such transferable features in coping with
both classification and localization subtasks in object detection. To address this issue, in this paper, we propose
Task-specific Inconsistency Alignment (TIA), by developing a new alignment mechanism in separate task spaces,
improving the performance of the detector on both subtasks. Specifically, we add a set of auxiliary predictors for
both classification and localization branches, and exploit
their behavioral inconsistencies as finer-grained domainspecific measures. Then, we devise task-specific losses to
align such cross-domain disagreement of both subtasks. By
optimizing them individually, we are able to well approximate the category- and boundary-wise discrepancies in
each task space, and therefore narrow them in a decoupled manner. TIA demonstrates superior results on various scenarios to the previous state-of-the-art methods. It
is also observed that both the classification and localization capabilities of the detector are sufficiently strengthened, further demonstrating the effectiveness of our TIA
method. Code and trained models are publicly available
at https://github.com/MCG-NJU/TIA.

1. Introduction
Object detection [13,14,25,28] is manifesting a high demand for massive annotated data, which however, due to
either economic or technical reasons, is struggling to be fulfilled in some scenarios. An alternative is to transfer knowledge from a source domain depicting general or synthetic
scenes to the target domain describing particular scenes of
interest. Yet, as a consequence of the domain shift [33], the
: Corresponding author.

(a) Vanilla [28]

(b) UMT [8]

(c) Our TIA

Figure 1. Exampled images from PASCAL VOC [10] → Clipart [18]. Compared with vanilla detector [28], both UMT [8] and
TIA identify more foreground objects (Row 1), yet deliver lower
as well as higher quality bounding boxes (Row 2), respectively.

performance of the detector would typically suffer dramatic
degradation. A practical strategy to cope with this dilemma
is to adopt Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA). Generally, by narrowing the divergence in pixel or feature-level
between the source and target domains, a detector trained
on source labeled domain can be then well-generalized to
unlabeled target domain. This classic strategy of domain
alignment, which originated from cross-domain classification [11,20,21,30,37,39], establishes a solid foundation for
downstream domain adaptive detection [3, 4, 8, 16, 29, 32].
Often, as an extension of domain adaptive classifiers, existing domain adaptive detectors focus solely on decreasing
the generalization error of their classifiers. Yet, they tend
to ignore the potential improvement of their localization
errors [4, 19]. As shown in Fig. 1, compared to vanilla detector, it is observed that the state-of-the-art domain adaptive detector (i.e. UMT [8]) is capable of correctly identifying and classifying more foreground objects, but delivering relatively lower quality bounding boxes for them. One
possible reason is that, by applying domain alignment via
an external binary classifier, the resulted transferable (i.e.
cross-domain invariant) features grown in the classification
space might be harmful for the localization in regression
space. Intuitively, the regression space is usually continuous and sparse and has no obvious decision boundaries,
hence significantly differs from the classification space.

14217

