Towards Discovering the Effectiveness of Moderately Confident Samples for
Semi-Supervised Learning
Hui Tang and Kui Jia*
South China University of Technology
eehuitang@mail.scut.edu.cn, kuijia@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) has been studied for a
long time to solve vision tasks in data-efficient application
scenarios. SSL aims to learn a good classification model using a few labeled data together with large-scale unlabeled
data. Recent advances achieve the goal by combining multiple SSL techniques, e.g., self-training and consistency regularization. From unlabeled samples, they usually adopt a
confidence filter (CF) to select reliable ones with high prediction confidence. In this work, we study whether the moderately confident samples are useless and how to select the
useful ones to improve model optimization. To answer these
problems, we propose a novel Taylor expansion inspired
filtration (TEIF) framework, which admits the samples of
moderate confidence with similar feature or gradient to the
respective one averaged over the labeled and highly confident unlabeled data. It can produce a stable and new information induced network update, leading to better generalization. Two novel filters are derived from this framework
and can be naturally explained in two perspectives. One
is gradient synchronization filter (GSF), which strengthens
the optimization dynamic of fully-supervised learning; it selects the samples whose gradients are similar to class-wise
majority gradients. The other is prototype proximity filter
(PPF), which involves more prototypical samples in training to learn better semantic representations; it selects the
samples near class-wise prototypes. They can be integrated
into SSL methods with CF. We use the state-of-the-art FixMatch as the baseline. Experiments on popular SSL benchmarks show that we achieve the new state of the art.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved great success in computer
vision tasks, with image classification [9] as one of the
prominent examples. The success can be mainly attributed
to large-scale labeled data. However, annotating enormous
* Corresponding author.

training data for all tasks of interest is practically infeasible.
To reduce the labeling cost, the topic of semi-supervised
learning (SSL) has been proposed and there are already a
large number of research works in SSL [40]. The goal of
SSL is to achieve good model generalization using limited
labeled data and many unlabeled data that are assumed to
follow the same distribution. In this work, we investigate
the classical topic, aiming to push the limit of SSL.
Recent SSL methods rely on deep models [47] to learn
feature representations that can facilitate the subsequent
classification. A common strategy is self-training [12, 17,
31], where the pseudo labels are iteratively generated and
then used as supervision to guide the model training on unlabeled samples. Another popular paradigm is consistency
regularization [29, 33], which constrains the model to produce consistent predictions for two different duplicates of
the same unlabeled sample. The difference between the two
duplicates can be made by random data augmentation [33]
or perturbation of network parameters [29]. After, a lot of
extensions have been proposed [2, 16, 21, 24, 38, 49]. The
two techniques are effective but not optimal on their own, as
suggested in [26]. The current best practice in SSL is technique combination, e.g., combining self-training and consistency regularization [4, 5, 18, 37, 44, 48, 48]. The cluster
and smoothness assumptions are enforced simultaneously.
The former [7] assumes that the decision boundaries are located in low-density regions and the latter [40] assumes that
the adjacent samples have similar labels. Such a combination can progressively improve the model performance,
as verified in the theoretical work [42]. Note that the two
techniques would be uninformative if the model predicts
a uniform distribution over classes for unlabeled samples.
To address it, existing methods adopt confidence filtering
[10, 18, 37], which abandons the samples whose prediction
confidences (ranged in [0, 1]) are lower than a predefined
high threshold (e.g., 0.95 [37]). It is reasonable that the
least confident samples are extremely unreliable. But are
all the moderately confident samples useless, e.g., ranged in
(0, 75, 0.95)? Is there any way to pick out the useful ones
to enhance the optimization power applied to the model?

14658

