Smooth Maximum Unit: Smooth Activation Function for Deep Networks using
Smoothing Maximum Technique

1

Koushik Biswas1 , Sandeep Kumar1, 2 , Shilpak Banerjee3 , Ashish Kumar Pandey1
IIIT Delhi 2 Shaheed Bhagat Singh College, University of Delhi 3 IIT Tirupati

{koushikb,ashish.pandey}@iiitd.ac.in, sandeep kumar@sbs.du.ac.in, shilpak@iittp.ac.in

Abstract
Deep learning researchers have a keen interest in
proposing new novel activation functions that can boost
neural network performance. A good choice of activation
function can have a significant effect on improving network
performance and training dynamics. Rectified Linear Unit
(ReLU) is a popular hand-designed activation function and
is the most common choice in the deep learning community due to its simplicity though ReLU has some drawbacks.
In this paper, we have proposed two new novel activation
functions based on approximation of the maximum function,
and we call these functions Smooth Maximum Unit (SMU
and SMU-1). We show that SMU and SMU-1 can smoothly
approximate ReLU, Leaky ReLU, or more general Maxout
family, and GELU is a particular case of SMU. Replacing ReLU by SMU, Top-1 classification accuracy improves
by 6.22%, 3.39%, 3.51%, and 3.08% on the CIFAR100
dataset with ShuffleNet V2, PreActResNet-50, ResNet-50,
and SeNet-50 models respectively. Also, our experimental
evaluation shows that SMU and SMU-1 improve network
performance in a variety of deep learning tasks like image classification, object detection, semantic segmentation,
and machine translation compared to widely used activation functions.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural network has emerged a lot in recent years
and has significantly impacted our real-life applications.
Neural networks are the backbone of deep learning. An activation function is the brain of the neural network, which
plays a central role in the effectiveness & training dynamics
of deep neural networks. Hand-designed activation functions are quite a common choice in neural network models.
ReLU [36] is a widely used hand-designed activation function. Despite its simplicity, ReLU has a major drawback,
known as the dying ReLU problem in which up to 50% neurons can be dead during network training. To overcome the

shortcomings of ReLU, a significant number of activations
have been proposed in recent years, and Leaky ReLU [33],
Parametric ReLU [12], ELU [6], Softplus [56], Randomized
Leaky ReLU [53] are a few of them though they marginally
improve performance of ReLU. Swish [41] is a non-linear
activation function proposed by the Google brain team, and
it shows some good improvement of ReLU. GELU [14] is
an another popular smooth activation function. It can be
shown that Swish and GELU both are a smooth approximation of ReLU. Recently, a few non-linear activations have
been proposed which improves the performance of ReLU,
Swish or GELU. Some of them are either hand-designed or
smooth approximation of Leaky ReLU function, and Mish
[34], ErfAct [2], Padé activation unit [35], Orthogonal Padé
activation unit [1] are a few of them.

2. Related Work and Motivation
In a deep neural network, activations are either fixed before training or trainable. Researchers have proposed several activations in recent years by combining known functions. Some of these functions have hyperparameters or
trainable parameters. In the case of trainable activation
functions, parameters are optimized during training. Swish
is a popular activation function that can be used as either a
constant or trainable activation function, and it shows some
good performance in a variety of deep learning tasks like
image classification, object detection, machine translation
etc. GELU shares similar properties like the Swish activation function, and it gains popularity in the deep learning community due to its efficacy in natural language processing tasks. GELU has been used in BERT [8], GPT2 [40], and GPT-3 [3] architectures. Padé activation unit
(PAU) has been proposed recently, and it is constructed
from the approximation of the Leaky ReLU function by rational polynomials of a given order. Though PAU improves
network performance in the image classification problem
over ReLU, its variants, and Swish, it has a major drawback. PAU contains many trainable parameters, which significantly increases the network complexity and computa-

794

