Joint Forecasting of Panoptic Segmentations with Difference Attention
Colin Graber1 Cyril Jazra1 Wenjie Luo2 Liangyan Gui1 Alexander Schwing1
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 2 Waymo

1. Introduction
Forecasting is needed for safe and effective autonomous
systems [9, 26]. For this reason, forecasting has been studied in many different domains from computer vision and
robotics to machine learning. In common across domains
is the discussion about what representations are useful for
forecasting. Representations which have been studied range
from trajectories [10,11,13,32,53] and bounding boxes [29,
30, 39, 50, 51] to semantic segmentation [6, 25, 28, 34, 36],
instance segmentation [8, 19, 27], images [12, 24, 52] and
recently also panoptic segmentations [14, 38].
Each representation has applications which benefit from
their use. We focus on panoptic segmentations as they naturally disentangle 1) objects which change position in an image due to observer motion; from 2) object instances which
change position due to both observer and instance motion.
However, the state-of-the-art on panoptic segmentation
forecasting [14] is challenged by two key issues. First, foreground predictions of individual instances are made independently of each other. This is suboptimal because the

Sec. 3.3: Prediction
Refinement

Attention Weights

Instance Depths

Background Depth

Instance Masks

Background Mask

Depth-based Mask Refinement

Panoptic Segmentation
Forecast

Forecasting of a representation is important for safe and
effective autonomy. For this, panoptic segmentations have
been studied as a compelling representation in recent work.
However, recent state-of-the-art on panoptic segmentation
forecasting suffers from two issues: first, individual object
instances are treated independently of each other; second,
individual object instance forecasts are merged in a heuristic manner. To address both issues, we study a new panoptic
segmentation forecasting model that jointly forecasts all object instances in a scene using a transformer model based
on ‘difference attention.’ It further refines the predictions by
taking depth estimates into account. We evaluate the proposed model on the Cityscapes and AIODrive datasets. We
find difference attention to be particularly suitable for forecasting because the difference of quantities like locations
enables a model to explicitly reason about velocities and
acceleration. Because of this, we attain state-of-the-art on
panoptic segmentation forecasting metrics.

Sec. 3.2: Foreground
Forecasting

Abstract

Figure 1. Our panoptic segmentation forecasting. We jointly reason about every instance in a scene to predict instance masks (top),
and then reason about the relative depth of foreground and background components (middle) to produce an output (bottom).

movements of instances are clearly correlated, e.g., when
considering traffic patterns like the ones in the Cityscapes
dataset [7]. Second, the method opted for a simple strategy
to merge individual object instance segmentation forecasts
with the background forecast. Specifically, in [14], object
instance segmentation forecasts are always placed in front
of the background segmentation forecast. This assumes that
no background objects are located closer to the camera than
any foreground entity, which is not true in practice.
In this work, we study a new method to address these two
issues: 1) To jointly forecast object instance segmentations,
we develop a modified attention module for transformer
models. Specifically, instead of the inner-product attention
in classical transformers, we propose “difference attention.”
This developed difference attention fits tasks like forecasting because it enables reasoning about velocities and acceleration, which is non-trivial with classical inner-product
attention (see Fig. 1 top). 2) To properly reason about object
and background placement, we develop a refinement head

2627

