Masking Adversarial Damage: Finding Adversarial Saliency
for Robust and Sparse Network
Byung-Kwan Lee*, Junho Kim*, Yong Man Ro†
Image and Video Systems Lab, School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, South Korea
{leebk, arkimjh, ymro}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Adversarial examples provoke weak reliability and potential security issues in deep neural networks. Although
adversarial training has been widely studied to improve
adversarial robustness, it works in an over-parameterized
regime and requires high computations and large memory
budgets. To bridge adversarial robustness and model compression, we propose a novel adversarial pruning method,
Masking Adversarial Damage (MAD) that employs secondorder information of adversarial loss. By using it, we can
accurately estimate adversarial saliency for model parameters and determine which parameters can be pruned without
weakening adversarial robustness. Furthermore, we reveal
that model parameters of initial layer are highly sensitive
to the adversarial examples and show that compressed feature representation retains semantic information for the target objects. Through extensive experiments on three public datasets, we demonstrate that MAD effectively prunes
adversarially trained networks without loosing adversarial
robustness and shows better performance than previous adversarial pruning methods.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved impressive
performances in a wide variety of computer vision tasks
(e.g., image classification [19,26], object detection [30,40],
and semantic segmentation [5, 18]). Despite the breakthrough outcomes, DNNs are easily deceived from adversarial attacks with carefully crafted perturbations [4, 9,
32, 50]. Injecting these perturbations into benign images
generates adversarial examples which hinder the decisionmaking process of DNNs. Although the perturbations are
imperceptible to humans, they easily induce vulnerable features in DNNs [22, 23]. Due to such fragility, various deep
learning applications have suffered from potential security
issues that induce weak reliability of DNNs [2, 44, 55].
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

Accordingly, to achieve robust and reliable DNNs, a lot
of adversarial research have been dedicated to presenting
powerful adversarial attack and defense algorithms in the
sense of cat-and-mouse games. Among various methods,
adversarial training (AT) [3, 9, 27, 32] has been widely studied to improve adversarial robustness so far, where DNNs
are trained with adversarial examples. Madry et al. [32]
have shown that adversarially trained models are robust
against several white-box attacks with the knowledge of
model parameters. Besides, recent studies [56,62] have further enhanced the robustness by adding various regularizations to fully utilize not only the adversarial examples but
also benign examples for model generalization.
Orthogonal to the adversarial issue, most of the ATbased methods work in an over-parameterized regime to
achieve the robustness, thus they induce higher computations and require larger memory budgets than benign
classifiers [32]. Thereby, applying AT-based methods to
resource-constrained devices is burdensome and known as
a critical limitation. To bridge adversarial robustness and
model compression, several studies [37, 45, 47, 52] have
introduced adversarial pruning mechanisms to reduce its
model capacity while preserving the adversarial robustness.
In standard training procedure, a promising pruning method is to remove the lowest weight magnitudes
(LWM) [14, 15], assuming that small magnitudes affect the
least changes of the model prediction. Under its assumption, Sehwang et al. [45] have proposed a 3-step pruning
method (pre-training, pruning, and fine-tuning) for the adversarial examples. Several works [12, 59] further have
enhanced LWM pruning methods by employing alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM) [63] or BetaBernoulli dropout [31] to eliminate unuseful model parameters. Recently, Sehwag et al. [46] have argued that despite
successful results of LWM pruning, such heuristic pruning
methods cause performance degradation when integrated
with adversarial training. Accordingly, they have formulated a way of finding importance scores [39] and removed
model parameters with low importance scores for adversarial training loss. We further focus on how to reflect corre-

15126

