CMT-DeepLab: Clustering Mask Transformers for Panoptic Segmentation
Qihang Yu1∗

Huiyu Wang1 Dahun Kim2 Siyuan Qiao3 Maxwell Collins3
Hartwig Adam3
Alan Yuille1
Liang-Chieh Chen3
1
2
Johns Hopkins University KAIST 3 Google Research

Abstract
We propose Clustering Mask Transformer (CMTDeepLab), a transformer-based framework for panoptic
segmentation designed around clustering. It rethinks the existing transformer architectures used in segmentation and
detection; CMT-DeepLab considers the object queries as
cluster centers, which fill the role of grouping the pixels
when applied to segmentation. The clustering is computed
with an alternating procedure, by first assigning pixels to
the clusters by their feature affinity, and then updating the
cluster centers and pixel features. Together, these operations comprise the Clustering Mask Transformer (CMT)
layer, which produces cross-attention that is denser and
more consistent with the final segmentation task. CMTDeepLab improves the performance over prior art significantly by 4.4% PQ, achieving a new state-of-the-art of
55.7% PQ on the COCO test-dev set.

person

Yukun Zhu3

tree

MaX-DeepLab

CMT-DeepLab
Figure 1. Our CMT-DeepLab generates denser cross-attention
maps than MaX-DeepLab [82]. The visualization is based on the
last transformer layer with averaged multi-head attentions.

1. Introduction
Panoptic segmentation [47], a recently proposed challenging segmentation task, aims to unify semantic segmentation [34] and instance segmentation [31]. Due to
its complicated nature, most panoptic segmentation frameworks [18,47,89] decompose the problem into several manageable proxy tasks, such as box detection [73], box-based
segmentation [32], and semantic segmentation [65].
Recently, the paradigm has shifted from the proxy-based
approaches to end-to-end systems, since the pioneering
work DETR [10], which introduces the first end-to-end
object detection method with transformers [80]. In their
framework, the image features, extracted by a convolutional
network [50], are enhanced by transformer encoders. Afterwards, a set of fixed size of positional embeddings, named
object queries, interact with the extracted image features
through several transformer decoders, consisting of crossattention and self-attention modules [3]. The object queries,
transformed into output embeddings by the decoders, are
∗ Work done during an internship at Google.

then directly used for bounding box predictions.
Along the same direction, end-to-end panoptic segmentation framework [82] has been proposed to simplify the
panoptic segmentation procedure, avoiding manually designed modules. The core idea is to exploit a set of object queries conditioned on the inputs to predict a set of
pairs, each containing a class prediction and a mask embedding vector. The mask embedding vector, multiplied by
the image features, yields a binary mask prediction. Notably, unlike the box detection task, where the prediction
is based on object queries themselves, segmentation mask
prediction requires both object queries and pixel features to
interact with each other to obtain the results, which consequently incurs different needs when updating the object
queries. To have a deeper understanding towards the role
that object queries play, we particularly look into the crossattention module in the mask transformer decoder, where
object queries interact with image features.
Our investigation finds that the update and usage of object queries are performed differently in the transformer-

2560

