Towards Fewer Annotations: Active Learning via Region Impurity and
Prediction Uncertainty for Domain Adaptive Semantic Segmentation
Binhui Xie1 Longhui Yuan1 Shuang Li1 Chi Harold Liu1 Xinjing Cheng2,3
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
2
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University 3 Inceptio Technology
{binhuixie,longhuiyuan,shuangli,chiliu}@bit.edu.cn

cnorbot@gmail.com

Abstract
Self-training has greatly facilitated domain adaptive semantic segmentation, which iteratively generates pseudo
labels on unlabeled target data and retrains the network.
However, realistic segmentation datasets are highly imbalanced, pseudo labels are typically biased to the majority classes and basically noisy, leading to an error-prone
and suboptimal model. In this paper, we propose a simple region-based active learning approach for semantic segmentation under a domain shift, aiming to automatically
query a small partition of image regions to be labeled while
maximizing segmentation performance. Our algorithm, Region Impurity and Prediction Uncertainty (RIPU), introduces a new acquisition strategy characterizing the spatial adjacency of image regions along with the prediction
confidence. We show that the proposed region-based selection strategy makes more efficient use of a limited budget than image-based or point-based counterparts. Further,
we enforce local prediction consistency between a pixel
and its nearest neighbors on a source image. Alongside,
we develop a negative learning loss to make the features
more discriminative. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our method only requires very few annotations to almost reach the supervised performance and substantially
outperforms state-of-the-art methods. The code is available
at https://github.com/BIT-DA/RIPU .

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, the task of comprehending an
image at the pixel level, is the foundation for numerous applications such as autonomous driving [63, 80], robot manipulation [51, 67], and medical analysis [48, 62]. Learning of segmentation models, however, relies heavily on
vast quantities of data with pixel-wise annotations, which
Corresponding author

(a) Target image

(b) Image-based selection (100%)

(c) Point-based selection (2.2%)

(d) Region-based selection (2.2%)

Figure 1. Illustration of different selection strategies. Imagebased selection (e.g., MADA [41]) picks a few target samples and
label the entire image, which is probably inefficient. Point-based
selection (e.g., LabOR [54]) chooses scarce points about which
the model is uncertain, while uncertainty estimation at point level
is prone to lump pixels that come from particular categories. Our
region-based selection asks for more annotations of regions with
more categories as well as object boundaries in an effective way.

is onerous and prohibitively expensive [9, 35]. Further, it
remains a major challenge to guarantee a good generalization to diverse testing situations. Various research efforts
have been directed to address the above issues, with domain
adaptation being promising methods [14, 29, 37, 64, 65, 72].
Recently, self-training has boosted domain adaptation,
which retrains the network with the pseudo labels generated
from confident predictions on the target domain [8, 40, 75,
83, 85–87]. Nevertheless, this competitive approach faces
an inherent challenge: class unbalance is usually extreme.
For instance, some classes e.g., “road” and “building”, appear more frequently than others such as “rider” and “light”.
Thereby, pseudo labels are noisy and self-training would put
heavy emphasis on classes with high frequency and sacrifice
the performance on rare classes or small objects, resulting
in undesired biases. Consequently, the performance lags far
behind the supervised learning counterparts.
To overcome this obstacle and encourage maximizing

8068

