Slot-VPS: Object-centric Representation Learning for Video Panoptic
Segmentation
Yi Zhou1 , Hui Zhang1 , Hana Lee2 , Shuyang Sun3 , Pingjun Li1 , Yangguang Zhu1 ,
ByungIn Yoo2 , Xiaojuan Qi4* , Jae-Joon Han2*
1
Samsung Research China - Beijing (SRC-B)
2
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT), South Korea
3
University of Oxford 4 The University of Hong Kong
{yi0813.zhou, hui123.zhang, hana.hn.lee, byungin.yoo, jae-joon.han}@samsung.com
kevinsun@robots.ox.ac.uk, xjqi@eee.hku.hk

Abstract

1. Introduction
Video panoptic segmentation (VPS) [17, 35, 47] aims at
classifying all foreground instances (things), e.g. cars, people, etc., and countless background semantics (stuff ), e.g.
* Corresponding author.

Semantic head

ROI-Aligned feats

Bbox head

ROI-Aligned feats

Mask head

Re-embedded
ROI-Aligned feats

Track head

Post-processing

Video Panoptic Segmentation (VPS) aims at assigning a
class label to each pixel, uniquely segmenting and identifying all object instances consistently across all frames. Classic solutions usually decompose the VPS task into several
sub-tasks and utilize multiple surrogates (e.g. boxes and
masks, centers and offsets) to represent objects. However,
this divide-and-conquer strategy requires complex postprocessing in both spatial and temporal domains and is vulnerable to failures from surrogate tasks. In this paper, inspired by object-centric learning which learns compact and
robust object representations, we present Slot-VPS, the first
end-to-end framework for this task. We encode all panoptic
entities in a video, including both foreground instances and
background semantics, with a unified representation called
panoptic slots. The coherent spatio-temporal object’s information is retrieved and encoded into the panoptic slots
by the proposed Video Panoptic Retriever, enabling to localize, segment, differentiate, and associate objects in a unified
manner. Finally, the output panoptic slots can be directly
converted into the class, mask, and object ID of panoptic
objects in the video. We conduct extensive ablation studies and demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on
two benchmark datasets, Cityscapes-VPS (val and test sets)
and VIPER (val set), achieving new state-of-the-art performance of 63.7, 63.3 and 56.2 VPQ, respectively.

Semantic feats

Panoptic Slots

Video panoptic
retriever

Position
Embedding

Figure 1. Comparison between previous works [17, 42] and the
proposed Slot-VPS. VPSNet represents objects with multiple representations, relies on several sub-networks, and requires complex
post-processing (e.g. NMS, things-stuff fusion, similarity score fusion for tracking), while we introduce panoptic slots to uniformly
represent panoptic objects (i.e. things and stuff) in a video, enabling a unified end-to-end framework. Code will be made publicly available at https://github.com/SAITPublic/SlotVPS.

sky, road, etc., segmenting and tracking all object instances
consistently across all frames. It is beneficial to many highlevel video understanding tasks, such as Video Question
Answering [33] and Video Captioning [50], and various
real-world applications, such as autonomous driving and
video editing.
Existing methods [17, 35, 47] model things and stuff in
a video separately with several sub-networks (as shown in
Figure 1) tailored to different sub-tasks including semantic
segmentation [6, 30], instance segmentation [2, 14, 21], and
tracking [38, 46]. Complicated post-processing in both spatial (e.g. things-stuff fusion) and temporal (e.g. similarity
scores fusion for instance association) domains is needed to

3093

