Revisiting Learnable Affines for Batch Norm in Few-Shot Transfer Learning
Moslem Yazdanpanah* 1,5 Aamer Abdul Rahman* 2,5 Muawiz Chaudhary 4,5 Christian Desrosiers 2
Mohammad Havaei 3 Eugene Belilovsky †4,5 Samira Ebrahimi Kahou †,2,5
1

University of Kurdistan; 2 École de technologie supérieure; 3 Imagia; 4 Concordia University, 5 Mila
Abstract

Batch normalization is a staple of computer vision models,
including those employed in few-shot learning. Batch normalization layers in convolutional neural networks are composed of a normalization step, followed by a shift and scale
of these normalized features applied via the per-channel
trainable affine parameters γ and β. These affine parameters were introduced to maintain the expressive powers
of the model following normalization. While this hypothesis holds true for classification within the same domain,
this work illustrates that these parameters are detrimental to downstream performance on common few-shot transfer tasks. This effect is studied with multiple methods on
well-known benchmarks such as few-shot classification on
miniImageNet, cross-domain few-shot learning (CD-FSL)
and META-DATASET. Experiments reveal consistent performance improvements on CNNs with affine unaccompanied
batch normalization layers; particularly in large domainshift few-shot transfer settings. As opposed to common
practices in few-shot transfer learning where the affine parameters are fixed during the adaptation phase, we show
fine-tuning them can lead to improved performance.

1. Introduction
Over the last decade, the growing availability of data has
allowed deep neural networks to achieve remarkable performance on various visual recognition tasks [10, 12, 13].
However, the size and variability of the dataset can have a
huge impact on the effectiveness of these models. Deep neural networks trained on datasets from a specific distribution
often fail to generalise their performance to new domains,
creating a compelling need for large-scale datasets [33]. De∗ Equal
*
contributions. † Equal senior author contribution.

This research
was partially funded by NSERC Discovery Grants [E.B., S.E.K.]; and
CIFAR AI Chair [S.E.K]. [M.C.] is funded by IVADO PRF Grant. We
thank Compute Canada and Calcul Quebéc for computational resources.
Correspondence to:
Moslem.Yazdanpanah@gmail.com,

aamer.abdul-rahman.1@ens.etsmtl.net

Figure 1. Aggregated distributions of normalization layers from
a ResNet10 model, pre-trained on miniImageNet, and fed with
samples from EuroSat. Although the input distributions differ,
the model with FN appears to accomodate the role of the affine
parameters, resulting in a more centered input to the normalization
layer (left) with relatively similar output distributions (right).

velopments in few-shot learning (FSL) have enabled deep
neural networks to draw data representations from target
classes with just a few labelled samples [7, 29, 35].
Throughout the literature, batch normalization (BN) [14]
layers are ubiquitous in FSL techniques. They speed up
model convergence and are believed to add regularization
[22]. Adding BN layers to deep learning models stabilizes
the distribution of layer input features by modulating their
mean and variance [14]. This results in a smoother optimization landscape and improved performance across a variety of
computer vision problems [28]. Despite these achievements,
there persists a poor understanding of the source of effectiveness from BN layers. Moreover, recent work has revealed
that these gains may not be the result of alleviating internal
covariate shift, as initially believed [28].
BN layers typically consist of two steps. First, the input
features are normalized by the mean and standard deviation

9109

