Commonality in Natural Images Rescues GANs:
Pretraining GANs with Generic and Privacy-free Synthetic Data
Kyungjune Baek, Hyunjung Shim†
Yonsei University
{bkjbkj12, kateshim}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Transfer learning for GANs successfully improves generation performance under low-shot regimes. However, existing studies show that the pretrained model using a single benchmark dataset is not generalized to various target
datasets. More importantly, the pretrained model can be
vulnerable to copyright or privacy risks as membership inference attack advances. To resolve both issues, we propose an effective and unbiased data synthesizer, namely
Primitives-PS, inspired by the generic characteristics
of natural images. Specifically, we utilize 1) the generic
statistics on the frequency magnitude spectrum, 2) the elementary shape (i.e., image composition via elementary
shapes) for representing the structure information, and 3)
the existence of saliency as prior. Since our synthesizer
only considers the generic properties of natural images, the
single model pretrained on our dataset can be consistently
transferred to various target datasets, and even outperforms
the previous methods pretrained with the natural images in
terms of Fréchet inception distance. Extensive analysis, ablation study, and evaluations demonstrate that each component of our data synthesizer is effective, and provide insights on the desirable nature of the pretrained model for
the transferability of GANs.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [13] are a powerful generative model that can synthesize complex data
by learning the implicit density distribution with adversarial training. Thanks to the impressive generation quality,
particularly in image generation tasks [4, 23, 30], GANs
have been widely used in various downstream tasks in
computer vision, such as data augmentation [9], superresolution [25,54], image translation [1,10], and image synthesis with primitive representation [27, 37]. Despite the remarkable quality, GANs require at least several thousand,
† Hyunjung Shim is a corresponding author.

(a) PinkNoise

(b) Primitives

(c) Primitives-S

(d) Primitives-PS

Figure 1. Visualization of our synthetic datasets. We visualize four
variants of our synthetic datasets and Primitives-PS is finally
chosen for the best performance. Example images are resized in
three different scales.

mostly several hundred thousand images for training. This
requirement for data collection is often infeasible in practical applications (e.g., many pictures of a treasure, endangered species, or the medical images of rare disease).
The idea of transfer learning has been recently introduced to GAN training [31, 49] for resolving the real-world
generation problem. Following the common practice, the
general framework of GAN transfer learning 1) pretrains
GANs on a publicly available large-scale source dataset
(e.g., FFHQ and ImageNet) and then 2) finetunes GANs
with a relatively small target dataset. As a result, developing GANs with transfer learning clearly improves the generation quality and diversity over the models trained from
scratch only with the target dataset.
Unfortunately, the effectiveness of transfer learning for
GANs highly depends on how similar the source dataset
is to the target dataset. According to TransferGAN [49],
transfer learning can achieve the best performance when the
source shares common characteristics with the target. For
example, when LFW [21] is the target dataset, the best performance is achieved with the source dataset of CelebA [28]
as both are face datasets. For Flower [33] or Kitchens [53],
utilizing CelebA as the source dataset does not significantly
improve the performance. Thus, it is required to search the
best source dataset for a given target dataset by measuring
the similarity between two datasets (e.g., FID score). Be-

7854

