HDR-NeRF: High Dynamic Range Neural Radiance Fields
Xin Huang1 ,* Qi Zhang2 , Ying Feng2 , Hongdong Li3 , Xuan Wang2 , Qing Wang1
1

School of Computer Science, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, China
2
3
Tencent AI Lab
Australian National University
xinhuang@mail.nwpu.edu.cn

{nwpuqzhang, yfeng.von, xwang.cv}@gmail.com

HONGDONG.LI@anu.edu.au

(a) Input views

qwang@nwpu.edu.cn

(b) Novel LDR views

(c) One of the novel HDR views

Figure 1. We recover a high dynamic range neural radiance field from (a) multiple LDR views with different exposures. Our system is able
to render (b) novel LDR views with arbitrary exposures and (c) novel HDR views.

Abstract
We present High Dynamic Range Neural Radiance
Fields (HDR-NeRF) to recover an HDR radiance field from
a set of low dynamic range (LDR) views with different exposures. Using the HDR-NeRF, we are able to generate both
novel HDR views and novel LDR views under different exposures. The key to our method is to model the simplified
physical imaging process, which dictates that the radiance
of a scene point transforms to a pixel value in the LDR image with two implicit functions: a radiance field and a tone
mapper. The radiance field encodes the scene radiance (values vary from 0 to +∞), which outputs the density and radiance of a ray by giving corresponding ray origin and ray direction. The tone mapper models the mapping process that
a ray hitting on the camera sensor becomes a pixel value.
The color of the ray is predicted by feeding the radiance and
the corresponding exposure time into the tone mapper. We
use the classic volume rendering technique to project the
output radiance, colors and densities into HDR and LDR
images, while only the input LDR images are used as the
supervision. We collect a new forward-facing HDR dataset
* Work done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab.

to evaluate the proposed method. Experimental results on
synthetic and real-world scenes validate that our method
can not only accurately control the exposures of synthesized
views but also render views with a high dynamic range.

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis is one of the most pursued topics
in computer graphics and computer vision. Limited by the
dynamic range of camera sensors and input views, rendered
novel views are often with a low dynamic range, while human eyes are able to perceive a much higher dynamic range
than what is possible by a regular camera. It is therefore
highly desirable to render novel HDR views to improve the
overall visual experience.
Recently, a series of works have been focused on recovering the radiance field of a scene to render photorealistic
novel views using deep neural networks [3,37,42,62]. They
implicitly encode volumetric densities and colors using a
multi-layer perceptron (MLP), which is termed neural radiance field (NeRF). These methods produce high-quality
novel views, yet the dynamic range of the obtained radiance in NeRF is limited to a low dynamic range (between

18398

