Cloning Outfits from Real-World Images to 3D Characters
for Generalizable Person Re-Identification
Yanan Wang1

Xuezhi Liang2

Shengcai Liao1 *

yanan.wang.cs@gmail.com

xz.liang.cs@gmail.com

scliao@ieee.org

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence (IIAI)1
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence2
Masdar City, Abu Dhabi, UAE

Abstract
Recently, large-scale synthetic datasets are shown to be
very useful for generalizable person re-identification. However, synthesized persons in existing datasets are mostly
cartoon-like and in random dress collocation, which limits
their performance. To address this, in this work, an automatic approach is proposed to directly clone the whole outfits from real-world person images to virtual 3D characters,
such that any virtual person thus created will appear very
similar to its real-world counterpart. Specifically, based
on UV texture mapping, two cloning methods are designed,
namely registered clothes mapping and homogeneous cloth
expansion. Given clothes keypoints detected on person images and labeled on regular UV maps with clear clothes
structures, registered mapping applies perspective homography to warp real-world clothes to the counterparts on the
UV map. As for invisible clothes parts and irregular UV
maps, homogeneous expansion segments a homogeneous
area on clothes as a realistic cloth pattern or cell, and expand the cell to fill the UV map. Furthermore, a similaritydiversity expansion strategy is proposed, by clustering person images, sampling images per cluster, and cloning outfits for 3D character generation. This way, virtual persons
can be scaled up densely in visual similarity to challenge
model learning, and diversely in population to enrich sample distribution. Finally, by rendering the cloned characters
in Unity3D scenes, a more realistic virtual dataset called
ClonedPerson is created, with 5,621 identities and 887,766
images. Experimental results show that the model trained
on ClonedPerson has a better generalization performance,
superior to that trained on other popular real-world and
synthetic person re-identification datasets. The ClonedPerson project is available at https:// github.com/ Yanan-Wangcs/ ClonedPerson.
* Shengcai Liao is the Corresponding Author.

1. Introduction
The generalization of person re-identification has gained
increasing attention in recent years. One way to improve
generalization is to develop large-scale and diverse training
datasets. However, collecting person images from surveillance videos is privacy sensitive, and the further data annotation is expensive. Therefore, recently, synthetic person
re-identification datasets have been actively developed due
to their advantages of no privacy concern and no annotation
cost [3, 4, 25]. For example, RandPerson [29] automatically
creates large-scale random 3D characters with 8,000 identities, rendered from simulation of surveillance environments
in Unity3D [27]. It is also proved in [29] that large-scale
synthetic datasets are very useful to improve generalization.
Similar findings are also observed in the following work
UnrealPerson [33]. However, synthesized persons in existing datasets are quite different from realistic persons, because synthesized persons are mostly cartoon-like and dress
in random collocation. This clear domain gap limits the performance of models trained on such synthetic datasets.
On the other hand, some researchers proposed to generate 3D human body models from real-world person images [13, 28, 34], targeting at high-fidelity reconstruction.
These methods try to generate 3D body shapes and the associated textures simultaneously, through deep neural networks. They can help reduce the gap between synthetic and
realistic person images to some extent due to the input of
real-world clothes textures. However, current methods are
still not satisfactory as the results are usually blur, and there
are many artifacts, e.g. in back views (see Fig. 8c).
Considering the above, in this work, an automatic approach is proposed to directly clone the whole outfits from
real-world person images to virtual 3D characters. By doing so, we would like to achieve two goals1 : (1) the directly
1 However, high-fidelity 3D reconstruction of person bodies, for example, heads and 3D body shapes, is not our target. On the other hand, high-

4900

