Cycle-Consistent Counterfactuals by Latent Transformations
Saeed Khorram, Li Fuxin
Collaborative Robotics and Intelligent Systems (CoRIS) Institute
Oregon State University
{khorrams, lif}@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
CounterFactual (CF) visual explanations try to find images similar to the query image that change the decision
of a vision system to a specified outcome. Existing methods either require inference-time optimization or joint training with a generative adversarial model which makes them
time-consuming and difficult to use in practice. We propose
a novel approach, Cycle-Consistent Counterfactuals by Latent Transformations (C3LT), which learns a latent transformation that automatically generates visual CFs by steering in the latent space of generative models. Our method
uses cycle consistency between the query and CF latent representations which helps our training to find better solutions. C3LT can be easily plugged into any state-of-the-art
pretrained generative network. This enables our method to
generate high-quality and interpretable CF images at high
resolution such as those in ImageNet. In addition to several
established metrics for evaluating CF explanations, we introduce a novel metric tailored to assess the quality of the
generated CF examples and validate the effectiveness of our
method on an extensive set of experiments.

1. Introduction
With convolutional neural networks (CNNs) revolutionizing the space of automatic visual recognition, there have
been many approaches attempting to better explain the inner workings of CNNs, including attribution maps [21, 41],
concept-based explanations [9, 36], rule-based explanations
[8], prototype-based explanations [5], etc. However, when
presented to humans, those kinds of explanations were not
necessarily easy to process. Recently, a substantial user
study [16] shows that Grad-CAM [41], LIME superpixels [36], etc., were not as informative to humans as simple
nearest neighbors from the training set.
Those findings suggest that humans prefer to see examples that are just similar to the natural images rather than
heatmaps, superpixels, etc. and counterfactual (CF) explanations [7, 11, 28, 30, 45, 46] might be more useful in help-

ing humans to understand deep networks. CF explanations
show humans examples that are similar to the explanation
subject but deep networks predict them as a different category. Such explanations have also been advocated by social
scientists [27, 45] as a preferred mode of explanation.
This paper mainly deals with CF explanations in the visual domain. CF explanation in the visual domain is more
difficult to generate than categorical inputs where one can
simply search for adversarial examples [28, 30, 45]. Methods that directly optimize for perturbations in the input
space [7] often lead to adversarial solutions [43], which manipulate CNN predictions with imperceptible changes. Adversarial examples are usually off the data manifold, where
CNNs are fooled because they do not generalize to the kinds
of data that have never been seen in training. In addition,
finding and replacing patches of features from images in
the CF class to a query one [11] also moves the images off
the natural image manifold by creating irregular edges.
Successful CF explanations usually avoid being adversarial by staying on the same data manifold the network has
been trained on. Hence, prior work usually utilizes a generative model such as a generative adversarial network (GAN)
or variational autoencoder (VAE) that ensures the generated
CF example lies on the data manifold. For example, ExplainGAN [39] jointly trains a GAN for each category along
with a mask generator that generates a masked region from
the latent code of the image, so that after the masked region
is transformed the image would be classified as another category by the CNN. Some other algorithms [37] optimize
for latent codes of a VAE model that will generate an image
similar to the original one yet classified as another category.
Despite these prior work, it remains difficult to apply
CF explanations in practice. One can consider two realistic use cases for explanation algorithms. The first is debugging, where users attempt to check why CNN is making a certain wrong classification. The second is knowledge gathering, where users may try to utilize explanations
to understand subtle differences between two classes. In
both cases, it would be beneficial for the user to quickly
churn through many examples to help building their mental

10203

