PIE-Net: Photometric Invariant Edge Guided Network for Intrinsic Image
Decomposition
Partha Das
University of Amsterdam,
3DUniversum
Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Sezer Karaoglu
University of Amsterdam,
3DUniversum
Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Theo Gevers
University of Amsterdam,
3DUniversum
Amsterdam, The Netherlands

p.das@uva.nl

s.karaoglu@3duniversum.com

Th.Gevers@uva.nl

Abstract
Intrinsic image decomposition is the process of recovering the image formation components (reflectance and shading) from an image. Previous methods employ either explicit priors to constrain the problem or implicit constraints
as formulated by their losses (deep learning). These methods can be negatively influenced by strong illumination conditions causing shading-reflectance leakages.
Therefore, in this paper, an end-to-end edge-driven hybrid CNN approach is proposed for intrinsic image decomposition. Edges correspond to illumination invariant gradients. To handle hard negative illumination transitions, a
hierarchical approach is taken including global and local
refinement layers. We make use of attention layers to further strengthen the learning process.
An extensive ablation study and large scale experiments
are conducted showing that it is beneficial for edge-driven
hybrid IID networks to make use of illumination invariant descriptors and that separating global and local cues
helps in improving the performance of the network. Finally, it is shown that the proposed method obtains state
of the art performance and is able to generalise well to
real world images. The project page with pretrained models, finetuned models and network code can be found at
https://ivi.fnwi.uva.nl/cv/pienet/.

1. Introduction
Intrinsic Image Decomposition (IID) is the process of
recovering the image formation components such as reflectance (albedo) and shading (illumination) from an image. The reflectance image can be used for albedo texture
edits [7, 33, 50], fabric recolouring [48] or semantic segmentation [4]. As for shading, the illumination image can
be used for relighting [43] or shape-from-shading i.e. estimating the shape/geometry of objects or scenes [21, 45].

The problem of IID is inherently ill-defined. Therefore, previous IID approaches employ priors to constrain
the problem. Retinex [24] is based on gradient information derived from images where shading variations correspond to small (soft) gradients and reflectance transitions
to larger (stronger) ones. Other constraints are explored
by [2], like piece-wise constancy, parsimony of reflectance,
shading smoothness, etc. Other approaches include global
sparsity priors on the palette of colours (albedo’s) and modelling the problem as latent variable Random Fields by [18].
However, these explicitly imposed constraints (i.e. assumptions about the world) may limit the applicability of these
methods. Recently, deep learning based methods are proposed [34, 42]. These methods are based on implicit constraints as formulated by losses, and multiple datasets or
image sequences [28, 46]. However, these approaches are
purely data-driven and therefore they may be limited in
their generalisation abilities (dataset bias). Traditional constraints and deep learning approaches are combined by [16]
by means of image edge guidance. However, edge-driven
hybrid methods can be influenced by strong illumination
conditions. For example, in case of strong shadows, the network may classify shadows as being reflectance edges. This
happens when the gradient assumption is violated: illumination changes correspond to soft gradients and reflectance
transitions to hard ones. This leads to the well-known problem of shading-reflectance leakage i.e. illumination (strong
shadow/shading) transitions which are interpreted/classified
as albedo transitions also called hard negative illumination
transitions, or simply hard (illumination) negatives.
Therefore, in this paper, an edge-driven hybrid CNN approach is proposed using gradients based on illumination
invariant descriptors i.e. Cross Color Ratios (CCR) [19].
CCR are illumination (including shadows and shading patterns) invariant gradients and hence only dependent on
albedo changes. To solve for hard negative illumination
transitions, a hierarchical CNN is proposed including global

19790

