Back to Reality: Weakly-supervised 3D Object Detection with Shape-guided
Label Enhancement
Xiuwei Xu1,2 , Yifan Wang1 , Yu Zheng1,2 , Yongming Rao1,2 , Jie Zhou1,2 , Jiwen Lu1,2 *
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
{xxw21, yifan-wa21, zhengyu19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; raoyongming95@gmail.com;
{jzhou, lujiwen}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Layout
Information

Abstract

Label Enhancement

chair
chair
chair
table

In this paper, we propose a weakly-supervised approach
for 3D object detection, which makes it possible to train a
strong 3D detector with position-level annotations (i.e. annotations of object centers). In order to remedy the information loss from box annotations to centers, our method,
namely Back to Reality (BR), makes use of synthetic 3D
shapes to convert the weak labels into fully-annotated virtual scenes as stronger supervision, and in turn utilizes
the perfect virtual labels to complement and refine the
real labels. Specifically, we first assemble 3D shapes
into physically reasonable virtual scenes according to the
coarse scene layout extracted from position-level annotations. Then we go back to reality by applying a virtualto-real domain adaptation method, which refine the weak
labels and additionally supervise the training of detector
with the virtual scenes. Furthermore, we propose a more
challenging benckmark for indoor 3D object detection with
more diversity in object sizes for better evaluation. With less
than 5% of the labeling labor, we achieve comparable detection performance with some popular fully-supervised approaches on the widely used ScanNet dataset. Code is available at: https://github.com/wyf-ACCEPT/BackToReality.

1. Introduction
3D object detection is a fundamental scene understanding problem, which aims to detect 3D bounding boxes and
semantic labels from a point cloud of 3D scene. Due to the
irregular form of point clouds and complex contexts in 3D
scenes, most existing 2D methods [31, 32, 50] cannot be directly applied to 3D object detection. Fortunately, with the
development of deep learning techniques on point cloud understanding [27, 28], recent works [11, 20, 25, 35, 51] have
* Corresponding author.

chair

Shape Repository

Weakly-annotated
Real Scene

Domain Adaptation

Fully-annotated
Virtual Scene

Figure 1. Demonstration of BR. We consider position-level annotations as the coarse layout of the scenes, which is utilized to
generate virtual scenes from a 3D shape repository. Physical constraints are applied on the virtual scenes to remedy the information
loss from box annotations to centers. Then a virtual-to-real domain
adaptation method is presented to additionally supervise the realscene 3D object detection with the virtual scenes. Dashed arrows
indicate supervision for training.

employed deep neural networks to directly detect objects
from point clouds and achieved favorable performance.
Despite the successes in deep learning based object detection on point clouds, massive amounts of labeled bounding boxes are required for training the detector. This issue significantly limits the applications of these methods,
as labeling a precise 3D box takes more than 100s even by
an experienced annotator [36]. Therefore, 3D object detection methods using cheap labels are desirable for practical applications. Motivated by this, increasing attention
has been paid to weakly-supervised 3D object detection
methods, which can be divided into two categories according to the form of annotation: scene-level [33] and
position-level [21, 22] where only the class tag and both
object center and class are annotated for each object respectively. The two types of annotation only require less
than 1% and 5% time for one instance compared to labeling a bounding box, as shown in Table 1. While scenelevel annotation is more time-saving, it is hard for the detector to learn how to precisely locate each object in a

8438

