Neural MoCon: Neural Motion Control for Physically Plausible Human Motion Capture
Buzhen Huang

Liang Pan

Yuan Yang

Jingyi Ju

Yangang Wang*

Southeast University, China

Abstract
Due to the visual ambiguity, purely kinematic formulations on monocular human motion capture are often physically incorrect, biomechanically implausible, and can not
reconstruct accurate interactions. In this work, we focus on
exploiting the high-precision and non-differentiable physics
simulator to incorporate dynamical constraints in motion
capture. Our key-idea is to use real physical supervisions
to train a target pose distribution prior for sampling-based
motion control to capture physically plausible human motion. To obtain accurate reference motion with terrain interactions for the sampling, we first introduce an interaction constraint based on SDF (Signed Distance Field) to
enforce appropriate ground contact modeling. We then design a novel two-branch decoder to avoid stochastic error from pseudo ground-truth and train a distribution prior
with the non-differentiable physics simulator. Finally, we
regress the sampling distribution from the current state of
the physical character with the trained prior and sample
satisfied target poses to track the estimated reference motion. Qualitative and quantitative results show that we can
obtain physically plausible human motion with complex terrain interactions, human shape variations, and diverse behaviors. More information can be found at https://
www.yangangwang.com/papers/HBZ-NM-202203.html

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed significant development of
marker-less motion capture, which promotes a wide variety of applications ranging from character animation to
human-computer interaction, personal well-being, and human behavior understanding. Extensive existing works can
kinematically capture accurate human pose from monocular
* Corresponding author. E-mail: yangangwang@seu.edu.cn. This work
was supported in part by the National Key R&D Program of China under Grant 2018YFB1403900, the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (No. 62076061), the “Young Elite Scientists Sponsorship Program
by CAST” (No. YES20200025), and the “Zhishan Young Scholar” Program of Southeast University (No. 2242021R41083).

Figure 1. Our method captures physically plausible human motion
from monocular RGB videos via neural motion control.

videos and images via network regression [22,25,26,66,67]
or optimization [6, 38, 41, 51]. However, they are often hard
to leverage in real-world systems due to a series of artifacts
that are not satisfied biomechanical and physical plausibility (e.g., jitter and floor penetration).
To improve motion quality and physical plausibility, a
few works focus on capturing human motion using physicsbased constraints. [42, 46, 47, 53, 57] incorporate physical laws as soft constraints in numerical optimization
framework and reduce artifacts. To make optimization be
tractable, they can only adopt simple and differentiable
physical models, which may result in high approximation
errors. Other methods [40, 60, 63] utilize non-differentiable
physics simulators with deep reinforcement learning (DRL)
to achieve accurate and physically plausible 3D human
pose estimation. However, training a desirable policy requires complex configurations [1, 5, 31], and it may be sensitive to environmental changes [39, 60]. The limitations
above make them be infeasible to estimate human pose with
scene interactions and subject varieties for motion capture
tasks. Nevertheless, motion control, typically samplingbased methods [35], have achieved an impressive performance in reproducing highly dynamic and acrobatic motions and is robust to contact-rich scenarios, which shows a
way for general physics-based motion capture.
In this paper, we aim to construct a physics-based motion

6417

