Dist-PU: Positive-Unlabeled Learning from a Label Distribution Perspective
Yunrui Zhao1
Qianqian Xu2,∗
Yangbangyan Jiang3,4
Peisong Wen1,2
Qingming Huang1,2,5,∗
1

School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
3
State Key Laboratory of Information Security, Institute of Information Engineering, CAS
4
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Key Laboratory of Big Data Mining and Knowledge Management, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2

zhaoyunrui20@mails.ucas.ac.cn

{xuqianqian,wenpeisong20z}@ict.ac.cn

jiangyangbangyan@iie.ac.cn

qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Positive-Unlabeled (PU) learning tries to learn binary
classifiers from a few labeled positive examples with many
unlabeled ones. Compared with ordinary semi-supervised
learning, this task is much more challenging due to the absence of any known negative labels. While existing costsensitive-based methods have achieved state-of-the-art performances, they explicitly minimize the risk of classifying
unlabeled data as negative samples, which might result in
a negative-prediction preference of the classifier. To alleviate this issue, we resort to a label distribution perspective
for PU learning in this paper. Noticing that the label distribution of unlabeled data is fixed when the class prior is
known, it can be naturally used as learning supervision for
the model. Motivated by this, we propose to pursue the label distribution consistency between predicted and groundtruth label distributions, which is formulated by aligning
their expectations. Moreover, we further adopt the entropy
minimization and Mixup regularization to avoid the trivial
solution of the label distribution consistency on unlabeled
data and mitigate the consequent confirmation bias. Experiments on three benchmark datasets validate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
With the advent of big data, deep neural networks have
attracted extensive attention, since their performance has
reached or even surpassed the human level in various tasks
[21, 35, 33]. Specifically, such great success usually relies
on supervision by a large amount of labeled data. However,
it is hard to obtain intact label information in many realworld applications, even those with only binary options. For
example, observed interactions between users and items in

Figure 1. Predicted label distributions of uPU [12], nnPU [27],
and Ours on the training data of CIFAR-10 with 5 repeats and
Vehicles as the positive class. Compared with uPU and nnPU,
the proposed label distribution alignment scheme (R̂lab ) rectifies
the negative-prediction preference, and achieves a predicted class
prior consistent with the ground-truth (black dashed lines).

recommendation systems are labeled positives. Since many
unconcerned factors like lack of exposure or other coincidences could account for missing interactions, we cannot
view all the unobserved interactions as negatives. Similar scenarios include Alzheimer’s disease recognition [11],
malicious URL detection [45] and particle picking in cryoelectron micrographs [4], where we only have access to a
few labeled positives with plenty of unlabeled data. Such a
great demand motivates us to learn from positive and unlabeled data, also known as PU learning.
Researchers have developed numerous PU algorithms
over the past decades. One prevalent research line would be
cost-sensitive PU learning. These methods [12, 14, 27, 38]
often assume the availability of class prior and minimize the
risk of classifying unlabeled data as negative instances. By
reweighting the importance of the positive and the negative
risks, they could get an either unbiased or consistent risk
estimator for PU learning.
Despite the great success the cost-sensitive methods have
14461

