Improving Subgraph Recognition with Variational Graph Information
Bottleneck
Junchi Yu1,2 , Jie Cao1 , Ran He1,2,3 *
1

NLPR&CRIPAC Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS, China
yujunchi2019@ia.ac.cn, jie.cao@cripac.ia.ac.cn, rhe@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Subgraph recognition aims at discovering a compressed
substructure of a graph that is most informative to the graph
property. It can be formulated by optimizing Graph Information Bottleneck (GIB) with a mutual information estimator. However, GIB suffers from training instability and degenerated results due to its intrinsic optimization process.
To tackle these issues, we reformulate the subgraph recognition problem into two steps: graph perturbation and subgraph selection, leading to a novel Variational Graph Information Bottleneck (VGIB) framework. VGIB first employs
the noise injection to modulate the information flow from
the input graph to the perturbed graph. Then, the perturbed
graph is encouraged to be informative to the graph property. VGIB further obtains the desired subgraph by filtering
out the noise in the perturbed graph. With the customized
noise prior for each input, the VGIB objective is endowed
with a tractable variational upper bound, leading to a superior empirical performance as well as theoretical properties. Extensive experiments on graph interpretation, explainability of Graph Neural Networks, and graph classification show that VGIB finds better subgraphs than existing
methods 1 .

1. Introduction
Graph classification, which aims to identify the labels
of graph-structured data, has attracted much attention in
diverse fields such as biochemistry [11, 19, 20, 34], social network analysis [14, 22, 44], and computer vision
[7, 23, 24, 27]. Recently, there has been a surge of interest
* Corresponding Author
1 Code is avaliable on https : / / github . com / Samyu0304 /

VGIB

in its reverse problem. That is, to recognize a compressed
subgraph of the input, which is most predictive to the graph
label [52]. Such a subgraph enjoys superior property for
predictive performance since it drops noisy and redundant
information and only preserves label-relevant information
[46,53]. Meanwhile, the produced subgraph serves as an intrinsic explanation to the prediction of the graph model [49].
Hence, recognizing a compressed yet informative subgraph,
namely the subgraph recognition, is the fundamental problem of many tasks. For example, biochemists are interested in discovering the substructure of the molecule which
most affects the molecule properties [20, 53]. In the explainability of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), it is vital
to generate the explanatory subgraph of the input, which
faithfully interprets the predicted results [28, 49]. In graph
classification, the significant substructures, such as nodes,
edges, and subgraphs, are highlighted to improve the predictive performances [3, 26, 39]. The subgraph recognition
problem is first studied in a unified view under the Graph
Information Bottleneck (GIB) framework [52]. It employs
the Shannon mutual information to quantify the compressed
and informative nature of the subgraph distribution. Although GIB permits theoretical analysis of the subgraph
recognition problem, its optimization process is inefficient
and unstable due to mutual information estimation, which is
shown in Fig. 1. Meanwhile, the inaccurate estimated value
leads to degenerated performance on subgraph recognition.
These issues motivate us to advance the existing framework
for improved subgraph recognition.
In this work, we address all the above issues with the proposed Variational Graph Information Bottleneck (VGIB).
VGIB reformulates the subgraph recognition problem into
two steps: graph perturbation and subgraph selection. During graph perturbation, VGIB employs a noise injection
method to selectively inject noises into the input graph to
obtain the perturbed graph. The intuition is that the noise

19396

