Reflection and Rotation Symmetry Detection via Equivariant Learning
Ahyun Seo

Byungjin Kim

Suha Kwak

Minsu Cho

Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), South Korea
http://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/EquiSym

Abstract
The inherent challenge of detecting symmetries stems
from arbitrary orientations of symmetry patterns; a reflection symmetry mirrors itself against an axis with a specific
orientation while a rotation symmetry matches its rotated
copy with a specific orientation. Discovering such symmetry patterns from an image thus benefits from an equivariant feature representation, which varies consistently with
reflection and rotation of the image. In this work, we introduce a group-equivariant convolutional network for symmetry detection, dubbed EquiSym, which leverages equivariant feature maps with respect to a dihedral group of reflection and rotation. The proposed network is built end-toend with dihedrally-equivariant layers and trained to output a spatial map for reflection axes or rotation centers.
We also present a new dataset, DENse and DIverse symmetry (DENDI), which mitigates limitations of existing benchmarks for reflection and rotation symmetry detection. Experiments show that our method achieves the state of the
arts in symmetry detection on LDRS and DENDI datasets.

1. Introduction
From molecules to galaxies, from nature to man-made
environments, symmetry is everywhere. Comprehensive
perception and exploitation of real-world symmetry are the
instinctive abilities of humans and animals that have the potential to take intelligent systems to the next level. The focus of this paper is on the two most primitive symmetries,
reflection and rotation symmetries. The goal of reflection
and rotation symmetry detection is to find a reflection axis
and a rotation center that remain invariant under reflection
and rotation, respectively. Despite decades of efforts [29,
46], symmetry detection methods have been limited to the
well-defined symmetry patterns, and the remedy for realworld symmetry is still yet to be thoroughly explored. The
simplicity of mathematical concepts of symmetry encouraged early approaches to find keypoint pairs that satisfy
pre-defined constraints for symmetry [1,3,32,37,39,43],

(a) image

(b) reflection axis

(c) rotation center

Figure 1. Symmetry detection examples of our method EquiSym.
(a) an input image, (b) a score map of reflection symmetry axes,
and (c) that of rotation symmetry centers. Best viewed in color.

which leverage hand-crafted local feature descriptors to detect sparse symmetry patterns. Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been successfully applied to detect reflection symmetry and have surpassed the previous
methods by learning score map regression [13] or symmetric matching [38] from data.
The primary challenge in detecting symmetry patterns
lies in the fact that a symmetry manifests itself with an arbitrary orientation and perceiving the pattern requires an
analysis based on the orientation; a reflection symmetry
mirrors itself against an axis with a specific orientation
and a rotation symmetry matches its rotated copy with a
specific orientation. Most methods for symmetry detection thus involve searching over the space of candidate
orientations of symmetry patterns and also developing a
robust representation that is either invariant or equivariant with respect to rotation and reflection. The early approaches leverage an equivariant representation by extracting oriented keypoints and performing orientation normalization [1,32,37,39,43]. While this technique has proven effective for shallow gradient-based features, it cannot be applied to deep feature maps from standard neural networks,
where rotation and reflection induce unpredictable variations in representation.
To address the challenge, we propose to learn a group-

9539

