Brain-Supervised Image Editing
Keith M. Davis III1 , Carlos de la Torre-Ortiz1 , Tuukka Ruotsalo1,2
first.last@helsinki.fi
1
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
2
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark

Figure 1: Brain signals are captured via EEG to supervise a semantic editing task. An individual is shown images that have an
associated vector representation while they look for a semantic feature of interest (such as dark hair) and their brain responses
are recorded. After a model is trained to detect semantic saliency from these brain responses, the classified brain responses
and the associated image vector representations are used to model features of the latent space that correlate with semantic
salience. Semantic features of a new source image can then be edited using this learned feature representation.

Abstract
Despite recent advances in deep neural models for semantic image editing, present approaches are dependent on
explicit human input. Previous work assumes the availability of manually curated datasets for supervised learning,
while for unsupervised approaches the human inspection of
discovered components is required to identify those which
modify worthwhile semantic features. Here, we present a
novel alternative: the utilization of brain responses as a supervision signal for learning semantic feature representations. Participants (N=30) in a neurophysiological experiment were shown artificially generated faces and instructed
to look for a particular semantic feature, such as “old”
or “smiling”, while their brain responses were recorded
via electroencephalography (EEG). Using supervision signals inferred from these responses, semantic features within
the latent space of a generative adversarial network (GAN)
were learned and then used to edit semantic features of new
images. We show that implicit brain supervision achieves
comparable semantic image editing performance to explicit
manual labeling. This work demonstrates the feasibility
of utilizing implicit human reactions recorded via braincomputer interfaces for semantic image editing and interpretation.

1. Introduction
Semantic editing of images has recently become possible by utilizing models that allow for the smooth manipulation of image representations. However, semantic editing
requires real-world conceptualizations of semantic information to be captured by the underlying models to achieve
convincing results. Due to their high performance in modeling highly complex features, the most popular techniques
involve various approaches built on generative neural networks [28, 2, 11, 42, 41, 27, 32, 16, 7], although other neural architectures [4, 29] have also shown promise.
Recent work has demonstrated that Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [15] encode human-interpretable
representations of semantic concepts [14, 42, 16, 7, 41],
which partially explains their performance in semantic editing tasks. However, GANs suffer from a lack of direct interpretability of their latent representations and do not directly allow accurate semantic control. That is, semantic
representations are encoded in a continuous space, but due
to their high-dimensional and multivariate representation,
mapping from latent features to salient semantic image features is non-trivial. Because of this, identifying and translating learned semantic representations into a usable form
remains an unsolved problem.
Supervised approaches, such as conditional GANs, do

18480

