GIQE: Generic Image Quality Enhancement via Nth Order Iterative Degradation
Pranjay Shyam1 , Kyung-Soo Kim1∗ , and Kuk-Jin Yoon2 *
1 Mechatronics, Systems, and Control Laboratory, 2 Visual Intelligence Laboratory
Department of Mechanical Engineering, KAIST, Republic of Korea
{pranjayshyam, kyungsookim, kjyoon}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Visual degradations caused by motion blur, raindrop,
rain, snow, illumination, and fog deteriorate image quality and, subsequently, the performance of perception algorithms deployed in outdoor conditions. While degradationspecific image restoration techniques have been extensively
studied, such algorithms are domain sensitive and fail in
real scenarios where multiple degradations exist simultaneously. This makes a case for blind image restoration and
reconstruction algorithms as practically relevant. However,
the absence of a dataset diverse enough to encapsulate all
variations hinders development for such an algorithm. In
this paper, we utilize a synthetic degradation model that
recursively applies sets of random degradations to generate naturalistic degradation images of varying complexity,
which are used as input. Furthermore, as the degradation
intensity can vary across an image, the spatially invariant
convolutional filter cannot be applied for all degradations.
Hence to enable spatial variance during image restoration
and reconstruction, we design a transformer-based architecture to benefit from the long-range dependencies. In addition, to reduce the computational cost of transformers,
we propose a multi-branch structure coupled with modifications such as a complimentary feature selection mechanism and the replacement of a feed-forward network with
lightweight multiscale convolutions. Finally, to improve
restoration and reconstruction, we integrate an auxiliary
decoder branch to predict the degradation mask to ensure
the underlying network can localize the degradation information. From empirical analysis on 10 datasets covering
rain drop removal, deraining, dehazing, image enhancement, and deblurring, we demonstrate the efficacy of the
proposed approach while obtaining SoTA performance.

1. Introduction
Image quality plays an important role in the performance
of vision-based algorithms designed for tasks such as object
* Co-corresponding authors. Listed in alphabetical order.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Images generated by proposed Nth order degradation

Figure 1.
(top) along with corresponding spatial distortion masks (bottom)
for a given input having (a) natural rainy droplets and synthetic (b)
motion blur, (c) snow, (d) rain, and (e) rain with snow.

detection, semantic segmentation, depth estimation, etc.
Hence, an image affected by environmental degradations
such as motion blur, illumination variations, rain, fog, snow,
and water droplets results in an undesirable performance
drop [22, 31]. Despite the nature of degradations, they can
be modeled using a common mask-based approach considering that they affect the spatial properties of an image to
reduce its quality. However, since the intensity and combinations of degradations co-occurring can be non-uniform,
some regions are bound to be affected more than others.
Hence, a generic image restoration algorithm should be able
to localize and be robust towards spatially varying degradations. While perception algorithms can be made robust
to diverse weather conditions either by extending the training dataset [25,37,43,46] or utilizing restoration algorithms
as preprocessing step [15, 24, 40] to generate clean images.
However, these approaches have their shortcomings as constructing a labeled dataset for high-level perception, diverse
enough to account for all variations, is time-consuming and
expensive. In contrast, image restoration algorithms are
presently degradation-specific (dehazing, deraining, raindrop removal, desnowing, etc.) and do not perform well
outside the distribution of training set [11, 16, 42, 44]. Furthermore, as SoTA image restoration algorithms are built
upon convolutional neural networks (CNNs), utilization of
the same convolution filter for the complete feature would
result in weak restoration owing to the co-occurrence of
multiple spatially-varying degradations across the image.

2077

