TransRAC: Encoding Multi-scale Temporal Correlation with Transformers for
Repetitive Action Counting
Huazhang Hu1 *, Sixun Dong1 *, Yiqun Zhao1 , Dongze Lian1,2 , Zhengxin Li1†, Shenghua Gao1,3,4†
1
2
ShanghaiTech University
National University of Singapore
3
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
4
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Energy Efficient and Custom AI IC
{huhzh, dongsx, v-zhaoyq, liandz, lizhx, gaoshh}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Counting repetitive actions are widely seen in human activities such as physical exercise. Existing methods focus
on performing repetitive action counting in short videos,
which is tough for dealing with longer videos in more realistic scenarios. In the data-driven era, the degradation
of such generalization capability is mainly attributed to the
lack of long video datasets. To complement this margin,
we introduce a new large-scale repetitive action counting
dataset covering a wide variety of video lengths, along with
more realistic situations where action interruption or action
inconsistencies occur in the video. Besides, we also provide a fine-grained annotation of the action cycles instead
of just counting annotation along with a numerical value.
Such a dataset contains 1,451 videos with about 20,000 annotations, which is more challenging. For repetitive action
counting towards more realistic scenarios, we further propose encoding multi-scale temporal correlation with transformers that can take into account both performance and efficiency. Furthermore, with the help of fine-grained annotation of action cycles, we propose a density map regressionbased method to predict the action period, which yields better performance with sufficient interpretability. Our proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art methods on all
datasets and also achieves better performance on the unseen dataset without fine-tuning. The dataset and code are
available 1 .

They can be modeled by the Newtonian mechanics, or detected with the aid of sensors for the understanding of the
world or our bodies. In computer vision, the detection
of repetitive/periodic motions also plays an important role,
such as in human activity, where the counting of some physical exercise movements benefits people in fitness detection and planning. Although one can use some sensors
(e.g., gravity sensors) on the human body, vision-based approaches enable non-invasive and thus make third-viewbased video analysis possible and promising. Repetitive
action counting in computer vision is also useful as an auxiliary cue for other human-centric video analysis applications, such as pedestrian detection [26] and 3D reconstruction [17, 28].
Despite this importance, repetitive action counting methods in computer vision has rarely been explored. Previous papers [5, 38] tend to count repetitive actions in short
videos, such as some simple videos grabbed from the Kinetics dataset [10]. However, these videos lack some realistic scenarios, which limits the application of the method in
more realistic scenarios due to the following two points:
• Restricted video length. The previous datasets [5, 16,
29, 38] typically contain only short videos (e.g., 0.430 s), however, methods are likely to be deployed to
long videos in real scenarios. For instance, we count
push-ups or jump-jacks with a video length of 60 s.
Counting actions in such long videos is more challenging because there might exist various anomalies in real
scenarios, such as the action being interrupted with internal or external reasons (Fig. 1(a) ), or the inconsistency between action periods (Fig. 1(b) ). These
anomalies might cause the previous algorithm to fail
or obtain sub-optimal performance, affecting the generalization of the algorithm to real scenarios.

1. Introduction
Planetary motion, the change of seasons, and heartbeats,
these periodic movements that are everywhere in our lives.
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding authors.

• Inadequate annotations. In previous datasets [5, 16,
29, 38], the number of repetitive actions in a video

1 https://svip- lab.github.io/dataset/RepCount_
dataset.html

19013

