Weakly Supervised Temporal Action Localization via
Representative Snippet Knowledge Propagation
Linjiang Huang1,2 Liang Wang3 Hongsheng Li1,2 *
1
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence, Hong Kong
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
ljhuang524@gmail.com, wangliang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Weakly supervised temporal action localization aims to
localize temporal boundaries of actions and simultaneously
identify their categories with only video-level category labels. Many existing methods seek to generate pseudo labels for bridging the discrepancy between classification and
localization, but usually only make use of limited contextual information for pseudo label generation. To alleviate
this problem, we propose a representative snippet summarization and propagation framework. Our method seeks to
mine the representative snippets in each video for propagating information between video snippets to generate better
pseudo labels. For each video, its own representative snippets and the representative snippets from a memory bank
are propagated to update the input features in an intraand inter-video manner. The pseudo labels are generated
from the temporal class activation maps of the updated features to rectify the predictions of the main branch. Our
method obtains superior performance in comparison to the
existing methods on two benchmarks, THUMOS14 and ActivityNet1.3, achieving gains as high as 1.2% in terms of
average mAP on THUMOS14. Our code is available at
https://github.com/LeonHLJ/RSKP.

1. Introduction
Temporal action localization in videos has a wide range
of applications in different scenarios. This task aims to localize action instances in untrimmed videos along the temporal dimension. Most existing methods [4, 18, 19, 46, 54]
are trained in a fully supervised manner where both videolevel labels and frame-wise annotations are provided. In
contrast to these strong supervision based methods, weaklysupervised temporal action localization method attempt to
localize action instances in videos, leveraging only videolevel supervisions. This setting enables the method to by* Corresponding author.

TSCN
STPN
GT
TSCN
STPN
GT

Figure 1. Two examples of the action of “Clean and Jerk”. The
barcode is the ground-truth (GT). The line charts are snippet-wise
classification scores. We show the detection results of two methods, TSCN [50] and STPN [33]. The instance in the orange box is
hard for both the two methods, because most of the snippets show
only a part of the athlete. In contrast, the instances (black box and
green box) with frontal view and whole body is much easier to be
detected. A direct way to address this issue would be to propagate
(red lines) knowledge of representative snippets to other snippets.

pass the manual annotations of temporal boundaries, which
are laborious, expensive and prone to large variations [39].
Due to the absence of fine-grained annotations, existing works mainly embrace a localization-by-classification
pipeline [42, 53], where a classifier is trained with videolevel annotations of action categories [31] and is used to
obtain a sequence of class logits or predictions, i.e., temporal class activation maps (TCAMs). Usually, detection results are obtained from TCAMs via a post-processing step
[33,42] (e.g., thresholding) or a localization branch [23,41].
Therefore, the quality of TCAMs determines the upper
bound of the model. However, there is generally be a discrepancy between classification and localization [20,22,24].
Since each video generally contains multiple snippets1 , with
only video-level annotations, the model would easily focus on the contextual background or discriminative snippets
that contribute most to video-level classification, which hin1 In this paper, we view snippets as the smallest granularity since the
high-level features of consecutive frames vary smoothly over time [11,45].

3272

