LGT-Net: Indoor Panoramic Room Layout Estimation with Geometry-Aware
Transformer Network
Zhigang Jiang1,2
Zhongzheng Xiang2
1
East China Normal University
zigjiang@gmail.com

even and just@126.com

2

Ming Zhao2
Jinhua Xu1 *
Yiwo Technology

jhxu@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

zhaoming@123kanfang.com

Abstract
3D room layout estimation by a single panorama using deep neural networks has made great progress. However, previous approaches can not obtain efficient geometry
awareness of room layout with the only latitude of boundaries or horizon-depth. We present that using horizondepth along with room height can obtain omnidirectionalgeometry awareness of room layout in both horizontal and
vertical directions. In addition, we propose a planargeometry aware loss function with normals and gradients
of normals to supervise the planeness of walls and turning of corners. We propose an efficient network, LGT-Net,
for room layout estimation, which contains a novel Transformer architecture called SWG-Transformer to model geometry relations. SWG-Transformer consists of (Shifted)
Window Blocks and Global Blocks to combine the local and
global geometry relations. Moreover, we design a novel
relative position embedding of Transformer to enhance the
spatial identification ability for the panorama. Experiments show that the proposed LGT-Net achieves better performance than current state-of-the-arts (SOTA) on benchmark datasets. The code is publicly available at https:
//github.com/zhigangjiang/LGT-Net.

1. Introduction
The goal of estimating the 3D room layout by an indoor
RGB image is to locate the corners or the floor-boundary
and ceiling-boundary, as shown in Fig. 3a, which plays a
crucial role in 3D scene understanding [24]. The panoramic
images have wider (360◦ ) field of view (FoV) than perspective images and contain the whole-room contextual information [30]. With the development of deep neural networks
and the popularity of panoramic cameras in recent years,
3D room layout estimation by a single panorama has made
great achievements [23, 28, 32].
Most room layouts conform to the Atlanta World assumption [20] with horizontal floor and ceiling, along with
* Corresponding author.

Post-Processing

3D Visualizing

512x1024x3

Feature Extractor

Feature Sequence
256x1024
Room Height (𝒉) 1x1
SWG-Transformer

x2

Window Block

256x1

Global Block

Horizon-Depth (𝒅)

Shifted Window Block

256x1

Global Block

Normal (𝒏)
Gradient (𝒈)

256x1024

Figure 1. Overall architecture of the proposed LGT-Net. The network estimates the room layout from a single panorama using the
omnidirectional-geometry aware loss of horizon-depth and room
height and the planar-geometry aware loss of normals and gradients of normals. We visualize the predicted boundaries (green)
by the horizon-depth and room height, and the floor plan (red)
with post-processing by Manhattan constraint, finally output the
3D room layout.

vertical walls [18]. Thus the room layout can be represented by floor-boundary and room height, as shown in
Fig. 3a. However, previous approaches [23, 24, 26] estimate
the room height by ceiling-boundary. And the networks predict the floor-boundary and ceiling-boundary with the same
output branch, which affects each other since they need to
predict both horizontal shape and vertical height of room
layout. Meanwhile, most previous approaches [23, 28, 32]
use Manhattan constraint [3] or directly simplify boundaries [18] in post-processing without considering the planar attribute of the walls to constrain the network output
results. In addition, for models [23, 24, 26] which formulate the room layout estimation task as 1D sequence prediction, a sequence processor is needed to model the geometry
relationship. Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory (Bi-

1654

