Mega-NeRF:
Scalable Construction of Large-Scale NeRFs for Virtual Fly-Throughs
Haithem Turki1
Deva Ramanan1,2
Mahadev Satyanarayanan1
1
3
Carnegie Mellon University
Argo AI
Abstract
We use neural radiance fields (NeRFs) to build interactive 3D environments from large-scale visual captures spanning buildings or even multiple city blocks collected primarily from drones. In contrast to single object scenes (on
which NeRFs are traditionally evaluated), our scale poses
multiple challenges including (1) the need to model thousands of images with varying lighting conditions, each of
which capture only a small subset of the scene, (2) prohibitively large model capacities that make it infeasible to
train on a single GPU, and (3) significant challenges for
fast rendering that would enable interactive fly-throughs.
To address these challenges, we begin by analyzing visibility statistics for large-scale scenes, motivating a sparse
network structure where parameters are specialized to different regions of the scene. We introduce a simple geometric clustering algorithm for data parallelism that partitions
training images (or rather pixels) into different NeRF submodules that can be trained in parallel. We evaluate our approach on existing datasets (Quad 6k and UrbanScene3D)
as well as against our own drone footage, improving training speed by 3x and PSNR by 12%. We also evaluate recent NeRF fast renderers on top of Mega-NeRF and introduce a novel method that exploits temporal coherence. Our
technique achieves a 40x speedup over conventional NeRF
rendering while remaining within 0.8 db in PSNR quality,
exceeding the fidelity of existing fast renderers.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in neural rendering techniques have
lead to significant progress towards photo-realistic novel
view synthesis, a prerequisite towards many VR and
AR applications. In particular, Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRFs) [24] have attracted significant attention, spawning
a wide range of follow-up works that improve upon various
aspects of the original methodology.
Scale. Simply put, our work explores the scalability
of NeRFs. The vast majority of existing methods explore
single-object scenes, often captured indoors or from synthetic data. To our knowledge, Tanks and Temples [17] is

1

?

A

B

1

C

2

D

E

F

3

Training: Data Partitioning
2

G

H

I

Inference: View Synthesis

3

Figure 1. We scale neural reconstructions to massive urban scenes
1000x larger than prior work. To do so, Mega-NeRF decomposes a
scene into a set of spatial cells (left), learning a separate NeRF submodule for each. We train each submodule with geometry-aware
pixel-data partitioning, making use of only those pixels whose rays
intersect that spatial cell (top right). For example, pixels from image 2 are added to the trainset of cells A, B, and F, reducing the
size of each trainset by 10x. To generate new views for virtual flythroughs, we make use of standard raycasting and point sampling,
but query the encompassing submodule for each sampled point
(bottom right). To ensure view generation is near-interactive, we
make use of temporal coherence by caching occupancy and color
values from nearby previous views (Fig. 4).

the largest dataset used in NeRF evaluation, spanning 463
m2 on average. In this work, we scale NeRFs to capture and
interactively visualize urban-scale environments from drone
footage that is orders of magnitude larger than any dataset
to date, from 150,000 to over 1,300,000 m2 per scene.
Search and Rescue. As a motivating use case, consider
search-and-rescue, where drones provide an inexpensive
means of quickly surveying an area and prioritizing limited first responder resources (e.g., for ground team deployment). Because battery life and bandwidth limits the ability
to capture sufficiently detailed footage in real-time [6], collected footage is typically reconstructed into 2D “birds-eyeview” maps that support post-hoc analysis [42]. We imagine
a future in which neural rendering lifts this analysis into 3D,
enabling response teams to inspect the field as if they were
flying a drone in real-time at a level of detail far beyond the

12922

