Exposure Normalization and Compensation for Multiple-Exposure Correction
Jie Huang,* Yajing Liu,* Xueyang Fu, Man Zhou, Yang Wang, Feng Zhao†, Zhiwei Xiong
University of Science and Technology of China
{hj0117,lyj123,manman}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {xyfu,ywang120,fzhao956,zwxiong}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Images captured with improper exposures usually bring
unsatisfactory visual effects. Previous works mainly focus
on either underexposure or overexposure correction, resulting in poor generalization to various exposures. An alternative solution is to mix the multiple exposure data for training a single network. However, the procedures of correcting
underexposure and overexposure to normal exposures are
much different from each other, leading to large discrepancies for the network in correcting multiple-exposures,
thus resulting in poor performance. The key point to address this issue lies in bridging different exposure representations. To achieve this goal, we design a multiple exposure correction framework based on an Exposure Normalization and Compensation (ENC) module. Specifically,
the ENC module consists of an exposure normalization part
for mapping different exposure features to the exposureinvariant feature space, and a compensation part for integrating the initial features unprocessed by the exposure
normalization part to ensure the completeness of information. Besides, to further alleviate the imbalanced performance caused by variations in the optimization process, we
introduce a parameter regularization fine-tuning strategy to
improve the performance of the worst-performed exposure
without degrading other exposures. Our model empowered
by ENC outperforms the existing methods by more than 2dB
and is robust to multiple image enhancement tasks, demonstrating its effectiveness and generalization capability for
real-world applications. Code: https://github.com/KevinJHuang/ExposureNorm-Compensation.

1. Introduction
In recent years, camera devices are used to capture photographs of a wide range of scenes at any time. As different scenes present various exposure conditions, images
captured with underexposures or overexposures often suffer
from unsatisfactory visual effects. For this reason, several
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

exposure correction methods have been proposed, including model-driven-based [4, 9, 11, 21, 38] and deep learningbased approaches [10, 33, 34, 36, 41]. However, most of
them focus on either underexposure or overexposed scenes,
causing poor generalization to other exposures. This makes
them incapable of being deployed in practical applications.
A naive way to solve this problem is to train specific
networks corresponding to each exposure condition, leading to a significant increase in training time and parameter
space. Alternatively, the network can be trained with a mixture of data from various exposure conditions to improve its
capability of multiple-exposure correction. However, due
to the variations of representations between underexposure
and overexposure, the procedures of correcting them to normal exposures differ greatly from each other, as shown in
Fig. 1. This introduces discrepancies for the network in correcting lightness and color across multiple-exposures, thus
making it difficult to train a single network and resulting in
poor performance. Besides, the variations in optimization
processes also make the network incline to overlook disadvantaged data of the mixed datasets [35] and bring about
imbalanced performance across exposures.
In this paper, we propose a framework for improving the
multiple-exposure correction performances. The key point
lies in narrowing the gap of different exposure representations. To this end, we design an Exposure Normalization
and Compensation (ENC) module, as shown in Fig. 3. It
consists of an exposure normalization part and a compensation part. Specifically, the exposure normalization part
maps different exposure features to the exposure-invariant
feature space. It is implemented by the Instance Normalization to coarsely align different exposure features, followed
by a normalization distilling loss on the normalized features
to further reduce the exposure effect. However, normalization will inevitably induce the loss of the image discriminative features [17, 27] for image reconstruction. Therefore,
the compensation part is introduced for integrating the features unprocessed by the exposure normalization part in the
spatial and channel dimension, which ensures the completeness information. Besides, to further enhance the correction
effect of the worst-performed exposure caused by imbal-

6043

