Rethinking Spatial Invariance of Convolutional Networks for Object Counting
Zhi-Qi Cheng1 , Qi Dai2 , Hong Li3*, Jingkuan Song4 , Xiao Wu3 , Alexander G. Hauptmann1
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Microsoft Research Asia 3 Southwest Jiaotong University
4
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{zhiqic,alex}@cs.cmu.edu, qid@microsoft.com,
{hl1997.work,jingkuan.song}@gmail.com, wuxiaohk@home.swjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Previous work generally believes that improving the spatial invariance of convolutional networks is the key to object counting. However, after verifying several mainstream
counting networks, we surprisingly found too strict pixellevel spatial invariance would cause overfit noise in the density map generation. In this paper, we try to use locally connected Gaussian kernels to replace the original convolution
filter to estimate the spatial position in the density map. The
purpose of this is to allow the feature extraction process to
potentially stimulate the density map generation process to
overcome the annotation noise. Inspired by previous work,
we propose a low-rank approximation accompanied with
translation invariance to favorably implement the approximation of massive Gaussian convolution. Our work points
a new direction for follow-up research, which should investigate how to properly relax the overly strict pixel-level
spatial invariance for object counting. We evaluate our
methods on 4 mainstream object counting networks (i.e.,
MCNN, CSRNet, SANet, and ResNet-50). Extensive experiments were conducted on 7 popular benchmarks for 3 applications (i.e., crowd, vehicle, and plant counting). Experimental results show that our methods significantly outperform other state-of-the-art methods and achieve promising
learning of the spatial position of objects1 .

1. Introduction
Object counting has been widely studied since it can potentially solve crowd flow monitoring, traffic management,
etc. The previous works [8, 28, 62] believe that the latchkey
to improving the object counting is to improve the spatial invariance of CNNs. Based on this starting point, more
and more networks (such as dilated CNNs [3, 13, 39], deformable CNNs [17, 34] and multi-column CNNs [11, 13,
71]) are studied for object counting.

𝜀

Σ

Figure 1. The left shows the idea of density map generation, and
the right is an example from SHTech-PartA dataset [76], where the
red dot is the annotation in groundtruth, and the black dot is the
real center position. The density map is generated by smoothing
the center points with the multi-dimensional Gaussian distribution.
There are two main types of noise: 1) the error ϵ between the true
center points and the annotations and 2) the overlap Σ caused by
multiple Gaussian kernels. Note that the left is merely an example.
The center point of crowd counting usually refers to the center of
the head. [Best view in color].

However, this research direction has appeared performance bottlenecks. We noticed that the counting accuracy
had not been significantly improved with further continuously optimizing the network architectures. Some recent
studies [6, 10, 30, 59] also witnessed a lot of noise during
density generation and conjecture that this might be the reason for the performance bottleneck. Although these efforts
have made some progress, we are still ignorant of the following questions. 1) Is blindly improving spatial invariance
valuable for object counting tasks? 2) How does density
noise affect performance?
Before answering these questions, let’s briefly introduce
the generation process of the density map. Figure 1 takes
crowd counting as an example. The density map is generated by smoothing the center point with multiple Gaussian
kernels. This preprocessing converts the discrete counting problem into a continuous density regression, but inevitably brings some noise. In general, there are two types
of noise. 1) The error between the actual center point and
annotation (i.e., ϵ between the red and black dots). 2) The
overlay of Gaussian kernels (i.e., Σ)2 . More formal mathematical description is in Sec. 3.1 and 3.2.

* Work done during a remote research collaboration with CMU.
1 Code is at https://github.com/zhiqic/Rethinking-Counting

2 Note that we have some abuse symbols here.

19638

