p
Contextual Instance
Decoupling for Robust Multi-Person Pose Estimation
tm
he

tion Abstraction

a

Dongkai Wang1
Shiliang Zhang1,2
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory

ial

{dongkai.wang, slzhang.jdl}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Crowded scenes make it challenging to differentiate persons and locate their pose keypoints. This paper proposes
the Contextual Instance Decoupling (CID), which presents
a new pipeline for multi-person pose estimation. Instead of
relying on person bounding boxes to spatially differentiate
persons, CID decouples persons in an image into multiple
instance-aware feature maps. Each of those feature maps is
hence adopted to infer keypoints for a specific person. Compared with bounding box detection, CID is differentiable
and robust to detection errors. Decoupling persons into different feature maps allows to isolate distractions from other
persons, and explore context cues at scales larger than the
bounding box size. Experiments show that CID outperforms
previous multi-person pose estimation pipelines on crowded
scenes pose estimation benchmarks in both accuracy and efficiency. For instance, it achieves 71.3% AP on CrowdPose,
outperforming the recent single-stage DEKR by 5.6%, the
bottom-up CenterAttention by 3.7%, and the top-down JCSPPE by 5.3%. This advantage sustains on the commonly
used COCO benchmark† .

1. Introduction
Multi-Person Pose Estimation (MPPE) detects all persons in an image, and locates keypoints for each of them.
As an important step for human activity understanding,
human-object interaction, human parsing, etc., MPPE has
attracted increasing attention. Current MPPE methods can
be summarized into three categories according to their followed pipelines, i.e. i) top-down methods [7, 21, 26, 33],
which detect person bounding boxes and perform pose
estimation for each bounding box, ii) bottom-up methods [2, 9, 11, 17, 20, 23] that first detect body keypoints, then
group them into corresponding persons, and iii) single-stage
regression methods, which regress pose keypoints coordinates [6, 19, 28, 30, 35] based on person features. Fig. 1 (a),
(b), and (c) illustrate those three pipelines, respectively.
† Code is available at https://github.com/kennethwdk/CID

top-down

heatmap

(a)

bottom-up

grouping

(b)

single-stage
input image

regression

(c)

CID

heatmap

(d)

Figure 1. Illustration of different MPPE pipelines for differentiating persons. (a) Top-down methods use bounding box to crop
person; (b) Bottom-up methods first detect all keypoints then
group them into different persons; (c) Single-stage methods directly regress keypoint coordinates based on sampled feature vector. (d) The proposed Contextual Instance Decoupling (CID) first
generates instance-aware feature maps, then infers heatmaps from
each person. It has potential to enjoy better robustness to detection
errors in (a), keypoint localization errors in (b), and alleviate the
difficulty of long distance regression in (c).

The above pipelines show different properties and defects for MPPE in crowded scenes. Regression paradigm
enjoys better efficiency, but suffers from the difficulty
of long distance regression. Top-down and bottom-up
pipelines rely on heatmaps to locate keypoints, e.g., a likelihood heatmap can be generated for each keypoint, where
the keypoint is located with argmax or soft-argmax [27] operations. Heatmap based methods need extra computations
to differentiate persons. As shown in Fig. 1 (a) and (b), topdown methods adopt bounding box cropping to differentiate
persons, while bottom-up methods utilize keypoint grouping. Bounding box cropping, e.g., RoIAlign [7] is sensitive
to detection errors, and cannot explore contexts outside the
box. Keypoint grouping is complex and not capable of recover keypoint location errors because it discards contextual
cues. Sec. 2 presents a more detailed review.
This work aims at studying a new MPPE pipeline to ef-

11060

