Diverse Plausible 360-Degree Image Outpainting
for Efficient 3DCG Background Creation
Naofumi Akimoto

Yuhi Matsuo
Keio University

Yoshimitsu Aoki

{nakimoto,ymatsuo}@aoki-medialab.jp, aoki@elec.keio.ac.jp

Figure 1. We generate the plausible environment from a narrow field of view image, using a transformer-based outpainting method that
considers the nature of 360-degree images, to realize efficient 3DCG scene creation. See also demonstrations in the supplementary video.

Abstract
We address the problem of generating a 360-degree image from a single image with a narrow field of view by estimating its surroundings. Previous methods suffered from
overfitting to the training resolution and deterministic generation. This paper proposes a completion method using a transformer for scene modeling and novel methods
to improve the properties of a 360-degree image on the
output image. Specifically, we use CompletionNets with
a transformer to perform diverse completions and AdjustmentNet to match color, stitching, and resolution with an
input image, enabling inference at any resolution. To improve the properties of a 360-degree image on an output
image, we also propose WS-perceptual loss and circular inference. Thorough experiments show that our method outperforms state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods both qualitatively
and quantitatively. For example, compared to SOTA methods, our method completes images 16 times larger in resolution and achieves 1.7 times lower Fréchet inception distance (FID). Furthermore, we propose a pipeline that uses
the completion results for lighting and background of 3DCG
scenes. Our plausible background completion enables perceptually natural results in the application of inserting virtual objects with specular surfaces.

1. Introduction
In recent three-dimensional computer graphics (3DCG)
production, 360-degree images are helpful for efficiently
creating lighting and backgrounds. For example, a designer
might spend much time creating 3D objects in the near field
and creating the background quickly by using 2D images
with a narrow field of view (NFoV) images or 360-degree
images. However, the production method of creating the
background by placing 2D images behind a 3D object cannot fully represent the scenery reflected on the surface of
the 3D object. Of course, this problem does not occur
if the image surrounds the object in 360 degrees. However, 360-degree images, especially high dynamic range images (HDRI), are generally more expensive to prepare than
NFoV images.
This paper addresses the problem of converting an NFoV
image into a 360-degree image by complementing its surroundings to obtain a 360-degree environment consistent
with the image given as a partial background (Fig. 1). By
solving this problem, users can use only a NFoV image to
reflect the surrounding environment to objects [1, 24], or in
the case of HDRI, to achieve natural shadows and global
illumination through Image-Based Lighting [6, 24].
For use by designers, it is desirable to infer NFoV images of any size and to have choices by generating diverse
360-degree images. However, existing methods are deter-

11441

