φ-SfT: Shape-from-Template with a Physics-Based Deformation Model
Navami Kairanda1, 2 Edith Tretschk1 Mohamed Elgharib1 Christian Theobalt1 Vladislav Golyanik1
1
2
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, SIC
Saarland University, SIC

Abstract
Shape-from-Template (SfT) methods estimate 3D surface deformations from a single monocular RGB camera
while assuming a 3D state known in advance (a template).
This is an important yet challenging problem due to the
under-constrained nature of the monocular setting. Existing SfT techniques predominantly use geometric and simplified deformation models, which often limits their reconstruction abilities. In contrast to previous works, this paper
proposes a new SfT approach explaining 2D observations
through physical simulations accounting for forces and material properties. Our differentiable physics simulator regularises the surface evolution and optimises the material
elastic properties such as bending coefficients, stretching
stiffness and density. We use a differentiable renderer to
minimise the dense reprojection error between the estimated
3D states and the input images and recover the deformation
parameters using an adaptive gradient-based optimisation.
For the evaluation, we record with an RGB-D camera challenging real surfaces exposed to physical forces with various material properties and textures. Our approach significantly reduces the 3D reconstruction error compared to
multiple competing methods. For the source code and data,
see https://4dqv.mpi-inf.mpg.de/phi-SfT/.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing general deformable, temporally-coherent
surfaces in 3D from monocular RGB videos is a longstanding, challenging and ill-posed problem. It was studied
under different assumptions, and methods addressing it can
be roughly classified into (template-free) non-rigid structure from motion (NRSfM) [8, 14], (template-based) shapefrom-template (SfT) [34, 40], and neural 3D mesh regression [27]. The objective of SfT is: Given a known initial
3D state (a template) of an observed deformable scene or
an object, reconstruct all its 3D states observed in the entire
image sequence [45]. Recent learning-based SfT methods
encode prior knowledge in neural network weights [13, 47].
This offers multiple advantages over a vast body of previ-

Figure 1. Our φ-SfT approach uses a physics simulator to
reconstruct challenging deforming 3D surfaces observed in a
monocular RGB video. Compared to existing methods, our estimates are significantly more accurate and physically plausible.

ous, model-based works [34, 36, 38, 40, 45, 46, 61], such as
the ability to handle larger deformations, a broader spectrum of supported types of motions and deformations (including highly nonlinear ones), and real-time operation.
One of the pivotal limitations of both classical and neural
SfT methods is that they capture general 3D states well but
not fine local surface deformations. This is a consequence
of the non-awareness of the physical fold formation process attributable to the elastic properties of the materials
and forces acting on them. As a result, existing methods
can only reconstruct predominantly global deformations.
This paper proposes φ-SfT (from Greek φυσικη meaning physics): A new analysis-by-synthesis SfT method
which addresses several limitations of the current state of
the art and improves the accuracy of monocular non-rigid
3D reconstruction by a significant margin; see Fig. 1 for
an overview. Our approach explicitly models the physical
fold formation process, and its parameters are physically
meaningful. φ-SfT does not require training data. We enable gradient-based optimisation by employing two components: A differentiable renderer and a differentiable physics
simulator. Our core idea is to use the latter as a regulariser
during the optimisation of our objective function. Next, the
differentiable renderer ensures that the reprojections of the
recovered 3D states accurately match the observed images.
In contrast to earlier photometric terms used for SfT [61],

3948

