Physical Simulation Layer for Accurate 3D Modeling
Mariem Mezghanni1

Théo Bodrito
1

Malika Boulkenafed

Maks Ovsjanikov1

LIX, Ecole Polytechnique, IP Paris

mezghanni,maks@lix.polytechnique.fr

Abstract
We introduce a novel approach for generative 3D modeling that explicitly encourages the physical and thus functional consistency of the generated shapes. To this end, we
advocate the use of online physical simulation as part of
learning a generative model. Unlike previous related methods, our approach is trained end-to-end with a fully differentiable physical simulator in the training loop. We accomplish this by leveraging recent advances in differentiable
programming, and introducing a fully differentiable pointbased physical simulation layer, which accurately evaluates
the shape’s stability when subjected to gravity. We then
incorporate this layer in a signed distance function (SDF)
shape decoder. By augmenting a conventional SDF decoder
with our simulation layer, we demonstrate through extensive experiments that online physical simulation improves
the accuracy, visual plausibility and physical validity of the
resulting shapes, while requiring no additional data or annotation effort.

1. Introduction
Over the past several years, there has been a steady
stream of works aimed at developing deep neural networks
for 3D shape generation. A key challenge is to accommodate plausible and diverse content while preserving geometric and structural validity [1, 27, 42]. Though remarkable
progress has been made in this direction, state-of-the-art approaches focus primarily on geometric or visual plausibility,
while discarding a key purpose of 3D design: functionality [23]. Indeed, a designed 3D shape is often meant to serve
a particular function in the real world. For instance, a chair
is expected to be stable when subjected to gravity. Ignoring
this crucial constraint leads the generated content to suffer
from severe functional artifacts such as lack of connectivity and physical instability [30], which severely hinders its
utility in real-world downstream tasks.
One way to address this challenge is by leveraging phys-

Baseline DeepSDF [32]

Offline simulation

Online simulation (ours)

Figure 1. Qualitative comparison of online simulation with the
SotA offline simulation [30] for the task of shape optimization.
From top to bottom: physically invalid shapes sampled from baseline DeepSDF [32], results using [30] and our results. The optimized shapes reflect the accuracy and efficiency of online simulation compared to the offline setting in terms of physical quality
and geometric consistency.

ical simulation to guide generative models to produce functionally valid shapes. Indeed, physical simulation is a common mechanism for verifying whether a candidate 3D shape
fulfills certain functionality [4, 22, 41]. Although physical simulation is a powerful tool that is applicable without additional data annotation, incorporating it into generative modeling can be challenging, since it is typically nondifferentiable and can be both complex and costly to be used
at training time. Thus, existing approaches that attempt to
combine generative networks with physical simulation are
typically limited to offline simulation, which requires to either iteratively filter and update the training data [36] or to
train a surrogate model that imitates the simulator while being suitable for learning [30]. While these works sidestep
the aforementioned challenges, they achieve this by sacrificing the major benefits of end-to-end training. In particular,
using offline simulation and surrogate models can hurt the
generalization power of the trained networks and introduce
data biases, implicitly promoting the seen valid geometric

13514

