Controllable Dynamic Multi-Task Architectures
Dripta S. Raychaudhuri1 Yumin Suh2 Samuel Schulter2 Xiang Yu2 Masoud Faraki2
Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury1 Manmohan Chandraker2,3
1
University of California, Riverside 2 NEC Labs America 3 University of California, San Diego
Conventional dynamic
multi-task networks

Abstract
Multi-task learning commonly encounters competition
for resources among tasks, specifically when model capacity is limited. This challenge motivates models which allow control over the relative importance of tasks and total
compute cost during inference time. In this work, we propose such a controllable multi-task network that dynamically adjusts its architecture and weights to match the desired task preference as well as the resource constraints.
In contrast to the existing dynamic multi-task approaches
that adjust only the weights within a fixed architecture,
our approach affords the flexibility to dynamically control
the total computational cost and match the user-preferred
task importance better. We propose a disentangled training of two hypernetworks, by exploiting task affinity and
a novel branching regularized loss, to take input preferences and accordingly predict tree-structured models with
adapted weights. Experiments on three multi-task benchmarks, namely PASCAL-Context, NYU-v2, and CIFAR-100,
show the efficacy of our approach. Project page is available
at https://www.nec-labs.com/˜mas/DYMU .

1. Introduction
Multi-task learning [7, 40] (MTL) solves multiple tasks
using a single model, with potential advantages of fast inference and improved generalization by sharing representations
across related tasks. However, in practical scenarios, simultaneously optimizing all tasks is difficult due to task conflicts
and limited model capacity [54]. Consequently, a trade-off
between the competing tasks has to be found, necessitating
precise balancing of the different task losses during optimization. In many applications, the desired trade-off can change
over time, requiring a new model to be retrained from scratch.
To overcome this lack of flexibility, recent methods propose
dynamic networks for multi-task learning [26, 36]. These
frameworks enable a single multi-task model to learn the
entire trade-off curve, and allow users to control the desired
trade-off during inference via task preferences denoting the
relative task importance.

Proposed framework

!

!

!

Task 1 Task 2 Task 3

Task 1 Task 2 Task 3

Task 1 Task 2 Task 3

Fixed compute cost
Fixed architecture

Control over compute
Flexible architecture

Figure 1. Problem setup. Our goal is to enable users to control
resource allocation dynamically among multiple tasks at inference
time. Conventional dynamic networks (PHN [36]) for MTL achieve
this in terms of weight changes within a fixed model (color gradients indicate proportion of weights allocated for each task). In
contrast, we perform resource allocation in terms of both architecture and weights. This enables us to control total compute cost in
addition to task preference. Dashed circle represents maximum
compute budget, while filled circle represents the desired budget.
Portion of colors represents the user-defined task importance.

Conventional dynamic approaches for MTL assume a
fixed model architecture, with all but the last prediction
layers shared, and control trade-offs by changing the weights
of this model. While such hard-parameter sharing is helpful
in saving resources, the performance is inevitably lower than
single task baselines when task conflicts exist due to oversharing of parameters between tasks [40] . Furthermore, the
fixed architecture suffers from a lack of flexibility, leading
to a constant compute cost irrespective of the given task
preference or compute budget changes. In many applications
where the budget can change over time, these approaches
may fail to take advantage of the increased resources in order
to improve performance or accordingly lower the compute
cost in order to satisfy stricter budget requirements.
To address the aforementioned issue and strike a balance
between flexibility and performance, we propose a more
expressive tree-structured [14] dynamic multi-task network
which can adapt its architecture in addition to its weights at
test-time, as illustrated in Figure 1. Specifically, we design a
controller using two hypernetworks [16] that predict archi-

10955

