BNUDC: A Two-Branched Deep Neural Network for Restoring Images
from Under-Display Cameras
Jaihyun Koh1,2 , Jangho Lee1 and Sungroh Yoon1,3,4 *
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University
2
Samsung Display Corporation 3 Interdisciplinary Program in AI, Seoul National University
4
AIIS, ASRI, INMC and ISRC, Seoul National University
1

{satyricon, ubuntu, sryoon}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract

Φ

Transmittance

100.0%

Simplification

0.0%
380nm

High Frequency
Degradation Layer

x

Low Frequency
Degradation Layer

Polarizor
Cathode
Electron Transport Layer

Emission Layer
(RGB+ Pixel Definition Layer [PDL] )

Hole Transport layer
Hole Injection Layer
Anode
Substrate

The images captured by under-display cameras (UDCs)
are degraded by the screen in front of them. We model this
degradation in terms of a) diffraction by the pixel grid,
which attenuates high-spatial-frequency components of the
image; and b) diffuse intensity and color changes caused
by the multiple thin-film layers in an OLED, which modulate the low-spatial-frequency components of the image. We
introduce a deep neural network with two branches to reverse each type of degradation, which is more effective than
performing both restorations in a single forward network.
We also propose an affine transform connection to replace
the skip connection used in most existing DNNs for restoring UDC images. Confining the solution space to the linear
transform domain reduces the blurring caused by convolution; and any gross color shift in the training images is eliminated by inverse color filtering. Trained on three datasets of
UDC images, our network outperformed existing methods
in terms of measures of distortion and of perceived image
quality.

Ψ

Ψ(x)

780nm

Wavelength

PDL (POLED)

PSF

y = Φ(Ψ(x))

Figure 1. Physical model of the degradation of the image received
by a UDC, simplified by two degradation processes: (1) color filtering and spatially variant attenuation Ψ by the thin-film layers
of the OLEDs, and (2) diffraction Φ by the pixel definition layer
(PDL), which can be represented by a point spread function (PSF).
A UDC image y can be simulated by compositing the effect of Ψ
and Φ on a latent image x.

1. Introduction
Under-display cameras (UDCs) are a key technology for
realizing full-screen smartphones. Unfortunately, the quality of the images captured by a UDC is considerably reduced by the light loss and diffraction introduced by the
display panel which is in front of it [8, 19, 40]. One way of
addressing this problem is to increase the proportion of the
panel which is transparent by reducing the pixel density in
the region of the display immediately above the camera, and
by modifying the layout of the RGB sub-pixels [26, 32, 37].
Increasing the transparent area reduces the resolution of the
screen, and therefore distortion of the light reaching the
* Correspondence to: Sungroh Yoon (sryoon@snu.ac.kr).

UDC is unavoidable with a screen of any acceptable resolution; and the presence of the wires required to drive the
pixels make this distortion worse. The natural limits on the
extent to which an OLED display can be rearranged mean
that restoration is required to make the images received by
a UDC look like the images that would be received if the
display was not in front of the UDC. Methods have recently
been proposed based on paired image datasets [8, 21, 40]
and image restoration [8, 16,19, 27,29, 33, 36,39] which use
a learning approach with a neural network.
Image restoration methods using deep neural networks
(DNNs) have progressed substantially over the years: specific DNN architectures have been developed for many

1950

