Evaluation-oriented Knowledge Distillation for Deep Face Recognition
Yuge Huang∗

Shouhong Ding‡

Jiaxiang Wu* Xingkun Xu
Youtu Lab, Tencent

{yugehuang, willjxwu, xingkunxu, ericshding}@tencent.com
https://github.com/Tencent/TFace/tree/master/recognition/tasks/ekd

Abstract
Input

Knowledge distillation (KD) is a widely-used technique
that utilizes large networks to improve the performance of
compact models. Previous KD approaches usually aim to
guide the student to mimic the teacher’s behavior completely in the representation space. However, such one-toone corresponding constraints may lead to inflexible knowledge transfer from the teacher to the student, especially
those with low model capacities. Inspired by the ultimate goal of KD methods, we propose a novel Evaluationoriented KD method (EKD) for deep face recognition to directly reduce the performance gap between the teacher and
student models during training. Specifically, we adopt the
commonly used evaluation metrics in face recognition, i.e.,
False Positive Rate (FPR) and True Positive Rate (TPR)
as the performance indicator. According to the evaluation protocol, the critical pair relations that cause the TPR
and FPR difference between the teacher and student models
are selected. Then, the critical relations in the student are
constrained to approximate the corresponding ones in the
teacher by a novel rank-based loss function, giving more
flexibility to the student with low capacity. Extensive experimental results on popular benchmarks demonstrate the
superiority of our EKD over state-of-the-art competitors.

1. Introduction
With a large number of recognition systems deployed on
mobile and edge devices, compact yet discriminative models are in increasingly high demand. Although some optimized neural network architectures for mobile devices [4,
25] are proposed in the recent years, there still exists an
enormous performance gap between these compact networks and the resource-intensive networks which have millions of parameters. In order to narrow the gap, Knowledge
Distillation (KD), which is a widely-used technique that utilizes the knowledge of a large network to improve the per* equal contribution. ‡ corresponding author.

𝑓𝑇
𝑓𝑆

CNN
Output

𝑡1 s1

𝑡2 s2

𝑡3 s3

𝑡1
𝑡2

𝑡4 s4

𝑡5 s5

𝑡1

𝑡3
s2

threshold = 0.55

𝑡5 𝑠1 0.45 𝑠5

s1
𝑡4
𝑠3

Positive Pair

threshold = 0.42

𝑠4

Negative Pair

Figure 1. Illustration of critical relations of samples. Different
colors indicate different models (Teacher T in blue and Student
S in green). Different shapes indicate samples of different subjects. The numbers denote the cosine similarities of samples. The
relation of the 1st and the 3rd samples is the only one whose similarities fall on the different side of the threshold in teacher and
student models (i.e., 0.6 > 0.55 in teacher while 0.5 < 0.55 in
student), and thus leads to the TPR difference. Therefore, in order
to pursue the same TPR of the teacher, the student which has limited model capability should pay more attention on the relation (in
red) of the 1st and the 3rd samples which is the critical relation.
Similarly, for the negative pairs, the relation of 1st and 5th samples
leads to the FPR difference and should be paid more attention.

formance of the compact models, is proposed.
The seminal works [2,10] introduced the original idea of
KD, which targets on reducing the Kullback–Leibler (KL)
divergence between each instance’s probabilities at the output layers of the teacher and the student networks. In the
past decade, work [13, 24, 33] has continued optimizing
KD methods by extending such instance-wise constraints to
the activation of the hidden layers. For example, attention
transfer [33] aims to elicit similar response patterns in feature maps. FitNets [24] directly constrains intermediate representations by using regressions. However, such instancebased methods essentially require the teacher and student
to share the same representation space, which is unrealistic

18740

