Balanced MSE for Imbalanced Visual Regression
Jiawei Ren1 , Mingyuan Zhang1 , Cunjun Yu2 , Ziwei Liu1
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
2
School of Computing, National University of Singapore
{jiawei011, mingyuan001}@e.ntu.edu.sg, cunjun.yu@comp.nus.edu.sg, ziwei.liu@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Data imbalance exists ubiquitously in real-world visual
regressions, e.g., age estimation and pose estimation, hurting the model’s generalizability and fairness. Thus, imbalanced regression gains increasing research attention
recently. Compared to imbalanced classification, imbalanced regression focuses on continuous labels, which can
be boundless and high-dimensional and hence more challenging. In this work, we identify that the widely used
Mean Square Error (MSE) loss function can be ineffective in imbalanced regression. We revisit MSE from a statistical view and propose a novel loss function, Balanced
MSE, to accommodate the imbalanced training label distribution. We further design multiple implementations of
Balanced MSE to tackle different real-world scenarios, particularly including the one that requires no prior knowledge about the training label distribution. Moreover, to
the best of our knowledge, Balanced MSE is the first general solution to high-dimensional imbalanced regression in
modern context. Extensive experiments on both synthetic
and three real-world benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of Balanced MSE. Code and models are available at
github.com/jiawei-ren/BalancedMSE.

1. Introduction
Visual regression, where models learn to predict continuous labels, is one of the most fundamental tasks in machine
learning. However, in real-world applications, data imbalance is widely encountered, hurting the model’s generalizability and fairness. For example, age estimation predicts
people’s age from their visual appearance, where age is a
continuous label. In practice, most of the training images
are from adults, while very few images are from children
and senior adults. As a result, models trained from such an
imbalanced dataset can have inferior performance on underrepresented groups [38]. Therefore, imbalanced regression
Corresponding author.

MSE

Train
𝜃

𝑝train(𝑦|𝑥)
NLL

𝑝train(𝑦)

𝑝train(𝑦)

𝑝train(𝑦|𝑥)

𝜃

𝑝bal(𝑦)
Balanced MSE

Train
𝜃

Test

𝑝bal(𝑦|𝑥)
NLL

𝑝train(𝑦|𝑥)

Test
𝜃

𝑝bal(𝑦|𝑥)

𝑝bal(𝑦)

Figure 1. Comparison between MSE and Balanced MSE. MSE
is equivalent to NLL on a prediction distribution, where the regressor θ’s prediction is the distribution mean. MSE lets the regressor model ptrain (y|x), which is not suitable to infer on the test
set due to a shift between the training label distribution ptrain (y)
and the balanced test label distribution pbal (y). In comparison,
Balanced MSE leverages ptrain (y) to make a statistical conversion
from pbal (y|x) to ptrain (y|x), thus allowing the regressor to model
the desired pbal (y|x) by still minimizing NLL of ptrain (y|x).

gains increasing research attention. A fresh imbalanced regression benchmark [38] in the modern deep learning context has been curated recently as well. Compared with imbalanced and long-tailed classification [4,12,24] that studies
categorical labels, imbalanced regression focuses on continuous labels, which can be boundless, high-dimensional, and
hence more challenging.
Unlike imbalanced classification that has been widely
discussed [15, 20, 35, 39], imbalanced regression is underexplored. Previous works [1, 33] focus on synthesizing samples for rare labels, which have limited feasibility in modern deep learning where inputs are always highdimensional. Recent research [31, 38] focuses on loss
reweighting. Reweighting assigns larger loss weights to
rare samples and smaller loss weights to frequent samples.
[31, 38] estimates the training label distributions using kernel density estimation (KDE) and reweight losses accordingly. However, prior works [5, 36] show that reweighting
has limited effectiveness on imbalanced classification. In a
following case study, we validate this finding in imbalanced

7926

