Dynamic MLP for Fine-Grained Image Classification
by Leveraging Geographical and Temporal Information
Lingfeng Yang1† , Xiang Li1∗ , Renjie Song2 , Borui Zhao2 , Juntian Tao1 ,
Shihao Zhou2 , Jiajun Liang2 , Jian Yang1 *
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, 2 Megvii Technology
{yanglfnjust, xiang.li.implus, taojuntian, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn
{songrenjie, zhoushihao, liangjiajun}@megvii.com, zhaoborui.gm@gmail.com

Abstract
Fine-grained image classification is a challenging computer vision task where various species share similar visual appearances, resulting in misclassification if merely
based on visual clues. Therefore, it is helpful to leverage
additional information, e.g., the locations and dates for
data shooting, which can be easily accessible but rarely
exploited. In this paper, we first demonstrate that existing multimodal methods fuse multiple features only on a
single dimension, which essentially has insufficient help in
feature discrimination. To fully explore the potential of
multimodal information, we propose a dynamic MLP on
top of the image representation, which interacts with multimodal features at a higher and broader dimension. The
dynamic MLP is an efficient structure parameterized by the
learned embeddings of variable locations and dates. It can
be regarded as an adaptive nonlinear projection for generating more discriminative image representations in visual
tasks. To our best knowledge, it is the first attempt to explore the idea of dynamic networks to exploit multimodal
information in fine-grained image classification tasks. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method. The t-SNE algorithm visually indicates that our
technique improves the recognizability of image representations that are visually similar but with different categories.
Furthermore, among published works across multiple finegrained datasets, dynamic MLP consistently achieves SOTA
results1 and takes third place in the iNaturalist challenge at
FGVC82 . Code is available at https://github.com/megviiresearch/DynamicMLPForFinegrained.
* Corresponding author. † Works is done as interns in Megvii Research.
Lingfeng Yang, Xiang Li, Juntian Tao, and Jian Yang are from PCA Lab,
Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education, and Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and
Video Understanding for Social Security, School of Computer Science and
Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology.
1 https://paperswithcode.com/dataset/inaturalist
2 https://www.kaggle.com/c/inaturalist-2021/leaderboard

(a)

(b)

(d)

(c)

(e)

Figure 1. Visualization of t-SNE [44] representations under well
trained models. Various similar species from the genus Turdus in
the iNaturalist 2021 dataset are depicted in different colors. (a):
The visualization of an image-only model. (b): Concatenating the
image, location, and date features before the classification head is
a typical strategy of utilizing additional information to help classification. The concatenated representation is more discriminative than the original. The concatenation strategy can be regarded
as a baseline for all methods that involve additional information.
(c): Intuitively, our proposed dynamic MLP expands the diversity
among different fine-grained species compared to the image-only
or concatenation framework. (d): The 3-d visualization of image
representation from the concatenation strategy. (e): The 3-d visualization of our dynamic MLP.

1. Introduction
Fine-grained image classification [1, 3, 5, 49, 53–55] is
a challenging computer vision task that distinguishes fine
categories of objects or species. In contrast to traditional
image classification [6, 18, 19, 26, 50], fine-grained image

10945

