Learning to Learn and Remember Super Long Multi-Domain Task Sequence
Zhenyi Wang1 , Li Shen2 , Tiehang Duan3 , Donglin Zhan4 , Le Fang1 , Mingchen Gao1
1
State University of New York at Buffalo, USA 2 JD Explore Academy, Beijing, China
3
Meta, Seattle, WA, USA 4 Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
{zhenyiwa, lefang, mgao8}@buffalo.com, {mathshenli, tiehang.duan}@gmail.com, dz2478@columbia.edu

Abstract
Catastrophic forgetting (CF) frequently occurs when
learning with non-stationary data distribution. The CF issue
remains nearly unexplored and is more challenging when
meta-learning on a sequence of domains (datasets), called
sequential domain meta-learning (SDML). In this work, we
propose a simple yet effective learning to learn approach, i.e.,
meta optimizer, to mitigate the CF problem in SDML. We first
apply the proposed meta optimizer to the simplified setting of
SDML, domain-aware meta-learning, where the domain labels and boundaries are known during the learning process.
We propose dynamically freezing the network and incorporating it with the proposed meta optimizer by considering the
domain nature during meta training. In addition, we extend
the meta optimizer to the more general setting of SDML,
domain-agnostic meta-learning, where domain labels and
boundaries are unknown during the learning process. We
propose a domain shift detection technique to capture latent
domain change and equip the meta optimizer with it to work
in this setting. The proposed meta optimizer is versatile and
can be easily integrated with several existing meta-learning
algorithms. Finally, we construct a challenging and largescale benchmark consisting of 10 heterogeneous domains
with a super long task sequence consisting of 100K tasks. We
perform extensive experiments on the proposed benchmark
for both settings and demonstrate the effectiveness of our
proposed method, outperforming current strong baselines by
a large margin.

1. Introduction
Catastrophic forgetting (CF) [47] frequently occurs when
learning with data distribution shift. The CF issue is largely
overlooked in the more challenging problem setting, i.e.,
meta-learning on a sequence of domains, where domain shift
occurs sequentially when the model meta-learns on a large
number of tasks and aims to generalize to the unseen tasks
from previous domains. This has significant implications for
real-world applications, for example:

• Robot learns on many visual recognition tasks, where each
task may consist of only a small number of labeled image
data. It may sequentially go through numerous environments as illustrated in Fig. 1. When adapting to a new
environment, the skills learned in previous environments
may be easily forgotten.
• For a personalized dialogue/recommendation system [44,
50], where learning the personal model for each user is
viewed as an individual task, the user base may shift over
time, e.g., the system is first deployed for Canadian users,
then the company extends its market to Europe. While
learning about European users, the system may quickly
forget previous Canadian users’ habits.
We generalize and formulate the above problem setting as
sequential domain meta-learning (SDML), where a model is
required to make proper decisions based on only a few training examples with the underlying environments/domains
constantly changing. Recent work reveals that catastrophic
forgetting often occurs when transferring a meta-learning
model to a new context [55, 79]. We expect that adjustments
to a new environment/domain should not erase the learned
knowledge from old ones. On the other hand, most existing
works of continual learning [58, 61] can only mitigate the
forgetting on a short sequence of (typically less than 50)
tasks. These continual learning methods are infeasible to be
directly applied in SDML with a super long task sequence
consisting of (at least) 100K tasks, which is our main focus.
We propose to learn a meta optimizer to mitigate the
catastrophic forgetting issue during the learning process. Intuitively, more important parameters for previous domains
should be updated more slowly to avoid forgetting and less
important parameters could be updated faster for efficient
learning of the current domain. To achieve this goal, we
store a small number of tasks in a memory buffer and calculate the gradient of the meta loss for the memory tasks
with respect to the learnable learning rates at each iteration.

Figure 1. Demonstration of SDML learning scenario

7982

