How much does input data type impact final face model accuracy?
Jiahao Luo1

Fahim Hasan Khan1 Issei Mori2 Akila de Silva1 Eric Sandoval Ruezga1
Minghao Liu1 Alex Pang1 James Davis1
1
University of California, Santa Cruz; 2 University of California, San Diego
{jluo53,davisje}@ucsc.edu

Abstract
Face models are widely used in image processing and
other domains. The input data to create a 3D face model
ranges from accurate laser scans to simple 2D RGB photographs. These input data types are typically deficient
either due to missing regions, or because they are underconstrained. As a result, reconstruction methods include
embedded priors encoding the valid domain of faces. System designers must choose a source of input data and then
choose a reconstruction method to obtain a usable 3D face.
If a particular application domain requires accuracy X,
which kinds of input data are suitable? Does the input data
need to be 3D, or will 2D data suffice? This paper takes a
step toward answering these questions using synthetic data.
A ground truth dataset is used to analyze accuracy obtainable from 2D landmarks, 3D landmarks, low quality 3D,
high quality 3D, texture color, normals, dense 2D image
data, and when regions of the face are missing. Since the
data is synthetic it can be analyzed both with and without measurement error. This idealized synthetic analysis is
then compared to real results from several methods for constructing 3D faces from 2D photographs. The experimental
results suggest that accuracy is severely limited when only
2D raw input data exists.

1. Introduction
Three dimensional face models are used in a diverse
set of application domains, including biometric identification [10], 3D avatars [54], social media filters, and photo
editing [46]. All of these applications benefit from high accuracy 3D models, however the degree of accuracy required
varies between a realistically rendered movie and a fun mobile app with cartoon ears.
The input data to create a 3D face model has a wide variation, ranging from 0.1 mm accurate laser scans to simple
2D RGB photographs. Raw data is usually not directly usable, whether due to holes in scanned meshes or because 2D
data is insufficiently constrained to determine 3D. A common solution is to apply a model to constrain or clean up

the raw data. The model can take many forms, for example
it could be an explicit prior applied to the distribution of a
parameter space, or implied by a specific neural network architecture and the trained node weights. In either case the
goal is to best use the limited input data to predict a valid
and complete 3D face.
System designers must choose a source of input data and
then choose a model and a method of fitting to obtain a usable 3D face. The vast majority of research has focused on
novel sensor designs to improve the raw data, or novel reconstruction methods and prior models which do a better
job producing faces from under-constrained data. In contrast, this paper seeks to answer the system designers question - If my application domain requires accuracy X, how
good does my input data need to be? Must I start from
3D data, or can I start from a photograph and predict a 3D
model which is good enough? If my user is wearing glasses
and my data is missing eyes, can I predict something based
on observation of the rest of the face? What about if there
is a mask blocking the mouth region? How much accuracy
will that cost me? In order to provide insight into questions
of this kind, we start with an existing ground truth dataset,
use an existing prior model, and then evaluate the accuracy
obtainable from different raw data types.
Our input data is derived from a publicly available
dataset which has 100s of 3D face scans in correspondence,
as well as multi-view 2D images of the same subjects [47].
This allows us to compare final 3D accuracy when raw input data is 2D feature points, 2D photographs, low quality
3D, 3D feature points, high quality 3D with partial missing
data, and complete high quality 3D.
Our primary analysis makes use of “synthetic” experiments. This allows extensive analysis both with and without noise. Input data is constructed directly from ground
truth by removing data to mimic measurement of only landmarks, or only low resolution 3D, or missing eyes. These
experiments test whether the prior model can predict accurate results for the unobserved portion of the face. We check
that the synthetic results generalize by conducting “real” experiments using only RGB photographs as input and testing

18985

