Video Swin Transformer
Ze Liu*12

Jia Ning∗13 Yue Cao1† Yixuan Wei14 Zheng Zhang1 Stephen Lin1 Han Hu1†
1
Microsoft Research Asia 2 University of Science and Technology of China
3
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 4 Tsinghua University
{t-liuze,v-jianing,yuecao,t-yixuanwei,zhez,stevelin,hanhu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
The vision community is witnessing a modeling shift from
CNNs to Transformers, where pure Transformer architectures have attained top accuracy on the major video recognition benchmarks. These video models are all built on
Transformer layers that globally connect patches across the
spatial and temporal dimensions. In this paper, we instead
advocate an inductive bias of locality in video Transformers, which leads to a better speed-accuracy trade-off compared to previous approaches which compute self-attention
globally even with spatial-temporal factorization. The locality of the proposed video architecture is realized by
adapting the Swin Transformer designed for the image domain, while continuing to leverage the power of pre-trained
image models. Our approach achieves state-of-the-art accuracy on a broad range of video recognition benchmarks,
including on action recognition (84.9 top-1 accuracy on
Kinetics-400 and 85.9 top-1 accuracy on Kinetics-600 with
∼20× less pre-training data and ∼3× smaller model size)
and temporal modeling (69.6 top-1 accuracy on SomethingSomething v2).

1. Introduction
Convolution-based backbone architectures have long
dominated visual modeling in computer vision [14, 18, 22,
24, 32, 33]. However, a modeling shift is currently underway on backbone architectures for image classification,
from Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to Transformers [8, 28, 34]. This trend began with the introduction
of Vision Transformer (ViT) [8, 34], which globally models
spatial relationships on non-overlapping image patches with
the standard Transformer encoder [38]. The great success
of ViT on images has led to investigation of Transformerbased architectures for video-based recognition tasks [1, 3].
Previously for convolutional models, backbone architec* Equal Contribution. † Equal Advising. The work is done when Ze
Liu, Jia Ning and Yixuan Wei are interns at Microsoft Research Asia.

tures for video were adapted from those for images simply by extending the modeling through the temporal axis.
For example, 3D convolution [35] is a direct extension of
2D convolution for joint spatial and temporal modeling at
the operator level. As joint spatiotemporal modeling is not
economical or easy to optimize, factorization of the spatial and temporal domains was proposed to achieve a better speed-accuracy tradeoff [30, 41]. In the initial attempts
at Transformer-based video recognition, a factorization approach is also employed, via a factorized encoder [1] or
factorized self-attention [1, 3]. This has been shown to
greatly reduce model size without a substantial drop in performance.
In this paper, we present a pure-transformer backbone architecture for video recognition that is found to surpass the
factorized models in efficiency. It achieves this by taking
advantage of the inherent spatiotemporal locality of videos,
in which pixels that are closer to each other in spatiotemporal distance are more likely to be correlated. Because of
this property, full spatiotemporal self-attention can be wellapproximated by self-attention computed locally, at a significant saving in computation and model size.
We implement this approach through a spatiotemporal
adaptation of Swin Transformer [28], which was recently
introduced as a general-purpose vision backbone for image
understanding. Swin Transformer incorporates inductive
bias for spatial locality, as well as for hierarchy and translation invariance. Our model, called Video Swin Transformer, strictly follows the hierarchical structure of the original Swin Transformer, but extends the scope of local attention computation from only the spatial domain to the spatiotemporal domain. As the local attention is computed on
non-overlapping windows, the shifted window mechanism
of the original Swin Transformer is also reformulated to
process spatiotemporal input.
As our architecture is adapted from Swin Transformer,
it can readily be initialized with a strong model pre-trained
on a large-scale image dataset. With a model pre-trained on
ImageNet-21K, we interestingly find that the learning rate
of the backbone architecture needs to be smaller (e.g. 0.1×)

3202

