Dressing in the Wild by Watching Dance Videos
Xin Dong1 , Fuwei Zhao2 , Zhenyu Xie2 , Xijin Zhang1
Daniel K. Du1 , Min Zheng1 , Xiang Long1 , Xiaodan Liang2∗ , Jianchao Yang1
1
ByteDance, 2 Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-Sen University
{zhaofw@mail2,xiezhy6@mail2,xdliang328@mail}.sysu.edu.cn
{dongxin.1016,zhangxijin,dukang.daniel,zhengmin.666,longxiang.0,yangjianchao}@bytedance.com

𝑂"

𝐼!

𝑂"

𝐼"

𝐼!

𝐼"

Figure 1. The results of the proposed method on in-the-wild images. Our model is capable of transferring arbitrary garments (e.g.,
shirts, pants, formal dresses, skirts, down jackets) from a source person image I s onto a challenging posed query person image I q
presented in real-world backgrounds, generating high-fidelity output image Oq with the query’s identity now wearing the source’s garments.

Abstract
While significant progress has been made in garment
transfer, one of the most applicable directions of humancentric image generation, existing works overlook the inthe-wild imagery, presenting severe garment-person misalignment as well as noticeable degradation in fine texture details. This paper, therefore, attends to virtual try-on
in real-world scenes and brings essential improvements in
authenticity and naturalness especially for loose garment
(e.g., skirts, formal dresses), challenging poses (e.g., cross
arms, bent legs), and cluttered backgrounds. Specifically,
we find that the pixel flow excels at handling loose garments whereas the vertex flow is preferred for hard poses,
and by combining their advantages we propose a novel gen-

erative network called wFlow that can effectively push up
garment transfer to in-the-wild context. Moreover, former
approaches require paired images for training. Instead, we
cut down the laboriousness by working on a newly constructed large-scale video dataset named Dance50k with
self-supervised cross-frame training and an online cycle optimization. The proposed Dance50k can boost real-world
virtual dressing by covering a wide variety of garments under dancing poses. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
superiority of our wFlow in generating realistic garment
transfer results for in-the-wild images without resorting to
expensive paired datasets. 1
1 Xiaodan Liang is the corresponding author. The project page of
wFlow is https://awesome-wflow.github.io.

3480

