Neural Prior for Trajectory Estimation
Chaoyang Wang1
Xueqian Li2,3
1
Carnegie Mellon University
chaoyanw@cs.cmu.edu

Jhony Kaesemodel Pontes3
2
University of Adelaide

Simon Lucey12
3
Argo AI

{xueqian.li, simon.lucey}@adelaide.edu.au

jpontes@argo.ai

Abstract

Neural trajectory prior
(i) spatial smoothness (iii) compressibility

Neural priors are a promising direction to capture lowlevel vision statistics without relying on handcrafted regularizers. Recent works have successfully shown the use of
neural architecture biases to implicitly regularize image denoising, super-resolution, inpainting, synthesis, scene flow,
among others. They do not rely on large-scale datasets to
capture prior statistics and thus generalize well to out-ofthe-distribution data. Inspired by such advances, we investigate neural priors for trajectory representation. Traditionally, trajectories have been represented by a set of
handcrafted bases that have limited expressibility. Here,
we propose a neural trajectory prior to capture continuous spatio-temporal information without the need for offline
data. We demonstrate how our proposed objective is optimized during runtime to estimate trajectories for two important tasks: Non-Rigid Structure from Motion (NRSfM) and
lidar scene flow integration for self-driving scenes. Our results are competitive to many state-of-the-art methods for
both tasks.

1. Introduction
Representing space-time with 3D trajectories provides
longer-term information about the dynamics of a 3D scene
compared to pairwise representations such as scene flow. It
also enables generic priors to solve underconstrained lowlevel vision tasks, especially for problems that need to be
agnostic to different objects and scenes. Here we aim to
model a general and dataless prior for estimating 3D trajectories through a neural runtime optimization approach.
Most works studying trajectory priors are from the NonRigid Structure from Motion (NRSfM) field, where they are
handcrafted to solve the ill-posed inverse problem of lifting dynamic 2D points to 3D. The most straightforward
trajectory prior assumes that points move smoothly over
time [56, 57]. However, it does not provide enough constraints to disambiguate the camera and point motion. On
the other hand, a collection of trajectories observed from
a scene contain statistics for stronger priors. The seminal
work of Akhter et al. [3] proposed to represent trajectories

𝐩
(𝑢, 𝑣) or
(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, 𝑡)

𝑓!

weight decoder

(ii) temporal smoothness

𝐭′

𝑓#

(a) NRSfM

𝑓"
𝛗

MLP

Applications

𝜏! 𝜏 " … 𝜏 # ∗ 𝜶

continuous traj. basis functions ∗ weights

…

𝜏

(𝑢, 𝑣)

(b) scene flow integration

𝜏
(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, 𝑡)

Figure 1. Our neural trajectory prior (NTP) regularizes the motion of a point to be smooth in space by the continuous mapping
of a coordinate MLP fϕ . Trajectories are represented as a linear
combination of overcomplete continuous basis functions τ 1 , τ 2 ,
..., τ K . The linear weights α is regularized to be compressible to
lower dimensional ϕ, and the basis functions are generated by a
temporal coordinate MLP fτ , which implicitly enforces temporal
smoothness. We show the results of applying NTP on NRSfM and
lidar scene flow integration.

by linearly combining a small set of Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT) bases. However, it is well known that such
low-rank linear models are not sufficient to represent complex motions and dense data where the number of trajectories is far greater than the length of the sequence. Recent
state-of-the-art NRSfM methods [33, 34, 53] combine both
shape and trajectory priors or are tailored towards specific
scenes such as deforming surfaces [31, 42, 44]. In this paper, we revisit the idea of a general trajectory prior. Our
approach differs from current methods in that we use the
architectural regularization properties of neural networks.
We are inspired by the recent innovations of using coordinate MLPs [36, 38, 40, 45] and propose a new general
neural trajectory prior to model continuous spatio-temporal
motions of dynamic scenes (see Fig. 1). We utilize the
smoothness bias of coordinate MLPs to enforce trajectories
to be temporally smooth and encourage nearby positions to
share similar motions. We also introduce a bottleneck layer
to the model, thus effectively constraining the output trajectories to be compressible to low dimensions. MLPs with
bottleneck has previously been used to regularize shapes for
shape-based NRSfM approaches [10, 53, 59, 60], showing
16532

