Vision-Language Pre-Training with Triple Contrastive Learning
Jinyu Yang1 , Jiali Duan2 , Son Tran2 , Yi Xu2 , Sampath Chanda2 , Liqun Chen2 , Belinda Zeng2 ,
Trishul Chilimbi2 , and Junzhou Huang1
1
University Of Texas at Arlington, 2 Amazon
jinyu.yang@mavs.uta.edu, jzhuang@uta.edu
{duajiali,sontran,yxaamzn,csampat,liquchen,zengb,trishulc}@amazon.com

Abstract
Vision-language representation learning largely benefits
from image-text alignment through contrastive losses (e.g.,
InfoNCE loss). The success of this alignment strategy is
attributed to its capability in maximizing the mutual information (MI) between an image and its matched text. However,
simply performing cross-modal alignment (CMA) ignores
data potential within each modality, which may result in degraded representations. For instance, although CMA-based
models are able to map image-text pairs close together in
the embedding space, they fail to ensure that similar inputs
from the same modality stay close by. This problem can get
even worse when the pre-training data is noisy. In this paper, we propose triple contrastive learning (TCL) for visionlanguage pre-training by leveraging both cross-modal and
intra-modal self-supervision. Besides CMA, TCL introduces
an intra-modal contrastive objective to provide complementary benefits in representation learning. To take advantage
of localized and structural information from image and text
input, TCL further maximizes the average MI between local regions of image/text and their global summary. To the
best of our knowledge, ours is the first work that takes into
account local structure information for multi-modality representation learning. Experimental evaluations show that our
approach is competitive and achieves the new state of the
art on various common down-stream vision-language tasks
such as image-text retrieval and visual question answering.

1. Introduction
Self-supervision is an active research topic both in vision
and language representation learning. Numerous methods
have been proposed with an impressive performance on challenging tasks [5, 7, 10, 17, 19, 40]. A typical approach is to
pre-train a model on massive amounts of unlabeled data in
a self-supervised manner, then fine-tune it for downstream
1 https://github.com/uta-smile/TCL
2 This work was done while Jinyu Yang was interning at Amazon

tasks (e.g., zero-shot learning and transfer learning) of interest. In the vision, self-supervision can be carried out using
exemplars [13], predicting the relative position between two
random patches [11] or via solving jigsaw [32]. In language,
masked language modeling (MLM) is widely used as the
method of choice for self-supervision.
Inspired by the success of self-supervision in individual modalities, there is a surging interest in self-supervised
vision-language pre-training (VLP) [4, 14], which is essential for multi-modal tasks such as visual question answering
(VQA), image-text retrieval, and visual entailment. These
tasks heavily rely on joint multi-modal embeddings which
are typically obtained by modeling interactions between vision and language features. To achieve this goal, various
VLP frameworks are proposed by exploiting massive imagetext pairs in the past few years [8, 16, 27, 28], where the
key insight is to apply a fusion encoder to the concatenation
of vision and language features to learn joint representations. Although simple and effective, this strategy suffers
from the problem that vision and language features lie in
different embedding spaces, which makes the feature fusion
quite challenging [26]. To mitigate this problem, the most
recent state of the art [26] disentangles the learning process
into two stages: i) first align cross-modal features by using
a contrastive loss (i.e., InfoNCE [33]) to pull the embeddings of matched image-text pairs together while pushing
those of non-matched pairs apart; then ii) apply a fusion encoder to the aligned image and text representations to learn
joint embeddings. Specifically, stage 1 aims to maximize
the mutual information (MI) between matched image-text
pair (I, T ) through InfoNCE loss, which is spurred by the
fact that I and T represent two ”views” of the same semantic [46]. However, the limitation of stage 1 lies in that:
simply performing cross-modal alignment (CMA) cannot
fully guarantee the expressiveness of the learned features
that is essential for joint multi-modal representation learning. The main reason is that I and T are unable to fully
describe each other. For instance, the text in (Figure 1 A)
only focus on salient objects in the paired image, while overlooking other detailed and fine-grained information. To align
I and T , only co-occurring features are captured by CMA.

15671

