Colar: Effective and Efficient Online Action Detection by Consulting Exemplars
Le Yang Junwei Han* Dingwen Zhang
School of Automation, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
https://nwpu-brainlab.gitee.io/index en

Abstract
Online action detection has attracted increasing research interests in recent years. Current works model historical dependencies and anticipate the future to perceive
the action evolution within a video segment and improve
the detection accuracy. However, the existing paradigm ignores category-level modeling and does not pay sufficient
attention to efficiency. Considering a category, its representative frames exhibit various characteristics. Thus, the
category-level modeling can provide complimentary guidance to the temporal dependencies modeling. This paper develops an effective exemplar-consultation mechanism
that first measures the similarity between a frame and exemplary frames, and then aggregates exemplary features based
on the similarity weights. This is also an efficient mechanism, as both similarity measurement and feature aggregation require limited computations. Based on the exemplarconsultation mechanism, the long-term dependencies can
be captured by regarding historical frames as exemplars,
while the category-level modeling can be achieved by regarding representative frames from a category as exemplars. Due to the complementarity from the categorylevel modeling, our method employs a lightweight architecture but achieves new high performance on three benchmarks. In addition, using a spatio-temporal network to
tackle video frames, our method makes a good trade-off
between effectiveness and efficiency. Code is available at
https://github.com/VividLe/Online-Action-Detection.

1. Introduction
With the development of mobile communications, video
has become a powerful medium to record life and transform information. As a result, video understanding technologies have aroused increasing research interests. Among
these technologies, temporal action detection [36, 39, 62]
can discover action instances from untrimmed videos and
extract valuable information. Well-performed action detec* Corresponding author.

OadTR

Self-attention at each frame

Anticipating future

Colar

Historical exemplars

······
Category exemplars

Figure 1. Comparison between existing state-of-the-art method
OadTR [42] and our proposed Colar. Unlike OadTR, Colar consults historical exemplars to model long-term dependencies and
consults category exemplars to capture category-level particularity, forming an effective and efficient method.

tion algorithms can benefit smart surveillance [32], anomaly
detection [4] etc. In recent years, along with action detection technologies becoming mature, a more challenging but
more practical
task,in online
namely
online
action
detection, has
(b) Differences
action
dectection
paradigm.
been proposed [8]. The online action detection algorithm
tackles a streaming video, reports the occurrence of an action instance, and keeps alarming until the action ends [8].
In inference, the algorithm only employs historical frames
that have been observed, but has no access to future frames.
As an early exploration, Geest et al. [8] discovered the
importance of modeling long-term dependencies. Later, Xu
et al. [45] revealed the value of anticipating future status
to enhance the long-term dependencies modeling. OadTR
[42] recently utilized the multi-head self-attention module
to jointly model historical dependencies and anticipate the
future, which achieved promising online action detection
results.
As an under-explored domain, there are three core challenges for online action detection: How to model long-term
dependencies? How to associate a frame with representative frames from the same category? How to conduct detection efficiently? Existing works [8, 42, 45] primarily focus on the long-term dependencies modeling, but ignore the

3160

