GIFS: Neural Implicit Function for General Shape Representation
Jianglong Ye1

Yuntao Chen2
Naiyan Wang2
1
2
UC San Diego
TuSimple

Xiaolong Wang1

Abstract
Recent development of neural implicit function has
shown tremendous success on high-quality 3D shape reconstruction. However, most works divide the space into
inside and outside of the shape, which limits their representing power to single-layer and watertight shapes. This
limitation leads to tedious data processing (converting nonwatertight raw data to watertight) as well as the incapability of representing general object shapes in the real
world. In this work, we propose a novel method to represent general shapes including non-watertight shapes and
shapes with multi-layer surfaces. We introduce General Implicit Function for 3D Shape (GIFS), which models the relationships between every two points instead of the relationships between points and surfaces. Instead of dividing 3D
space into predefined inside-outside regions, GIFS encodes
whether two points are separated by any surface. Experiments on ShapeNet show that GIFS outperforms previous
state-of-the-art methods in terms of reconstruction quality, rendering efficiency, and visual fidelity. Project page
is available at https://jianglongye.com/gifs.

Inside

Class2
Outside

Class3

(a) Previous works
Surface
Surface

(b) One possible approach

Point1

Point2

Point3
(c) Ours

1. Introduction
3D shape reconstruction is a fundamental problem in
computer vision, robotics, and graphics. The choice of
shape representation heavily affects the reconstruction quality. In recent years, Neural Implicit Function (NIFs) have
achieved high quality and high resolution reconstruction
with a compact representation [9, 11, 31, 47, 48]. Most NIF
approaches employ a neural network to classify whether a
3D point is inside or outside the surface [47] as shown in
Figure 1(a) or compute the signed distance from a 3D point
to one surface [48]. However, most shapes in the real world
cannot be simply represented by one watertight surface.
Considering multi-layer shapes (e.g., cars with seats inside), binary classification of the 3D space is insufficient.
To tackle this problem, one possible approach is to extend
the original definition from binary classification to multiclass classification. We take the double-layer circle as an
example and illustrate this idea in Figure 1(b). The lim-

Class1

(d) Demo

(e) Reconstruction result on ShapeNet Bus

Figure 1. Comparison of different methods. Previous works
divide the space into inside and outside like (a). One possible
approach for multi-layer shape is to perform multi-class classification like (b). Our method no longer assigns predefined labels to
points but classifies whether whether two points are separated by
any surface, as shown in (c). In (d) and (e), we present a demo
shape and a reconstructed bus from ShapeNet respectively.

itation of the extension is that shapes with different layers
require different models. Therefore it can not represent general shapes in a unified approach. This method will also fail
to represent non-watertight shapes (e.g., garments) since
they cannot be partitioned into any number of regions.
In this paper, we introduce a General Implicit Function
for 3D Shape (GIFS). Along with this representation, we
further design an algorithm to extract explicit surfaces from
GIFS. Instead of dividing a 3D space into predefined cate-

12829

