Bridging Video-text Retrieval with Multiple Choice Questions
Yuying Ge1

Yixiao Ge2 Xihui Liu5 Dian Li4 Ying Shan2 Xiaohu Qie3
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 ARC Lab, 3 Tencent PCG
4
Content Understanding Center, 3 Tencent PCG 5 UC Berkeley

yuyingge@hku.hk

Ping Luo1

{yixiaoge, goodli, yingsshan, tigerqie}@tencent.com

xihui.liu@berkeley.edu

pluo@cs.hku.hk

https://github.com/TencentARC/MCQ
“dancing”
“laying” 
“talking”  Verb answer

“green grass” 
“stage”  MCQ
Noun answer “beach” 

BridgeFormer
𝑄

𝑄

𝐾, 𝑉

TextFormer

Remove
for retrieval

VideoFormer
𝐹1

𝐹2

𝐹𝑀

…

Verb question
Noun question
“A girl in shorts and a hat
is [?] on the [?]”

Figure 1. Overview of our novel pretext task, Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ), for video-text pre-training. MCQ is performed using a
newly-proposed parametric module BridgeFormer, which associates all-level local features (intermediate tokens) from VideoFormer and
TextFormer to answer multiple choice questions in the form of contrastive learning. Given that nouns and verbs carry informative local
objects and object motions, we construct a noun question (in yellow) and a verb question (in red) by erasing the corresponding phrase
from the sentence. The BridgeFormer is trained to select the correct erased phrase via visual reasoning with intermediate tokens from
VideoFormer, given the questions’ intermediate tokens from TextFormer. The noun and verb questions promote VideoFormer to capture
detailed spatial content and temporal information. The semantic associations between video-text intermediate tokens are also enhanced via
the proxy task of questions and answers. Note that BridgeFormer is removed for downstream retrieval.

Abstract
Pre-training a model to learn transferable video-text
representation for retrieval has attracted a lot of attention
in recent years. Previous dominant works mainly adopt
two separate encoders for efficient retrieval, but ignore local associations between videos and texts. Another line of
research uses a joint encoder to interact video with texts,
but results in low efficiency since each text-video pair needs
to be fed into the model. In this work, we enable finegrained video-text interactions while maintaining high efficiency for retrieval via a novel pretext task, dubbed as Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ), where a parametric module BridgeFormer is trained to answer the “questions” constructed by the text features via resorting to the video features. Specifically, we exploit the rich semantics of text (i.e.,
nouns and verbs) to build questions, with which the video
encoder can be trained to capture more regional content
and temporal dynamics. In the form of questions and answers, the semantic associations between local video-text

features can be properly established. BridgeFormer is able
to be removed for downstream retrieval, rendering an efficient and flexible model with only two encoders. Our
method outperforms state-of-the-art methods on the popular text-to-video retrieval task in five datasets with different
experimental setups (i.e., zero-shot and fine-tune), including
HowTo100M (one million videos). We further conduct zeroshot action recognition, which can be cast as video-to-text
retrieval, and our approach also significantly surpasses its
counterparts. As an additional benefit, our method achieves
competitive results with much shorter pre-training videos
on single-modality downstream tasks, e.g., action recognition with linear evaluation.

1. Introduction
Pre-training a model to learn transferable representations for video-text retrieval requires the understanding of
video concepts, text semantics, and the relationships be-

16167

