Deep Safe Multi-view Clustering: Reducing the Risk of Clustering Performance
Degradation Caused by View Increase
Huayi Tang1,2 , Yong Liu1,2 ∗
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing, China
1

tangh4681@gmail.com,liuyonggsai@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
Multi-view clustering has been shown to boost clustering performance by effectively mining the complementary
information from multiple views. However, we observe that
learning from data with more views is not guaranteed to
achieve better clustering performance than from data with
fewer views. To address this issue, we propose a general
deep learning based framework that is guaranteed to reduce the risk of performance degradation caused by view
increase. Concretely, the model is trained to simultaneously
extract complementary information and discard the meaningless noise by automatically selecting features. These
two learning procedures are incorporated into one unified
framework by the proposed optimization objective. In theory, the empirical clustering risk of the model is no higher
than learning from data before the view increase and data
of the new increased single view. Also, the expected clustering risk of the model under divergence-based loss is no
higher than that with high probability. Comprehensive experiments on benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of the proposed framework in achieving safe multi-view clustering.

1. Introduction
Multi-view data, which contains data collected from different sources, exists widely in real-world application scenarios. For example, video can be represented by audible
and visual information, and images can be characterized
by different descriptors. As an important topic in multiview learning, multi-view clustering (MVC) aims to partition similar instances into the same group and dissimilar
instances into different groups by utilizing the complementary information in multi-view data [35, 46]. Through the
well-designed learning mechanism, multi-view clustering
∗ Corresponding author.

can fully discover the potential structure hidden in multiview data and achieve better clustering performance.

Figure 1. Clustering performance degradation phenomenon.

However, in real-world scenarios, multi-view data are
collected and constructed dynamically, which leads to an increasing number of views. For instance, a new view will be
added to the original multi-view dataset after a new description is proposed. Thus, a natural problem is, will the clustering performance of the multi-view model degrade when
the number of views increases? Intuitively, data of the increased view contain both semantic features and meaningless noise. The former can provide complementary information that is beneficial for improving clustering performance. The latter, however, may bring the risk of clustering
performance degradation. That is, more views do not necessarily guarantee to promote the clustering performance.
Sometimes, on the contrary, conducting clustering on the
dataset with more views may obtain worse results than that
with fewer views. This performance degradation caused by
view increase is observed in our experiments. As shown in
Figure 1, the clustering performance of some MVC methods degenerates when the number of views increases, which
verifies the fact that conducting clustering on datasets with
more views will not always be better. Besides, single-view
can be regarded as a special variant of multi-view. Thus, any
multi-view model can be directly applied to obtain a singleview result on data of the new increased view. This result
may perform better than the multi-view model, which has
been verified and discussed in [34]. Therefore, how to re-

202

