Anomaly Detection via Reverse Distillation from One-Class Embedding
Hanqiu Deng
Xingyu Li
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta
{hanqiu1,xingyu}@ualberta.ca

Abstract
Knowledge distillation (KD) achieves promising results
on the challenging problem of unsupervised anomaly detection (AD). The representation discrepancy of anomalies in
the teacher-student (T-S) model provides essential evidence
for AD. However, using similar or identical architectures
to build the teacher and student models in previous studies hinders the diversity of anomalous representations. To
tackle this problem, we propose a novel T-S model consisting of a teacher encoder and a student decoder and introduce a simple yet effective ”reverse distillation” paradigm
accordingly. Instead of receiving raw images directly, the
student network takes teacher model’s one-class embedding as input and targets to restore the teacher’s multiscale representations. Inherently, knowledge distillation in
this study starts from abstract, high-level presentations to
low-level features. In addition, we introduce a trainable
one-class bottleneck embedding (OCBE) module in our T-S
model. The obtained compact embedding effectively preserves essential information on normal patterns, but abandons anomaly perturbations. Extensive experimentation on
AD and one-class novelty detection benchmarks shows that
our method surpasses SOTA performance, demonstrating
our proposed approach’s effectiveness and generalizability.

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection (AD) refers to identifying and localizing anomalies with limited, even no, prior knowledge of
abnormality. The wide applications of AD, such as industrial defect detection [3], medical out-of-distribution detection [50], and video surveillance [24], makes it a critical
task as well as a spotlight. In the context of unsupervised
AD, no prior information on anomalies is available. Instead, a set of normal samples is provided for reference.
To tackle this problem, previous efforts attempt to construct
various self-supervision tasks on those anomaly-free samples. These tasks include, but not limited to, sample reconstruction [2,5,11,16,26,34,38,48], pseudo-outlier augmen-

Figure 1. Anomaly detection examples on MVTec [3]. Multiresolution Knowledge Distillation (MKD) [33] adopts the conventional KD architecture in Fig. Fig. 2(a). Our reverse distillation
method is capable of precisely localising a variate of anomalies.

tation [23, 42, 46], knowledge distillation [4, 33, 39], etc.
In this study, we tackle the problem of unsupervised
anomaly detection from the knowledge distillation-based
point of view. In knowledge distillation (KD) [6, 15],
knowledge is transferred within a teacher-student (T-S) pair.
In the context of unsupervised AD, since the student experiences only normal samples during training, it is likely to
generate discrepant representations from the teacher when
a query is anomalous. This hypothesis forms the basis of
KD-based methods for anomaly detection. However, this
hypothesis is not always true in practice due to (1) the
identical or similar architectures of the teacher and student
networks (i.e., non-distinguishing filters [33]) and (2) the
same data flow in the T-S model during knowledge transfer/distillation. Though the use of a smaller student network
partially addresses this issue [33, 39], the weaker representation capability of shallow architectures hinders the model
from precisely detecting and localizing anomalies.
To holistically address the issue mentioned above, we
propose a new paradigm of knowledge distillation, namely
Reverse Distillation, for anomaly detection. We use simple diagrams in Fig. 2 to highlight the systematic difference between conventional knowledge distillation and the
proposed reverse distillation. First, unlike the conventional
knowledge distillation framework where both teacher and
student adopt the encoder structure, the T-S model in our

9737

