Fingerprinting Deep Neural Networks Globally via Universal
Adversarial Perturbations
Zirui Peng1 * Shaofeng Li1 * Guoxing Chen1,
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

2

Cheng Zhang2

The Ohio State University

3

Haojin Zhu1,

CSIRO’s Data61

4

Minhui Xue3,4

The University of Adelaide

{pengzirui,shaofengli,guoxingchen,zhu-hj}@sjtu.edu.cn, zhang.7804@osu.edu, jason.xue@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel and practical mechanism to enable the service provider to verify whether a suspect model is stolen from the victim model via model extraction attacks. Our key insight is that the profile of a DNN
model’s decision boundary can be uniquely characterized
by its Universal Adversarial Perturbations (UAPs). UAPs
belong to a low-dimensional subspace and piracy models’
subspaces are more consistent with victim model’s subspace
compared with non-piracy model. Based on this, we propose a UAP fingerprinting method for DNN models and
train an encoder via contrastive learning that takes fingerprints as inputs, outputs a similarity score. Extensive studies show that our framework can detect model Intellectual
Property (IP) breaches with confidence > 99.99 % within
only 20 fingerprints of the suspect model. It also has good
generalizability across different model architectures and is
robust against post-modifications on stolen models.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, deep learning has emerged as a
promising approach and the foundation for a wide range of
real-world applications. As network architecture becomes
more and more sophisticated and training costs rise, welltrained models become lucrative targets for the adversary
looking to “steal” them. By querying the publicly available
APIs of these models, an adversary can collect the outputs
to train a piracy model, dubbed model extraction attacks [4,
6, 7, 16, 31, 37, 42].
Existing works on mitigating model extraction attacks
and protecting the Intellectual Property (IP) of trained models fall into two groups [8, 18]. The first group is based
on watermarking techniques [2, 14, 17, 26, 29, 32, 35]. The
idea is that the model owner introduces into her IP model
a backdoor (i.e., a watermark), which would persist during
* Equal contribution.

the model extraction. By checking whether a suspect model
contains the injected watermark, a defender can determine
whether this model is pirated.
The other category is based on fingerprinting techniques
that leverage inherent information (i.e., decision boundary)
of the trained models. Observing that a DNN model can
be uniquely profiled by its decision boundary which is also
likely to be inherited by piracy models, a model extraction
attack can be identified by examining whether a suspect
model has (almost) the same decision boundary as the victim model. A line of research [5, 13, 24] adopts adversarial
examples to represent the decision boundaries.
However, the effectiveness of existing mitigation
schemes were challenged. Watermarking based solutions
suffer from utility drop caused by watermarks. Another
concern is that an attacker can illegally inject a backdoor
to argue the ownership which violates the non-forgeable demand [17]. Adversarial examples can only capture the local
geometry, particularly, orientations of the decision boundary in local regions surrounding the adversarial examples,
which may fail to be transferred to the suspect model due to
decision boundary variation during the extraction [21, 30].
In this paper, we explore methods to capture the global
characteristics of the decision boundary. As demonstrated
in Figure 1, we propose a more effective model extraction
detection scheme based on Universal Adversarial Perturbations (UAPs) [27]. A carefully selected UAP vector v can
fool the model on almost all datapoints. We find that UAPs
are drawn from a low-dimensional subspace that contains
most of the normal vectors of decision boundary. Due to
decision boundary dependency, UAP subspaces of piracy
models are more consistent with that of the victim model,
which enables us to give a similarity score.
There are two challenges in applying UAPs for detecting model extraction. First, since the calculation of UAPs
usually requires the knowledge of model parameters (i.e.,
white-box access) which model owners are not willing to
provide, it is intractable for the defender to obtain UAPs of
suspect models via black-box access. The second challenge

13430

