HyperSegNAS: Bridging One-Shot Neural Architecture Search with
3D Medical Image Segmentation using HyperNet
Cheng Peng1 Andriy Myronenko2 Ali Hatamizadeh2 Vishwesh Nath2
Md Mahfuzur Rahman Siddiquee3 Yufan He2 Daguang Xu2 Rama Chellappa1 Dong Yang2
1
Johns Hopkins University 2 NVIDIA 3 Arizona State University

Abstract
Semantic segmentation of 3D medical images is a challenging task due to the high variability of the shape and
pattern of objects (such as organs or tumors). Given the
recent success of deep learning in medical image segmentation, Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has been introduced to find high-performance 3D segmentation network
architectures. However, because of the massive computational requirements of 3D data and the discrete optimization nature of architecture search, previous NAS methods
require a long search time or necessary continuous relaxation, and commonly lead to sub-optimal network architectures. While one-shot NAS can potentially address these
disadvantages, its application in the segmentation domain
has not been well studied in the expansive multi-scale multipath search space. To enable one-shot NAS for medical image segmentation, our method, named HyperSegNAS, introduces a HyperNet to assist super-net training by incorporating architecture topology information. Such a HyperNet can be removed once the super-net is trained and introduces no overhead during architecture search. We show
that HyperSegNAS yields better performing and more intuitive architectures compared to the previous state-of-the-art
(SOTA) segmentation networks; furthermore, it can quickly
and accurately find good architecture candidates under different computing constraints. Our method is evaluated on
public datasets from the Medical Segmentation Decathlon
(MSD) challenge, and achieves SOTA performances.

1. Introduction
Automated medical image segmentation is an active
research area with many clinical applications including
anatomical analysis [29] and disease diagnosis [14]. Medical image segmentation remains challenging despite advances in deep learning methods. To address the large variability of target objects, the limited number of data samples,
and the higher dimensional and high resolution nature of

(a) DiNTS [16] Searched Architecture, 5,067 MB

(b) HyperSegNAS Searched Architecture, 5,358 MB

(c) Five-fold cross-validation for 1a and 1b

Figure 1. Architectures found from DiNTS [16] (1a) and our
proposed HyperSegNAS (1b) based on the Pancreas dataset in
MSD [1]. Under similar compute costs, HyperSegNAS’ architecture uses more skip connections and ensure features of multiple
scales are propagated for predictions. Our architecture performs
significantly better than DiNTS, as shown in 1c.

3D images, researchers have spent a great effort in designing efficient neural architectures under various computing
settings [9, 10, 27, 28, 32].
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has surfaced in response to handcrafted approaches and promises to find
well performing architecture through automated algorithms.
While initially focusing on classification [5, 26, 39, 43, 48],
NAS has been also introduced to the segmentation domain
in recent years [16, 21, 25, 37, 38, 40, 44, 47]. Segmentation

20741

