Polymorphic-GAN: Generating Aligned Samples across Multiple Domains with
Learned Morph Maps
Seung Wook Kim 1,2,3
Karsten Kreis1
Daiqing Li1
4
1,2,3
Antonio Torralba
Sanja Fidler
1

NVIDIA

2

University of Toronto

3

Vector Institute

4

MIT

{seungwookk,kkreis,daiqingl,sfidler}@nvidia.com, torralba@mit.edu
Zero-shot Segmentation Transfer

Aligned Samples

Image Editing

Edit Transfer

Figure 1. We introduce Polymorphic-GAN (PMGAN) for generating aligned samples across multiple domains. PMGAN enables a diverse
set of applications, including zero-shot segmentation and cross-domain image editing, by learning geometric differences between domains.

Abstract
Modern image generative models show remarkable sample quality when trained on a single domain or class of
objects. In this work, we introduce a generative adversarial network that can simultaneously generate aligned image samples from multiple related domains. We leverage
the fact that a variety of object classes share common attributes, with certain geometric differences. We propose
Polymorphic-GAN which learns shared features across all
domains and a per-domain morph layer to morph shared
features according to each domain. In contrast to previous works, our framework allows simultaneous modelling
of images with highly varying geometries, such as images
of human faces, painted and artistic faces, as well as multiple different animal faces. We demonstrate that our model
produces aligned samples for all domains and show how it
can be used for applications such as segmentation transfer and cross-domain image editing, as well as training in
low-data regimes. Additionally, we apply our PolymorphicGAN on image-to-image translation tasks and show that we
can greatly surpass previous approaches in cases where the
geometric differences between domains are large.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) have achieved
remarkable image synthesis quality [5, 11, 27, 28]. Moreover, GANs like StyleGAN [27, 28] have been shown to
form a semantic understanding of the modeled images in

their features [3, 4, 14, 21, 24, 34, 54, 59, 61, 66, 70], which
has been leveraged in diverse applications, including image
editing [9,19,30,31,36,58,73], inverse rendering [68], style
transfer [1,29], image-to-image translation [7,8,22,49], and
semi-supervised learning [34, 66, 70].
GANs are usually trained on images from individual domains, such as human faces [25, 27]. However, there are
many related domains which share similar semantics and
characteristics, such as animal faces or face paintings. In
our work, we aim to train a generative model with a shared
backbone to produce aligned samples from multiple related
domains. By aligned, we mean images that share common
attributes and conditions across domains, such as pose and
lighting. This has an obvious computational advantage by
sharing weights across domains, but more importantly, it
affords a variety of applications such as transferring segmentation labels from one domain to another, in which such
information may not be available. Furthermore, by editing
one domain, we get edits in other domains for free.
The main obstacle to building a GAN that simultaneously synthesizes outputs from different domains is that
even though the semantics are often shared, the geometry
can vary significantly (consider, for example, the face of
a human, a dog, and a cat). This prevents a natural sharing of generator features among such semantically aligned,
but geometrically varying domains. Common approaches
such as fine-tuning a pre-trained GAN [26, 43, 64] unfortunately lose the ability to sample from the parent domain, or,
more generally, multiple domains at the same time. Learn-

10630

