M5Product: Self-harmonized Contrastive Learning for E-commercial
Multi-modal Pretraining
Xiao Dong1† , Xunlin Zhan1,2† , Yangxin Wu1 , Yunchao Wei3 , Michael C. Kampffmeyer4 , Xiaoyong Wei5 ,
Minlong Lu6 , Yaowei Wang5 , Xiaodan Liang1,2?
1
Sun Yat-sen University 2 Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University 3 Beijing Jiaotong University
4
UiT The Arctic University of Norway 5 PengCheng Laboratory 6 Alibaba Group.
{dongx55, zhanxlin, wuyx29}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {dx.icandoit,wychao1987,xdliang328}@gmail.com,
ymlml@zju.edu.cn, michael.c.kampffmeyer@uit.no, cswei@scu.edu.cn, wangyw@pcl.ac.cn

Abstract

 

Despite the potential of multi-modal pre-training to
learn highly discriminative feature representations from
complementary data modalities, current progress is being
slowed by the lack of large-scale modality-diverse datasets.
By leveraging the natural suitability of E-commerce, where
different modalities capture complementary semantic information, we contribute a large-scale multi-modal pretraining dataset M5Product. The dataset comprises 5
modalities (image, text, table, video, and audio), covers
over 6,000 categories and 5,000 attributes, and is 500⇥
larger than the largest publicly available dataset with a similar number of modalities. Furthermore, M5Product contains incomplete modality pairs and noise while also having a long-tailed distribution, resembling most real-world
problems. We further propose Self-harmonized ContrAstive
LEarning (SCALE), a novel pretraining framework that
integrates the different modalities into a unified model
through an adaptive feature fusion mechanism, where the
importance of each modality is learned directly from the
modality embeddings and impacts the inter-modality contrastive learning and masked tasks within a multi-modal
transformer model. We evaluate the current multi-modal
pre-training state-of-the-art approaches and benchmark
their ability to learn from unlabeled data when faced with
the large number of modalities in the M5Product dataset.
We conduct extensive experiments on four downstream tasks
and demonstrate the superiority of our SCALE model, providing insights into the importance of dataset scale and diversity. Dataset and codes are available at 1 .

Category
Image

Caption

Table

Video

Audio

Text

Bubble Matt Blind Box Storage Ladder
Transparent Display Dust-proof Doll Hand-made
Jasmine Doll Acrylic Box Holder

Table

Item: Blind Box Ladder Storage Box
Brand: Tang Craftsman
Material: Wood
Color: White, Light Gray, Dark Gray
Applicable People: Adults
Applicable Scene: Study

Video

Audio

Figure 1. Our M5Product dataset contains a large variety of
modalities (image, text, table, video and audio) that depict the
categories, descriptions, materials, properties and purposes of Ecommerce products, and diverse real-world data samples.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning has been driving the rapid development of fields such as computer vision and natural
1

Image

https://xiaodongsuper.github.io/M5Product_dataset/
† Equal contribution. ? Corresponding Author.

language processing, as well as research on multi-modal
representation learning. In particular, it has been shown
both from a theoretical [18] and a practical [16, 58] perspective that large scale datasets with diverse modalities
can effectively enhance the discrimination of generated features and thus improve the performance in vision-language
tasks. However, current advances are severely limited by
the lack of such large-scale diverse-modality datasets, with
the largest public multi-modal datasets only containing text
and image modalities and no category information [41].
Given the prevalence of online shopping in daily life,
with its natural occurrence of multi-modal information

21252

