Set-Supervised Action Learning in Procedural Task Videos
via Pairwise Order Consistency
Zijia Lu
Northeastern Univeristy

Ehsan Elhamifar
Northeastern University

lu.zij@northeastern.edu

e.elhamifar@northeastern.edu

Abstract

Learning actions by partitioning long and untrimmed
procedural videos into action segments has recently drawn
increasing attention in video understanding.
Fullysupervised methods [23, 26, 46, 55, 57, 62] require dense
annotation of training videos with framewise action labels, which is costly and unscalable. Therefore, weaklysupervised methods [5, 9, 13, 30, 31, 33, 37, 44, 45, 52, 58]
learn from weak labels, in the form of action transcripts,
1 Code available at https://github.com/ZijiaLewisLu/
CVPR22-POC.

2

3

4

 















1 2
3 4

different
actions




 




1. Introduction

1

   





We address the problem of set-supervised action learning, whose goal is to learn an action segmentation model
using weak supervision in the form of sets of actions occurring in training videos. Our key observation is that videos
within the same task have similar ordering of actions, which
can be leveraged for effective learning. Therefore, we propose an attention-based method with a new Pairwise Ordering Consistency (POC) loss that encourages that for each
common action pair in two videos of the same task, the attentions of actions follow a similar ordering. Unlike existing sequence alignment methods, which misalign actions
in videos with different orderings or cannot reliably separate more from less consistent orderings, our POC loss
efficiently aligns videos with different action orders and is
differentiable, which enables end-to-end training. In addition, it avoids the time-consuming pseudo-label generation
of prior works. Our method efficiently learns the actions
and their temporal locations, therefore, extends the existing
attention-based action localization methods from learning
one action per video to multiple actions using our POC loss
along with video-level and frame-level losses. By experiments on three datasets, we demonstrate that our method
significantly improves the state of the art. We also show that
our method, with a small modification, can effectively address the transcript-supervised action learning task, where
actions and their ordering are available during training.1

  
estimated .
reference .
ordering




Figure 1. Our attention-based framework with pairwise ordering consistency for set-supervised action learning.

i.e., ordered lists of actions in videos, or action sets, i.e., sets
of unique actions in videos (obtained from video narrations,
captions or meta-tags). For action transcripts/sets, learning
faces the major challenge of finding the temporal regions
of actions in videos during the training. Learning from action sets, referred to as set-supervised action learning, additionally faces the challenge of not knowing the ground-truth
action orderings in training videos.
Most prior works on set-supervised action learning [31,
33, 44] alternate between three steps: i) generating actiontranscripts from action-sets, ii) generating pseudo-labels
from transcripts using Viterbi decoding, iii) training the
model using pseudo-labels. However, generating transcripts
and pseudo-labels is costly, slowing down the training and
inference speeds, while the often erroneous pseudo-labels in
early training iterations degrade the performance. [13] proposes a two-branch CNN that co-supervise each other and
directly predicts the label and length of each video segment.
Despite faster training/inference speed, [13] uses a fixed ra-

19903

