MISF:Multi-level Interactive Siamese Filtering for High-Fidelity Image Inpainting
Xiaoguang Li1 ,* Qing Guo2∗ , Di Lin3 , Ping Li4 ,
Wei Feng3† , Song Wang1†
1

University of South Carolina, USA, 2 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, 3 College of
Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, China, 4 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong

Abstract
Although achieving significant progress, existing deep
generative inpainting methods still show low generalization
across different scenes. As a result, the generated images
usually contain artifacts or the filled pixels differ greatly
from the ground truth, making them far from real-world applications. Image-level predictive filtering is a widely used
restoration technique by predicting suitable kernels adaptively according to different input scenes. Inspired by this
inherent advantage, we explore the possibility of addressing
image inpainting as a filtering task. To this end, we first study
the advantages and challenges of the image-level predictive
filtering for inpainting: the method can preserve local structures and avoid artifacts but fails to fill large missing areas.
Then, we propose the semantic filtering by conducting filtering on deep feature level, which fills the missing semantic
information but fails to recover the details. To address the issues while adopting the respective advantages, we propose a
novel filtering technique, i.e., Multi-level Interactive Siamese
Filtering (MISF) containing two branches: kernel prediction branch (KPB) and semantic & image filtering branch
(SIFB). These two branches are interactively linked: SIFB
provides multi-level features for KPB while KPB predicts
dynamic kernels for SIFB. As a result, the final method takes
the advantage of effective semantic & image-level filling for
high-fidelity inpainting. Moreover, we discuss the relationship between MISF and the naive encoder-decoder-based
inpainting, inferring that MISF provides novel dynamic convolutional operations to enhance the high generalization
capability across scenes. We validate our method on three
challenging datasets, i.e., Dunhuang, Places2, and CelebA.
Our method outperforms state-of-the-art baselines on four
metrics, i.e., L1 , PSNR, SSIM, and LPIPS.

* Xiaoguang Li and Qing Guo are co-first authors and contribute equally.
† Wei Feng (wfeng@ieee.org) and Song Wang (songwang@cec.sc.edu)

are the corresponding authors. Please try the released code and model in
https://github.com/tsingqguo/misf.

1. Introduction
Image inpainting is a fundamental problem in computer
vision and artificial intelligence applications. The main goal
is to fill missing pixels in an image and make it identical
to the clean one. Recent works mainly address the task by
modeling it as a generation task [17, 19, 24, 30]. As a result,
they can employ cutting-edge deep generative techniques
(e.g., generative adversarial network [10, 22]) to realize highquality restoration on challenging datasets. However, the
generative network-based inpainting encodes the input image
to a latent space and then decodes it to a new image. Such
a process neglects the explicit prior, i.e., smoothness across
neighboring pixels or features, and the fidelity of inpainting
fully relies on the data and training strategy.
Note that, different from the generation task, image inpainting has its specific challenges: First, the image inpainting requires the completed images to respect the clean image (i.e., to produce high-fidelity images) and to be natural.
These requirements make image inpainting different from
the pure image generation task that mainly focuses on naturalness. Second, the missing areas’ shapes may be different
and the background scenes are diverse. These facts require
the inpainting method to have high generalization capability
across missing areas and scenes. Although deep generative
networks achieve significant progress on image inpainting,
they are far from solving the above challenges. For example,
the recent work RFRNet [17] conducts feature reasoning on
the encoder-decoder network and achieves state-of-the-art
performance on public datasets. Nevertheless, given different faces with different missing areas, it is hard to produce
high-fidelity inpainting results. Moreover, the artifacts appear in the results. As shown in Fig. 1, for the top-left
example with small missing areas, RFRNet can generate a
natural face. However, when comparing with the ground
truth, we see that the local structures around the arrows are
distorted. For the bottom-left example with larger missing
areas, RFRNet even fails to produce a natural face. When
handling other natural scenes (e.g., two examples on the

1869

