Panoptic-PHNet: Towards Real-Time and High-Precision LiDAR Panoptic
Segmentation via Clustering Pseudo Heatmap
Jinke Li

Xiao He Yang Wen Yuan Gao Xiaoqiang Cheng
Uisee Foundation Research & Development

Dan Zhang

{jinke.li, xiao.he, yang.wen, yuan.gao, xiaoqiang.cheng, dan.zhang}@uisee.com

64

Abstract

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been a rapid development of
autonomous driving, and as an essential perception task of
its key technologies, scene understanding has attracted considerable attention from researchers. Panoptic segmentation is a recently introduced task in the image domain [18]
that aims to unify semantic segmentation and instance segmentation in a single framework. With the release of LiDAR point cloud benchmarks, e.g., SemanticKITTI [1] and
nuScenes [10], related works in the 3D field have also been
extensively promoted.
The purpose of LiDAR panoptic segmentation is not
only to predict class labels for all points, including foreground points (thing) and background points (stuff ), but

60
Panoptic Quality [%]

As a rising task, panoptic segmentation is faced with
challenges in both semantic segmentation and instance segmentation. However, in terms of speed and accuracy, existing LiDAR methods in the field are still limited. In this
paper, we propose a fast and high-performance LiDARbased framework, referred to as Panoptic-PHNet, with three
attractive aspects: 1) We introduce a clustering pseudo
heatmap as a new paradigm, which, followed by a center grouping module, yields instance centers for efficient
clustering without object-level learning tasks. 2) A knntransformer module is proposed to model the interaction
among foreground points for accurate offset regression. 3)
For backbone design, we fuse the fine-grained voxel features
and the 2D Bird’s Eye View (BEV) features with different
receptive fields to utilize both detailed and global information. Extensive experiments on both SemanticKITTI dataset
and nuScenes dataset show that our Panoptic-PHNet surpasses state-of-the-art methods by remarkable margins with
a real-time speed. We achieve the 1st place on the public
leaderboard of SemanticKITTI and leading performance on
the recently released leaderboard of nuScenes.

Panoptic-PHNet

56
DS-Net
52

Panoptic-PolarNet

48

KPConv + PointPillar

44
40

LPSAD

Rangenet++ + PointPillar

36
0

2

4

6
8
Frames-per-second

10

12

Figure 1. Panoptic quality vs. single frame inference latency on
SemanticKITTI [1]. Green area indicates real-time zone, which
meets 10 frame-per-second frequency. The 2D CNN based approaches [22, 40], the 3D CNN based approach [14] and the combined methods [1] are shown in blue, red and gray respectively.
Our proposed Panoptic-PHNet outperforms all other methods in
PQ by a large margin and still maintains a real-time speed.

also the instance IDs for thing points. According to the implementation of instance segmentation, panoptic segmentation can be categorized into proposal-based and proposalfree approaches.
Proposal-based methods require an independent network
or branch to predict proposals [1, 17], a drawback of which
is that the capability of instance segmentation heavily depends on the performance of object detection.
In contrast, proposal-free ones [14, 19, 24] explore
clustering-based methods for instance segmentation. Since
such methods are not bothered with the inconsistency issue based on a cascade design, they are relatively elegant in
respect of implementation. Yet the commonly used heuristic clustering algorithms, such as Mean Shift [7] and HDBSCAN [4], are time-consuming and difficult to be accelerated with GPU. Although Panoptic-PolarNet [40] attempts
to use a lightweight instance head from Panoptic-DeepLab

11809

