Uncertainty-Guided Probabilistic Transformer for Complex Action Recognition
Hongji Guo, Hanjing Wang, Qiang Ji
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180
{guoh11, wangh36, jiq}@rpi.edu

Abstract
A complex action consists of a sequence of atomic
actions that interact with each other over a relatively
long period of time. This paper introduces a probabilistic model named Uncertainty-Guided Probabilistic Transformer (UGPT) for complex action recognition. The selfattention mechanism of a Transformer is used to capture the
complex and long-term dynamics of the complex actions. By
explicitly modeling the distribution of the attention scores,
we extend the deterministic Transformer to a probabilistic
Transformer in order to quantify the uncertainty of the prediction. The model prediction uncertainty is used to improve both training and inference. Specifically, we propose
a novel training strategy by introducing a majority model
and a minority model based on the epistemic uncertainty.
During the inference, the prediction is jointly made by both
models through a dynamic fusion strategy. Our method is
validated on the benchmark datasets, including Breakfast
Actions, MultiTHUMOS, and Charades. The experiment results show that our model achieves the state-of-the-art performance under both sufficient and insufficient data.

1. Introduction
In general, a complex action refers to a high-level activity like “making a sandwich”, which consists of a sequence of atomic actions such as “cutting bun” and “smearing butter” as illustrated in Fig. 1. In this paper, we deal
with complex action recognition. It has many applications
such as visual surveillance [23], human-robot interactions
[24], and sports analysis [33]. Complex action recognition is challenging because of the following reasons: (1)
complex actions have relatively long temporal durations,
which makes it difficult for conventional dynamic models
to capture the long-range dependencies; (2) people perform the same complex actions differently, which causes
a large intra-class variation; and (3) background and irrelevant frames contained in the video may cause difficulties
for the recognition.
Most existing approaches directly recognize the com-

cut bun

smear butter

take topping

put topping

put bun

take topping

smear butter

put topping

put bun

Person 1

cut bun

Person 2

Figure 1. Two samples of “making a sandwich” in Breakfast Actions [18]. A complex action consists of a sequence of atomic
actions, which may vary in durations, orders, etc.

plex actions without explicitly considering the underlying
dynamics [1, 6, 29, 42]. In fact, the information of atomic
actions and their interactions are often ignored. However,
the underlying interactions among atomic actions over time
are crucial for understanding complex actions [21, 44, 47].
Furthermore, complex actions may last for a long period,
traditional sequence modeling architectures such as recurrent neural network [30], long short-term memory [12] and
gated recurrent unit network [5] may not effectively and efficiently handle the long-range dependencies.
In this paper, we propose to use a Transformer [36] as the
backbone of our model to explicitly capture the long-term
dependencies among atomic actions. Transformers were
first proposed for the language translation task to capture the
dependencies among words. The self-attention mechanism,
which is the core of a Transformer, is now widely used for
computer vision tasks such as image generation [45], object
detection [20], and group activity recognition [8]. Considering its capabilities of capturing complex and long-range
dynamics, Transformer is suitable for modeling complex
actions.
While powerful, the conventional Transformer cannot effectively quantify its prediction uncertainty, which is essential to improving the model performance under noisy and
imbalanced data distribution. To address this issue, we introduce a probabilistic Transformer. Specifically, we treat
the attention scores of a Transformer as random variables
to capture the stochastic dependencies and uncertainty in
the inputs. We further propose to employ the negative log-

20052

