Sparse to Dense Dynamic 3D Facial Expression Generation
Naima Otberdout
Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inria, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189 CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France
naima.otberdout@univ-lille.fr

Claudio Ferrari
Deparment of Architecture and Engineering
University of Parma, Italy
claudio.ferrari2@unipr.it

Mohamed Daoudi
IMT Nord Europe, Institut Mines-Télécom, Univ. Lille, Centre for Digital Systems, F-59000 Lille, France
Univ. Lille, CNRS, Centrale Lille, Institut Mines-Télécom, UMR 9189 CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France
mohamed.daoudi@imt-nord-europe.fr

Stefano Berretti
Media Integration ad Communication Center
University of Florence, Italy

Alberto Del Bimbo
Media Integration ad Communication Center
University of Florence, Italy

stefano.berretti@unifi.it

alberto.delbimbo@unifi.it

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a solution to the task of
generating dynamic 3D facial expressions from a neutral
3D face and an expression label. This involves solving
two sub-problems: (i) modeling the temporal dynamics of
expressions, and (ii) deforming the neutral mesh to obtain the expressive counterpart. We represent the temporal evolution of expressions using the motion of a sparse
set of 3D landmarks that we learn to generate by training a manifold-valued GAN (Motion3DGAN). To better encode the expression-induced deformation and disentangle
it from the identity information, the generated motion is
represented as per-frame displacement from a neutral configuration. To generate the expressive meshes, we train
a Sparse2Dense mesh Decoder (S2D-Dec) that maps the
landmark displacements to a dense, per-vertex displacement. This allows us to learn how the motion of a sparse
set of landmarks influences the deformation of the overall
face surface, independently from the identity. Experimental results on the CoMA and D3DFACS datasets show that
our solution brings significant improvements with respect to
previous solutions in terms of both dynamic expression generation and mesh reconstruction, while retaining good generalization to unseen data. Code and models are available
at https://github.com/CRISTAL-3DSAM/Sparse2Dense.

Figure 1. 3D dynamic facial expression generation: A GAN
generates the motion of 3D landmarks from an expression label
and noise; A decoder expands the animation from the landmarks
to a dense mesh, while keeping the identity of a neutral 3D face,

1. Introduction
Synthesizing dynamic 3D (4D) facial expressions aims
at generating realistic face instances with varying expressions or speech-related movements that dynamically evolve
across time, starting from a face in neutral expression. It
finds application in a wide range of graphics applications
spanning from 3D face modeling, to augmented and virtual reality for animated films and computer games. While
recent advances in generative neural networks have made
possible the development of effective solutions that operate on 2D images [17, 37], the literature on the problem of
generating facial animation in 3D is still quite limited.
To perform a faithful and accurate 3D facial animation,

20385

