Automatic Relation-aware Graph Network Proliferation
Shaofei Cai1,2 , Liang Li1 ,* Xinzhe Han1,2 , Jiebo Luo3 , Zheng-Jun Zha4 , Qingming Huang1,2,5
1
Key Lab of Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, 3 University of Rochester
4
University of Science and Technology of China, China, 5 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{shaofei.cai,xinzhe.han}@vipl.ict.ac.cn,liang.li@ict.ac.cn,
jluo@cs.rochester.edu,zhazj@ustc.edu.cn,qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Graph neural architecture search has sparked much attention as Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have shown
powerful reasoning capability in many relational tasks.
However, the currently used graph search space overemphasizes learning node features and neglects mining hierarchical relational information. Moreover, due to diverse mechanisms in the message passing, the graph search
space is much larger than that of CNNs. This hinders
the straightforward application of classical search strategies for exploring complicated graph search space. We
propose Automatic Relation-aware Graph Network Proliferation (ARGNP) for efficiently searching GNNs with
a relation-guided message passing mechanism. Specifically, we first devise a novel dual relation-aware graph
search space that comprises both node and relation learning operations. These operations can extract hierarchical
node/relational information and provide anisotropic guidance for message passing on a graph. Second, analogous to cell proliferation, we design a network proliferation
search paradigm to progressively determine the GNN architectures by iteratively performing network division and differentiation. The experiments on six datasets for four graph
learning tasks demonstrate that GNNs produced by our
method are superior to the current state-of-the-art handcrafted and search-based GNNs. Codes are available at
https://github.com/phython96/ARGNP.

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs), as a dominant paradigm
to handle graph-structured data, have significantly promoted the performance in many relation reasoning tasks,
such as molecular prediction [7, 15, 18, 24], social network
analysis [35,40], 3D point cloud recognition [30,31,47,54],
* Corresponding author.

object detection [19,22], semantic segmentation [23,33,53],
few-shot learning [26, 50, 60], etc. Despite their great success, the architectures of GNNs are usually manually designed, which requires tremendous expert knowledge and
intensive trial and error. To explore advanced GNN architectures and reduce the human intervention, researchers attempt to automate the design process with the help of neural architecture search (NAS) [17, 36, 43, 64, 65] and have
achieved superior performance. This is known as graph
neural architecture search, where there are two most critical
components: (1) graph search space and (2) search strategy.
The graph search space defines which graph neural networks can be represented in principle, determining the upper bound of networks’ reasoning capability. Current graph
search space mainly focuses on designing node-learning
operations, which is categorized into macro search space
[32, 43] and micro search space [11, 17, 36, 65]. The former explores the combinations of existing message passing mechanisms (i.e., using general-purpose GNNs as candidate operations), while the latter emphasizes the construction for novel ones (i.e., designing fine-grained operations
such as node aggregating and feature combining functions).
However, they all neglect mining the latent hierarchical
relational information associated with edges. In fact, relational information can provide anisotropic guidance for
message aggregation of neighboring nodes, which is critical for constructing relation-guided message passing mechanisms. Motivated by this, in this paper, we explore designing micro graph search space from the perspective of
learning both hierarchical relation and node features.
The search strategy details how to explore search space,
determining the search efficiency and effect. Some early
works [17, 64, 65] apply reinforcement learning (RL) based
strategy to search for GNNs by building, training, and
evaluating various graph neural architectures from scratch,
which is extremely time-consuming. Recently, due to
the high computational efficiency, one-shot differentiable
strategies [11, 32, 36] have attracted a lot of interest, which

10863

