How Well Do Sparse ImageNet Models Transfer?
Eugenia Iofinova*

Alexandra Peste*

Mark Kurtz

Dan Alistarh

IST Austria

IST Austria

Neural Magic

IST Austria & Neural Magic

Abstract
Transfer learning is a classic paradigm by which models pretrained on large “upstream” datasets are adapted to
yield good results on “downstream” specialized datasets.
Generally, more accurate models on the “upstream”
dataset tend to provide better transfer accuracy “downstream”. In this work, we perform an in-depth investigation of this phenomenon in the context of convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) trained on the ImageNet dataset,
which have been pruned—that is, compressed by sparsifiying their connections. We consider transfer using unstructured pruned models obtained by applying several stateof-the-art pruning methods, including magnitude-based,
second-order, re-growth, lottery-ticket, and regularization
approaches, in the context of twelve standard transfer tasks.
In a nutshell, our study shows that sparse models can match
or even outperform the transfer performance of dense models, even at high sparsities, and, while doing so, can lead
to significant inference and even training speedups. At
the same time, we observe and analyze significant differences in the behaviour of different pruning methods. The
code is available at: https://github.com/ISTDASLab/sparse-imagenet-transfer.

1. Introduction
The large computational costs of deep learning have
led to significant academic and industrial interest in model
compression, defined roughly as obtaining smaller-footprint
models matching the accuracy of larger models. Model
compression is a rapidly-developing area, and several general approaches have been investigated, of which pruning
and quantization are among the most popular [18, 28].
We focus our present study on weight pruning, whose
objective is to remove, by setting to zero, as many weights
as possible without losing model accuracy. Weight pruning
is, arguably, the compression method with the richest history [42] and is currently a very active research topic [28].
* These
authors contributed equally.
Correspondence
{eugenia.iofinova, alexandra.peste}@ist.ac.at

to:

Thanks to this trend, a set of fairly consistent accuracy
benchmarks has emerged for pruning, along with increasingly efficient computational support [11, 20, 40, 52].
One major goal of model compression is to enable deployment on edge devices. Such devices may naturally encounter different data distributions, so it is tempting to ask
how compressed models would perform for transfer learning, broadly defined as leveraging information from some
baseline “upstream” (“pretrained”) task in order to perform better on a “downstream” (“finetuning”) task. Specifically, we mainly focus on a prototypical transfer learning
setup [36]: starting from models trained and compressed on
the ImageNet-1K dataset [60], we refine the resulting models onto several different target tasks. In this context, we examine the question of how well the resulting sparse models
transfer. Our motivation is both practical—sparse transfer
can provide speedups for both inference and training on the
downstream model—and analytical, as we aim to shed light
on the impact of sparsity on the resulting features.
Our study will consider two common transfer learning
variants: full finetuning, where all unpruned weights can be
optimized during transfer, and linear finetuning, where only
the final linear layer of the model is finetuned downstream.
While both are popular, we will see that they can lead to
different results. We additionally explore inference-time
speedups using a sparsity-aware inference engine [9], and
for the first time examine training-time speed-up achievable
for linear finetuning via sparse models. Furthermore, we
analyze the impact of different pruning methods and task
characteristics on transfer performance.
We consider the top-performing pruning methods in
terms of ImageNet accuracy, roughly split into three categories. The first is given by progressive sparsification
methods, which start from an accurate dense baseline and
proceed to gradually remove weights, followed by finetuning. The prototypical example is gradual magnitude pruning (GMP) [17,22,23,69], which uses absolute weight magnitude as the pruning criterion. In addition, we examine
WoodFisher pruning [63], which leverages second-order information for highly-accurate pruning.
The second rough category is given by sparse regu-

12266

