PTTR: Relational 3D Point Cloud Object Tracking with Transformer
Changqing Zhou1,3† * Zhipeng Luo2,3† Yueru Luo1† Tianrui Liu1,3
Liang Pan2 ‡ Zhongang Cai3 Haiyu Zhao3 Shijian Lu1
1
Nanyang Technological University 2 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 3 Sensetime Research

Abstract
In a point cloud sequence, 3D object tracking aims to
predict the location and orientation of an object in the current search point cloud given a template point cloud. Motivated by the success of transformers, we propose Point
Tracking TRansformer (PTTR), which efficiently predicts
high-quality 3D tracking results in a coarse-to-fine manner
with the help of transformer operations. PTTR consists of
three novel designs. 1) Instead of random sampling, we design Relation-Aware Sampling to preserve relevant points
to given templates during subsampling. 2) Furthermore,
we propose a Point Relation Transformer (PRT) consisting of a self-attention and a cross-attention module. The
global self-attention operation captures long-range dependencies to enhance encoded point features for the search
area and the template, respectively. Subsequently, we generate the coarse tracking results by matching the two sets of
point features via cross-attention. 3) Based on the coarse
tracking results, we employ a novel Prediction Refinement
Module to obtain the final refined prediction. In addition,
we create a large-scale point cloud single object tracking
benchmark based on the Waymo Open Dataset. Extensive
experiments show that PTTR achieves superior point cloud
tracking in both accuracy and efficiency. Our code is available at https://github.com/Jasonkks/PTTR.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of 3D sensors in the past
decade, solving various vision problems [16, 20, 21, 23, 24,
26, 29, 42, 43, 45] with point clouds has attracted increasing
attention due to the huge potential in applications such as
autonomous driving, motion planning, and robotics. As a
long-standing research problem in computer vision, object
tracking with point clouds has also drawn wide research interests. 3D object tracking aims to detect not only object
poses and positions in each frame but also object motion
* Work done during an internship at Sensetime
† Equal contribution
‡ Corresponding author

Template

Search

100 Frames

(a)

200 Frames
(c)

(b)

300 Frames

Figure 1. (a) 3D point cloud object tracking aims to track the target object based on a given template point cloud. (b) PTTR outperforms existing approaches by large margins on KITTI tracking
dataset [9]. (c) We visualize our tracking results over consecutive
frames, including “100 Frames”, “200 Frames” and “300 Frames”,
which demonstrate the robustness of PTTR for long-term tracking.

trajectories across consecutive frames. However, 3D tracking still faces a number of open and challenging problems
such as LiDAR point cloud sparsity, random shape incompleteness, texture feature absence, etc.
Existing 3D object tracking approaches can be largely
categorized into two groups: multi-object tracking (MOT)
and single-object tracking (SOT). MOT methods [36,39,40,
46] generally adopt a detect-to-track strategy by first detecting objects in each frame and then matching the detections
across consecutive frames based on the estimated location
or speed. In contrast, most SOT methods are only required
to process a subset of point clouds, which usually come
with much lower computational consumption and higher
throughput. We study SOT in this work, and our objective
is to estimate the location and orientation of a single object
in the search frame given an object template.
The pioneer 3D SOT method SC3D [10] first generates
a series of candidates given the last location of a specific
object, and the prediction is made by selecting the bestmatched candidate in the latent space. However, it is not
end-to-end trainable and suffers from low inference speed
18531

