Neural Face Identification in a 2D Wireframe Projection of a Manifold Object
Kehan Wang∗
University of California, Berkeley

Jia Zheng Zihan Zhou
Manycore Tech Inc.

wang.kehan@berkeley.edu

{jiajia, shuer}@qunhemail.com

Abstract
In computer-aided design (CAD) systems, 2D line drawings are commonly used to illustrate 3D object designs.
To reconstruct the 3D models depicted by a single 2D line
drawing, an important key is finding the edge loops in the
line drawing which correspond to the actual faces of the
3D object. In this paper, we approach the classical problem of face identification from a novel data-driven point
of view. We cast it as a sequence generation problem:
starting from an arbitrary edge, we adopt a variant of the
popular Transformer model to predict the edges associated
with the same face in a natural order. This allows us to
avoid searching the space of all possible edge loops with
various hand-crafted rules and heuristics as most existing
methods do, deal with challenging cases such as curved
surfaces and nested edge loops, and leverage additional
cues such as face types. We further discuss how possibly imperfect predictions can be used for 3D object reconstruction. The project page is at https://manycoreresearch.github.io/faceformer.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we revisit a classical problem in computeraided design (CAD), namely the conversion of 2D line
drawings into 3D objects. In a traditional CAD pipeline,
design engineers commonly draw a 2D wireframe1 of the
desired object when creating their ideas and when communicating their ideas to others. Therefore, there is a strong
need to develop algorithms which can convert 2D line drawings into 3D solid models for analysis, simulation, and manufacturing.
An important step of 3D reconstruction from 2D line
drawings is face identification, that is, finding loops of the
edges which correspond to faces of the 3D object (Figure 1).
If the correct face configuration of an object can be obtained, the number of degrees of freedom in its reconstruction will be greatly reduced. Many studies have been per∗ Work done during an internship at Manycore Tech Inc.
1 We use the terms “wireframe” and “line drawing” interchangeably.

Figure 1. Given a 2D line drawing, face identification aims to
find edge loops which correspond to actual faces of the 3D object.
First row: A case where several faces (including the one indicated
by a red arrow) are enclosed by two or more loops. Second row:
A case where multiple topologically correct interpretations exist.

formed to achieve this goal, and in certain cases, a satisfactory solution exists. For example, it is well known that there
is a unique planar embedding when the object has genus 0
and the drawing is 3-connected, from which the set of faces
can be determined [24]. However, for a general manifold
object with complex geometry (e.g., curved surfaces) and
topology (e.g., high genus), the task remains difficult.
A close look at current methods reveals two primary
sources of challenges. The first one is the algorithmic complexity. As no analytical solution is available for a general
manifold object, these methods need to search through the
space of all possible face loops, which grows exponentially
with the number of vertices. In order to make the solution efficient, much effort has been made to design heuristic
search algorithms [7, 18, 19, 27]. The second one is the
inherent ambiguity in reconstructing 3D objects from 2D
projections. For example, it is impossible for a topological
algorithm to tell if two nested cycles (Figure 1, first row)
are coplanar, thus are two loops of the same face. Besides, a
single 2D projection may yield multiple topologically correct solutions (Figure 1, second row). In such cases, additional heuristics (e.g., number of cycles, regularities) or

1622

