Ranking Distance Calibration for Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning
Pan Li1 , Shaogang Gong1 , Chengjie Wang2 and Yanwei Fu3
1
Queen Mary University of London 2 Tencent Youtu Lab 3 Fudan University
{pan.li, s.gong}@qmul.ac.uk,

jasoncjwang@tencent.com,

yanweifu@fudan.edu.cn

k-nearest neighbors: {2,4,6,8}

Abstract

Expanded k-nearest neighbors:{2,4,6,8,7}

4

Recent progress in few-shot learning promotes a more
realistic cross-domain setting, where the source and target datasets are in different domains. Due to the domain
gap and disjoint label spaces between source and target
datasets, their shared knowledge is extremely limited. This
encourages us to explore more information in the target domain rather than to overly elaborate training strategies on
the source domain as in many existing methods. Hence, we
start from a generic representation pre-trained by a crossentropy loss and a conventional distance-based classifier,
along with an image retrieval view, to employ a re-ranking
process to calibrate a target distance matrix by discovering
the k-reciprocal neighbours within the task. Assuming the
pre-trained representation is biased towards the source, we
construct a non-linear subspace to minimise task-irrelevant
features therewithin while keep more transferrable discriminative information by a hyperbolic tangent transformation.
The calibrated distance in this target-aware non-linear subspace is complementary to that in the pre-trained representation. To impose such distance calibration information onto the pre-trained representation, a Kullback-Leibler
divergence loss is employed to gradually guide the model
towards the calibrated distance-based distribution. Extensive evaluations on eight target domains show that this target ranking calibration process can improve conventional
distance-based classifiers in few-shot learning.

1. Introduction
Few-Shot Learning (FSL) promises to allow a machine
to learn novel concepts from limited experience, i.e. few
novel target data and data-rich source data. Typically, the
defaulted FSL assumes that the source and target data is
in the same domain, but belong to different classes. In
practice, FSL is required to generalise to different target domains. Cross-Domain Few-Shot Learning (CD-FSL)
[9, 10, 12, 20, 41] has been studied more recently. In CDFSL, the target data not only has a different label space but
also are from a different domain to the source data.

1

8

1

1
6

7

Ranking for intra-task dicovery

4
2

2

4

6
1

1

8

1
k-nearest neighbors set

distance calibration

a / b sample(a/b) of class 0/1 1 / 1 original/updated sample
k-reciprocal nearest neighbor discovery

6

2
8

4

1

1

Figure 1. An illustration of ranking distance calibration process in a FSL task. The idea is to first discover likely positive
samples (e.g. sample 7) for each instance (e.g. sample 1) and then
to calibrate their pairwise distances. This is achieved by mining
the reciprocal ranking relations for each instance retrieval task in
the target domain so to expand the k-nearest neighbours set.

It is nontrivial to directly extend the general FSL approach to address the CD-FSL challenges. In fact, many
promising FSL methods [8, 34, 36, 38] performed poorly in
CD-FSL [10, 41]. The central idea of these general FSL
methods is to transfer and generalise the visual representations learned from source data to target data. However, the
significant visual domain gap between the source and target
data in CD-FSL makes it fundamentally difficulty to learn a
shared visual representation across different domains.
A few recent CD-FSL studies [20, 23, 41, 45] try to learn
a generalisable feature extractor to improve model transferability, which is a popular idea in domain generalisation and
domain adaptation [18, 43, 46, 52, 54] where the source and
target domains share the same label space. Empirically, this
approach shows some improvement on CD-FSL but it does
not model any visual and label characteristics of the target
domain and more importantly their cross-domain impact on
the pre-trained source domain representation. We argue this
cross-domain mapping between the source domain representation and its interpretion in the context of the target domain data characteristics is essential for effective CD-FSL.
From a related perspective, other CD-FSL studies have considered fine-tuning the source domain feature representation
from augmenting additional support data in the target domain, e.g. either explicitly augmenting the support data by
adversarial training [45] and image transformations [10], or

9099

