Coherent Point Drift Revisited for Non-rigid Shape Matching and Registration
Aoxiang Fan1 , Jiayi Ma1∗ , Xin Tian1 , Xiaoguang Mei1 , and Wei Liu2
1
2
Wuhan University, China
Tencent Data Platform, China
{fanaoxiang,xin.tian}@whu.edu.cn, {jyma2010,meixiaoguang}@gmail.com, wl2223@columbia.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we explore a new type of extrinsic method
to directly align two geometric shapes with point-to-point
correspondences in ambient space by recovering a deformation, which allows more continuous and smooth maps to
be obtained. Specifically, the classic coherent point drift is
revisited and generalizations have been proposed. First, by
observing that the deformation model is essentially defined
with respect to Euclidean space, we generalize the kernel
method to non-Euclidean domains. This generally leads to
better results for processing shapes, which are known as
two-dimensional manifolds. Second, a generalized probabilistic model is proposed to address the sensibility of coherent point drift method to local optima. Instead of directly
optimizing over the objective of coherent point drift, the new
model allows to focus on a group of most confident ones,
thus improves the robustness of the registration system. Experiments are conducted on multiple public datasets with
comparison to state-of-the-art competitors, demonstrating
the superiority of our method which is both flexible and efficient to improve the matching accuracy due to our extrinsic
alignment objective in ambient space.

1. Introduction
Non-rigid shape matching lies at the core of many applications in computer vision and graphics, ranging from
statistical shape analysis, information and style transfer to
the generation of new shapes among others [68]. Unlike the
rigid counterpart, non-rigid shape matching is much more
intractable since the matching cannot be exactly modeled by
a small number of parameters. As a result, matching extrinsically by determining the deformation in ambient space,
i.e. 3D Euclidean space, is deemed as a very difficult task
and most attention has been given to intrinsic methods.
The group of intrinsic methods is favorable for matching shapes involving complex motions because the intrin∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1. A demonstration of our method. The first and second
shapes are a matching pair produced by MWP [34], where the
result is presented by color transfer (unmatched point in white).
Given the imperfect result, our method proceeds by robustly estimating a transformation from the first to the second shape, which
results in the third transformed shape. The refined matching result
is manifested in the fourth shape (in comparison to the first).

sic properties or features are invariant to extrinsic changes.
In particular, a prominent strategy is to exploit the spectral quantities using eigen-decomposition of the LaplaceBeltrami operator [61], which is in theory invariant to isometric shape deformations. The strategy has proven to
be very effective, represented by the framework of functional maps [52] and its numerous follow-up works in recent
years [46, 56, 58]. In essence, these methods are to find a
well-defined feature space to represent each point in shape,
so that Euclidean metrics can be used to establish correspondences or maps. However, some fundamental problems exist in this category. The maps recovered in feature
space normally do not have the properties such as continuity or smoothness. Moreover, the transformation of points
inevitably means loss of information which inherently prohibits accurate alignment at fine scales, especially in less
prominent areas such as flat regions.
In contrast, extrinsic methods have the potential advantages to preserve the desired properties of maps and obtain
more accurate alignment, since the objective is based on
ambient space. Efforts in this line of work are relatively
less compared to the intrinsic methods. In particular, the
classic coherent point drift (CPD) [51] and its extended
variants [4, 31], deformation based on vector field flow [15]
and divergence-free field [19] have been proposed in recent
years. However, their performances are restricted due to
some commonly-known major obstacles. To begin with,

1424

