The Majority Can Help the Minority:
Context-rich Minority Oversampling for Long-tailed Classification
Seulki Park1 * Youngkyu Hong2 Byeongho Heo2 Sangdoo Yun2 Jin Young Choi1
1
2
ASRI, ECE., Seoul National University
NAVER AI Lab
seulki.park@snu.ac.kr, yk.hong@kaist.ac.kr, {bh.heo, sangdoo.yun}@navercorp.com, jychoi@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Context-rich
oversampling

The problem of class imbalanced data is that the generalization performance of the classifier deteriorates due to
the lack of data from minority classes. In this paper, we propose a novel minority over-sampling method to augment diversified minority samples by leveraging the rich context of
the majority classes as background images. To diversify the
minority samples, our key idea is to paste an image from
a minority class onto rich-context images from a majority
class, using them as background images. Our method is simple and can be easily combined with the existing long-tailed
recognition methods. We empirically prove the effectiveness
of the proposed oversampling method through extensive experiments and ablation studies. Without any architectural
changes or complex algorithms, our method achieves stateof-the-art performance on various long-tailed classification benchmarks. Our code is made available at https:
//github.com/naver-ai/cmo.

Random
oversampling

Random oversampling

1. Introduction
Real-world data are likely to be inherently imbalanced [13, 19, 29, 30], where the number of samples per
class differs greatly. If models are trained on an imbalanced
dataset, they can be easily biased toward majority classes
and tend to have a poor generalization ability on recognizing minority classes (i.e., overfitting).
A simple and straightforward method to overcome the
class imbalance problem is to repeatedly oversample the
minority classes [6,44]. However, these naive oversampling
can intensify the overfitting problem, since the repeatedly
selected samples have less diversity but almost similar image contexts [39]. For example, consider a minority class of
‘snow goose,’ in which the geese always stand upon grass in
the training images. If samples are drawn from these limited
training samples [44] or even if new samples are produced
* The work for this paper was performed as part of an internship at
NAVER AI Lab.

Context-rich oversampling

Figure 1. Concept of context-rich minority oversampling. In the
real-world long-tailed dataset iNaturalist 2018 [19], the number of
samples from the head class and the tail class is extremely different (Upper). Simple random oversampling method repeatedly produces context-limited images from minority classes. We propose
a novel context-rich oversampling method to generate diversified
minority images. To this end, we oversample the tail-class images
with various sizes. Then, these patches are pasted onto the headclass images to have various backgrounds. Our key idea is to bring
rich contexts from majority samples into minority samples.

by interpolating within the class [6], only context-limited
images will be created as in Figure 1. Our goal is to solve the
aforementioned problem by introducing a simple contextrich oversampling method.
We pay attention to the characteristics of long-tailed
16887

