Leveraging Adversarial Examples to Quantify
Membership Information Leakage
Ganesh Del Grosso 1, * Hamid Jalalzai 1, * Georg Pichler 2, * Catuscia Palamidessi 1 Pablo Piantanida 3
1
Inria - Laboratoire d’Informatique de l’École polytechnique, France
2
TU Wien, Austria
3
International Laboratory on Learning Systems (ILLS)
McGill - ETS - MILA - CNRS - Université Paris-Saclay - CentraleSupélec, Canada
1

{ganesh.del-grosso-guzman, hamid.jalalzai, catuscia.palamidessi}@inria.fr
2

georg.pichler@ieee.org

Abstract
The use of personal data for training machine learning
systems comes with a privacy threat and measuring the level
of privacy of a model is one of the major challenges in machine learning today. Identifying training data based on
a trained model is a standard way of measuring the privacy risks induced by the model. We develop a novel approach to address the problem of membership inference in
pattern recognition models, relying on information provided
by adversarial examples. The strategy we propose consists
of measuring the magnitude of a perturbation necessary to
build an adversarial example. Indeed, we argue that this
quantity reflects the likelihood of belonging to the training
data. Extensive numerical experiments on multivariate data
and an array of state-of-the-art target models show that our
method performs comparable or even outperforms stateof-the-art strategies, but without requiring any additional
training samples.

1. Introduction
With the deluge of data and increase of computational
power within the last decades, performance of modern machine learning shows dramatic improvement in a wide range
of applications such as computer vision [15,23,42] and natural language processing [6, 13, 62]. Along with this improvements new methods emerge, leading to remarkable
change in societal applications ranging from industry [7,25]
to modern medicine [24, 35, 59] to art [16, 22], all of which
may be considered sensitive domains, given the nature of
the data.
While the benefits of machine learning are set upfront,
* Equal contribution.

3

piantani@mila.quebec

other societal aspects such as fairness [38, 57] or safety [5]
should not be trampled on [4]. It is common consensus that
models require vast amounts of training data [2,12] to reach
state-of-the-art performance; meanwhile they do not necessarily guarantee the anonymity of the data provider [20].
This represents a serious privacy issue and controlling such
leakage of information with modern regulation presents a
new challenge [18, 37]. With recent data protection regulations [1,43] personal data are required to be protected while
being used by machine learning models [54]. To improve
safety in machine learning, the study of attack strategies
that exploit models in order to infer training data, or even
corrupt them, has become an active area of research.
In this paper we investigate membership inference attacks (MIAs) [32–34,46,48–51,55,63], in which an attacker
tries to determine whether or not a sample was part of the
training set of a target model [49]. By leveraging adversarial attacks, we propose an MIA strategy that achieves similar performance to the state-of-the-art, but without using
training samples to construct the attack. We only require
accessing the target model and the testing sample.
Adversarial attacks maximize the loss function of a
model with respect to an input sample, in order to find a perturbation that changes the class predicted by the model. Interestingly, we empirically observed that changing the predicted class requires a larger perturbation for samples that
are part of the training set since the model was tuned to
minimize the empirical loss function computed using these
samples. Hence the idea is to measure this perturbation, i.e.,
the distance between an adversarial example and its original counterpart, and test whether it is lager than a certain
threshold. We call this measure Adversarial Distance. Figure 1 provides an overview of our strategy1 .
1 The illustrations for the pipeline’s input and adversarial noise are provided by [17]. The noise illustrated in Figure 1 is obtained with a fast

10399

