Towards Implicit Text-Guided 3D Shape Generation
Zhengzhe Liu1 Yi Wang2 Xiaojuan Qi3∗ Chi-Wing Fu1∗
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 The University of Hong Kong
{zzliu,cwfu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

wangyi@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract
In this work, we explore the challenging task of generating 3D shapes from text. Beyond the existing works, we
propose a new approach for text-guided 3D shape generation, capable of producing high-fidelity shapes with colors that match the given text description. This work has
several technical contributions. First, we decouple the
shape and color predictions for learning features in both
texts and shapes, and propose the word-level spatial transformer to correlate word features from text with spatial
features from shape. Also, we design a cyclic loss to encourage consistency between text and shape, and introduce
the shape IMLE to diversify the generated shapes. Further, we extend the framework to enable text-guided shape
manipulation. Extensive experiments on the largest existing text-shape benchmark [10] manifest the superiority
of this work. The code and the models are available at
https://github.com/liuzhengzhe/Towards- ImplicitText-Guided-Shape-Generation.

1. Introduction
3D shape creation has a wide range of applications, e.g.,
CAD, games, animations, computational design, augmented
reality, etc. Significant progress has been made in recent
years by exploiting neural networks and generative models
to learn to produce 3D shapes. Yet, existing works [7, 12, 13,
22, 34, 35, 47, 49, 70, 76, 78] focus mostly on generating the
overall shapes, whereas the more recent ones [11, 14, 23, 44,
59, 79, 80] attempt to generate shapes with more details.
In this work, we are interested in the challenging task of
text-guided 3D shape generation—Given a sentence, e.g.,
“A comfortable red color chair with four legs,” we aim to
develop a method to automatically generate a 3D shape that
follows the text description; see Figure 1 (a) for our example
results. This research direction has great potential for efficient 3D shape production, say by taking user speech/text
input to guide or condition the process of generating 3D
shapes. By this means, we can assist users to readily generate and edit 3D models for diverse applications.
*: Corresponding authors

(a)

(b)

xjqi@eee.hku.hk

A comfortable red color chair with four legs.

A computer chair with green pink
padding and back, black arm rests,
and five spokes legs with rollers.

(c)

Brown colored whole wood oval
shaped coffee table. rectangular

Figure 1. (a) Chairs of different structures and appearances generated by our method from the same given sentence. Our method
also allows text-based manipulation in color (b) and in shape (c).

While many methods [40,61–64,67,72,73,77,82,83] have
been developed for generating 2D images from text, the task
of generating 3D shapes from text is rather under-explored.
Chen et al. [10] generate 3D shapes from natural language
descriptions by learning joint text and shape embeddings,
but the performance and visual quality are highly limited
by the low-resolution 3D representations. Another very
recent work [33] leverages semantic labels to guide the shape
generation, but it requires predefined semantic labels and
cannot directly deal with natural language inputs.
To enhance 3D shape generation from text, we propose a new solution by leveraging the implicit representation [13, 48, 54] to predict an occupancy field. Yet, several
inherited challenges have not been addressed in the early
works for properly adopting the implicit representation for
the text-to-shape task. First, the above works generate shapes
typically without colors, which are crucial in text-guided 3D
shape generation, since text descriptions often contain colors; we empirically found that directly predicting shape and
color with a single implicit decoder often lead to shape distortion and color blur. Second, text contains a large amount of
spatial-relation information, e.g., “a wooden table on a metal
base.” Still, spatial-relation local features are ignored in existing works, since the implicit decoder generally considers
only the global feature from the auto encoder as input [13].
Third, the generated shapes are not all consistent with the

17896

