DO-GAN: A Double Oracle Framework for Generative Adversarial Networks
Aye Phyu Phyu Aung1,2 ,* Xinrun Wang1 *†, Runsheng Yu1 ,* Bo An1†
Senthilnath Jayavelu2 , Xiaoli Li1,2,3†
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore
3
A*STAR Centre for Frontier AI Research, Singapore
{ayep0001,xinrun.wang, boan}@ntu.edu.sg, runshengyu@gmail.com,
{j_senthilnath, xlli}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new approach to train Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) where we deploy a
double-oracle framework using the generator and discriminator oracles. GAN is essentially a two-player zero-sum
game between the generator and the discriminator. Training GANs is challenging as a pure Nash equilibrium may
not exist and even finding the mixed Nash equilibrium is
difficult as GANs have a large-scale strategy space. In DOGAN, we extend the double oracle framework to GANs. We
first generalize the players’ strategies as the trained models
of generator and discriminator from the best response oracles. We then compute the meta-strategies using a linear
program. For scalability of the framework where multiple generators and discriminator best responses are stored
in the memory, we propose two solutions: 1) pruning the
weakly-dominated players’ strategies to keep the oracles
from becoming intractable; 2) applying continual learning
to retain the previous knowledge of the networks. We apply
our framework to established GAN architectures such as
vanilla GAN, Deep Convolutional GAN, Spectral Normalization GAN and Stacked GAN. Finally, we conduct experiments
on MNIST, CIFAR-10 and CelebA datasets and show that
DO-GAN variants have significant improvements in both
subjective qualitative evaluation and quantitative metrics,
compared with their respective GAN architectures.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [8] have been
applied in various domains such as image and video generation, text-to-image synthesis and equipment condition
monitoring [18, 29–31]. Various architectures are proposed
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

to generate more realistic samples [23, 27, 28] as well as
regularization techniques [1, 25]. From the game-theoretic
perspective, GANs can be viewed as a two-player game
where the generator samples the data and the discriminator
classifies the data as real or generated. They are alternately
trained to maximize their respective utilities till convergence
corresponding to a pure Nash Equilibrium (NE).

Figure 1. Training images with fixed noise for SGAN and DOSGAN/P (pruning) until termination. Both during training and after
convergence, DO-SGAN/P can generate better quality images with
FID score of 6.32 against SGAN’s FID score of 6.98.

However, pure NE cannot be reliably reached by existing algorithms as pure NE may not exist [7, 21]. This also
leads to unstable training in GANs depending on the data
and the hyperparameters. Therefore, mixed NE is a more
suitable solution concept [11]. Several recent works propose
mixture architectures with multiple generators and discriminators that consider mixed NE such as MIX+GAN [2] and
MGAN [10] but they cannot guarantee to converge to mixed
NE. Mirror-GAN [11] computes the mixed NE by sampling
over the infinite-dimensional strategy space and proposes
provably convergent proximal methods. However, the sampling approach may not be efficient as mixed NE may only
have a few strategies in the support set.

11275

