DyTox: Transformers for Continual Learning with DYnamic TOken eXpansion
Arthur Douillard1,2 , Alexandre Ramé1 , Guillaume Couairon1,3 , Matthieu Cord1,4
1
Sorbonne Université, 2 Heuritech, 3 Meta AI, 4 valeo.ai
arthur.douillard@heuritech.com, {alexandre.rame, matthieu.cord}@sorbonne-universite.fr,
gcouairon@fb.com

Abstract
Deep network architectures struggle to continually learn
new tasks without forgetting the previous tasks. A recent
trend indicates that dynamic architectures based on an expansion of the parameters can reduce catastrophic forgetting efficiently in continual learning. However, existing approaches often require a task identifier at test-time, need
complex tuning to balance the growing number of parameters, and barely share any information across tasks. As a
result, they struggle to scale to a large number of tasks without significant overhead.
In this paper, we propose a transformer architecture based
on a dedicated encoder/decoder framework. Critically, the
encoder and decoder are shared among all tasks. Through
a dynamic expansion of special tokens, we specialize each
forward of our decoder network on a task distribution. Our
strategy scales to a large number of tasks while having negligible memory and time overheads due to strict control of
the expansion of the parameters. Moreover, this efficient
strategy doesn’t need any hyperparameter tuning to control
the network’s expansion. Our model reaches excellent results on CIFAR100 and state-of-the-art performances on the
large-scale ImageNet100 and ImageNet1000 while having
fewer parameters than concurrent dynamic frameworks.1

Figure 1: DyTox’s continual learning performance on
ImageNet1000: for each task, 100 new classes are learned
while previously learned classes are not fully accessible but
shouldn’t be forgotten. Our strategy DyTox (in red) is stateof-the-art by a large margin. Note that at the initial step before the continual process begins (denoted by a dashed rectangle ), our model has performance comparable to other
baselines: the performance gain is achieved by reducing
catastrophic forgetting. Moreover, we have systematically
fewer parameters than previous approaches.

1. Introduction
Most of the deep learning literature focuses on learning
a model on a fixed dataset. However, real-world data constantly evolve through time, leading to ever-changing distributions: i.e., new classes or domains appeared. When
a model loses access to previous classes data (e.g., for privacy reasons) and is fine-tuned on new classes data, it catastrophically forgets the old distribution. Continual learning
models aim at balancing a rigidity/plasticity trade-off where
old data are not forgotten (rigidity to changes) while learning new incoming data (plasticity to adapt). Despite recent
1 Code is released at https://github.com/arthurdouillard/dytox

advances, it is still an open challenge.
A growing amount of efforts have emerged to tackle
catastrophic forgetting [49, 34, 63, 29, 18, 64]. Recent
works [65, 39, 30, 21, 24, 54] dynamically expand the network architectures [65, 39] or re-arrange their internal structures [21, 54, 30, 24]. Unfortunately at test-time, they require to know the task to which the test sample belongs —
in order to know which parameters should be used. More recently, DER [64] and Simple-DER [41] discarded the need
for this task identifier by learning a single classifier on the
concatenation of all produced embeddings by different sub19285

