Segment and Complete: Defending Object Detectors against Adversarial Patch
Attacks with Robust Patch Detection
Jiang Liu 1 , Alexander Levine2 , Chun Pong Lau1 , Rama Chellappa1 , Soheil Feizi2
1
Johns Hopkins University, 2 University of Maryland, College Park
{jiangliu, clau13, rchella4}@jhu.edu, {alevine0,sfeizi}@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
Object detection plays a key role in many security-critical
systems. Adversarial patch attacks, which are easy to implement in the physical world, pose a serious threat to
state-of-the-art object detectors. Developing reliable defenses for object detectors against patch attacks is critical
but severely understudied. In this paper, we propose Segment and Complete defense (SAC), a general framework
for defending object detectors against patch attacks through
detection and removal of adversarial patches. We first train
a patch segmenter that outputs patch masks which provide
pixel-level localization of adversarial patches. We then propose a self adversarial training algorithm to robustify the
patch segmenter. In addition, we design a robust shape completion algorithm, which is guaranteed to remove the entire
patch from the images if the outputs of the patch segmenter
are within a certain Hamming distance of the ground-truth
patch masks. Our experiments on COCO and xView datasets
demonstrate that SAC achieves superior robustness even
under strong adaptive attacks with no reduction in performance on clean images, and generalizes well to unseen
patch shapes, attack budgets, and unseen attack methods.
Furthermore, we present the APRICOT-Mask dataset, which
augments the APRICOT dataset with pixel-level annotations
of adversarial patches. We show SAC can significantly reduce the targeted attack success rate of physical patch attacks. Our code is available at https://github.com/
joellliu/SegmentAndComplete.

1. Introduction
Object detection is an important computer vision task that
plays a key role in many security-critical systems including
autonomous driving, security surveillance, identity verification, and robot manufacturing [42]. Adversarial patch
attacks, where the attacker distorts pixels within a region
of bounded size, pose a serious threat to real-world object
detection systems since they are easy to implement physi-

Figure 1. We adopt a “detect and remove” strategy for defending object detectors against patch attacks. Left: Predictions on a
clean image; middle: predictions on an adversarial image; right:
predictions on SAC masked image.

cally. For example, physical adversarial patches can make
a stop sign [40] or a person [41] disappear from object detectors, which could cause serious consequences in securitycritical settings such as autonomous driving. Despite the
abundance [9, 22, 23, 25, 29, 39–41, 43, 45, 51] of adversarial patch attacks on object detectors, defenses against such
attacks have not been extensively studied. Most existing
defenses for patch attacks are restricted to image classification [16, 17, 24, 32, 34, 44, 46, 49]. Securing object detectors
is more challenging due to the complexity of the task.
In this paper, we present Segment and Complete (SAC)
defense that can robustify any object detector against patch
attacks without re-training the object detectors. We adopt
a “detect and remove” strategy (Fig. 1): we detect adversarial patches and remove the area from input images, and
then feed the masked images into the object detector. This
is based on the following observation: while adversarial
patches are localized, they can affect predictions not only
locally but also on objects that are farther away in the image
because object detection algorithms utilize spatial context
for reasoning [38]. This effect is especially significant for
deep learning models, as a small localized adversarial patch

14973

