Label Matching Semi-Supervised Object Detection
Binbin Chen2 , Weijie Chen1,2,†, Shicai Yang2 , Yunyi Xuan2 , Jie Song1
Di Xie2 , Shiliang Pu2 , Mingli Song1 , Yueting Zhuang1,†
1

Zhejiang University, 2 Hikvision Research Institute

{chenbinbin8,chenweijie5,yangshicai,xuanyunyi,xiedi,pushiliang.hri}@hikvision.com
{sjie,songml,yzhuang}@zju.edu.cn

Semi-supervised object detection has made significant
progress with the development of mean teacher driven selftraining. Despite the promising results, the label mismatch
problem is not yet fully explored in the previous works,
leading to severe confirmation bias during self-training. In
this paper, we delve into this problem and propose a simple yet effective LabelMatch framework from two different
yet complementary perspectives, i.e., distribution-level and
instance-level. For the former one, it is reasonable to approximate the class distribution of the unlabeled data from
that of the labeled data according to Monte Carlo Sampling. Guided by this weakly supervision cue, we introduce a re-distribution mean teacher, which leverages adaptive label-distribution-aware confidence thresholds to generate unbiased pseudo labels to drive student learning. For
the latter one, there exists an overlooked label assignment
ambiguity problem across teacher-student models. To remedy this issue, we present a novel label assignment mechanism for self-training framework, namely proposal selfassignment, which injects the proposals from student into
teacher and generates accurate pseudo labels to match each
proposal in the student model accordingly. Experiments
on both MS-COCO and PASCAL-VOC datasets demonstrate the considerable superiority of our proposed framework to other state-of-the-arts. Code will be available at
https://github.com/HIK-LAB/SSOD.

1. Introduction
Supervised learning has advanced object detection in the
past few years, benefited from tremendous labeled training
data [5, 17, 26, 28, 34]. However, it is extremely expensive and time-consuming to collect accurate annotations. As
an alternative, semi-supervised object detection (SSOD) is
proposed to use a small amount of labeled data in conjunc† Corresponding author

Distribution-level mismatch

Abstract

Instance-level mismatch
IoU based label assignment

Training

NMS

CLS+REG
similar score, similar IoU
Score: 1.00
IoU: 0.70
Score: 1.00
IoU: 0.70
Score: 1.00
IoU: 0.70

IoU: 0.70

Pseudo label

Corresponding
Proposals

Score: 1.00
IoU: 0.65
Score: 1.00 Random
IoU: 0.90*
NMS
Score: 1.00
IoU: 0.75

Low
localization
IoU
Ambiguous
classification
score

similar score, different IoU
Only CLS

GT

Figure 1. Label mismatch problems on the MS-COCO dataset.
1) Distribution-level mismatch: there exists a bias between the
pseudo labels produced by the single confidence threshold and the
ground truth labels (GT) during self-training, as shown in the relation of the blue bar and the orange dotted line. 2) Instance-level
mismatch: there are two kinds of training patterns for the unlabeled data in the previous SSOD frameworks. One is the same
as supervised learning, using both classification and box regression for optimization, which will overfit the poor-quality pseudo
labels and result in low localization accuracy. To avoid incorrect
box regression, another one merely exploits a classification objective [22], which will bring ambiguity due to the similar classification scores to confuse the post-processing of Non-MaximumSuppression (NMS).

tion with a large amount of unlabeled data to optimize the
detectors [14, 22, 31, 37, 40]. Recently, SSOD has achieved
growing interest in the object detection community.
Self-training has been proven useful in SSOD, especially
mean teacher framework [22, 37], which annotates the unlabeled data by a gradually evolving teacher and guides the
learning of a student in a mutually beneficial manner. As
the key process of mean teacher, the existing pseudo labeling methods [22, 37, 40] simply utilize a hand-crafted confidence threshold to filter out low-quality pseudo labels and

14381

