Deep Stereo Image Compression via Bi-directional Coding
Jianjun Lei1
1

Xiangrui Liu1

Tianjin University

2

Bo Peng1 * Dengchao Jin1
University of Wollongong

{jjlei,xr liu,bpeng,jdc3159761141}@tju.edu.cn,

3

Wanqing Li2

Jingxiao Gu3

CalmCar Vehicle Vision System

wanqing@uow.edu.au,

jingxiao.gu@calmcar.com

Abstract
Existing learning-based stereo compression methods
usually adopt a unidirectional approach to encoding one
image independently and the other image conditioned upon
the first. This paper proposes a novel bi-directional
coding-based end-to-end stereo image compression network (BCSIC-Net). BCSIC-Net consists of a novel bidirectional contextual transform module which performs
nonlinear transform conditioned upon the inter-view context in a latent space to reduce inter-view redundancy, and a
bi-directional conditional entropy model that employs interview correspondence as a conditional prior to improve coding efficiency. Experimental results on the InStereo2K and
KITTI datasets demonstrate that the proposed BCSIC-Net
can effectively reduce the inter-view redundancy and outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of stereoscopic imaging
technologies, stereo images are widely used in many applications, such as augmented reality, autonomous driving,
and robot navigation [23, 11, 31, 21]. Accordingly, several
methods [8, 14, 15, 18, 19, 24, 13] have been developed and
improved to compress stereo images. Different from single
image compression, compression of stereo images needs to
reduce the inter-view redundancy in addition to the intraview redundancy.
Traditionally, stereo image compression methods employ inter-view prediction, such as disparity compensation
prediction (DCP) [8, 15, 18, 19], to deal with the inter-view
redundancy. For instance, when compressing the right image, DCP estimates the disparities between the right image
and the reconstructed left image, then derives the prediction
of the right image via disparity compensation. The disparities and the residues between the actual and predicted right
image are encoded. However, the hand-crafted prediction
methods struggle to cope with the intricate inter-view cor* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Illustration of compression performance achieved by the
proposed method and the state-of-the-art method HESIC [13].

relations for complex scenes, and thus the residues and the
bits often remain large.
With the development of deep learning, end-to-end single image compression [2, 3, 27, 20, 22, 26, 10, 12, 25, 17,
16] has achieved promising progress. These works have
provided insights and methodologies for stereo image compression, and some frameworks [24, 13] following the deep
learning paradigm have been preliminarily studied. Specifically, they adopt deep learning-based single image compression networks and inter-view prediction networks to reduce the intra-view and inter-view redundancy, respectively.
The existing methods mainly employ a unidirectional coding mechanism to reduce the inter-view redundancy, i.e.,
the reconstruction [8, 18, 19, 13] or the latent representation [24] of the left image is propagated as a context to the
right-view coding branch. Therefore, they follow on the
strictly sequential coding order that the left image is first
encoded and then the right image or vice versa. Such a unidirectional framework, on the one hand, is not always effective to reduce the inter-view redundancy. On the other hand,
it is difficult to extend the framework into a bi-directional
coding framework that is expected to be more effective in
reducing the inter-view redundancy, hence, saving the bitrate.

19669

