Efficient Maximal Coding Rate Reduction by Variational Forms
Christina Baek⇤
Carnegie Mellon University
kbaek@cs.cmu.edu

*equal contribution

Ziyang Wu⇤
International Digital Economy Academy
wuziyang@idea.edu.cn *equal contribution

Kwan Ho Ryan Chan
Johns Hopkins University

Tianjiao Ding
Johns Hopkins University

Yi Ma
University of California, Berkeley

kchan49@jhu.edu

tding@jhu.edu

yima@eecs.berkeley.edu

Benjamin D. Haeffele
Johns Hopkins University
bhaeffele@jhu.edu

Abstract
The principle of Maximal Coding Rate Reduction
(MCR2 ) has recently been proposed as a training objective
for learning discriminative low-dimensional structures intrinsic to high-dimensional data to allow for more robust
training than standard approaches, such as cross-entropy
minimization. However, despite the advantages that have
been shown for MCR2 training, MCR2 suffers from a significant computational cost due to the need to evaluate and
differentiate a significant number of log-determinant terms
that grows linearly with the number of classes. By taking
advantage of variational forms of spectral functions of a
matrix, we reformulate the MCR2 objective to a form that
can scale significantly without compromising training accuracy. Experiments in image classification demonstrate that
our proposed formulation results in a significant speed up
over optimizing the original MCR2 objective directly and
often results in higher quality learned representations. Further, our approach may be of independent interest in other
models that require computation of log-determinant forms,
such as in system identification or normalizing flow models.

1. Introduction
Given a classification task, deep networks aim to learn a
nonlinear mapping, consisting of a series of linear and nonlinear functions, that can map data to their correct labels.
The overall deep network can often be interpreted as a composition of a nonlinear “featurizer” f✓ and a linear classifier
g(z) = W z for some matrix W . The hidden layers or

the featurizer is designated with learning a latent representation z ✓ = f✓ (x) 2 Rd that best facilitates the final layer
or classifier for the downstream task.
The canonical way to train a deep learning model for
a classification task is empirical risk minimization using
cross-entropy (CE) loss. While CE measures the difference
between the model’s prediction and the true labels, it does
not explicitly enforce any structure over the representation.
In fact, Papyan, Han, and Donoho [8, 17] show that this direct label fitting implicitly leads to neural collapse in deep
networks. That is, as CE loss converges to 0, the representations of each class at the last hidden layer collapse to a
single point, suppressing within-class variability.
Beyond neural collapse and failing to represent withinclass variation, several works [1, 5, 19] have empirically
shown that training neural networks using stochastic gradient descent (SGD) on CE loss often leads the network
to utilize the simplest, often spurious, feature in the image
for classification. This hypothesis is theoretically supported
by [2] which verified that when multiple explanations can
describe a class, models trained with CE often pick a subset
of features that can classify a majority of the points well and
then classifies the remaining points from noise in the data.
To alleviate this issue, Yu et al. [21] proposed a framework for learning geometrically meaningful representations, via a featurizer f✓ , by maximizing the coding rate
reduction (MCR2 ). In brief, the MCR2 objective encourages the latent representation of the entire training set to
expand or occupy as much volume as possible, while simultaneously pushing each class to compress or occupy as
little space as possible. Empirically and theoretically, it is
shown that this objective drives the latent representations of

500

