Condensing CNNs with Partial Differential Equations
Anil Kag, Venkatesh Saligrama
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Boston University
{anilkag, srv}@bu.edu

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) rely on the depth
of the architecture to obtain complex features. It results in
computationally expensive models for low-resource IoT devices. Convolutional operators are local and restricted in
the receptive field, which increases with depth. We explore
partial differential equations (PDEs) that offer a global receptive field without the added overhead of maintaining
large kernel convolutional filters. We propose a new feature
layer, called the Global layer, that enforces PDE constraints
on the feature maps, resulting in rich features. These constraints are solved by embedding iterative schemes in the
network. The proposed layer can be embedded in any deep
CNN to transform it into a shallower network. Thus, resulting in compact and computationally efficient architectures
achieving similar performance as the original network. Our
experimental evaluation demonstrates that architectures with
global layers require 2 − 5× less computational and storage
budget without any significant loss in performance.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been the
backbone for recent advances in image recognition [19],
object detection [33], and other applications [31] interfacing the image modalities. Convolutional filters with limited receptive fields act on localized input regions to generate low-level features. Features used for decision-making
are complex functions of these low-level features, achieved
through the composition of many such convolutional operators applied in sequence, resulting in deep networks with
high inference/train time and large model size.
Recent works [3, 5] have explored neural networks inspired by ordinary differential equations (ODEs), offering richer representation than their discrete counterparts.
Resnets [8] can be viewed as a discretized form of ODEs.
The final architecture based on these continuous layers leads
to higher computational cost in comparison to their discrete
counterpart [2], namely due to the costly fixed point solvers.
In contrast, we explore novel constraints on the feature maps,

based on partial differential equations (PDEs) that offer similar rich representation but with shallower neural networks. In
addition, we provide efficient and scalable solvers to provide
computational and storage savings.
Proposed Method. We explore a hybrid approach wherein
we modify discrete models by embedding a new layer with
a global receptive field that operates on the input feature
map and computes complex compositions of these low-level
features. We call this layer the Global feature layer. It approximately solves a PDE constraint that couples the input
and output feature maps. In a typical discrete model, at every
input resolution, the same convolutional block is applied
repeatedly m times. We modify this structure by keeping
only one convolutional block and replacing the m − 1 blocks
with a single global feature layer (see Figure 1). Thus, reducing the deep neural network to a much shallower network
without any significant performance loss. It leads to smaller
models with low computational and storage costs. In addition, it improves both the train and inference times.
By keeping at least one block from the original architecture, we are incorporating the signature of this architecture.
It allows the application of this generic global feature layer
to any architecture. Also, since a good start for any iterative solver implies smaller steps to reach the solution, this
original block helps to initialize the PDE solution.
Estimated Savings. Suppose a Resnet architecture constructed with three resolutions has m residual blocks, and
for the three resolutions, the compute cost is = {c1 , c2 , c3 }
respectively. The total compute cost for operating this network is m × (c1 + c2 + c3 ). Global residual block replaces m − 1 residual blocks with just one global block
and assuming that the cost of this global block is similar, i.e.
= {c1 , c2 , c3 }, then the cost to operate the modified network
is 2 × (c1 + c2 + c3 ). Given that m > 2, the modified network can lead to computational savings over Resnet. Similar
conclusions can be drawn for storage savings.
Motivational Example. To motivate our approach, we apply the Global feature layer to the Resnet32 [8] architecture,
where at each feature map resolution, the same block repeats
5 times. With the experimental setup described in the section 4, we train three models on the CIFAR-10 dataset: (a)

610

