Open-Domain, Content-based, Multi-modal Fact-checking of
Out-of-Context Images via Online Resources
Sahar Abdelnabi, Rakibul Hasan, and Mario Fritz
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security
{sahar.abdelnabi,rakibul.hasan,fritz}@cispa.de

Q: Does this caption match its image?
Step 2

: Let's find out!

Visual evidence
Step 1
Image-image
consistency

Query image

Text-text
consistency
David Cameron speaks
during a campaign visit to
Frinton-on-Sea Essex

...

'David Cameron', 'Tony Blair', 'Andrew Holness', 'Jamaica',
'Jamaica Labour Party', 'United Kingdom', 'Economy',
'Prime minister', '2020 Jamaican general election','General election'

Step 2

WWW

David Cameron speaking in Kingston, Jamaica.
David Cameron addressing Jamaica's parliament.
Jamaican election: Labour Party wins narrow victory.
Jamaica accuses David Cameron of misrepresenting prisoner deal.

Query caption

Ground truth: Falsified

Textual evidence

Image-caption
consistency

Step 1

: Falsified!

Figure 1. To evaluate the veracity of image-caption pairings, we leverage visual and textual evidence gathered by querying the Web. We
propose a novel framework to detect the consistency of the claim-evidence (text-text and image-image), in addition to the image-caption
pairing. Highlighted evidence represents the model’s highest attention, showing a difference in location compared to the query caption.

Abstract
Misinformation is now a major problem due to its potential high risks to our core democratic and societal values
and orders. Out-of-context misinformation is one of the
easiest and effective ways used by adversaries to spread viral false stories. In this threat, a real image is re-purposed
to support other narratives by misrepresenting its context
and/or elements. The internet is being used as the go-to way
to verify information using different sources and modalities. Our goal is an inspectable method that automates this
time-consuming and reasoning-intensive process by factchecking the image-caption pairing using Web evidence. To
integrate evidence and cues from both modalities, we introduce the concept of ‘multi-modal cycle-consistency check’
/
; starting from the image/caption, we gather textual/visual evidence, which will be compared against the
other paired caption/image, respectively. Moreover, we
propose a novel architecture, Consistency-Checking Net-

work (CCN), that mimics the layered human reasoning
across the same and different modalities: the caption vs.
textual evidence, the image vs. visual evidence, and the
image vs. caption. Our work offers the first step and benchmark for open-domain, content-based, multi-modal factchecking, and significantly outperforms previous baselines
that did not leverage external evidence1 .

1. Introduction
Recently, there has been a growing and widespread concern about ‘fake news’ and its harmful societal, personal,
and political consequences [1, 18, 24], including people’s
own health during the pandemic [6, 7, 30]. Misusing generative AI technologies to create deepfakes [13, 21, 36]
further fuelled these concerns [5, 14]. However, imagerepurposing— where a real image is misrepresented and
used out-of-context with another false or unrelated narrative
1 For code, checkpoints, and dataset, check:
https : / / s abdelnabi.github.io/OoC-multi-modal-fc/

14940

