RelTransformer: A Transformer-Based Long-Tail Visual Relationship
Recognition
Jun Chen1 , Aniket Agarwal1,2 , Sherif Abdelkarim1 , Deyao Zhu1 , Mohamed Elhoseiny1
1
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
2
Indian Institute of Technology
{jun.chen,deyao.zhu,mohamed.elhoseiny}@kaust.edu.sa
aagarwal@ma.iitr.ac.in, sherif.abdelkarim91@gmail.com

？

player

bat

attention flow

global context
umpire
catcher
player

behind
wearing
wearing

(a)

subject O object

catcher
shin guard
helmet

S

player

O

bat

holding

···
player

in front of

S

player

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Given an image with several annotated objects, the objective is to predict the visual relationship between the image region of
“player” and “bat”. (b) It illustrates our message-passing strategy: we attentively aggregate visual features from all the triplets in the global
context, the subject, and object to the “holding” feature via attention. All the boxes above denote the corresponding visual features.

Abstract
The visual relationship recognition (VRR) task aims at
understanding the pairwise visual relationships between interacting objects in an image. These relationships typically
have a long-tail distribution due to their compositional nature. This problem gets more severe when the vocabulary
becomes large, rendering this task very challenging. This
paper shows that modeling an effective message-passing
flow through an attention mechanism can be critical to tackling the compositionality and long-tail challenges in VRR.
The method, called RelTransformer, represents each image as a fully-connected scene graph and restructures the
whole scene into the relation-triplet and global-scene contexts. It directly passes the message from each element in
the relation-triplet and global-scene contexts to the target
relation via self-attention. We also design a learnable memory to augment the long-tail relation representation learning. Through extensive experiments, we find that our model

generalizes well on many VRR benchmarks. Our model
outperforms the best-performing models on two large-scale
long-tail VRR benchmarks, VG8K-LT (+2.0% overall acc)
and GQA-LT (+26.0% overall acc), both having a highly
skewed distribution towards the tail. It also achieves strong
results on the VG200 relation detection task. Our code is
available at https://github.com/Vision-CAIR/
RelTransformer.

1. Introduction
The Visual Relationship Recognition (VRR) task goes
beyond recognizing individual objects by comprehensively
understanding relationships between interacting objects in
a visual scene. Owing to the enriched scene understanding
provided by VRR, it benefits various other vision tasks such
as image captioning (e.g., [10,46,47]), VQA (e.g., [15,40]),
image generation (e.g., [16]), and 3D scene synthesis (e.g.,

19507

