Auditing Privacy Defenses in Federated Learning
via Generative Gradient Leakage
1

Zhuohang Li1
Jiaxin Zhang2
Luyang Liu3
Jian Liu1
2
3
University of Tennessee, Knoxville
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Google Research
zli96@vols.utk.edu,

zhangj@ornl.gov,

luyangliu@google.com,

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) framework brings privacy benefits to distributed learning systems by allowing multiple
clients to participate in a learning task under the coordination of a central server without exchanging their private
data. However, recent studies have revealed that private information can still be leaked through shared gradient information. To further protect user’s privacy, several defense
mechanisms have been proposed to prevent privacy leakage via gradient information degradation methods, such as
using additive noise or gradient compression before sharing it with the server. In this work, we validate that the
private training data can still be leaked under certain defense settings with a new type of leakage, i.e., Generative Gradient Leakage (GGL). Unlike existing methods that
only rely on gradient information to reconstruct data, our
method leverages the latent space of generative adversarial
networks (GAN) learned from public image datasets as a
prior to compensate for the informational loss during gradient degradation. To address the nonlinearity caused by the
gradient operator and the GAN model, we explore various
gradient-free optimization methods (e.g., evolution strategies and Bayesian optimization) and empirically show their
superiority in reconstructing high-quality images from gradients compared to gradient-based optimizers. We hope the
proposed method can serve as a tool for empirically measuring the amount of privacy leakage to facilitate the design
of more robust defense mechanisms.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) [26, 29, 34] has recently
emerged as a new machine learning paradigm that enables
multiple clients to collaboratively train a global learning
model under the orchestration of a central server. Instead
of directly exchanging their private data, each client learns
on its local dataset and shares the computed model update or
gradient to update the global model. FL places a heavy emphasis on user’s data privacy, which has made it particularly
suitable for developing machine learning models in privacysensitive scenarios such as typing prediction [21], spoken

jliu@utk.edu

FL Model Gradient Space
𝑦

2

𝑦′
3

1
Natural Image Space

Private Image

3

Reconstructed Image via
Existing Method

Reconstructed Image via
the Proposed GGL
GAN Image Manifold

1 Client comFigure 1. Illustration of data leakage via gradient: ⃝
putes gradients on its private data; 2
⃝ Client applies defense to
degrade the computed gradients y; 3
⃝ Adversary attempts to reconstruct the private image from the shared gradients y ′ .

language understanding [16,20], medical research [4,8,41],
and financial services [32, 50].
Although FL is designed to structurally encode data minimization principles to protect privacy, recent studies have
revealed that, in certain cases, sensitive information can still
be leaked through the shared gradients [13, 35, 51, 54, 56].
To further strengthen FL’s privacy properties in these cases,
several defense strategies have been proposed to degrade
the gradient information before sharing it with the server,
such as differential privacy [14, 48], gradient compression/sparsification [56], and perturbing gradients via data
representations [44]. These state-of-the-art privacy defenses have been shown to be effective against existing attacks through modifying the gradient information to degrade its fidelity prior to sharing.
A natural question is: Can the aforementioned defenses
provide sufficient privacy guarantees to prevent the leakage
of sensitive information from the client’s private data? To
investigate this, we model the gradient leakage process as
an inverse problem, where the goal is to reconstruct the private training data from the client’s shared low-fidelity and
noisy gradients. Existing methods seek to solve this inverse
problem by iteratively solving for the optimal set of data
samples that best match the client’s shared gradients via an
optimization process (e.g., gradient descent [13, 51] or L-

10132

