ViSTA: Vision and Scene Text Aggregation for Cross-Modal Retrieval
Mengjun Cheng2 * Yipeng Sun1 * † Longchao Wang1 Xiongwei Zhu1
Kun Yao1 Jie Chen2 Guoli Song3 Junyu Han1 Jingtuo Liu1 Errui Ding1 Jingdong Wang1
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc.1
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University,2 Peng Cheng Laboratory3
{sunyipeng, wanglongchao, zhuxiongwei, yaokun01, hanjunyu, liujingtuo}@baidu.com
mjcheng@stu.pku.edu.cn, {chenj, songgl}@pcl.ac.cn, {dingerrui, wangjingdong}@baidu.com

Abstract
Visual appearance is considered to be the most important cue to understand images for cross-modal retrieval,
while sometimes the scene text appearing in images can
provide valuable information to understand the visual semantics. Most of existing cross-modal retrieval approaches
ignore the usage of scene text information and directly
adding this information may lead to performance degradation in scene text free scenarios. To address this issue, we propose a full transformer architecture to unify
these cross-modal retrieval scenarios in a single Vision and
Scene Text Aggregation framework (ViSTA). Specifically,
ViSTA utilizes transformer blocks to directly encode image
patches and fuse scene text embedding to learn an aggregated visual representation for cross-modal retrieval. To
tackle the modality missing problem of scene text, we propose a novel fusion token based transformer aggregation
approach to exchange the necessary scene text information
only through the fusion token and concentrate on the most
important features in each modality. To further strengthen
the visual modality, we develop dual contrastive learning
losses to embed both image-text pairs and fusion-text pairs
into a common cross-modal space. Compared to existing
methods, ViSTA enables to aggregate relevant scene text
semantics with visual appearance, and hence improve results under both scene text free and scene text aware scenarios. Experimental results show that ViSTA outperforms
other methods by at least 8.4% at Recall@1 for scene text
aware retrieval task. Compared with state-of-the-art scene
text free retrieval methods, ViSTA can achieve better accuracy on Flicker30K and MSCOCO while running at least
three times faster during the inference stage, which validates the effectiveness of the proposed framework.
* Equal Contributions. This work is done when Mengjun Cheng is a
research intern at Baidu Inc.
† Corresponding author.

Scene text
missing

Image

Image
𝜃"
𝜃!

𝜃!

𝜃"

𝜃! ≈ 𝜃"
(a) Conventional cross-modal retrieval

𝜃" < 𝜃!
(b) Vision and scene text aggregation

Query: “A person holding up a gummy hot dog in their hand.”
Visual embedding

Scene text embedding

Figure 1. Given a text query, two images are close in visual semantics for (a) conventional cross-modal retrieval. By considering visual appearance and scene text information, e.g.,“gummy
hotdog”, into one framework, (b) the proposed Vision and Scene
Text Aggregation (ViSTA) approach enables to distinguish the semantic difference between images I1 and I2 (θ2 < θ1 ), and can
be also adapted to conventional scene text free scenarios.

1. Introduction
As one of the most important multi-modal understanding tasks, cross-modal retrieval attracts much attention due
to its valuable applications, e.g., news search and product
retrieval. Cross-modal text-to-image retrieval [10, 11, 22]
aims to return the most relevant candidate based on the relevance between the text content of a query and the visual
appearance of an image. The performance of this retrieval
task is largely improved by better visual representation and
detailed image-text alignment [3, 22, 25, 28].
In recent years, following the success of BERT [7] in
natural language modeling, transformer-based single encoder architectures [5, 15, 16, 20, 23, 26, 29, 36, 44, 47, 49]
are adopted to fuse images and text, and image-text pretraining for fine-tuning becomes the mainstream paradigm
in modeling visual-language tasks, significantly boosting
15184

