Sparse Fuse Dense: Towards High Quality 3D Detection with Depth Completion
Xiaopei Wu1,2 , Liang Peng1,2 , Honghui Yang1,2 , Liang Xie1 , Chenxi Huang1 ,
∗
Chengqi Deng1 , Haifeng Liu1 , Deng Cai1,2*
1
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University 2 Fabu Inc., Hangzhou, China
{wuxiaopei, pengliang, yanghonghui}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Current LiDAR-only 3D detection methods inevitably suffer from the sparsity of point clouds. Many multi-modal
methods are proposed to alleviate this issue, while different
representations of images and point clouds make it difficult to fuse them, resulting in suboptimal performance. In
this paper, we present a novel multi-modal framework SFD
(Sparse Fuse Dense), which utilizes pseudo point clouds generated from depth completion to tackle the issues mentioned
above. Different from prior works, we propose a new RoI
fusion strategy 3D-GAF (3D Grid-wise Attentive Fusion) to
make fuller use of information from different types of point
clouds. Specifically, 3D-GAF fuses 3D RoI features from
the pair of point clouds in a grid-wise attentive way, which
is more fine-grained and more precise. In addition, we propose a SynAugment (Synchronized Augmentation) to enable
our multi-modal framework to utilize all data augmentation
approaches tailored to LiDAR-only methods. Lastly, we customize an effective and efficient feature extractor CPConv
(Color Point Convolution) for pseudo point clouds. It can
explore 2D image features and 3D geometric features of
pseudo point clouds simultaneously. Our method holds the
highest entry on the KITTI car 3D object detection leaderboard† , demonstrating the effectiveness of our SFD. Code
will be made publicly available.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the rise of deep learning and autonomous
driving has led to a rapid development of 3D detection. Current 3D detection methods are mainly based on LiDAR point
clouds [1, 3, 6, 22, 23, 29, 30, 42, 43, 50], while the sparsity
of point clouds considerably limits their performances. The
sparse LiDAR point clouds provide poor information in distant and occluded regions, making it difficult to generate
precise 3D bounding boxes. Many multi-modal methods
are proposed to address this problem. MV3D [2] introduces
∗ Corresponding author
† On the date of CVPR deadline, i.e., Nov.16, 2021

an RoI fusion strategy to fuse features of images and point
clouds on the second stage. AVOD [15] proposes to fuse full
resolution feature crops from the image feature maps and
BEV feature maps for a high recall. MMF [20] leverages 2D
detection, ground estimation and depth completion to assist
3D detection. In MMF, pseudo point clouds are used for
backbone feature fusion, and depth completion feature maps
are used for RoI feature fusion. Despite their great success,
they have two shortcomings.
Coarse RoI Fusion Strategy When fusing RoI features,
as shown in Figure 2(a), previous RoI fusion methods concatenate 2D LiDAR RoI features cropped from BEV LiDAR
feature maps and 2D image RoI features cropped from FOV
image feature maps. We note that this RoI fusion strategy
is coarse. Firstly, 2D image RoI features are usually mixed
with features from other objects or backgrounds, which will
confuse the model. Secondly, the RoI fusion strategy ignores
object part correspondences in 2D images and 3D point
clouds. In this paper, we propose a more fine-grained RoI
fusion strategy 3D-GAF (3D Grid-wise Attentive Fusion),
which fuse 3D RoI features instead of 2D RoI features as
shown in Figure 2(b). We elaborate on three advantages of
3D-GAF over previous RoI fusion methods in Section 3.3.
Insufficient Data Augmentation This shortcoming exists in most multi-modal methods. Because 2D image data
cannot be operated like 3D LiDAR data, many data augmentation approaches are difficult to deploy in multi-modal
methods. It is a crucial reason why multi-modal methods
are usually inferior to single-modal methods [47]. To this
end, we introduce our SynAugment (Synchronized Augmentation). We observe that after converting 2D images
to 3D pseudo point clouds, the representations of images
and raw point clouds are unified, suggesting that we can
operate images just like raw point clouds. However, it is not
enough. Some complicated data augmentation approaches
such as gt-sampling [41] and local rotation [49] may cause
occlusions on the FOV (field of view). It is a non-negligible
issue because image features need to be extracted on the
FOV. Now, it is time to jump out of the mindset. With 2D
images converted to 3D pseudo point clouds, why don’t we

5418

