Towards General Purpose Vision Systems:
An End-to-End Task-Agnostic Vision-Language Architecture
Tanmay Gupta1
Amita Kamath1
Aniruddha Kembhavi1
Derek Hoiem2
1
2
PRIOR @ Allen Institute for AI
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
https://prior.allenai.org/projects/gpv

Abstract
Computer vision systems today are primarily N-purpose
systems, designed and trained for a predefined set of tasks.
Adapting such systems to new tasks is challenging and often requires non-trivial modifications to the network architecture (e.g. adding new output heads) or training process
(e.g. adding new losses). To reduce the time and expertise required to develop new applications, we would like to
create general purpose vision systems that can learn and
perform a range of tasks without any modification to the architecture or learning process. In this paper, we propose
GPV-1, a task-agnostic vision-language architecture that
can learn and perform tasks that involve receiving an image
and producing text and/or bounding boxes, including classification, localization, visual question answering, captioning, and more. We also propose evaluations of generality of
architecture, skill-concept1 transfer, and learning efficiency
that may inform future work on general purpose vision. Our
experiments indicate GPV-1 is effective at multiple tasks,
reuses some concept knowledge across tasks, can perform
the Referring Expressions task zero-shot, and further improves upon the zero-shot performance using a few training
samples.

1. Introduction
Computer vision systems today are N -purpose learners — designed, trained, and limited to N predetermined
tasks. Single-purpose models specialize in a single task, and
adapting them to a new task or dataset requires an architecture change, minimally replacing the last classification
layer. Multi-purpose models, such as Mask-RCNN [13], simultaneously solve more than one task, but the architecture
and learning are tailored to specific tasks which must be de1 For this work, we define concepts, skills and tasks as follows: Concepts – nouns (e.g. car, person, dog), Skills – operations that we wish to
perform on the given inputs (e.g. classification, object detection, image
captioning), Tasks – predefined combinations of a set of skills performed
on a set of concepts (e.g. ImageNet classification task involves the skill of
image classification across 1000 concepts).

Text

Boxes with
relevance scores

brown

0.13

0.75

0.02
0.04

yes

What color is the dog?
Are there trees being seen?

GPV
1
0.99

Locate dog.
Generate a description for the image.

A dog
and a cat
laying on
a bed.

0.59
0.77
0.37

What is this?
0.40

0.30

cat

Figure 1. A task-agnostic vision-language architecture. GPV-1
takes an image and a natural language task description and outputs
bounding boxes, confidences and text. GPV-1 can be trained endto-end on any task that requires a box or text output, without any
architecture modifications such as adding a new task-head. Results
correspond to a model trained to perform VQA, localization, captioning, and classification tasks. Star indicates the output modality
supervised during training for each task.

fined in advance. In vision-language models [32], dedicated
output heads are typically used for each task and dataset.
Analogous to a general purpose computer, a general purpose vision (GPV) system is designed to carry out many vision tasks, not all known at the time of design, constrained
only by its input modalities, memory/instructions, and output modalities. General purpose systems enable new applications to be developed without knowledge of or access
to the underlying mechanics. The NLP community has
made significant progress in this direction with sequenceto-sequence transformer-based models, such as T5 [41] and
GPT-3 [3], which can be trained to solve many language
tasks without changing the architecture. We believe such
advances are now possible within computer vision, though
with many new challenges.
In this paper, we propose an end-to-end trainable taskagnostic vision-language architecture, GPV-1, as a step towards general purpose vision systems. As input, our system

16399

