Real-time Hyperspectral Imaging in Hardware via Trained Metasurface Encoders
Maksim Makarenko1† , Arturo Burguete-Lopez1 , Qizhou Wang1 , Fedor Getman1 , Silvio Giancola1 ,
Bernard Ghanem1 , Andrea Fratalocchi1
1
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
Thuwal, 23955-6900, KSA
†

maksim.makarenko@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
Hyperspectral imaging has attracted significant attention
to identify spectral signatures for image classification and
automated pattern recognition in computer vision. State-ofthe-art implementations of snapshot hyperspectral imaging
rely on bulky, non-integrated, and expensive optical elements,
including lenses, spectrometers, and filters. These macroscopic components do not allow fast data processing for, e.g.
real-time and high-resolution videos. This work introduces
Hyplex™, a new integrated architecture addressing the limitations discussed above. Hyplex™ is a CMOS-compatible,
fast hyperspectral camera that replaces bulk optics with
nanoscale metasurfaces inversely designed through artificial
intelligence. Hyplex™ does not require spectrometers but
makes use of conventional monochrome cameras, opening up
the possibility for real-time and high-resolution hyperspectral imaging at inexpensive costs. Hyplex™ exploits a modeldriven optimization, which connects the physical metasurfaces layer with modern visual computing approaches based
on end-to-end training. We design and implement a prototype version of Hyplex™ and compare its performance
against the state-of-the-art for typical imaging tasks such as
spectral reconstruction and semantic segmentation. In all
benchmarks, Hyplex™ reports the smallest reconstruction
error. We additionally present what is, to the best of our
knowledge, the largest publicly available labeled hyperspectral dataset for semantic segmentation. 1

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral imaging is gaining considerable interest in
many areas including civil, environmental, aerial, military,
and biological sciences for estimating spectral features that
allow the identification and remote sensing of complex materials [10, 29]. Ground-based hyperspectral imaging enables
automated classification for food inspection, surgery, biol1 Dataset available on https://github.com/makamoa/hyplex.

Figure 1. Hardware implemented Hyplex™ imaging system. (a)
Example of metasurface pixel arrays (blue squares). (b) Schematic
of meta-pixel array on top of a camera sensor. (c) Closeup showing
the metasurface projectors as subpixels of the array. (d) Scanning
electron microscope image of a fabricated metasurface pixel. (e)
Optical micrograph of the metasurface pixel array. (f) Illustration
of the barcode generated by (e).

ogy, dental and medical diagnosis [1, 21, 34, 42]. Likewise,
aerial and submarine hyperspectral imaging are currently
opening new frontiers in agriculture and marine biology for
the taxonomic classification of fauna, and through aerial
drone footage for precision agriculture [2, 10, 13, 14]. The
present state-of-the-art in hyperspectral imaging, however,
is still affected by problems of expensive setup costs, timeconsuming post-data processing, low speed of data acquisition, and the needs of macroscopic optical and mechanical
components [41, 58]. A single hyperspectral image obtained
from a high-resolution camera typically requires gigabytes
of storage space, making it impossible to perform real-time

12692

