Align Representations with Base: A New Approach to Self-Supervised Learning
Shaofeng Zhang1 , Lyn Qiu1 , Feng Zhu2 , Junchi Yan1 ,* Hengrui Zhang1 ,
Rui Zhao1,2 , Hongyang Li2 , Xiaokang Yang1
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 SenseTime Research
{sherrylone, lyn qiu, yanjunchi, sqstardust, xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn
{zhufeng, zhaorui, lihongyang}@sensetime.com
𝑥"

Abstract

Overlap
𝑧!"

Existing symmetric contrastive learning methods suffer
from collapses (complete and dimensional) or quadratic
complexity of objectives. Departure from these methods
which maximize mutual information of two generated views,
along either instance or feature dimension, the proposed
paradigm introduces intermediate variables at the feature
level, and maximizes the consistency between variables and
representations of each view. Specifically, the proposed intermediate variables are the nearest group of base vectors
to representations. Hence, we call the proposed method
ARB (Align Representations with Base). Compared with
other symmetric approaches, ARB 1) does not require negative pairs, which leads the complexity of the overall objective function is in linear order, 2) reduces feature redundancy, increasing the information density of training samples, 3) is more robust to output dimension size, which outperforms previous feature-wise arts over 28% Top-1 accuracy on ImageNet-100 under low-dimension settings.

1. Introduction
One major bottleneck in deep learning is the scarcity of
labeled data, and much attention has been paid to unsupervised learning [15, 17, 30, 33] and self-supervised learning
[4, 12, 14, 16, 25, 40]. Among the mainstream approaches,
most fall into one of three classes: generative, pretext-tasksbased, and contrastive methods. Generative based methods
[15, 30, 39] mainly use pixel-level reconstruction to learn
the backbone. However, the backbone usually learns a semantic feature, so it’s unnecessary to record the information
of each pixel. Therefore, more attempts about discriminative approaches are proposed to train encoders by providing
* Junchi Yan is the correspondence author. Shaofeng Zhang, Lyn Qiu,
Junchi Yan, Xiaokang Yang are also with MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Artificial Intelligence Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University.
Rui Zhao is also with Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University.

𝑥"
𝑧!"

𝑧!#
Gradient
Collapse
Redundancy

𝑧$"
𝑧$#

𝑏!#
Zero overlap

𝑧$"

Feature vector

𝑏$#

Feature distribution
Base distribution
(a) directly align

𝑥!

(b) align base

𝑥!

Figure 1. Comparison of direct alignment (a) and the proposed
ARB (b). z1A and z2A mean the first and second dimensional feature of view A. Direct alignment will easily cause dimensional
collapse (green dash line) and redundancy (gray area). In ARB, we
solve these caveats by introducing intermediate variables—nearest
B
group of base (bA
1 and b2 ) to representations. Then, the redundancy reduces to zero without dimensional collapse.

pretext tasks [10, 17, 31], which gain obviously better performance, such as rotation angle [10] and spot artifacts [39].
Among these, contrastive-based methods [4, 5, 19] are the
mainstream of current research. The incentive is that views
of the same images generated by random augmentation retain similar semantic information. Hence, aligning the twoview embeddings is the key to success. However, directly
aligning the embeddings usually causes degenerated solutions [35], which means different samples are mapped to
the same points in feature space, as shown on the left side
of Fig. 1. This is often due to the lack of proper objective
functions or architectures [6, 32].
Therefore, one way is to design a suitable objective function. SimCLR [4] takes each two embeddings as one pair,
where positive pairs are views of the same images and negative pairs are composed of views of the different images. By
expanding the consistency between positive pairs and the
difference between negative pairs, models can avoid mapping different samples to the same points. However, such a
strategy calcuates the similarity of every two samples, and
this brings quadratic complexity. Another way is to build a
proper architecture: BYOL [16] and SimSiam [6] propose
asymmetric structures, e.g., Stop-Gradient to avoid negative
sampling. Despite their promising results and linear com-

16600

