A Closer Look at Few-shot Image Generation
Yunqing Zhao1
Henghui Ding2
Houjing Huang3
Ngai-Man Cheung1 *
1
2
3
Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD)
ETH Zürich
ByteDance Ltd.
yunqing zhao@mymail.sutd.edu.sg,
iter

ngaiman cheung@sutd.edu.sg

TGAN

TGAN + ADA

FreezeD

EWC

CDC

Ours

500
Pretrained on Source (iter 0)
adapt to

1000

2000

3000
iter

10-shot real Amedeo’s paintings

TGAN
EWC

TGAN+ADA
CDC

FreezeD
Ours

500

Intra-LPIPS(↑)

0.65

1000
0.58
0.50

2000

0.43

iter

0.35
0

500

1000

2000

3000

3000

Figure 1. Upper Left: Transferring a GAN pretrained on a large-scale source domain (FFHQ [23]) to 10-shot Amedeo Modigliani’s paintings [53]. Right: During adaptation, we randomly select four fixed noise input and visualize the generated images with different existing
methods. We observe that all methods including those with disproportionate focus on diversity preserving achieve similar quality after convergence (evaluated by our proposed realisticness classifier in Sec. 4.2). Therefore, the better methods are those that can slow down diversity
degradation (Bottom Left, evaluated by intra-LPIPS in Sec. 4.3). We perform a rigorous study and show quantitative results in Sec. 4.5.

Abstract
Modern GANs excel at generating high quality and diverse images. However, when transferring the pretrained
GANs on small target data (e.g., 10-shot), the generator
tends to replicate the training samples. Several methods
have been proposed to address this few-shot image generation task, but there is a lack of effort to analyze them under
a unified framework. As our first contribution, we propose
a framework to analyze existing methods during the adaptation. Our analysis discovers that while some methods have
disproportionate focus on diversity preserving which impede
quality improvement, all methods achieve similar quality after convergence. Therefore, the better methods are those
that can slow down diversity degradation. Furthermore, our
analysis reveals that there is still plenty of room to further
slow down diversity degradation.
Informed by our analysis and to slow down the diver* Corresponding Author

sity degradation of the target generator during adaptation,
our second contribution proposes to apply mutual information (MI) maximization to retain the source domain’s rich
multi-level diversity information in the target domain generator. We propose to perform MI maximization by contrastive loss (CL), leverage the generator and discriminator as two feature encoders to extract different multi-level
features for computing CL. We refer to our method as Dual
Contrastive Learning (DCL). Extensive experiments on several public datasets show that, while leading to a slower
diversity-degrading generator during adaptation, our proposed DCL brings visually pleasant quality and state-of-theart quantitative performance.

1. Introduction
Powerful Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [4,
14, 24] have been built in recent years that can generate images with high fidelity and diversity [6, 44]. Unfortunately,

9140

