Panoptic, Instance and Semantic Relations: A Relational Context Encoder to
Enhance Panoptic Segmentation
Shubhankar Borse *

Hyojin Park *

Hong Cai
Debasmit Das
Fatih Porikli
Qualcomm AI Research †

Risheek Garrepalli

{sborse, hyojinp, hongcai, debadas, rgarrepa, fporikli}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
This paper presents a novel framework to integrate both
semantic and instance contexts for panoptic segmentation.
In existing works, it is common to use a shared backbone
to extract features for both things (countable classes such
as vehicles) and stuff (uncountable classes such as roads).
This, however, fails to capture the rich relations among
them, which can be utilized to enhance visual understanding and segmentation performance. To address this shortcoming, we propose a novel Panoptic, Instance, and Semantic Relations (PISR) module to exploit such contexts. First,
we generate panoptic encodings to summarize key features
of the semantic classes and predicted instances. A Panoptic Relational Attention (PRA) module is then applied to
the encodings and the global feature map from the backbone. It produces a feature map that captures 1) the relations across semantic classes and instances and 2) the relations between these panoptic categories and spatial features. PISR also automatically learns to focus on the more
important instances, making it robust to the number of instances used in the relational attention module. Moreover,
PISR is a general module that can be applied to any existing panoptic segmentation architecture. Through extensive evaluations on panoptic segmentation benchmarks like
Cityscapes, COCO, and ADE20K, we show that PISR attains considerable improvements over existing approaches.

1. Introduction
Panoptic segmentation [22] provides a unifying framework encompassing both semantic and instance segmentation. Its objective is to segment an image into things and
stuff. Things include countable objects, such as cars and
pedestrians, and stuff refers to uncountable concepts like
sky and vegetation. Generating individual masks for things
is similar to instance segmentation, while predicting masks
* These authors contributed equally.
†Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

Figure 1. Our proposed PISR module takes features and predictions for semantic and instance segmentation as inputs and applies a relational attention scheme. In this image, we show the input/output pairs obtained by applying PISR to a Panoptic-DeepLab
model with ResNet50 backbone. The improvements in both the
features and panoptic predictions are clearly visible. PISR produces more confident and accurate predictions in regions where a
lot of instances are cluttered together (shown with white arrows).
The feature maps are visualized for the persons class.

for stuff is equivalent to performing semantic segmentation.
Since it aims to perform both tasks simultaneously,
panoptic segmentation presents a challenge beyond conventional semantic or instance segmentation. Early works [22]
propose to use separate modules for the two tasks, e.g.,
a Mask-RCNN module for instance segmentation and an
FCN-based module for semantic segmentation. These two
outputs are then combined during post-processing to generate panoptic segmentation. However, the accuracy in this
case heavily relies on object detection quality. Besides, having two separate modules leads to redundant computations.

1269

