Beyond Supervised vs. Unsupervised: Representative Benchmarking and
Analysis of Image Representation Learning
Matthew Gwilliam and Abhinav Shrivastava
University of Maryland, College Park

Abstract
By leveraging contrastive learning, clustering, and other
pretext tasks, unsupervised methods for learning image representations have reached impressive results on standard
benchmarks. The result has been a crowded field – many
methods with substantially different implementations yield
results that seem nearly identical on popular benchmarks,
such as linear evaluation on ImageNet. However, a single
result does not tell the whole story. In this paper, we compare methods using performance-based benchmarks such
as linear evaluation, nearest neighbor classification, and
clustering for several different datasets, demonstrating the
lack of a clear front-runner within the current state-of-theart. In contrast to prior work that performs only supervised vs. unsupervised comparison, we compare several
different unsupervised methods against each other. To enrich this comparison, we analyze embeddings with measurements such as uniformity, tolerance, and centered kernel alignment (CKA), and propose two new metrics of our
own: nearest neighbor graph similarity and linear prediction overlap. We reveal through our analysis that in isolation, single popular methods should not be treated as
though they represent the field as a whole, and that future
work ought to consider how to leverage the complimentary
nature of these methods. We also leverage CKA to provide
a framework to robustly quantify augmentation invariance,
and provide a reminder that certain types of invariance will
be undesirable for downstream tasks.

1. Introduction
Image features are critical components in many computer vision (CV) pipelines. In this paper, we define image features, also referred to as embeddings, encodings, or
representations, as an n-dimensional vector that represents
the content of an image. With the emergence of deep learning, classical approaches to computing image features have
been supplanted by neural networks that use large amounts
of data to generate powerful image representations. The
most widespread method is straightforward: a neural net-

Barlow Twins

Which method is best?
DeepCluster

MoCo

SwAV

0.04

0.02

0.00

Linear, ImageNet

Linear, Aircraft

0.02

0.04

0.04
0.02
k-NN,
ImageNet

0.00

0.02
0.04
K-Means,
ImageNet

Figure 1. Results for a sample of classification benchmarks we
perform in this paper. While these bar charts report real results,
lack of axes is intentional – the exact numbers are in Section 4. Importantly, between the four tasks, there is no clear “best” method.

work (e.g., a ResNet50 [30]) is trained to classify the images in some large dataset, typically ImageNet. The portion
of the network that performs the classification, usually just
the final layer, is then removed, and the outputs of the penultimate layer for a given image are considered the features
for that image. This process relies on image classification,
a supervised learning task, and thus requires the availability
of large amounts of annotated, high-quality data.
Recent successes make unsupervised learning a viable
alternative paradigm where image features are learned without the need for class labels. Within unsupervised learning,
methods can be considered either generative or discriminative. Generative methods are typically designed for reconstruction or similar tasks [5, 19, 20, 35, 51]. Since we
are more concerned with a potential transfer to downstream
tasks such as image classification and object detection, we

9642

