Identifying Ambiguous Similarity Conditions via Semantic Matching
Han-Jia Ye
Yi Shi
De-Chuan Zhan
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
{yehj, shiy, zhandc}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Similar

Abstract
Rich semantics inside an image result in its ambiguous
relationship with others, i.e., two images could be similar
in one condition but dissimilar in another. Given triplets
like “aircraft” is similar to “bird” than “train”, Weakly Supervised Conditional Similarity Learning (WS-CSL) learns
multiple embeddings to match semantic conditions without
explicit condition labels such as “can fly”. However, similarity relationships in a triplet are uncertain except providing a condition. For example, the previous comparison becomes invalid once the conditional label changes to
“is vehicle”. To this end, we introduce a novel evaluation
criterion by predicting the comparison’s correctness after
assigning the learned embeddings to their optimal conditions, which measures how much WS-CSL could cover latent semantics as the supervised model. Furthermore, we
propose the Distance Induced Semantic COndition VERification Network (D ISCOVER N ET), which characterizes
the instance-instance and triplets-condition relations in a
“decompose-and-fuse” manner. To make the learned embeddings cover all semantics, D ISCOVER N ET utilizes a set
module or an additional regularizer over the correspondence between a triplet and a condition. D ISCOVER N ET
achieves state-of-the-art performance on benchmarks like
UT-Zappos-50k and Celeb-A w.r.t. different criteria.

1. Introduction
Learning embeddings (a.k.a. representations) from
data benefits machine learning and visual recognition systems [1,6,11,25,27,39,42,43,49]. Side information such as
triplets [9, 10, 22, 29, 31] indicates the comparison relationship of objects, from which the embedding pulls visually
similar objects close while pushing dissimilar ones away.
The linkage between objects conveys rich information
about the object itself as well as its relationship with others,
which becomes ambiguous when the similarity is measured
from different perspectives. As illustrated in Fig. 1 (upper),
(a) female with glasses, (b) female without glasses, and (c)

(

,

Similar

,
Dissimilar

Condition = “gender”

)

(

,

,

)

Dissimilar

Condition = “wear glasses”
Supervised

Supervised

Figure 1. Upper: Two triplets with the same set of instances could
be both meaningful when we measure similarity from different
conditions. Lower Left: Given original (correct) triplets and their
reversed variants (invalid w.r.t. the same similarity condition) on
UT-Zappos-50k, we compute the proportion a model predicts them
as valid ones. Last three are WS-CSL methods. Lower right: Our
proposed criterion avoids the issue of reversed triplets naturally,
and our D ISCOVER N ET outperforms other WS-CSL methods.

male with glasses are organized in triplets.1 We think (a)
and (b) are more similar when we measure based on “gender”. In contrast, we also treat (a) and (c) as neighbors since
they “wear glasses”. Since one embedding space outputs
fixed relationships between instances, learning multiple embeddings facilitates discovering rich semantics.
Given triplets associated with their condition labels, indicating under what kind of similarity the comparisons are
made, Conditional Similarity Learning (CSL) learns multiple embeddings to cover latent semantic [36, 38]. During the evaluation, CSL predicts whether a triplet is meaningful or not under a specified condition. Although supervised CSL has been successfully applied in various applications [18, 19, 26, 34], labeling conditions introduces additional costs. As in a recommendation system, users may
click relevant items (label item-wise similarities) based on
particular preferences, and we only collect diverse comparison relationships without explicit condition labels. [24, 32]
propose Weakly Supervised-CSL (WS-CSL), where multiple embeddings are learned with triplets and the model is
unaware of their corresponding conditions.
1 In a valid triplet (a, b, c), (a, b) is more similar than (a, c).

16610

