Stratified Transformer for 3D Point Cloud Segmentation
Xin Lai1 *

Jianhui Liu2,3∗
Shu Liu3
1
CUHK 2 HKU

Li Jiang4
Liwei Wang1
Hengshuang Zhao2,5
Xiaojuan Qi2†
Jiaya Jia1,3
3
4
SmartMore MPI Informatics 5 MIT

Abstract
3D point cloud segmentation has made tremendous
progress in recent years. Most current methods focus on
aggregating local features, but fail to directly model longrange dependencies. In this paper, we propose Stratified
Transformer that is able to capture long-range contexts and
demonstrates strong generalization ability and high performance. Specifically, we first put forward a novel key sampling strategy. For each query point, we sample nearby
points densely and distant points sparsely as its keys in a
stratified way, which enables the model to enlarge the effective receptive field and enjoy long-range contexts at a low
computational cost. Also, to combat the challenges posed
by irregular point arrangements, we propose first-layer
point embedding to aggregate local information, which facilitates convergence and boosts performance. Besides, we
adopt contextual relative position encoding to adaptively
capture position information. Finally, a memory-efficient
implementation is introduced to overcome the issue of varying point numbers in each window. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of our method
on S3DIS, ScanNetv2 and ShapeNetPart datasets. Code is
available at https:// github.com/ dvlab-research/ StratifiedTransformer.

1. Introduction
Nowadays 3D point clouds can be conveniently collected. They have demonstrated great potential in various
applications, such as autonomous driving, robotics and augmented reality. Unlike regular pixels in 2D images, 3D
points are arranged irregularly, hampering direct adoption
of well-studied 2D networks to process 3D data. Therefore,
it is imperative to explore advanced methods that are tailored for 3D point cloud data.
Abundant methods [7, 15, 16, 34, 35, 41, 52, 61, 62] have
explored 3D point cloud segmentation and obtained decent
* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding Author

Input / Ground Truth
bed
chair

w/o stratified
curtain
desk

floor

w/ stratified
table
wall

Figure 1. Visualization of Effective Receptive Field (ERF) [29],
given the feature of interest (shown with green star) in the output
layer. Red region corresponds to high contribution. Left: Input
point cloud and the ground truth. Middle: The ERF and prediction
of the model without stratified strategy and by only attending to its
own window. Right: The ERF and prediction of the model with
direct long-range dependency, using the stratified strategy. More
illustrations are shown in the supplementary file.

performance. Most of them focus on aggregating local features, but fail to explicitly model long-range dependencies,
which has been demonstrated to be crucial in capturing contexts from a long distance [49]. Along another line of research, Transformer [44] can naturally harvest long-range
information via the self-attention mechanism. However,
only limited attempts [31, 62] have been made to apply
Transformer to 3D point clouds. Point Transformer [62]
proposes “vector self-attention” and “subtraction relation”
to aggregate local features, but it is still difficult to directly
capture long-range contexts. Voxel Transformer [31] is tailored for object detection and performs self-attention over
the voxels, but it loses accurate position due to voxelization.
Differently, we develop an efficient segmentation network to capture long-range contexts using the standard
multi-head self-attention [44], while keeping position information intact. To this end, we propose a simple and powerful framework, namely, Stratified Transformer.
Specifically, we first partition the 3D space into nonoverlapping cubic windows, inspired by Swin Transformer [26]. However, in Swin Transformer, different
windows work independently, and each query token only
chooses the tokens within its window as keys, thus attend-

8500

