SelfD: Self-Learning Large-Scale Driving Policies From the Web
Jimuyang Zhang Ruizhao Zhu Eshed Ohn-Bar
Boston University
{zhangjim, rzhu, eohnbar}@bu.edu

Figure 1. Learning From Unlabeled Data Facilitates Scalable Navigation Decision-Making. Our goal is to develop robust, generalized,
and easily deployable decision-making policies for navigation. Our key insight is to make use of the hours of freely available and highly
diverse navigation data from the web in order to augment the knowledge and robustness of an initially trained navigation policy.

Abstract
Effectively utilizing the vast amounts of ego-centric navigation data that is freely available on the internet can advance generalized intelligent systems, i.e., to robustly scale
across perspectives, platforms, environmental conditions,
scenarios, and geographical locations. However, it is difficult to directly leverage such large amounts of unlabeled
and highly diverse data for complex 3D reasoning and planning tasks. Consequently, researchers have primarily focused on its use for various auxiliary pixel- and imagelevel computer vision tasks that do not consider an ultimate navigational objective. In this work, we introduce
SelfD, a framework for learning scalable driving by utilizing large amounts of online monocular images. Our key
idea is to leverage iterative semi-supervised training when
learning imitative agents from unlabeled data. To handle
unconstrained viewpoints, scenes, and camera parameters,
we train an image-based model that directly learns to plan
in the Bird’s Eye View (BEV) space. Next, we use unla-

beled data to augment the decision-making knowledge and
robustness of an initially trained model via self-training.
In particular, we propose a pseudo-labeling step which enables making full use of highly diverse demonstration data
through “hypothetical” planning-based data augmentation.
We employ a large dataset of publicly available YouTube
videos to train SelfD and comprehensively analyze its generalization benefits across challenging navigation scenarios. Without requiring any additional data collection or
annotation efforts, SelfD demonstrates consistent improvements (by up to 24%) in driving performance evaluation on
nuScenes, Argoverse, Waymo, and CARLA.

1. Introduction
How can we learn generalized models for robust visionbased navigation in complex and dynamic settings? While
humans can effortlessly transfer general navigation knowledge across settings and platforms [36, 46, 52, 53], current real-world development of navigation agents generally deploys within a fixed pre-assumed setting (e.g., ge-

17316

