DisARM: Displacement Aware Relation Module for 3D Detection
Yao Duan

Kai Xu∗

Chenyang Zhu
Yuqing Lan
Renjiao Yi
Xinwang Liu
National University of Defense Technology

Abstract
We introduce Displacement Aware Relation Module
(DisARM), a novel neural network module for enhancing the performance of 3D object detection in point cloud
scenes. The core idea is extracting the most principal contextual information is critical for detection while the target is incomplete or featureless. We find that relations between proposals provide a good representation to describe
the context. However, adopting relations between all the
object or patch proposals for detection is inefficient, and
an imbalanced combination of local and global relations
brings extra noise that could mislead the training. Rather
than working with all relations, we find that training with
relations only between the most representative ones, or anchors, can significantly boost the detection performance.
Good anchors should be semantic-aware with no ambiguity and able to describe the whole layout of a scene with
no redundancy. To find the anchors, we first perform a preliminary relation anchor module with an objectness-aware
sampling approach and then devise a displacement based
module for weighing the relation importance for better utilization of contextual information. This light-weight relation module leads to significantly higher accuracy of object instance detection when being plugged into the state-ofthe-art detectors. Evaluations on the public benchmarks of
real-world scenes show that our method achieves the stateof-the-art performance on both SUN RGB-D and ScanNet V2. The code and models are publicly available at
https://github.com/YaraDuan/DisARM .

1. Introduction
Detecting objects directly from the 3D point cloud is
challenging yet imperative in many computer vision tasks,
such as autonomous navigation, path planning for robotics,
as well as some AR applications. The goal of 3D object
detection is to localize all valid shapes and recognize their
semantic label simultaneously, which puts forward high requirements for understanding the whole input scene.
∗ Corresponding author: kevin.kai.xu@gmail.com

table 
table 

(a) input point cloud

(b) w/o relations

table 

cabinet 

(c) with redundant and incomplete relations

(d) with valid relations

Figure 1. Illustration of the importance of DisARM. (b) It is easy
to mistake the cabinet as a table when the point cloud is incomplete and featureless. (c) Redundant relations are usually incomplete and lose the important displacement information of the target
object. (d) The network can recognize and locate the cabinet easily with the help of DisARM which provides valid surrounding
environment information.

With the rapid development of deep learning and the increasing scale of the online 3D dataset, data-driven methods
such as CNN have been widely adopted for object detection.
The critical observation of these methods is that the context
is as important as the object itself for accurate detection.
However, the extra information provided by 3D brings noise
and irregularity, which makes it more challenging to apply
convolution to gather the correct context for detection.
To avoid irregularity while applying convolution for 3D
object detection, the community recently introduces two
typical categories of methods. [17, 37, 45] are trying to
project the raw point cloud onto aligned structures such as
voxel grids which can apply 3D convolution naturally. In
an alternative way, [25] adopts max-pooling to fuse information of an irregular point cloud directly. These methods
can achieve good performance while the input scene is complete and clean. However, the real scanned data is usually
incomplete and noisy, making it difficult to extract the key
information through this intrinsic context fusion approach.
To further release the power of context, some methods try to adopt the context explicitly for object detection.

16980

