Scale-Equivalent Distillation for Semi-Supervised Object Detection
Qiushan Guo1 , Yao Mu1 , Jianyu Chen2 , Tianqi Wang 1 , Yizhou Yu1 , Ping Luo1
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 Tsinghua University
{qsguo,ymu,tqwang,yzyu,pluo}@cs.hku.hk jianyuchen@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent Semi-Supervised Object Detection (SS-OD)
methods are mainly based on self-training, i.e., generating hard pseudo-labels by a teacher model on unlabeled
data as supervisory signals. Although they achieved certain success, the limited labeled data in semi-supervised
learning scales up the challenges of object detection. We
analyze the challenges these methods meet with the empirical experiment results. We find that the massive False
Negative samples and inferior localization precision lack
consideration. Besides, the large variance of object sizes
and class imbalance (i.e., the extreme ratio between background and object) hinder the performance of prior arts.
Further, we overcome these challenges by introducing a
novel approach, Scale-Equivalent Distillation (SED), which
is a simple yet effective end-to-end knowledge distillation
framework robust to large object size variance and class imbalance. SED has several appealing benefits compared to
the previous works. (1) SED imposes a consistency regularization to handle the large scale variance problem. (2) SED
alleviates the noise problem from the False Negative samples and inferior localization precision. (3) A re-weighting
strategy can implicitly screen the potential foreground regions of the unlabeled data to reduce the effect of class imbalance. Extensive experiments show that SED consistently
outperforms the recent state-of-the-art methods on different
datasets with significant margins. For example, it surpasses
the supervised counterpart by more than 10 mAP when using 5% and 10% labeled data on MS-COCO.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks achieve strong results under
the supervised learning framework driven by large-scale
datasets, such as ImageNet [5] (about 1.28 million labeled
images). However, different from classification, object detection further involves locating objects with a bounding
box. Therefore, the annotation for object detection is much
more expensive, leading to labeled data remaining scarcely
related to classification. Recently, Semi-Supervised Learn-

Figure 1. The overall framework of SED. Our model improves the
scale equivalence, which is critical for object detectors, by regularizing the consistency between different-sized images. Furthermore, the inherent False Negative sample noise is alleviated by
self-distillation. A re-weighting strategy is adopted to solve the
severe class imbalance problem. The bird in the left example is a
False Negative sample when the threshold is set to 0.7. The right
example shows the scale inconsistency of different-sized images.

ing (SSL) for classification has received much attention
[2, 29, 33, 35], whose results are comparable to the fully supervised model on ImageNet. However, Semi-supervised
Object Detection (SS-OD) is more challenging than SSL on
ImageNet classification. Recent SS-OD methods improve
the performance by leveraging both the limited labeled data
and the massive unlabeled data, but they suffer from the
large variance of object sizes, massive False Negative samples and class imbalance problem, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
The scale of objects varies in a small range for the ImageNet classification model, whereas the scale variation of
MS-COCO dataset [18] is large across object instances for
the detector. As shown in Fig. 2a, the standard deviation of

14522

