ClusterGNN: Cluster-based Coarse-to-Fine Graph Neural Network for Efficient
Feature Matching

1

Yan Shi1 * Jun-Xiong Cai1 * Yoli Shavit 2 Tai-Jiang Mu1 Wensen Feng3† Kai Zhang1†
2
3
Tsinghua University
Faculty of Engineering, Bar Ilan University
Huawei Technologies
shi-y20@mails.tsinghu.edu.cn, caijunxiong000@163.com,yolisha@gmail.com
taijiang@tsinghua.edu.cn,fengwensen@huawei.com,zhangkai@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) with attention have
been successfully applied for learning visual feature matching. However, current methods learn with complete graphs,
resulting in a quadratic complexity in the number of features. Motivated by a prior observation that self- and
cross- attention matrices converge to a sparse representation, we propose ClusterGNN, an attentional GNN architecture which operates on clusters for learning the feature matching task. Using a progressive clustering module we adaptively divide keypoints into different subgraphs
to reduce redundant connectivity, and employ a coarse-tofine paradigm for mitigating miss-classification within images. Our approach yields a 59.7% reduction in runtime
and 58.4% reduction in memory consumption for dense detection, compared to current state-of-the-art GNN-based
matching, while achieving a competitive performance on
various computer vision tasks.

1. Introduction
Finding correspondences between images is an essential task for many computer vision applications such as Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) [14, 20],
Structure-from-Motion (SfM) [32, 43] and camera pose estimation [48]. Given a pair of images, correspondences
can be established through point-to-point feature matching.
Classical pipelines typically obtain correspondences with a
nearest neighbor (NN) search of feature descriptors and reject outliers based on their match score or using a mutual
NN check. Such methods focus only on the local similarity
between feature descriptors while ignoring geometric information and the global receptive field.
Recent works [5, 30, 35] have proposed to learn the task
of feature matching using graph neural networks (GNNs)
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding authors.

Figure 1. Sparse attention in cluster-based feature matching. Each
keypoint interacts only with points within its cluster (proposed
method) instead of interacting with all keypoints as in current
GNN-based feature matching [30].

and attention. In SuperGlue [30], Transformer [40] based
GNNs are applied on the complete graph of keypoints
within (intra graph) and between (inter graph) images. Each
node is represented with an encoded keypoint descriptor and
updated using self- and cross- multi-head attention, while
alternating between the intra- and inter- complete graphs,
respectively. Learning complete graphs with attention suffers from a computational and memory complexity which is
quadratic in N, where N is the number of keypoints. However, keypoints typically show a strong correlation with just
a small number of points (sparse adjacency matrix). Furthermore, in the context of feature matching, a large portion
of keypoints are non-repeatable and irrelevant for matching.
A complete graph representation is thus redundant and results in wasteful attention-based message passing.
Efforts to reduce the quadratic complexity of attention
mainly focused on self-attention. For example, reducing
the attention dimension by splitting the input sequence into
local windows [23] or by approximating attention with kernels [8]. However, these works are less suitable for fea-

12517

