Sound and Visual Representation Learning with Multiple Pretraining Tasks
Arun Balajee Vasudevan1 ,
Dengxin Dai2 ,
ETH Zurich1
MPI for Informatics2

Luc Van Gool1,3
KU Leuven 3

{arunv,vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch, ddai@mpi-inf.mpg.de

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) is a popular paradigm to
train deep networks on pretext tasks that readily extract supervision from the data. Typically, this allows models to learn
data representations, which are then used for downstream
tasks. The objectives for these SSL tasks are designed based
on the corresponding downstream tasks. As a result, pretrained deep networks on SSL tasks yield good performance
on that downstream task or related tasks when finetuned. We
note in the literature [16, 67] that these pretrained models are
not generic enough to give a satisfactory performance on a
diverse pool of downstream tasks. For instance, some pretext
tasks [9, 28] on images focus on learning global image feature representation while few others [8, 43, 67, 61] focuses

Pretraining

...

SSL task 2

SSL task K

Multi-SSL

Multi SSL

Multi SSL

Multi SSL

...
Downstream
task 1

Downstream
task 2

Downstream
task N

(a)
Pipeline
of our
approach
Classification
vs Object
Detection
tradeoff
87

Incremental Learning

86.5

VOC07 accuracy (%)

Different self-supervised tasks (SSL) reveal different features from the data. The learned feature representations
can exhibit different performance for each downstream task.
In this light, this work aims to combine Multiple SSL tasks
(Multi-SSL) that generalizes well for all downstream tasks.
For this study, we investigate binaural sounds and image
data. For binaural sounds, we propose three SSL tasks
namely, spatial alignment, temporal synchronization of foreground objects and binaural sounds and temporal gap prediction. We investigate several approaches of Multi-SSL
and give insights into the downstream task performance on
video retrieval, spatial sound super resolution, and semantic prediction using OmniAudio dataset. Our experiments
on binaural sound representations demonstrate that MultiSSL via incremental learning (IL) of SSL tasks outperforms
single SSL task models and fully supervised models in the
downstream task performance. As a check of applicability on
other modalities, we also formulate our Multi-SSL models
for image representation learning and we use the recently
proposed SSL tasks, MoCov2 and DenseCL. Here, Multi-SSL
surpasses recent methods such as MoCov2, DenseCL and
DetCo by 2.06%, 3.27% and 1.19% on VOC07 classification
and +2.83, +1.56 and +1.61 AP on COCO detection.

SSL task 1

Downstream

Abstract

Multi-task

86
85.5

Concatenation

85
84.5
84

MoCov2

Multi-SSL
Single SSL

83.5
83

DenseCL

82.5
38.4

38.9

39.4

39.9

40.4

40.9

41.4

41.9

COCO detection Pred (mAP)

(b) Classification vs Object detection tradeoff
Figure 1: Self Supervised Learning (SSL) tasks are designed
for specific downstream tasks. Our work demonstrates how
a single model learns to combine Multiple SSL tasks (i.e.,
Multi-SSL) that generalizes well for all the downstream
tasks. Figure (b) shows comparison of single SSL tasks: MoCov2 [28] and DenseCL [67] with our Multi-SSL models.

on local features. The former works well on downstream
tasks like image retrieval or classification while the latter
helps more for dense prediction/labelling tasks. For instance,
this is evident in Figure 1(b) where MoCov2 [28] performs
good for classification while DenseCL [67] comes out better
for object detection task.
Be it visual, sound, or linguistic data, how well the data
representations are learned determines the generalization
capability of a model. When the models are generic, feature
representations from them perform satisfactorily on several

14616

