Bandits for Structure Perturbation-based Black-box Attacks to Graph Neural
Networks with Theoretical Guarantees
Binghui Wang*, Youqi Li†, and Pan Zhou‡
*Department of Computer Science, Illinois Institute of Technology
†
‡

School of Cyberspace Science and Technology, and School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology

Hubei Engineering Research Center on Big Data Security, School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology

Email: *bwang70@iit.edu, †liyouqi@bit.edu.cn, ‡panzhou@hust.edu.cn
Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have achieved state-ofthe-art performance in many graph-based tasks such as node
classification and graph classification. However, many recent works have demonstrated that an attacker can mislead
GNN models by slightly perturbing the graph structure. Existing attacks to GNNs are either under the less practical
threat model where the attacker is assumed to access the
GNN model parameters, or under the practical black-box
threat model but consider perturbing node features that are
shown to be not enough effective. In this paper, we aim to
bridge this gap and consider black-box attacks to GNNs with
structure perturbation as well as with theoretical guarantees. We propose to address this challenge through bandit
techniques. Specifically, we formulate our attack as an online optimization with bandit feedback. This original problem is essentially NP-hard due to the fact that perturbing
the graph structure is a binary optimization problem. We
then propose an online attack based on bandit optimization
which
√ is proven to be sublinear to the query number T , i.e.,
O( N T 3/4 ) where N is the number of nodes in the graph.
Finally, we evaluate our proposed attack by conducting experiments over multiple datasets and GNN models. The
experimental results on various citation graphs and image
graphs show that our attack is both effective and efficient.

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have been emerging as
the most prominent methodology for learning with graphs,
such as social networks, chemical networks, superpixel
graphs, etc. GNNs have also advanced many graph-related
applications including but not limited to drug discovery [24],
fake news detection on social media [21], traffic forecasting [34], and superpixel graph classification [11]. However,
recent works have shown that GNNs are vulnerable to ad‡ Corresponding author.

versarial attacks [10, 37, 31, 38, 26, 32, 25, 20]. That is, an
attacker can easily fool a GNN model by slightly perturbing the graph structure (e.g., injecting new fake edges into
the graph or deleting the existing edges from the graph) or
perturbing the node features. Most of the existing attacks
to GNNs essentially rely on white-box or gray-box threat
model [10, 37, 31, 38, 26, 32, 25]. An attacker can not only
obtain the predictions generated by the targeted GNN model,
but also know the whole (i.e., in white-box) or partial (i.e.,
in gray-box) GNNs’ inner parameters and network structure. These threat models enable the attacker to derive the
true gradients that can be used to construct an (almost) optimal edge/feature perturbation via first-order optimization
approaches, e.g., projected gradient descent (PDG).
In practice, however, an attacker often has limited knowledge about the GNN model. For instance, many models are
deployed as an API due to the commercial value. In these
practical scenarios, an attacker can only obtain the model predictions by querying the API, while not knowing the model’s
other information. An attack based on such a realistic threat
model is called a black-box attack, which significantly raises
the bar for the attacker as he cannot obtain the gradient information. A recent work [20] performs black-box attacks
against GNNs. However, this work has two key drawbacks.
First, it assumes that the attacker can only perturb the (continuous) node features. Existing works (e.g., [37]) have
shown that feature perturbation-based attacks to GNNs are
significantly less effective than structure perturbation-based
attacks. Second, the attack is implemented via a heuristic
greedy algorithm, which has no theoretically guaranteed attack performance. Note that black-box attacks are classified
as soft-label black-box attacks [14, 18] and hard-label [8]
black-box attacks. The former means an attacker knows the
confidence scores when querying a target model, while the
latter means an attacker only knows the predicted label.
In this paper, we consider soft-label black-box attacks to
GNNs with structure perturbation. However, such a new
attack setting is much more challenging, as finding the optimal structure perturbation is essentially an NP-hard problem

13379

