Divide and Conquer: Compositional Experts
for Generalized Novel Class Discovery
Muli Yang, Yuehua Zhu, Jiaping Yu, Aming Wu∗ , and Cheng Deng*
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
{mlyang, yuehuazhu, jpyu}@stu.xidian.edu.cn, amwu@xidian.edu.cn, chdeng@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
In response to the explosively-increasing requirement of
annotated data, Novel Class Discovery (NCD) has emerged
as a promising alternative to automatically recognize unknown classes without any annotation. To this end, a model
makes use of a base set to learn basic semantic discriminability that can be transferred to recognize novel classes.
Most existing works handle the base and novel sets using
separate objectives within a two-stage training paradigm.
Despite showing competitive performance on novel classes,
they fail to generalize to recognizing samples from both
base and novel sets. In this paper, we focus on this generalized setting of NCD (GNCD), and propose to divide
and conquer it with two groups of Compositional Experts
(ComEx). Each group of experts is designed to characterize the whole dataset in a comprehensive yet complementary fashion. With their union, we can solve GNCD in an
efficient end-to-end manner. We further look into the drawback in current NCD methods, and propose to strengthen
ComEx with global-to-local and local-to-local regularization. ComEx1 is evaluated on four popular benchmarks,
showing clear superiority towards the goal of GNCD.

1. Introduction
A key to the success of deep learning is huge amounts
of curated data with elaborate annotations [12, 25, 31]. Despite being expensive and cumbersome to collect, the annotated data plays an indispensable role since deep models are
notoriously known to be data-hungry. In this regard, SemiSupervised Learning (SSL) [4,5,39] sheds some light on the
dilemma. Requiring only a small amount of annotations,
SSL addresses unannotated data using pseudo-labeling or
consistency regularization, yet limited to known classes
from existing annotations. To recognize unknown classes
never seen in training, Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) [9, 28, 37]

resorts to extra annotations to learn transferable attributes
among known and unknown classes, which in turn exacerbates the need for annotations.
We consider a new task setting that naturally addresses
the limitations of both SSL and ZSL, namely Novel Class
Discovery (NCD) [15, 16]. As shown in Fig. 1a, NCD assumes two sets of samples with disjoint classes — a base
set containing labeled samples of base classes, and a novel
set containing unlabeled samples of novel classes. The goal
of NCD, besides correctly classifying base2 samples, is to
recognize novel classes out of unlabeled samples using no
extra knowledge. In practice, the base and novel sets are often subsets of a same dataset, and thus share similar visual
knowledge that can be transferred to discover novel classes.
In view of this, most existing NCD methods [15, 16, 24,
46–48] adopt a two-stage paradigm: a supervised training
stage on the base set to learn basic semantic discriminability, and a fine-tuning stage on the novel set to discover novel
classes by clustering unlabeled samples. To compensate
the lack of supervised information, the two aforementioned
SSL techniques are often employed to strengthen clustering
performance — using pseudo labels estimated in the novel
set as clustering targets, and enforcing consistency between
different transformations of a same input. Despite being
competitive on discovering novel classes, these methods inevitably suffer from performance degradation on the base
set due to separate objectives for base and novel classes.
This can be problematic for deployment on a system handling data from both sets. A most recent work [13] identifies this problem and proposes a unified objective for NCD.
Although yielding promising results on either base or novel
set, this method struggles to generalize to the union of the
two sets, i.e., testing on both base and novel samples, showing it is still not yet ready for real-world deployment.
In this paper, we focus on the generalized setting of
NCD (GNCD), aiming at designing a unified model that
works well on both base and novel sets, especially on their
union. This is challenging due to the uneven properties of

* Corresponding authors.
1 Code: https://github.com/muliyangm/ComEx.

2 We interchangeably use base / labeled, and novel / unlabeled.

14268

