Neural Emotion Director: Speech-preserving semantic control of facial
expressions in “in-the-wild” videos
Foivos Paraperas Papantoniou1
1
2

Panagiotis P. Filntisis1

Petros Maragos1

Anastasios Roussos2,3

School of Electrical & Computer Engineering, National Technical University of Athens, Greece

Institute of Computer Science, Foundation for Research & Technology - Hellas (FORTH), Greece
3

College of Engineering, Mathematics and Physical Sciences, University of Exeter, UK

Figure 1. Our Neural Emotion Director (NED) can manipulate facial expressions in input videos while preserving speech, conditioned on
either the semantic emotional label (top part of figure), or on an external reference style as extracted from a reference video (bottom part).
Please zoom in for details. Video results can be found at: https://foivospar.github.io/NED/

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a novel deep learning method
for photo-realistic manipulation of the emotional state of
actors in “in-the-wild” videos. The proposed method is
based on a parametric 3D face representation of the actor in
the input scene that offers a reliable disentanglement of the
facial identity from the head pose and facial expressions. It
then uses a novel deep domain translation framework that
alters the facial expressions in a consistent and plausible
manner, taking into account their dynamics. Finally, the altered facial expressions are used to photo-realistically manipulate the facial region in the input scene based on an
especially-designed neural face renderer. To the best of our
knowledge, our method is the first to be capable of controlling the actor’s facial expressions by even using as a
sole input the semantic labels of the manipulated emotions,
while at the same time preserving the speech-related lip
movements. We conduct extensive qualitative and quantitative evaluations and comparisons, which demonstrate the
effectiveness of our approach and the especially promising

results that we obtain. Our method opens a plethora of
new possibilities for useful applications of neural rendering technologies, ranging from movie post-production and
video games to photo-realistic affective avatars.

1. Introduction
Photo-realistically manipulating faces in images or
videos has received substantial attention lately, with impressive results that expand the range of creative video editing,
content creation and the VFX industry. Yet, when it comes
to altering the facial emotion in videos, existing techniques
exhibit severe limitations. The importance of this type of
manipulation is clearly illustrated when shooting movies,
as capturing the desired actor’s emotion typically requires
multiple efforts, despite the uttered words being predefined.
A robust solution to emotion editing would conveniently
place the manipulation of facial performance in the postproduction stage.
In the past, the problem has been tackled by assuming
that different recordings of the same script being acted in

18781

