Instance-Dependent Label-Noise Learning with Manifold-Regularized
Transition Matrix Estimation
De Cheng1 , Tongliang Liu2 , Yixiong Ning1 , Nannan Wang1∗, Bo Han3 , Gang Niu4 ,
Xinbo Gao5 , Masashi Sugiyama4,6 .
1
Xidian University, 2 TML Lab, The University of Sydney, 3 Hong Kong Baptist University,
4
RIKEN, 5 Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, 6 The University of Tokyo.
{dcheng,nnwang}@xidian.edu.cn, tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au, yxning@stu.xidian.edu.cn,
bhanml@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, gang.niu.ml@gmail.com,gaoxb@cqupt.edu.cn, sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
In label-noise learning, estimating the transition matrix
has attracted more and more attention as the matrix plays an
important role in building statistically consistent classifiers.
However, it is very challenging to estimate the transition
matrix T (x), where x denotes the instance, because it is
unidentifiable under the instance-dependent noise (IDN). To
address this problem, we have noticed that, there are psychological and physiological evidences showing that we humans
are more likely to annotate instances of similar appearances
to the same classes, and thus poor-quality or ambiguous
instances of similar appearances are easier to be mislabeled
to the correlated or same noisy classes. Therefore, we propose assumption on the geometry of T (x) that “the closer
two instances are, the more similar their corresponding transition matrices should be”. More specifically, we formulate
above assumption into the manifold embedding, to effectively reduce the degree of freedom of T (x) and make it stably
estimable in practice. The proposed manifold-regularized
technique works by directly reducing the estimation error
without hurting the approximation error about the estimation
problem of T (x). Experimental evaluations on four synthetic
and two real-world datasets demonstrate that our method
is superior to state-of-the-art approaches for label-noise
learning under the challenging IDN.

1. Introduction
Label-noise learning has drawn more and more attention
in the deep learning community, e.g., [3, 5, 11, 29, 50, 53].
The main reason is that accurately annotating large-scale
datasets becomes extremely costly and sometimes even infeasible [14]. An effective way is to collect such large-scale
datasets from the crowd-sourcing platform [49] or online
queries [4], which inevitably yield low-quality and noisy
∗ Corresponding author.

data. Thus, mitigating the side-effects of noisy labels becomes a very crucial topic. The noise model can be categorized as the class-conditional noise (CCN) and the instancedependent noise (IDN). In CCN, each instance from one
class has a fixed probability of being assigned to another.
While in IDN, the probability that an instance is mislabeled
depends on both its class and features. In this paper, we focus on the more promising IDN approach, which considers
a more general noise and can cope with real-world noise.
The traditional label-noise learning methods can be divided into two categories: algorithms with statistically inconsistent classifiers and algorithms with statistically consistent
classifiers. In the first category, algorithms do not model
the label noise distribution explicitly, they usually employ
some heuristics to reduce the negative effects of the label
noise [8–11]. Although such approaches often empirically
work well, the learned classifier from the data with label
noise may not be statistically consistent and their reliability cannot be guaranteed. To address this limitation, the
classifier-consistent algorithms have been proposed. Specifically, recent studies showed that estimating the transition
matrix plays an important role in building consistent classifiers for label-noise learning, as these methods can explicitly
model the generation process of the noisy label [7, 35]. However, it is very challenging to obtain the instance-dependent
transition matrix (IDTM) for getting the noisy labels from
the clean labels, because the IDTM T (x) as a function of instance x is unidentifiable under IDN without any constraint.
Existing methods have tried to deal with this challenging
and ill-posed problem from two perspectives. First, they
have simplified the complex problem of estimating a matrixvalued function T (x) for the general label noise into a problem of estimating T (i.e., a fixed matrix), which is known as
CCN. Then, some anchor points (training data that certainly
belong to some specific classes) are adopted to easily estimate the transition matrix T [22,32]. Although such methods

16630

