OVE6D: Object Viewpoint Encoding for Depth-based 6D Object Pose Estimation
Dingding Cai1 ,
Janne Heikkilä2 , Esa Rahtu1
1
Tampere University, 2 University of Oulu
{dingding.cai, esa.rahtu}@tuni.fi, janne.heikkila@oulu.fi

Abstract
This paper proposes a universal framework, called
OVE6D, for model-based 6D object pose estimation from a
single depth image and a target object mask. Our model is
trained using purely synthetic data rendered from ShapeNet,
and, unlike most of the existing methods, it generalizes
well on new real-world objects without any fine-tuning. We
achieve this by decomposing the 6D pose into viewpoint, inplane rotation around the camera optical axis and translation, and introducing novel lightweight modules for estimating each component in a cascaded manner. The resulting
network contains less than 4M parameters while demonstrating excellent performance on the challenging T-LESS
and Occluded LINEMOD datasets without any datasetspecific training. We show that OVE6D outperforms some
contemporary deep learning-based pose estimation methods specifically trained for individual objects or datasets
with real-world training data. The implementation is available at https://github.com/dingdingcai/OVE6D-pose.

1. Introduction
The 6D pose of an object refers to a geometric mapping
from the object coordinate system to the camera reference
frame [18, 22]. Most commonly, this transformation is defined in terms of 3D rotation (object orientation) and 3D
translation (object location). The ability to infer the object
pose is an essential feature for many applications interacting with the environment. For instance, in robotic manipulation [10] and augmented reality [30], the pose is needed
for grasping or realistically rendering artificial objects.
In recent works, the object pose estimation problem is
commonly approached by either establishing local correspondences between the object 3D model and the observed
data [16, 17, 36], or via direct regression [6, 39]. In both
cases, the inference models are often optimized and stored
separately for each object instance. Such approach quickly
turns intractable as the number of object instances grows.
Meanwhile, some existing works [49, 59] consider building a single model for multiple objects. However, to retain

Figure 1. A) We propose a single universal pose estimation model
(called OVE6D) that is trained using more than 19,000 synthetic
objects from ShapeNet. B) The pre-trained model is applied to
encode the 3D mesh model of the target object (unseen during the
training phase) into a viewpoint codebook. C) At the inference
time, OVE6D takes a depth image, an object segmentation mask,
and an object ID as an input, and estimates the 6D pose of the target object using the corresponding viewpoint codebook. New object can be added by simply encoding the corresponding 3D mesh
model and including it into the codebook database (B).

the performance, the model requires expensive re-training
every time a new object instance is added to the database.
In addition, most of the best-performing methods need annotated real-world training data, which is laborious to obtain. Although some works [24, 41, 43] consider using synthetic examples in training, they suffer from noticeable performance degradation due to the domain gap.
An alternative approach, called LatentFusion, was proposed in [32]. In this work, they first reconstruct a latent 3D
object model from a small set of reference views, and later
use the model to infer the 6D pose of the corresponding object from the input image. The main advantage is the ability

6803

