How Much More Data Do I Need?
Estimating Requirements for Downstream Tasks
Rafid Mahmood1
James Lucas1,2,3
David Acuna1,2,3
Daiqing Li1
Jonah Philion1,2,3
1
1
1,2,3
Jose M. Alvarez
Zhiding Yu
Sanja Fidler
Marc T. Law1
1
NVIDIA 2 University of Toronto 3 Vector Institute
{rmahmood, jalucas, dacunamarrer, daiqingl, jphilion, josea, zhidingy, sfidler, marcl}@nvidia.com

Abstract
Given a small training data set and a learning algorithm, how much more data is necessary to reach a target
validation or test performance? This question is of critical importance in applications such as autonomous driving
or medical imaging where collecting data is expensive and
time-consuming. Overestimating or underestimating data
requirements incurs substantial costs that could be avoided
with an adequate budget. Prior work on neural scaling
laws suggest that the power-law function can fit the validation performance curve and extrapolate it to larger data set
sizes. We find that this does not immediately translate to the
more difficult downstream task of estimating the required
data set size to meet a target performance. In this work, we
consider a broad class of computer vision tasks and systematically investigate a family of functions that generalize the
power-law function to allow for better estimation of data
requirements. Finally, we show that incorporating a tuned
correction factor and collecting over multiple rounds significantly improves the performance of the data estimators.
Using our guidelines, practitioners can accurately estimate
data requirements of machine learning systems to gain savings in both development time and data acquisition costs.

1. Introduction
Before deploying a deep learning model, designers may
mandate that the model meet a baseline performance, such
as a target metric over a held out validation or test set. For
example, an object detector may require a minimum mean
average precision before being deployed in a safety-critical
application. One of the most effective ways of meeting the
target performance is by collecting more training data for a
given model. However, how much more data is needed?
Overestimating data requirements can incur costs from
unnecessary collection, cleaning, and annotation. For example, annotating segmentation data sets may require 15
to 40 seconds per object [2], meaning annotating a driving

Figure 1. Extrapolating accuracy on ImageNet [7] as a function
of data set size from 10% of the data set (125, 000 images; dotted)
and 50% (600, 000 images; dashed) using four regression functions. The vertical dashed lines show how much data is needed to
meet a target 67% validation accuracy according to each dashed
curve. All the dashed curves can accurately extrapolate performance as they are given a sufficient amount of images. Although
the functions have an error of 1-6% from the ground truth (67%
at 900, 000 images), they mis-estimate the data requirement by
120, 000 to 310, 000 images.

data set of 100, 000 images with on average 10 cars per image can take between 170 and 460 days-equivalent of time.
On the other hand, underestimating means having to collect more data at a later stage, incurring future costs and
workflow delays. For instance in autonomous vehicle applications, each period of data collection requires managing
a fleet of drivers to record driving videos. Thus, accurately
estimating how much data is needed for a given task can
reduce both costs and delays in the deep learning workflow.
There is a growing body of literature on estimating the
sample complexity of machine learning models [4, 11, 12].
Recently proposed neural scaling laws suggest that generalization scales with the data set size according to a power

275

