TubeR: Tubelet Transformer for Video Action Detection
Jiaojiao Zhao1 ,* Yanyi Zhang2 ,* Xinyu Li3 ,* Hao Chen3 , Bing Shuai3 , Mingze Xu3 , Chunhui Liu3 ,
Kaustav Kundu3 , Yuanjun Xiong3 , Davide Modolo3 , Ivan Marsic2 , Cees G.M. Snoek1 , Joseph Tighe3
1
University of Amsterdam 2 Rutgers University 3 AWS AI Labs
person detection

Abstract
We propose TubeR: a simple solution for spatio-temporal
video action detection. Different from existing methods that
depend on either an off-line actor detector or hand-designed
actor-positional hypotheses like proposals or anchors, we
propose to directly detect an action tubelet in a video by simultaneously performing action localization and recognition
from a single representation. TubeR learns a set of tubeletqueries and utilizes a tubelet-attention module to model the
dynamic spatio-temporal nature of a video clip, which effectively reinforces the model capacity compared to using
actor-positional hypotheses in the spatio-temporal space.
For videos containing transitional states or scene changes,
we propose a context aware classification head to utilize
short-term and long-term context to strengthen action classification, and an action switch regression head for detecting
the precise temporal action extent. TubeR directly produces
action tubelets with variable lengths and even maintains
good results for long video clips. TubeR outperforms the
previous state-of-the-art on commonly used action detection
datasets AVA, UCF101-24 and JHMDB51-21. Code will be
available on GluonCV(https://cv.gluon.ai/).

1. Introduction
This paper tackles the problem of spatio-temporal human
action detection in videos [3, 17, 39], which plays a central
role in advanced video search engines, robotics, and selfdriving cars. Action detection is a compound task, requiring the localization of per-frame person instances, the linking of these detected person instances into action tubes and
the prediction of their action class labels. Two approaches
for spatio-temporal action detection are prevalent in the literature: frame-level detection and tubelet-level detection.
Frame-level detection approaches detect and classify the action independently on each frame [14, 29, 32], and then link
per-frame detections together into coherent action tubes. To
compensate for the lack of temporal information, several
* Equally contributed and work done while at AWS AI Labs

anchor

cuboid refine

t
t
hypotheses on fixed action location hypotheses on cuboid anchor
Fencing

Fencing

TubeR

t

seq-to-seq
no detector
no proposal
no hypotheses

t

Figure 1. TubeR takes as input a video clip and directly outputs
tubelets: sequences of bounding boxes and their action labels. TubeR runs end-to-end without person detectors, anchors or proposals.

methods simply repeat 2D proposals [12, 15, 35] or offline
person detections [9, 28, 37, 43] over time to obtain spatiotemporal features (Figure 1 top left).
Alternatively, tubelet-level detection approaches [16, 19,
26, 33, 45, 49], directly generate spatio-temporal volumes
from a video clip to capture the coherence and dynamic nature of actions. They typically predict action localization and
classification jointly over spatio-temporal hypotheses, like
3D cuboid proposals [16, 19] (Figure 1 top right). Unfortunately, these 3D cuboids can only capture a short period of
time, also when the spatial location of a person changes as
soon as they move, or due to camera motion. Ideally, this
family of models would use flexible spatio-temporal tubelets
that can track the person over a longer time, but the large
configuration space of such a parameterization has restricted
previous methods to short cuboids. In this work we present
a tubelet-level detection approach that is able to simultaneously localize and recognize action tubelets in a flexible
manner, which allows tubelets to change in size and location
over time (Figure 1 bottom). This allows our system to leverage longer tubelets, which aggregate visual information of a
person and their actions over longer periods of time.
We draw inspiration from sequence-to-sequence modelling in natural language processing (NLP), particularly
machine translation [21, 24, 36, 40], and its application to
object detection, DETR [4]. Being a detection framework,

13598

