E-CIR: Event-Enhanced Continuous Intensity Recovery
Chen Song Qixing Huang Chandrajit Bajaj
The University of Texas at Austin
{song, huangqx, bajaj}@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
A camera begins to sense light the moment we press the
shutter button. During the exposure interval, relative motion between the scene and the camera causes motion blur, a
common undesirable visual artifact. This paper presents ECIR, which converts a blurry image into a sharp video represented as a parametric function from time to intensity. ECIR leverages events as an auxiliary input. We discuss how
to exploit the temporal event structure to construct the parametric bases. We demonstrate how to train a deep learning
model to predict the function coefficients. To improve the
appearance consistency, we further introduce a refinement
module to propagate visual features among consecutive
frames. Compared to state-of-the-art event-enhanced deblurring approaches, E-CIR generates smoother and more
realistic results. The implementation of E-CIR is available
at https://github.com/chensong1995/E-CIR.

1. Introduction
The shutter speed, or the length of the exposure interval, controls how much light reaches the image sensor
from the environment. If the exposure interval is too short,
the camera only has the time to capture very few photons. Consequently, the resulting image is not only unilluminated but also lacks fine details. On the other hand, if
the exposure interval is too long, the relative motion between the scene and the camera may potentially be very
significant. The resulting image is then the temporal average of a moving trajectory, causing blurry artifacts. Traditionally, it is presumed that any motion during the exposure interval, including both camera shake and subject
movement, is unwanted and should therefore be removed.
Over the past several decades, researchers have studied
extensively how to convert a blurry image into a sharp
one [1, 5, 6, 10, 11, 13–16, 27, 32, 34, 41, 42]. It is only until
recently when several works that reconstruct the complete
motion trajectory have received profound attention [9, 28].
These works introduce algorithms that convert a blurry image into a sharp video describing the exact movement that
causes the blurry artifact.

blurry frame

Our Approach

sharp video
event stream

Figure 1. Problem Description. In this imaginary scene, we place
a white square along the edge of a black disk. The image taken
by the conventional camera is blurry because the disk rotates at
a fast speed. It is as if the perimeter of the disk somehow grows
into a gray collar. During the exposure interval, the event sensor
produces a spiral of events. Our approach takes the blurry frame
and the events as input and produces a sharp video sequence as
output. The output video explains the motion blur by entailing the
complete motion trajectory of the rotating disk.

Sharp video reconstruction is an ill-posed problem because there are infinitely many motion trajectories whose
temporal averages correspond to the same blurry frame. To
compensate for the ambiguity, previous works [7, 8, 20, 24,
25, 35, 39, 40, 43] exploit event data as an auxiliary input,
which provides additional information during the exposure
interval at a finer temporal resolution, as shown in Figure 1.
Even with the event input, difficult challenges remain. The
events fail to capture the complete motion information. The
video reconstruction quality is determined not only by the
appearance of each individual frame but also the temporal
smoothness. The immense density of events creates another
obstacle for effective and efficient processing. The success
of video deblurring depends on how the blurry image, the
events, and priors about video sequences are integrated together. This calls for suitable video representations and prediction algorithms.
This paper makes fundamental contributions in video
representations and methodologies for recovering accurate
and temporally consistent videos. Specifically, we propose
a continuous video representation whose coefficients are
highly interpretable and easy to learn, due to their strong
correlation to the events. For every pixel (x, y), we rep-

7803

