Bending Reality: Distortion-aware Transformers for Adapting to Panoramic
Semantic Segmentation
Jiaming Zhang1 Kailun Yang1 * Chaoxiang Ma2 Simon Reiß1,3 Kunyu Peng1 Rainer Stiefelhagen1
1

CV:HCI Lab, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology 2 ByteDance Inc. 3 Carl Zeiss AG

Abstract
Panoramic images with their 360◦ directional view encompass exhaustive information about the surrounding
space, providing a rich foundation for scene understanding. To unfold this potential in the form of robust panoramic
segmentation models, large quantities of expensive, pixelwise annotations are crucial for success. Such annotations
are available, but predominantly for narrow-angle, pinholecamera images which, off the shelf, serve as sub-optimal resources for training panoramic models. Distortions and the
distinct image-feature distribution in 360◦ panoramas impede the transfer from the annotation-rich pinhole domain
and therefore come with a big dent in performance. To get
around this domain difference and bring together semantic
annotations from pinhole- and 360◦ surround-visuals, we
propose to learn object deformations and panoramic image distortions in the Deformable Patch Embedding (DPE)
and Deformable MLP (DMLP) components which blend
into our Transformer for PAnoramic Semantic Segmentation (Trans4PASS) model. Finally, we tie together shared
semantics in pinhole- and panoramic feature embeddings
by generating multi-scale prototype features and aligning
them in our Mutual Prototypical Adaptation (MPA) for
unsupervised domain adaptation. On the indoor Stanford2D3D dataset, our Trans4PASS with MPA maintains
comparable performance to fully-supervised state-of-thearts, cutting the need for over 1, 400 labeled panoramas.
On the outdoor DensePASS dataset, we break state-of-theart by 14.39% mIoU and set the new bar at 56.38%.1

1. Introduction
Panoramic 360◦ cameras have received an increasing
amount of attention in fields, such as omnidirectional sensing in automated vehicles [13, 75] and bringing immersive viewing experiences to augmented- and virtual reality
* Corresponding author (e-mail: kailun.yang@kit.edu).
1 Code will be made publicly available at https://github.com/

jamycheung/Trans4PASS.

(a) Pinhole image

(c) Raw PE

(b) Panoramic image

(d) Deformable PE

Figure 1: Semantic segmentation of (a) narrow-angle pinhole image and (b) 360◦ panoramic image. Compared to (c) standard
Patch Embeddings, our (d) Deformable Patch Embedding partitions 360◦ images while considering distortions, e.g. in sidewalks.

displays [69, 71]. Opposed to images captured with pinhole cameras, that occupy narrow Fields of View (FoV),
panoramic images offer omni-range perception, benefiting
the detection of road scene objects and indoor scene elements [13, 20]. In particular, dense semantic segmentation
on panoramic images, facilitates a high-level holistic pixelwise understanding of surrounding environments [45, 73].
Panoramic semantic segmentation is usually performed
on 2D panoramas that were transformed using equirectangular projection [58, 75], which is accompanied by image
distortions and object deformations (see Fig. 1). Further,
in the 360◦ image domain, labeled data is scarce which necessitates model training to be carried out on semantically
matching narrow-FoV pinhole datasets. These two circumstances culminate in a significantly degraded performance
on panoramic segmentation as compared to the pinhole
counterpart [72] and as such they have to be adequately addressed. Considering the intricacies of panoramas, convolution variants [10, 55, 59] and attention-augmented models [75] were proposed to mitigate image distortions and
enlarge receptive fields of Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs). However, they remain sub-optimal in handling the
severe deformations from pinhole- to panoramic data, and
fail in establishing long-range contextual dependencies in
the ultra-wide 360◦ images, which prove essential for accurate semantic segmentation [17, 94].

16917

