G AN O R C ON : Are Generative Models Useful for Few-shot Segmentation?
Oindrila Saha
Zezhou Cheng
Subhransu Maji
University of Massachusetts Amherst
{osaha, zezhoucheng, smaji}@cs.umass.edu

A

GAN-based segmentation

B

CON-based segmentation

Step I: StyleGAN training

Step I: MoCo training

CON

GAN

C

Cars

Faces

queue
Cats

…

z

Upsample

Upsample

D

…
Hypercolumns

..
.

Hypercolumns

Step II: Projector training

Step II: Interpreter training

…

D

Step III: Distill

Step II: Projector training

Figure 1. G AN O R C ON — A comparison of GAN and contrastive learning (CON) approaches for few-shot part segmentation.
A Both approaches consist of three steps. Step I: Train a GAN decoder for generating images or a contrastive learning based image
encoder. Step II: Train a projector given a few labeled examples using hypercolumn representations from the decoder or encoder.
Step III: For efficient inference, distill the GAN sampled images and their labels to an off-the-shelf feed-forward segmentation
model. This step is optional for CON as the model is feed-forward. B CON representations achieve better performance while being
nearly an order-of-magnitude faster to train than GAN representations on several datasets. C CON representations are significantly
worse when trained on GAN generated images. D CON representations are effective at fine-grained part segmentation tasks — the
figure shows the output of our method trained with 16 labeled faces.

Abstract
Advances in generative modeling based on GANs has
motivated the community to find their use beyond image
generation and editing tasks. In particular, several recent works have shown that GAN representations can be
re-purposed for discriminative tasks such as part segmentation, especially when training data is limited. But how
do these improvements stack-up against recent advances
in self-supervised learning? Motivated by this we present
an alternative approach based on contrastive learning and
compare their performance on standard few-shot part segmentation benchmarks. Our experiments reveal that not
only do the GAN-based approach offer no significant performance advantage, their multi-step training is complex,
nearly an order-of-magnitude slower, and can introduce additional bias. These experiments suggest that the inductive
biases of generative models, such as their ability to disentangle shape and texture, are well captured by standard
feed-forward networks trained using contrastive learning.

1. Introduction
“When solving a problem of interest, do not solve a more
general problem as an intermediate step.”
—Vladimir Vapnik

Generative modeling has long been used for unsupervised representation learning for recognition tasks. But recently, several works (e.g., [41, 46]) have shown that representations from off-the-shelf GANs (e.g., [3, 20]) can be
re-purposed for part segmentation tasks, in part due to their
ability to generate highly realistic images. These models
can be trained with a few labeled samples, often outperforming transfer learning baselines for a range of object
categories. Yet, generating images is arguably more challenging than learning representations for part labeling. This
begs the question if the intermediate step of training a GAN
is useful. What information, if any, is lost in the process
of training a GAN, and if alternatives, in particular those
based on unsupervised constrastive learning (e.g., [5,8,14]),
are just as effective. Despite recent advances in generative
and contrastive learning, a careful comparison of their ef-

9991

