Bringing Old Films Back to Life
Ziyu Wan1
Bo Zhang2
Dongdong Chen3
Jing Liao1 *
1
City University of Hong Kong 2 Microsoft Research 3 Microsoft Cloud + AI
{raywzy,cddlyf}@gmail.com

zhanbo@microsoft.com

jingliao@cityu.edu.hk

http://raywzy.com/Old_Film

Figure 1. Real-world old films restored by our method. First row: original video frames. Second row: the restored frames. Third row: the
restored frames after further colorization. The quality of old films is considerably enhanced after restoration.

Abstract
We present a learning-based framework, recurrent transformer network (RTN), to restore heavily degraded old films.
Instead of performing frame-wise restoration, our method
is based on the hidden knowledge learned from adjacent
frames that contain abundant information about the occlusion, which is beneficial to restore challenging artifacts
of each frame while ensuring temporal coherency. Moreover, contrasting the representation of the current frame
and the hidden knowledge makes it possible to infer the
scratch position in an unsupervised manner, and such defect localization generalizes well to real-world degradations.
To better resolve mixed degradation and compensate for
the flow estimation error during frame alignment, we propose to leverage more expressive transformer blocks for
spatial restoration. Experiments on both synthetic dataset
and real-world old films demonstrate the significant superiority of the proposed RTN over existing solutions. In addition, the same framework can effectively propagate the
color from keyframes to the whole video, ultimately yielding
compelling restored films. The implementation and model
will be released at https://github.com/raywzy/Bringing-OldFilms-Back-to-Life.
* Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
Old film classics have the lasting power to strike the resonance and fantasies of audiences today. Unfortunately, many
of them have become less popular because people are no
longer used to the low resolution and disturbing artifacts
caused by the photographic film aging. Film restoration
techniques have been developed to bring these old films
back to life, which nonetheless takes painstaking efforts.
The restoration nowadays is conducted digitally, where the
artists meticulously examine each frame, manually retouch
the blemishes, fix up the flickering and finally perform the
colorization frame by frame, so repairing the entire old film
brings insurmountable expenses. Hence, people desire an algorithm that performs all of these tedious tasks automatically
such that old films can be revived in modern looking.
Old films typically suffer from mixed degradations,
which, to the best of our knowledge, only a few works aim
to solve. While one can sequentially apply dedicated models for restoration, the models designed for specific tasks
cannot generalize well to real-world degradations. Recently,
higher-order degradation models [41, 48] have been proposed to characterize the real-world degradations, yet these
works mainly consider the photometric degradations, such
as blurriness and noises, rather than the structured defects
(e.g., scratches, cracks, etc.) that obstruct the most in old

17694

