Noise Is Also Useful: Negative Correlation-Steered Latent Contrastive Learning
Jiexi Yan1 , Lei Luo2 , Chenghao Xu1 , Cheng Deng1 ,* Heng Huang2
1
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA
{jxyan1995, luoleipitt, shydyl1456113691, chdeng.xd,henghuanghh}@gmail.com

Abstract
How to effectively handle label noise has been one of the
most practical but challenging tasks in Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). Recent popular methods for training DNNs
with noisy labels mainly focus on directly filtering out samples with low confidence or repeatedly mining valuable information from low-confident samples. However, they cannot guarantee the robust generalization of models due to
the ignorance of useful information hidden in noisy data.
To address this issue, we propose a new effective method
named as LaCoL (Latent Contrastive Learning) to leverage
the negative correlations from the noisy data. Specifically,
in label space, we exploit the weakly-augmented data to filter samples and adopt classification loss on strong augmentations of the selected sample set, which can preserve the
training diversity. While in metric space, we utilize weaklysupervised contrastive learning to excavate these negative
correlations hidden in noisy data. Moreover, a cross-space
similarity consistency regularization is provided to constrain the gap between label space and metric space. Extensive experiments have validated the superiority of our
approach over existing state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
In the past ten years, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs)
have achieved impressive performance and revolutionized
a wide variety of computer vision applications, such as image recognition [13,14], semantic segmentation [31,36], object detection [10,27], and cross-modal retrieval [30,34,48].
The remarkable success in training DNNs has been benefiting from the collection of large-scale datasets with highquality human annotations (e.g., ImageNet [8] and MSCOCO [28]).
However, it is expensive and time-consuming to obtain
high-quality annotations for large-scale data in most realworld scenarios. To overcome this limitation, online key
* C.D. is corresponding author.

Noisy Label: Dog
It is a dog.

Noisy Label:
Dog

It is not a bird.
It is not a cat.

Figure 1. An illustration of negative information and pairwise negative correlation. Negative information (Left) provides a new complementary label to the training sample. If the assigned complementary label is wrong, it will attenuate the performance severely.
Pairwise negative correlation (Right) randomly selects K negative
samples that are not in the same category as the anchor image, e.g.,
the anchor image has the negative correlation to the image labeled
“car”. Instead of using noisy positive correlation (black arrows),
these pairwise negative correlations (red arrows) can be well captured in metric space to improve the robustness of DNNs.

search engine [4, 26] or crowdsourcing [52] methods are
proposed to efficiently and cheaply gain the desired training datasets with low-quality labels, in which noisy labels
are likely to be introduced consequently. Although DNNs
have high model capacities, they often overfit the noisy labels due to the memorization effect, resulting in poor classification and generalization performance [53]. Therefore,
developing an effective method to improve the robustness of
DNNs against noisy labels is of great practical importance.
Early robust learning methods primarily model noisy labels with the noise transition matrix [11, 15, 40] and use
it refine losses. However, it is difficult to correctly estimate the noise transition matrix, as it heavily relies on
either prior knowledge or a subset of high-quality labeled
data. Considering the memorization effect to noisy labels,
recent methods attempt to select high-confident samples as
clean data and filter out others through a human-defined
rule. For example, the small-loss trick widely-used in many

31

