Learning Hierarchical Cross-Modal Association
for Co-Speech Gesture Generation
Xian Liu1 , Qianyi Wu2 , Hang Zhou1 , Yinghao Xu1 , Rui Qian1 , Xinyi Lin3 ,
Xiaowei Zhou3 , Wayne Wu4 , Bo Dai5 , Bolei Zhou1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Monash University 3 Zhejiang University
4
SenseTime Research 5 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
{alvinliu@ie, zhouhang@link, xy119@ie, qr021@ie, bzhou@ie}.cuhk.edu.hk, qianyi.wu@monash.edu,
{shinylin, xwzhou}@zju.edu.cn, wuwenyan@sensetime.com, bo.dai@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Generating speech-consistent body and gesture movements is a long-standing problem in virtual avatar creation.
Previous studies often synthesize pose movement in a holistic manner, where poses of all joints are generated simultaneously. Such a straightforward pipeline fails to generate fine-grained co-speech gestures. One observation is
that the hierarchical semantics in speech and the hierarchical structures of human gestures can be naturally described into multiple granularities and associated together.
To fully utilize the rich connections between speech audio
and human gestures, we propose a novel framework named
Hierarchical Audio-to-Gesture (HA2G) for co-speech gesture generation. In HA2G, a Hierarchical Audio Learner
extracts audio representations across semantic granularities. A Hierarchical Pose Inferer subsequently renders
the entire human pose gradually in a hierarchical manner. To enhance the quality of synthesized gestures, we develop a contrastive learning strategy based on audio-text
alignment for better audio representations. Extensive experiments and human evaluation demonstrate that the proposed method renders realistic co-speech gestures and outperforms previous methods in a clear margin. Project page:
https://alvinliu0.github.io/projects/HA2G.

1. Introduction
When communicating with other people, we spontaneously make co-speech gestures to help convey our
thoughts. Such non-verbal behaviors supplement speech information, making the content clearer and more understandable to listeners [11, 48, 62]. Psycho-linguistic studies also
suggest that virtual avatars with plausible speech gestures
are more intimate and trustworthy [60]. Therefore, actuating embodied AI agents such as social robots and digital

humans with expressive body movements and gestures is of
great importance to facilitating human machine interaction
[55, 56]. To this end, researchers have explored the task of
co-speech gesture synthesis [1,2,8,19,25–27,41,53,68,69],
which aims at generating a sequence of human gestures
given the speech audio and transcripts as input.
Traditionally, the task is tackled through building oneto-one correspondences between speech and unit gesture
pairs [12, 13, 32, 47]. Such pipelines require huge human
efforts, making them inapplicable to general scenarios of
unseen speech. Recent studies leverage deep learning to
solve this problem by training a neural network to map
a compact representation of audio [1, 25, 26, 41, 53] and
text [3, 8, 35, 68, 69] to holistic human pose sequence. However, such a straightforward approach fails to capture the
micro-scale motions and cross-modal information, e.g., the
subtle finger movements and the rich meanings contained in
speech audio. The problem of how to learn the fine-grained
cross-modal association remains unsolved.
In order to fully exploit the rich multi-modal semantics,
we identify two important observations from a human gesture study [48]: 1) Different types of co-speech gestures are
related to distinct levels of audio information. For example,
the metaphorical gestures are strongly associated with the
high-level speech semantics (e.g., when depicting a ravine,
one would moving two outstretched hands apart and saying
“gap”), while the low-level audio features of beat and volume lead to the rhythmic gestures. 2) The dynamic patterns
of different human body parts in co-speech gestures are not
the same, such as the flexible fingers and relatively still upper arms. Thus it is improper to generate the upper body
pose as a whole like previous studies [1–3,25,26,41,53,68].
Inspired by the discussions above, we develop the Hierarchical Audio-to-Gesture (HA2G) pipeline, which generates diverse co-speech gestures. Our key insight is to build
hierarchical cross-modal associations across multiple lev-

10462

