Geometry-Aware Guided Loss for Deep Crack Recognition
Zhuangzhuang Chen Jin Zhang Zhuonan Lai Jie Chen Zun Liu
Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China

Jianqiang Li ∗

chenzhuangzhuang2016@email.szu.edu.cn, {jin.zhang, chenjie, zunliu, lijq}@szu.edu.cn

Abstract

ing surrounding backgrounds, resulting in different signalto-noise ratios [44] [2].

Despite the substantial progress of deep models for crack
recognition, due to the inconsistent cracks in varying sizes,
shapes, and noisy background textures, there still lacks the
discriminative power of the deeply learned features when
supervised by the cross-entropy loss. In this paper, we propose the geometry-aware guided loss (GAGL) that enhances
the discrimination ability and is only applied in the training stage without extra computation and memory during inference. The GAGL consists of the feature-based geometryaware projected gradient descent method (FGA-PGD) that
approximates the geometric distances of the features to the
class boundaries, and the geometry-aware update rule that
learns an anchor of each class as the approximation of the
feature expected to have the largest geometric distance to
the corresponding class boundary. Then the discriminative
power can be enhanced by minimizing the distances between the features and their corresponding class anchors
in the feature space. To address the limited availability of
related benchmarks, we collect a fully annotated dataset,
namely, NPP2021, which involves inconsistent cracks and
noisy backgrounds in real-world nuclear power plants. Our
proposed GAGL outperforms the state of the arts on various
benchmark datasets including CRACK2019, SDNET2018,
and our NPP2021.

Recently, the application of deep learning technology on
crack recognition tasks has achieved great success [4, 14,
39]. These methods [14, 43] commonly train the convolution neural network (CNN) on sub-images, then apply the
trained model on the high-resolution images with a sliding
window [6] to scan and classify the existence of cracks in
each sub-image. However, the traditional CNN-based methods for crack recognition have a crucial limitation: the inability of extracting discriminative features of cracks in a
realistic environment. That is, due to the inconsistent cracks
in varying sizes and shapes [43], the noisy texture patterns
of the surrounding background, and the limited discriminative ability of the cross-entropy (CE) loss [37], it is challenging for deep models to extract the discriminate features
that can be successfully classified. To verify this, Fig. 1(a)
visualizes the crack and non-crack images in the feature
space. It demonstrates that each class of images projected in
the feature space spread in a wide area, and crack/non-crack
features are mixed together and close to the class boundary. Therefore, the existing approaches are inappropriate for
crack recognition in a realistic environment.

1. Introduction
Concrete structure health monitoring is of crucial importance in various industries [2, 5, 7, 38, 39], of which crack
damage classification is the first and critical stage. There
is a great need for automated testing methods to recognize
and repair cracks before the onset of serious deterioration so
that the heavy maintenance costs could be reduced. However, it is extremely challenging to realize crack recognition in a real-world industrial environment. The cracks are
commonly presented as dark curves on walls in inconsistent
sizes and irregular shapes [13], moreover, mixed with vary∗ Corresponding Author

In this paper we propose a novel geometry-aware guided
loss (GAGL) to enhance the discriminative power of the
deeply learned features with the joint supervision of CE
loss. GAGL enlarges the inter-class features separation and
reduces the intra-class features variation by pulling the deep
features of the same class to the feature that has the largest
geometric distance to the class boundary. There are several
challenges to realize such a loss as discussed in the below.
Due to the irregularity of the class boundaries [24], it
is hard to detect the class boundaries and estimate the geometric distances of features to them. To solve this issue,
we propose a feature-based geometry-aware projected gradient descent method (FGA-PGD) to approximate the geometric distances of the features to class boundaries. Intuitively, features which are close to the decision boundaries
are vunerable to attacks. As shown in Fig. 1, to find the misclassified adversarial variants of input features, the features
near the boundary require less rounds (i.e., lighter colors) of

4703

