ShapeFormer: Transformer-based Shape Completion via Sparse Representation
Xingguang Yan1 Liqiang Lin1 Niloy J. Mitra2,3 Dani Lischinski4 Daniel Cohen-Or1,5 Hui Huang1∗
1

Shenzhen University 2 University College London 3 Adobe Research 4 Hebrew University of Jerusalem 5 Tel Aviv University

Abstract
We present ShapeFormer, a transformer-based network
that produces a distribution of object completions, conditioned on incomplete, and possibly noisy, point clouds. The
resultant distribution can then be sampled to generate likely
completions, each exhibiting plausible shape details while
being faithful to the input.
To facilitate the use of transformers for 3D, we introduce a compact 3D representation, vector quantized deep
implicit function (VQDIF), that utilizes spatial sparsity to
represent a close approximation of a 3D shape by a short
sequence of discrete variables. Experiments demonstrate
that ShapeFormer outperforms prior art for shape completion from ambiguous partial inputs in terms of both completion quality and diversity. We also show that our approach
effectively handles a variety of shape types, incomplete patterns, and real-world scans.

ShapeFormer

1. Introduction
Shapes are typically acquired with cameras that probe
and sample surfaces. The process relies on line of sight and,
at best, can obtain partial information from the visible parts
of objects. Hence, sampling complex real-world geometry
is inevitably imperfect, resulting in varying sampling densities and missing parts. This problem of surface completion
has been extensively investigated over multiple decades [5].
The central challenge is to compensate for incomplete data
by inspecting non-local hints in the observed data to infer
missing parts using various forms of priors.
Recently, deep implicit function (DIF) has emerged as
an effective representation for learning high-quality surface
completion. To learn shape priors, earlier DIFs [13, 41, 48]
encode each shape using a single global latent vector.
Combining a global code with region-specific local latent
codes [14, 15, 22, 27, 35, 50] can faithfully preserve geometric details of the input in the completion. However, when
presented with ambiguous partial input, for which multiple
* Corresponding author: Hui Huang (hhzhiyan@gmail.com)
Project page: https://shapeformer.github.io

Figure 1. ShapeFormer predicts multiple completions for a realworld scan of a sports car (left column), a chair with missing parts
(middle column), and a partial point cloud of human lower legs
(right column). The input point clouds are superimposed with the
generated shapes to emphasize the faithfulness of the completion
to the input point cloud.

plausible completions are possible (see Fig. 1), the deterministic nature of local DIF usually fails to produce meaningful completions for unseen regions. A viable alternative
is to combine generative models to handle the input uncer-

6239

