Audio-Visual Speech Codecs:
Rethinking Audio-Visual Speech Enhancement by Re-Synthesis
Karren Yang1 Dejan Marković2 Steven Krenn2 Vasu Agrawal2 Alexander Richard2
1
MIT 2 Meta Reality Labs Research
karren@mit.edu

{dejanmarkovic,stevenkrenn,vasuagrawal,richardalex}@fb.com

Abstract
Since facial actions such as lip movements contain significant information about speech content, it is not surprising that audio-visual speech enhancement methods are
more accurate than their audio-only counterparts. Yet,
state-of-the-art approaches still struggle to generate clean,
realistic speech without noise artifacts and unnatural distortions in challenging acoustic environments. In this paper, we propose a novel audio-visual speech enhancement
framework for high-fidelity telecommunications in AR/VR.
Our approach leverages audio-visual speech cues to generate the codes of a neural speech codec, enabling efficient synthesis of clean, realistic speech from noisy signals.
Given the importance of speaker-specific cues in speech, we
focus on developing personalized models that work well for
individual speakers. We demonstrate the efficacy of our approach on a new audio-visual speech dataset collected in an
unconstrained, large vocabulary setting, as well as existing
audio-visual datasets, outperforming speech enhancement
baselines on both quantitative metrics and human evaluation studies. Please see the supplemental video for qualitative results1 .

1. Introduction
Humans have the remarkable ability to extract speech
content from visual information such as lip movement.
Studies show that viewing speakers’ faces improves human
listening in noisy environments [41, 57], and that individuals naturally learn to read lip movements when their hearing is impaired [24]. Inspired by these observations, audiovisual speech enhancement methods leverage the visual input of a speaker to isolate their voice in a noisy environment
[35]. By integrating facial frames of a target speaker with
a noisy audio spectrogram, for example, recent deep learning models can generate a mask for the spectrogram that
suppresses irrelevant voices and background sounds from
1 https://github.com/facebookresearch/facestar/
releases/download/paper_materials/video.mp4

Figure 1. Audio-Visual Speech Codecs. Our model performs
speech enhancement by leveraging audio-visual speech cues to
synthesize the discrete codes of a neural speech codec. (a) During
training, we first learn a codebook of natural speech for a target
speaker by training a neural speech codec to compress and decode
their clean speech signal. We then train an auto-regressive probabilistic model over the codes conditioned on noisy audio and visual
inputs. (b) During inference, we use the auto-regressive model to
generate a sequence of speech codes, which are then synthesized
into speech using the decoder module of the speech codec.

the output [1, 11, 18]. These models prove useful for reducing noise and improving speech intelligibility of videos for
downstream applications.
However, there are a growing number of telecommunications applications where the quality and realism of the
output speech, beyond speech intelligibility, are paramount.
One example is social telepresence in AR/VR, which aims
to enable realistic face-to-face conversations between people in a virtual setting [34, 62]. Immersive virtual conversations require extremely high-quality speech signals: each
speaker’s voice must sound clean and realistic when rendered in the virtual environment, as if a real conversation
were taking place there. Current state-of-the-art methods
fall short of these applications for two main reasons. First,

8227

