LD-ConGR: A Large RGB-D Video Dataset for Long-Distance Continuous
Gesture Recognition
Yanjun Wu1,2
Dan Liu1
Libo Zhang1,2 *
Institute of Software Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
Hangzhou Institute for Advanced Study, UCAS, Hangzhou, China

1

{liudan, libo, yanjun}@iscas.ac.cn

Abstract
Gesture recognition plays an important role in natural
human-computer interaction and sign language recognition. Existing research on gesture recognition is limited
to close-range interaction such as vehicle gesture control
and face-to-face communication. To apply gesture recognition to long-distance interactive scenes such as meetings
and smart homes, a large RGB-D video dataset LD-ConGR
is established in this paper. LD-ConGR is distinguished
from existing gesture datasets by its long-distance gesture
collection, fine-grained annotations, and high video quality. Specifically, 1) the farthest gesture provided by the
LD-ConGR is captured 4m away from the camera while
existing gesture datasets collect gestures within 1m from
the camera; 2) besides the gesture category, the temporal
segmentation of gestures and hand location are also annotated in LD-ConGR; 3) videos are captured at high resolution (1280 × 720 for color streams and 640 × 576 for
depth streams) and high frame rate (30 fps). On top of the
LD-ConGR, a series of experimental and studies are conducted, and the proposed gesture region estimation and key
frame sampling strategies are demonstrated to be effective
in dealing with long-distance gesture recognition and the
uncertainty of gesture duration. The dataset and experimental results presented in this paper are expected to boost the
research of long-distance gesture recognition. The dataset
is available at https://github.com/Diananini/
LD-ConGR-CVPR2022.

1. Introduction
Gesture is an important way of information transmission. We use gestures to assist our language expression,
* Corresponding author (libo@iscas.ac.cn). This work was supported
by the Key Research Program of Frontier Sciences, CAS, Grant No.
ZDBS-LY-JSC038. Libo Zhang was supported CAAI-Huawei MindSpore
Open Fund and Youth Innovation Promotion Association, CAS (2020111).

Jester

NVIDIA Gesture

EgoGesture

ChaLearn ConGD

IPN Hand

LD-ConGR (Ours)

Figure 1. Example frames from gesture datasets. The upper left
corner of each frame marks the dataset from which it is sampled.
The gestures in our dataset LD-ConGR are collected at long distances and are more challenging to recognize.

communicate with the deaf, direct traffic, and so on. Furthermore, gestures help us interact with machines more naturally and conveniently: 1) A simple gesture can replace
multiple mouse and keyboard operations. 2) In scenes such
as hospitals, conferences, and smart homes, people prefer
touchless interaction methods such as gestures and voice.
3) Gesture interaction is more user-friendly and lowers the
barrier to using smart devices. There are many datasets
[1, 12, 15, 21, 27] and related research [2, 3, 10, 16, 18, 28]
for gesture recognition. These datasets focus on interaction
with wearable devices (e.g., EgoGesture [27]), interaction
with vehicles (e.g., NVIDIA Gesture [15]), sign language
and symbolic gestures (e.g., ChaLearn ConGD [21]), or interaction with computers (e.g., Jester [12] and IPN Hand

3304

