URetinex-Net: Retinex-based Deep Unfolding Network for Low-light Image
Enhancement
Wenhui Wu1 Jian Weng2 Pingping Zhang3 Xu Wang2 * Wenhan Yang4 Jianmin Jiang2
1
College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Shenzhen University
2
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
3
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
4
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
Abstract

𝑹𝟎

Retinex model-based methods have shown to be effective in layer-wise manipulation with well-designed priors
for low-light image enhancement. However, the commonly
used hand-crafted priors and optimization-driven solutions
lead to the absence of adaptivity and efficiency. To address these issues, in this paper, we propose a Retinexbased deep unfolding network (URetinex-Net), which unfolds an optimization problem into a learnable network to
decompose a low-light image into reflectance and illumination layers. By formulating the decomposition problem
as an implicit priors regularized model, three learningbased modules are carefully designed, responsible for datadependent initialization, high-efficient unfolding optimization, and user-specified illumination enhancement, respectively. Particularly, the proposed unfolding optimization
module, introducing two networks to adaptively fit implicit
priors in data-driven manner, can realize noise suppression and details preservation for the final decomposition
results. Extensive experiments on real-world low-light images qualitatively and quantitatively demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of the proposed method over
state-of-the-art methods. The code is available at https:
//github.com/AndersonYong/URetinex-Net.

Input

𝑹𝟑

𝑳𝟎

𝑳𝟑

𝑹𝟏

𝑹𝟐

𝑳𝟏

𝑳𝟐

URetinex-Net
Figure 1. Decomposition results in each unfolding stage, where
decomposed components step-wise get rid of degradation. Gamma
correction is applied for the decomposed illumination layer for
better visual effect.

light image. Especially for the low-light image enhancement (LLIE), many methods have been proposed, including histogram equalization [29], unsharp masking algorithms [7], Retinex-based methods [12, 27], multiple exposure fusion [5], and deep learning-based methods [11, 34].
Since Retinex theory well models color perception of human vision, LLIE methods based on Retinex theory have
attracted much attention. As stated in Retinex theory, an
image can be decomposed into two components, i.e., reflectance and illumination. Mathematically, the observed
image I can be expressed by

1. Introduction
Images captured in a poor light environment always suffer from low contrast and low visibility, which pose challenges for both human visualization and numerous highlevel vision tasks such as object detection [21, 23, 35]. To
uncover the buried details in the low-light image and avoid
degenerated performance of the subsequent vision tasks,
researchers have made great efforts on contrast enhancement, texture recovering and noise removal for the low-

I = R · L,

(1)

where R, L and · denote reflectance, illumination and
element-wise multiplication, respectively. In some early
Retinex-based methods [16, 17], illumination is first estimated, and then reflectance is treated as the final enhanced
results. Although details can be largely recovered from the
input, it often leads to an unnatural and over-exposed look.
Afterward, a number of model-based methods which have

* Corresponding author. wangxu@szu.edu.cn

5901

