DiffusionCLIP: Text-Guided Diffusion Models for Robust Image Manipulation
Gwanghyun Kim1
Taesung Kwon1
Jong Chul Ye2,1
Dept. of Bio and Brain Engineering1 , Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI2
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, Korea
{gwang.kim, star.kwon, jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr

Figure 1. DiffusionCLIP enables faithful text-driven manipulation of real images by (a) preserving important details when the stateof-the-art GAN inversion-based methods fail. Other novel applications include (b) image translation between two unseen domains, (c)
stroke-conditioned image synthesis to an unseen domain, and (d) multi-attribute transfer.

Abstract
Recently, GAN inversion methods combined with Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) enables zeroshot image manipulation guided by text prompts. However,
their applications to diverse real images are still difficult
due to the limited GAN inversion capability. Specifically,
these approaches often have difficulties in reconstructing
images with novel poses, views, and highly variable contents
compared to the training data, altering object identity, or producing unwanted image artifacts. To mitigate these problems
This research was supported by Field-oriented Technology Development Project for Customs Administration through the National Research
Foundation of Korea(NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science & ICT and
Korea Customs Service (NRF-2021M3I1A1097938), and supported by
the Institute of Information & communications Technology Planning &
Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No.20190-00075, Artificial Intelligence Graduate School Program (KAIST)).

and enable faithful manipulation of real images, we propose
a novel method, dubbed DiffusionCLIP, that performs textdriven image manipulation using diffusion models. Based on
full inversion capability and high-quality image generation
power of recent diffusion models, our method performs zeroshot image manipulation successfully even between unseen
domains and takes another step towards general application by manipulating images from a widely varying ImageNet
dataset. Furthermore, we propose a novel noise combination
method that allows straightforward multi-attribute manipulation. Extensive experiments and human evaluation confirmed
robust and superior manipulation performance of our methods compared to the existing baselines. Code is available at
https://github.com/gwang-kim/DiffusionCLIP.git

1. Introduction
Recently, GAN inversion methods [1–4, 7, 32, 40] combined with Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP)

2426

