Clothes-Changing Person Re-identification with RGB Modality Only
Xinqian Gu1,2 , Hong Chang1,2 , Bingpeng Ma2 , Shutao Bai1,2 , Shiguang Shan1,2 , Xilin Chen1,2
1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{xinqian.gu,shutao.bai}@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {changhong,sgshan,xlchen}@ict.ac.cn, bpma@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
The key to address clothes-changing person reidentification (re-id) is to extract clothes-irrelevant features,
e.g., face, hairstyle, body shape, and gait. Most current
works mainly focus on modeling body shape from multimodality information (e.g., silhouettes and sketches), but
do not make full use of the clothes-irrelevant information
in the original RGB images. In this paper, we propose
a Clothes-based Adversarial Loss (CAL) to mine clothesirrelevant features from the original RGB images by penalizing the predictive power of re-id model w.r.t. clothes.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that using RGB images only, CAL outperforms all state-of-the-art methods
on widely-used clothes-changing person re-id benchmarks.
Besides, compared with images, videos contain richer appearance and additional temporal information, which can
be used to model proper spatiotemporal patterns to assist
clothes-changing re-id. Since there is no publicly available clothes-changing video re-id dataset, we contribute a
new dataset named CCVID and show that there exists much
room for improvement in modeling spatiotemporal information. The code and new dataset are available at: https:
//github.com/guxinqian/Simple-CCReID.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-id) [12,23,54] aims to search
the target person from surveillance videos across different
locations and times. Most existing works [11, 19, 40] assume that pedestrians do not change their clothes in a short
period of time. However, if we want to re-identify a pedestrian over a long period of time, the clothes-changing problem cannot be avoided. Besides, clothes-changing problem
also exists in some short-time real-world scenarios, e.g.,
criminal suspects usually change their clothes to avoid being identified and tracked. Due to the crucial role in intelligent surveillance system, clothes-changing person reid [7, 49] has attracted increasing attention in recent years.
Humans can distinguish their acquaintances, even if

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. The visualization of (a) two original images, (b) the
learned feature maps only with identification loss, and (c) the
learned feature maps with identification loss and the proposed
CAL. Note that all training settings of (b) and (c) are consistent
except loss functions. (b) only highlights face as the clothesirrelevant features, while (c) highlights more clothes-irrelevant
features, e.g., face, hairstyle, and body shape. (Since different
samples of the same person in the training set mostly wear the
same shoes, shoes are also highlighted.)

these acquaintances wear clothes that they have never seen
before. The reason is that the human brain can decouple and
utilize clothes-irrelevant features, e.g., face, hairstyle, body
shape, and gait. To avoid the interference of clothes, some
clothes-changing re-id methods [6, 18] and gait recognition
methods [4, 52] model body shape and gait from multimodality inputs (e.g., skeletons [35], silhouettes [4], radio
signals [7], contour sketches [49], and 3D shape [6]) or by
disentangled representation learning [52]. However, multimodality-based methods need additional models or equipment to capture multi-modality information, and learning
disentangled representations is usually time-consuming.
Actually, the original RGB modality contains rich
clothes-irrelevant information which is largely underutilized by the current methods. As for some clothes-changing
re-id methods [6, 35], although they use a strong backbone
(i.e. ResNet [15]) to extract features from the original images, without a properly designed loss function, the learned
feature map only focuses on some simple clothes-irrelevant
information, e.g., face (see Fig. 1 (b)), while other crucial
clothes-irrelevant information is omitted. As for most gait
recognition methods [4, 13], they usually discard the original input videos and resort to other modality inputs, e.g.,
silhouettes.
To better mine the clothes-irrelevant information in RGB

1060

