Self-Sustaining Representation Expansion for
Non-Exemplar Class-Incremental Learning
Kai Zhu1
Wei Zhai1
Yang Cao1,3,†
Jiebo Luo2
Zheng-Jun Zha1
1
2
University of Science and Technology of China
University of Rochester
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{zkzy@mail., wzhai056@mail., forrest@}ustc.edu.cn

jluo@cs.rochester.edu

zhazj@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Non-exemplar class-incremental learning is to recognize both the old and new classes when old class samples cannot be saved. It is a challenging task since representation optimization and feature retention can only be
achieved under supervision from new classes. To address
this problem, we propose a novel self-sustaining representation expansion scheme. Our scheme consists of a structure
reorganization strategy that fuses main-branch expansion
and side-branch updating to maintain the old features, and
a main-branch distillation scheme to transfer the invariant knowledge. Furthermore, a prototype selection mechanism is proposed to enhance the discrimination between the
old and new classes by selectively incorporating new samples into the distillation process. Extensive experiments on
three benchmarks demonstrate significant incremental performance, outperforming the state-of-the-art methods by a
margin of 3%, 3% and 6%, respectively.

Figure 1. The t-SNE visualization. Compared to the baseline in
Section 4.1, (1) the representations of the old classes in our method
are better maintained (circular area), (2) and the novel class is
more discriminating from the old classes (rectangular area).

1. Introduction
Since deep neural networks have made great advances
in fully supervised conditions, research attention is increasingly turning to other aspects of learning. An important aspect is the ability to continuously learn new tasks as the
input stream is updated, which is often the case in real applications. In recent years, class-incremental learning (CIL)
[11, 27], a difficult type in continual learning, has attracted
much attention, which aims to recognize new classes without forgetting the old ones that have been learned.
In this case, re-training the old and new class samples
jointly in each phase is time-consuming and laborious, not
to mention that the old class samples may not be fully available. A simple alternative is to fine-tune the network using
the new class, however, it will cause the catastrophic forgetting problem [8]. That is, during the optimization process,
† Corresponding Author

the entire representation and the classifier become biased
toward the new class, resulting in a sharp drop in the performance for the old class. To deal with it, recent CIL methods
maintain the past knowledge by preserving some representative samples (i.e., exemplars [27]) and introducing various
distillation losses [7], and correct the bias caused by number
imbalance by calibrating the classifier [11].
However, most of the existing methods [21, 30] assume
that a certain number (e.g., 2000) of exemplars can be stored
in memory, which is usually difficult to satisfy in practice
due to user privacy or device limitations. This fact poses
great difficulties to incremental learning, because the optimization of the representation and the correction of the classifier will degenerate directly from the imbalance between
the old and new classes. To this end, this paper focuses
on this ability of incrementally learning new classes where
old class samples cannot be preserved, which is called non-

9296

