Learning ABCs: Approximate Bijective Correspondence
for isolating factors of variation with weak supervision
Kieran A. Murphy*
Univ. of Pennsylvania

Varun Jampani
Google Research

Srikumar Ramalingam
Google Research

Ameesh Makadia
Google Research

kieranm@†

varunjampani@‡

rsrikumar@‡

makadia@‡

Abstract
Representational learning forms the backbone of most
deep learning applications, and the value of a learned representation is intimately tied to its information content regarding different factors of variation. Finding good representations depends on the nature of supervision and the learning
algorithm. We propose a novel algorithm that utilizes a weak
form of supervision where the data is partitioned into sets
according to certain inactive (common) factors of variation
which are invariant across elements of each set. Our key
insight is that by seeking correspondence between elements
of different sets, we learn strong representations that exclude
the inactive factors of variation and isolate the active factors
that vary within all sets. As a consequence of focusing on
the active factors, our method can leverage a mix of setsupervised and wholly unsupervised data, which can even
belong to a different domain. We tackle the challenging
problem of synthetic-to-real object pose transfer, without
pose annotations on anything, by isolating pose information which generalizes to the category level and across the
synthetic/real domain gap. The method can also boost performance in supervised settings, by strengthening intermediate
representations, as well as operate in practically attainable
scenarios with set-supervised natural images, where quantity is limited and nuisance factors of variation are more
plentiful. Accompanying code may be found on github.

1. Introduction
A good representation is just as much about what it excludes as what it includes, in terms of factors of variation
across a dataset [52]. Control over the information content of
learned representations depends on the nature of available supervision and the algorithm used to leverage it. For example,
full supervision of desired factors of variation provides max* Work done as part of the Google AI Residency program.
† seas.upenn.edu
‡ google.com

imum flexibility for fully disentangled representations, as an
interpretable mapping is straightforward to obtain between
elements and the factors [3, 19]. However, such supervision
is often unrealistic since many common factors of variation,
such as 3D pose or lighting in image data, are difficult to
annotate at scale in real-world settings. On the other hand,
unsupervised learning makes the fewest limiting assumptions about the data but does not allow control over the
discovered factors [30]. Neither extreme, fully supervised or
unsupervised, is practical for many real-world tasks.
As an alternative, we consider weak supervision in the
form of set membership [9, 24], used in prior works though
often only informally defined. To be specific, we assume
access to subsets of training data within which some inactive factors of variation have fixed values and the remaining
active factors freely vary for different elements of the subset.
For example, consider the images of a synthetic car in set A
of Fig. 1. All images in this set share common values for
factors of variation relating to the specific car instance, and
the only actively varying factor is the car’s orientation in the
image. Set membership is the only information; there are no
annotations on any factors of variation. In many complex
tasks that are beyond the scope of categorical classification,
set supervision serves as a more flexible source of information for operating on factors of variation across a dataset.
Many techniques designed to utilize set supervision exploit correspondence across data that match in desired factors
of variation [7, 54]. For instance, if images of cars with the
same 3D pose are grouped together (i.e. the inactive factor
in each set is pose), then a straightforward training objective
that maps images within groups to similar embeddings and
images from different groups to dissimilar embeddings will
have successfully isolated pose. However, in this scenario
and more generally, this variant of set supervision is often
prohibitive to obtain: in our example it requires identifying
images of different cars from exactly the same viewpoint.
A more readily available form of set supervision is where
the desired factors are active in each set. Continuing the example, such supervision can be obtained by simply imaging
each car from multiple viewpoints (as in set A in Fig. 1).

16010

