HDNet: High-resolution Dual-domain
Learning for Spectral Compressive Imaging
Xiaowan Hu∗,1,2 , Yuanhao Cai*,1,2 , Jing Lin1,2 , Haoqian Wang1,2,† ,
Xin Yuan3 , Yulun Zhang4 , Radu Timofte4 , and Luc Van Gool4
1
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Shenzhen Institute of Future Media Technology, 3 Westlake University, 4 ETH Zurich
HSI

Abstract
The rapid development of deep learning provides a better solution for the end-to-end reconstruction of hyperspectral image (HSI). However, existing learning-based methods have two major defects. Firstly, networks with selfattention usually sacrifice internal resolution to balance
model performance against complexity, losing fine-grained
high-resolution (HR) features. Secondly, even if the optimization focusing on spatial-spectral domain learning
(SDL) converges to the ideal solution, there is still a significant visual difference between the reconstructed HSI and
the truth. So we propose a high-resolution dual-domain
learning network (HDNet) for HSI reconstruction. On the
one hand, the proposed HR spatial-spectral attention module with its efficient feature fusion provides continuous and
fine pixel-level features. On the other hand, frequency domain learning (FDL) is introduced for HSI reconstruction
to narrow the frequency domain discrepancy. Dynamic FDL
supervision forces the model to reconstruct fine-grained frequencies and compensate for excessive smoothing and distortion caused by pixel-level losses. The HR pixel-level attention and frequency-level refinement in our HDNet mutually promote HSI perceptual quality. Extensive quantitative
and qualitative experiments show that our method achieves
SOTA performance on simulated and real HSI datasets.
https://github.com/Huxiaowan/HDNet

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral images (HSIs) with more spectral bands
can capture richer scene information and fixed wavelength
imaging characteristics, which are used in image classification [32], object detection [50], and tracking [17,30] widely.
Imaging systems with single 1D or 2D sensors take a
long time to scan a scene for HSIs. They are not suitable
for capturing dynamic scenes. Recently, the coded aperture
snapshot spectral imaging (CASSI) system [24, 39, 40] can
capture 3D HSI cubes at a real-time rate. CASSI exploits a
* Equal Contribution. † Corresponding Author.

558.5 nm

λ-Net

TSA-Net

DGSMP

HDNet (Ours)

Truth

636.5 nm

584.5 nm

481.5 nm

Figure 1. Frequency spectra visualization of different methods.

coded aperture to modulate the HSI signal and compress it
into a 2D measurement. Nonetheless, a core problem of the
CASSI system is to recover the reliable and fine underlying
3D HSI signal from the 2D compressed images.
Traditional methods mainly regularize the reconstruction
based on hand-crafted priors that delineate the structure of
HSI. But manually adjusted parameters result in poor generalization. Researchers began using convolutional neural networks (CNN) for HSI reconstruction [41, 45]. Some methods [23, 27, 28, 43] focus on self-attention learning in the
spatial domain, but they usually sacrifice feature resolution
to cut down the computational complexity of non-local attention maps [27, 28]. These operations inevitably damage
the spectral auto-correlation and information continuity. Inspired by the extensive exploration of pixel-level attention
in high-level visual tasks [5, 22], we find that it is critical
to elaborate high-resolution (HR) and fine-grained spectralspatial attention for HSIs. However, although finer attention is undoubtedly beneficial for reconstructing HSI with
rich spectral bands, capturing pixel-level perception for HSI
with 28 spectral channels is far more challenging than 3channel RGB images. It requires an optimal trade-off between model performance and resource costs.
Besides, existing learning-based methods [3, 14, 27, 28,
42] for HSI reconstruction mainly focus on spatial-spectral

17542

