WALT: Watch And Learn 2D amodal representation from Time-lapse imagery
N Dinesh Reddy

Robert Tamburo
Srinivasa G. Narasimhan
Carnegie Mellon University
http://walt.cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Current methods for object detection, segmentation, and
tracking fail in the presence of severe occlusions in busy urban environments. Labeled real data of occlusions is scarce
(even in large datasets) and synthetic data leaves a domain
gap, making it hard to explicitly model and learn occlusions. In this work, we present the best of both the real
and synthetic worlds for automatic occlusion supervision
using a large readily available source of data: time-lapse
imagery from stationary webcams observing street intersections over weeks, months, or even years. We introduce a new
dataset, Watch and Learn Time-lapse (WALT), consisting of
12 (4K and 1080p) cameras capturing urban environments
over a year. We exploit this real data in a novel way to automatically mine a large set of unoccluded objects and then
composite them in the same views to generate occlusions.
This longitudinal self-supervision is strong enough for an
amodal network to learn object-occluder-occluded layer
representations. We show how to speed up the discovery of
unoccluded objects and relate the confidence in this discovery to the rate and accuracy of training occluded objects.
After watching and automatically learning for several days,
this approach shows significant performance improvement
in detecting and segmenting occluded people and vehicles,
over human-supervised amodal approaches.

1. Introduction
While there has been strong progress in data-driven
methods for object detection [10,14,20,40], tracking [7,58,
59, 62], segmentation [4, 22, 30, 39, 50] and reconstruction
[25,27,29,53] with limited occlusions, most methods underperform in severely occluded scenarios. Severe occlusions
are common in busy intersections and crowded places. Even
in less dense scenes, pedestrians and vehicles often pass
each other or pass behind other objects. As a result, objects
are either not detected at all, or the 2D bounding boxes and
segments are truncated and produce errors in downstream
processes such as 3D reconstruction [5, 6, 25, 41, 42, 45].
Much of this state of affairs can be attributed to the
fact that occlusions are treated as noise that must be over-

Figure 1. We visualize the prediction of amodal representation
of vehicles and people under severe occlusions trained using our
longitudinal self-supervision framework. The method shows significant improvement in amodal detection and segmentation with
images captured from different cameras.

come by robust measures [16, 17, 23, 36, 52, 57]. There are
several challenges that make this strategy hard to succeed.
First, it is much harder to label object bounding boxes or
segments that are occluded, even for humans [47, 49, 63].
Thus, even large datasets like COCO [38] and ImageNet
[34] have relatively few objects labeled that are severely occluded [47, 63]. This creates a strong bias against learning
robustness to occlusions [11,46,56]. Further, the evaluation
metrics are often reported on the entire datasets [9, 18, 38]
that could hide problems in occluded scenarios.
As a result, there is growing recognition that occlusions
must be explicitly modeled and learned [15, 19, 30, 30, 48,
61]. This has led to new efforts in labeling occlusions explicitly in multiple datasets [21, 47, 63]. Using such supervision, amodal, or holistic, representations (e.g. segmentations and bounding boxes) of objects are learned from partially occluded observations [28, 54, 60]. While producing
significantly better results than before, these commendable
efforts are still plagued by the same challenges - difficulty
for humans to label occlusions in real scenes and the limited dataset size. To supplement such limited data, focus
has turned toward synthesizing objects in occluded scenarios using synthetic inpainting [30, 31, 60] using computer
graphics [1,13,24]. CG can generate a large amount of data
for supervision (given today’s cloud computing resources)

9356

