Neural Points: Point Cloud Representation with Neural Fields for Arbitrary
Upsampling
Wanquan Feng1
1

Jin Li2

Hongrui Cai1

University of Science and Technology of China

2

Xiaonan Luo2

Juyong Zhang1 *

Guilin University Of Electronic Technology

lcfwq@mail.ustc.edu.cn, 20032201014@mails.guet.edu.cn, hrcai@mail.ustc.edu.cn,
luoxn@guet.edu.cn, juyong@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose Neural Points, a novel point
cloud representation and apply it to the arbitrary-factored
upsampling task. Different from traditional point cloud
representation where each point only represents a position or a local plane in the 3D space, each point in Neural Points represents a local continuous geometric shape
via neural fields. Therefore, Neural Points contain more
shape information and thus have a stronger representation ability. Neural Points is trained with surface containing rich geometric details, such that the trained model
has enough expression ability for various shapes. Specifically, we extract deep local features on the points and construct neural fields through the local isomorphism between
the 2D parametric domain and the 3D local patch. In the
final, local neural fields are integrated together to form
the global surface. Experimental results show that Neural Points has powerful representation ability and demonstrate excellent robustness and generalization ability. With
Neural Points, we can resample point cloud with arbitrary resolutions, and it outperforms the state-of-the-art
point cloud upsampling methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/WanquanF/NeuralPoints.

1. Introduction
Point cloud, which is the most fundamental and popular representation of 3D scenes, has been widely used in
many applications like 3D reconstruction [11, 14, 24, 33],
virtual/augmented reality [10, 34] and autonomous driving [16, 36]. In the traditional representation of point cloud,
each point only represents a position in the 3D space, and it
can be further extended to represent a local plane if its normal vector is assigned. Therefore, the representation ability
of point cloud is still limited by its resolution. Although
point cloud upsampling methods [17, 18, 38, 43] have been
proposed to improve its representation ability, their strategy
is still a “discrete-to-discrete” manner and can not overcome
the limitation of current point cloud representation.
In this work, we propose Neural Points, a novel point
* Corresponding author

cloud representation, which significantly improves the representation ability and can be naturally applied to the upsampling task. Different from traditional representation,
each point of Neural Points encodes a local surface patch
represented via neural fields. Specifically, each point-wise
surface patch is represented as a local isomorphism between
the 2D parametric domain and the 3D local surface patch,
and the isomorphism is implicitly represented via neural
fields. Thanks to its continuous nature, free of the limitation of finite resolution, powerful representation ability to
involve more shape information, neural fields enable Neural Points several advantages over traditional discrete point
cloud representation. Meanwhile, the trained model of neural fields is shared for all local patches, and thus the storage
overhead of Neural Points is quite small.
Unlike some existing methods which represent the whole
surface model via one neural field [26, 41], both the neural
fields and the point features passed into Neural Points are
all local. With this design, our Neural Points representation
shows several advantages including excellent ability to express details, strong generalization ability, and low need for
training data. Specifically, we employ local neural fields to
construct the continuous bijective mapping between the 2D
parametric domain and the 3D local surface patch, based on
the fact that 3D local patch on the 2D manifold is isomorphic to a 2D simply connected disk. With the neural field,
each 3D local patch can be viewed as a parametric surface
defined in a 2D parametric domain. To this end, we employ
an encoder to extract point-wise local features and take the
local feature as a part of the input passed into the neural field
network. With the local shape information, the neural field
can represent the surface patch well, and the trained network model is shared by all local patches of all 3D models.
In the final, we design an integration strategy to integrate
all the local neural fields together to form the final global
shape. The model of Neural Points is trained with geometric surface in high resolution with rich geometric details,
such that the trained Neural Points model can represent rich
geometric shapes.

18633

