Learning To Recognize Procedural Activities with Distant Supervision
Xudong Lin1 * Fabio Petroni2 Gedas Bertasius3
Marcus Rohrbach2 Shih-Fu Chang1 Lorenzo Torresani2,4
1
Columbia University 2 Facebook AI Research 3 UNC Chapel Hill 4 Dartmouth

Abstract
In this paper we consider the problem of classifying
fine-grained, multi-step activities (e.g., cooking different
recipes, making disparate home improvements, creating
various forms of arts and crafts) from long videos spanning
up to several minutes. Accurately categorizing these activities requires not only recognizing the individual steps that
compose the task but also capturing their temporal dependencies. This problem is dramatically different from traditional action classification, where models are typically optimized on videos that span only a few seconds and that
are manually trimmed to contain simple atomic actions.
While step annotations could enable the training of models to recognize the individual steps of procedural activities, existing large-scale datasets in this area do not include
such segment labels due to the prohibitive cost of manually annotating temporal boundaries in long videos. To address this issue, we propose to automatically identify steps
in instructional videos by leveraging the distant supervision of a textual knowledge base (wikiHow) that includes
detailed descriptions of the steps needed for the execution
of a wide variety of complex activities. Our method uses a
language model to match noisy, automatically-transcribed
speech from the video to step descriptions in the knowledge base. We demonstrate that video models trained to
recognize these automatically-labeled steps (without manual supervision) yield a representation that achieves superior generalization performance on four downstream tasks:
recognition of procedural activities, step classification, step
forecasting and egocentric video classification.

1. Introduction
Imagine being in your kitchen, engaged in the preparation of a sophisticated dish that involves a sequence of complex steps. Fortunately, your J.A.R.V.I.S.1 comes to your
rescue. It actively recognizes the task that you are trying
to accomplish and guides you step-by-step in the successful
* Research done while XL was an intern at Facebook AI Research.
1 A fictional AI assistant in the Marvel Cinematic Universe.

execution of the recipe. The dramatic progress witnessed in
activity recognition [9,11,51,53] over the last few years has
certainly made these fictional scenarios a bit closer to reality. Yet, it is clear that in order to attain these goals we must
extend existing systems beyond atomic-action classification
in trimmed clips to tackle the more challenging problem of
understanding procedural activities in long videos spanning
several minutes. Furthermore, in order to classify the procedural activity, the system must not only recognize the individual semantic steps in the long video but also model their
temporal relations, since many complex activities share several steps but may differ in the order in which these steps
appear or are interleaved. For example, “beating eggs” is a
common step in many recipes which, however, are likely to
differ in the preceding and subsequent steps.
In recent years, the research community has engaged in
the creation of several manually-annotated video datasets
for the recognition of procedural, multi-step activities.
However, in order to make detailed manual annotations possible at the level of both segments (step labels) and videos
(task labels), these datasets have been constrained to have a
narrow scope or a relatively small scale. Examples include
video benchmarks that focus on specific domains, such as
recipe preparation or kitchen activities [11, 27, 40, 62], as
well as collections of instructional videos manually-labeled
for step and task recognition [50, 63]. Due to the large cost
of manually annotating temporal boundaries, these datasets
have been limited to a small size both in terms of number
of tasks (about a few hundreds activities at most) as well as
amount of video examples (about 10K samples, for roughly
400 hours of video). While these benchmarks have driven
early progress in this field, their limited size and narrow
scope prevent the training of modern large-capacity video
models for recognition of general procedural activities.
On the other end of the scale/scope spectrum, the
HowTo100M dataset [34] stands out as an exceptional resource. It is over 3 orders of magnitude bigger than prior
benchmarks in this area along several dimensions: it includes over 100M clips showing humans performing and
narrating more than 23,000 complex tasks for a total duration of 134K hours of video. The downside of this massive

13853

