Continual Learning for Visual Search with Backward Consistent Feature Embedding
Jun-Cheng Chen2
Tzer-Yi Wu3
Chu-Song Chen1,*
Timmy S. T. Wan1
National Taiwan University1
Academia Sinica2
Ucfunnel Co. Ltd.3
{r08944004,chusong}@csie.ntu.edu.tw, pullpull@citi.sinica.edu.tw, kenny.wu@ucfunnel.com

Abstract
In visual search, the gallery set could be incrementally
growing and added to the database in practice. However,
existing methods rely on the model trained on the entire
dataset, ignoring the continual updating of the model. Besides, as the model updates, the new model must re-extract
features for the entire gallery set to maintain compatible
feature space, imposing a high computational cost for a
large gallery set. To address the issues of long-term visual
search, we introduce a continual learning (CL) approach
that can handle the incrementally growing gallery set with
backward embedding consistency. We enforce the losses of
inter-session data coherence, neighbor-session model coherence, and intra-session discrimination to conduct a continual learner. In addition to the disjoint setup, our CL solution also tackles the situation of increasingly adding new
classes for the blurry boundary without assuming all categories known in the beginning and during model update.
To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst CL method both tackling
the issue of backward-consistent feature embedding and allowing novel classes to occur in the new sessions. Extensive
experiments on various benchmarks show the efﬁcacy of our
approach under a wide range of setups1 .

1. Introduction
Continual learning (CL) aims to learn new tasks while
keeping the functions learned from the old sessions. The
technology has been rapidly evolving; nevertheless, the active research area in CL focuses on image classiﬁcation but
ignores the demand for image retrieval (aka visual search).
For obtaining powerful feature representations in image retrieval, most works [37,44,57,67] still require a model to be
trained on an entire dataset simultaneously instead of in an
incremental manner. However, a practical visual search system should be capable of continually learning from new materials while consolidating the old knowledge to cope with
the data accumulated with time.
* indicates corresponding author.
1 Code: https://github.com/ivclab/CVS

Blurry Setup

Disjoint Setup

Space 2

Space 2

Space 1

Space 1

Session 1

Session 2

Session 1

Session 2

General Incremental Setup

Session 1

Session 2

Session J

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed approach with the general
incremental setup. Our solution allows the new gallery set of seen
and unseen classes freely and incrementally added to the database
with respect to the widely adopted disjoint and the recent blurry
setups. In addition, it also considers backward compatible embedding for a session sequence. This avoids the gallery embeddings of
old and new sessions from being separated in incompatible feature
spaces. Thus, our approach is more practical for real retrieval applications. Semi-transparent icons represent the data points from
the previous sessions collected so far.

As data grows, despite updating the model by simply
ﬁne-tuning, many observations [11, 69] reveal that catastrophic forgetting happens. A series of strategies have been
developed in CL to address the problem [11, 29, 43]. The
methods can make a single deep model capable of updating
itself successively while avoiding disappointing overall performance. However, there are still several ongoing issues.
First, many works in CL emphasize the disjoint setup
where the data from the old class will not show during training in a new task (or session). The task boundary arising
over classes restricts the usage of CL since many retrieval
systems need to collect extra data of the seen labels for improving their models in new sessions. Although recent studies (e.g. [2, 4]) allow the class overlapping among the tasks,
the blurry setup in these works assumes that all the class labels in the future sessions are pre-given in advance; only the
instance ratios in the classes vary with the session (Fig. 1).
This kind of data scenario is impractical for most visualsearch applications (e.g., in an e-commerce system, the new

16702

