Understanding and Increasing Efficiency of Frank-Wolfe Adversarial Training
Theodoros Tsiligkaridis,* Jay Roberts*
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Lincoln Laboratory
Lexington, MA 02421
ttsili@mit.edu, jay.roberts@ll.mit.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks are easily fooled by small perturbations known as adversarial attacks. Adversarial Training
(AT) is a technique that approximately solves a robust optimization problem to minimize the worst-case loss and is
widely regarded as the most effective defense against such
attacks. Due to the high computation time for generating
strong adversarial examples in the AT process, single-step
approaches have been proposed to reduce training time.
However, these methods suffer from catastrophic overfitting
where adversarial accuracy drops during training, and although improvements have been proposed, they increase
training time and robustness is far from that of multi-step AT.
We develop a theoretical framework for adversarial training
with FW optimization (FW-AT) that reveals a geometric connection between the loss landscape and the distortion of l-inf
FW attacks (the attack’s l-2 norm). Specifically, we analytically show that high distortion of FW attacks is equivalent to
small gradient variation along the attack path. It is then experimentally demonstrated on various deep neural network
architectures that l-inf attacks against robust models achieve
near maximal l-2 distortion, while standard networks have
lower distortion. Furthermore, it is experimentally shown
that catastrophic overfitting is strongly correlated with low
distortion of FW attacks. This mathematical transparency
differentiates FW from the more popular Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) optimization. To demonstrate the utility
of our theoretical framework we develop FW-AT-Adapt, a
novel adversarial training algorithm which uses a simple
distortion measure to adapt the number of attack steps during training to increase efficiency without compromising
robustness. FW-AT-Adapt provides training time on par with
single-step fast AT methods and improves closing the gap
between fast AT methods and multi-step PGD-AT with minimal loss in adversarial accuracy in white-box and black-box
settings.

* Equal contributions.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNN) achieve excellent performance across various domains [18]. As these models are
deployed across industries (e.g., healthcare or autonomous
driving), concerns of robustness and reliability become increasingly important. Several organizations have identified
important principles of artificial intelligence (AI) that include the notions of reliability and transparency [19, 21, 24].
One issue of large capacity models such as DNNs is that
small, carefully chosen input perturbations, known as adversarial perturbations, can lead to incorrect predictions [12].
Various enhancement methods have been proposed to defend against adversarial perturbations [16, 20, 22, 28]. One
of the best performing algorithms is adversarial training
(AT) [20], which is formulated as a robust optimization
problem [31]. Computation of optimal adversarial perturbations is NP-hard [36] and approximate methods are used to
solve the inner maximization. The most popular approximate
method that has been proven to be successful is projected gradient descent (PGD) [10]. Frank-Wolfe (FW) optimization
has been recently proposed in [8] and was shown to effectively fool standard networks with less distortion, and can
be efficiently used to generate sparse counterfactual perturbations to explain model predictions and visualize principal
class features [27].
Since PGD has proven to be the main algorithm for adversarially robust deep learning, reducing its high computational
cost without sacrificing performance, i.e. fast adversarial
training, is a primary issue. Various methods have been
proposed based on using a single PGD step, known as Fast
Gradient Sign Method (FGSM) [37] but fail for large perturbations. [37] identified that FGSM-based training achieves
some robustness initially during training but robustness drastically drops within an epoch, a phenomenon known as catastrophic overfitting (CO). While some methods have been
proposed to ameliorate this problem [2, 14, 30], the training
time suffers as a result and/or robustness is not on par with
multi-step PGD-AT.
In this paper, we use the Frank-Wolfe optimization to
derive a relationship between the ℓ2 norm of ℓ∞ adversarial

50

