Measuring Compositional Consistency for Video Question Answering
Mona Gandhi1 *, Mustafa Omer Gul2 *, Eva Prakash2 , Madeleine Grunde-McLaughlin3 ,
Ranjay Krishna3 , Maneesh Agrawala2
Veermata Jijabai Technological Institute1 , Stanford University2 , University of Washington3
{mbgandhi b18}@ce.vjti.ac.in, {momergul, eprakash, maneesh}@stanford.edu,
{mgrunde, ranjaykrishna}@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Recent video question answering benchmarks indicate
that state-of-the-art models struggle to answer compositional questions. However, it remains unclear which types
of compositional reasoning cause models to mispredict.
Furthermore, it is difficult to discern whether models arrive at answers using compositional reasoning or by leveraging data biases. In this paper, we develop a question
decomposition engine that programmatically deconstructs
a compositional question into a directed acyclic graph of
sub-questions. The graph is designed such that each parent
question is a composition of its children. We present AGQADecomp, a benchmark containing 2.3M question graphs,
with an average of 11.49 sub-questions per graph, and
4.55M total new sub-questions. Using question graphs, we
evaluate three state-of-the-art models with a suite of novel
compositional consistency metrics. We find that models either cannot reason correctly through most compositions or
are reliant on incorrect reasoning to reach answers, frequently contradicting themselves or achieving high accuracies when failing at intermediate reasoning steps.

1. Introduction
Compositional reasoning is fundamental to how humans
represent visual events [20, 26, 32, 38]. For instance, Figure 1 visualizes a video consisting of actions such as taking
a picture and holding a bottle; the action holding a bottle
involves an actor initially twisting the bottle and then later
holding it. This ability to compose interactions and actions
is reflected in the compositional nature of language people
use to communicate about what they see [5,28]. To measure
compositional reasoning of visual events, the computer vision community has proposed multiple video benchmarks
using question answering [12, 23, 39]. These benchmarks
ask questions such as “Is a phone the first object that the
* Equal contribution

Compositional question decomposition
Q. Is a phone the ﬁrst object that the person is touching after
taking a picture?

A: yes,

PRED: no

Q. Does a phone exist?

A: yes,

PRED: yes

Q. What is the ﬁrst object that the person is touching after
taking a picture?

A: phone, PRED: bottle

Q. What is the person touching after taking a picture?
Q. Is a person touching something after taking a picture? A: yes,

PRED: no

Q. Is the person touching something?

A: yes,

PRED: yes

Q. Is the person taking a picture?

A: yes,

PRED: yes

Q. Does a person exist?

A: yes,

PRED: yes

Q. Is the person taking something?

A: yes,

PRED: no

Q. Does a picture exist?

A: yes,

PRED: yes

A: yes,

PRED: yes

Q. Does a person exist after taking a picture?
...
Legend:

objects

relationships

actions

time

Figure 1. We introduce a question decomposition engine, which
produces a DAG of sub-questions from a compositional question
about visual events. A sub-question is designed to contain a subset of the original question’s reasoning steps. Our engine produces a benchmark with 4.55M question answer pairs associated
with 9.6K videos. We design handcrafted programs and templates
for each sub-question as well as composition rules to compose
sub-questions together. We analyze existing models using a suite
of new compositional consistency metrics using our DAGs. Our
DAGs isolate which composition rules cause mispredictions (error path is shown by pink arrows). They also highlight scenarios
where models might exhibit self-contradiction (blue arrows).

person is touching after taking a picture?”, where models
need to compose actions (taking a picture) with relationships (touching) and objects (phone) to arrive at the correct
answer. Using these benchmarks, researchers have recently
concluded that state-of-the-art models [8, 22, 25] struggle to
reason compositionally [12].
Unfortunately, existing benchmarks are unable to explain why video question answering models struggle with

5046

