Feature Erasing and Diffusion Network for Occluded Person Re-Identification
Zhikang Wang1,2 *, Feng Zhu2†, Shixiang Tang3 , Rui Zhao2,4 , Lihuo He5 ‡, Jiangning Song1
1
Monash University, 2 SenseTime Research, 3 The University of Sydney,
4
Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 5 Xidian University
zkwang00@gmail.com, zhufeng@sensetime.com, stan3906@uni.sydney.edu.au, zhaorui@sensetime.com,
lihuo.he@gmail.com, jiangning.song@monash.edu

Abstract
Occluded person re-identification (ReID) aims at matching occluded person images to holistic ones across different camera views. Target Pedestrians (TP) are often
disturbed by Non-Pedestrian Occlusions (NPO) and NonTarget Pedestrians (NTP). Previous methods mainly focus
on increasing the model’s robustness against NPO while ignoring feature contamination from NTP. In this paper, we
propose a novel Feature Erasing and Diffusion Network
(FED) to simultaneously handle challenges from NPO and
NTP. Specifically, aided by the NPO augmentation strategy
that simulates NPO on holistic pedestrian images and generates precise occlusion masks, NPO features are explicitly eliminated by our proposed Occlusion Erasing Module (OEM). Subsequently, we diffuse the pedestrian representations with other memorized features to synthesize the
NTP characteristics in the feature space through the novel
Feature Diffusion Module (FDM). With the guidance of the
occlusion scores from OEM, the feature diffusion process
is conducted on visible body parts, thereby improving the
quality of the synthesized NTP characteristics. We can
greatly improve the model’s perception ability towards TP
and alleviate the influence of NPO and NTP by jointly optimizing OEM and FDM. Furthermore, the proposed FDM
works as an auxiliary module for training and will not be
engaged in the inference phase, thus with high flexibility.
Experiments on occluded and holistic person ReID benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of FED over state-of-theart methods.

1. Introduction
Person Re-Identification (ReID) aims at retrieving the
same pedestrians captured by different cameras with differ* Zhikang Wang did this work as an intern in SenseTime Research.
† Corresponding author.
‡ This research was supported partially by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 61876146).

(a) Holistic

(b) Non-Pedestrian Occlusion

(c) Non-Target Pedestrian

Figure 1. Illustration of pose estimation and human parsing on
pedestrian images. Both models perform well on holistic and
object occluded pedestrians but fail on multi-pedestrian images.
Meanwhile, human parsing models have difficulty in identifying
personal belongings, e.g., backpacks, and umbrellas.

ent viewpoints, lighting conditions, and locations. With the
rapid development of deep learning area and publication of
large-scale image and video ReID datasets, ReID methods
based on deep neural networks have achieved remarkable
performance [14, 19, 27, 29]. Most of these approaches assume that a holistic body of each pedestrian is available for
feature extraction. However, in real-world scenarios, e.g.,
railway stations, schools, hospitals, and shopping malls,
pedestrians are inevitably disturbed by non-pedestrian occlusions (NPO) and non-target pedestrians (NTP). Therefore, designing a powerful network for the occluded person
ReID is essential.
Methods assisted by human key points [5, 21] and human parsing information [15] dominate the state-of-the-art
performance of the occluded ReID task. Generally, an auxiliary model extracts the body information first, and then
the extracted information will assist the training of models.
The strategy can greatly avoid mistakenly treating NPO as
human parts. However, such methods have many caveats.
Firstly, due to the domain gap between the training and testing data, the performance of the auxiliary models can not
be consistent. In Fig.1, we adopt official pose estimation

4754

