Doodle It Yourself: Class Incremental Learning by Drawing a Few Sketches
Ayan Kumar Bhunia1 Viswanatha Reddy Gajjala* Subhadeep Koley1,2 Rohit Kundu*
Aneeshan Sain1,2 Tao Xiang1,2 Yi-Zhe Song1,2
1
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom.
2
iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence.
{a.bhunia, s.koley, a.sain, t.xiang, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk; viswanathareddy998@gmail.com

Abstract
The human visual system is remarkable in learning new
visual concepts from just a few examples. This is precisely
the goal behind few-shot class incremental learning (FSCIL), where the emphasis is additionally placed on ensuring
the model does not suffer from “forgetting”. In this paper,
we push the boundary further for FSCIL by addressing two
key questions that bottleneck its ubiquitous application (i)
can the model learn from diverse modalities other than just
photo (as humans do), and (ii) what if photos are not readily accessible (due to ethical and privacy constraints). Our
key innovation lies in advocating the use of sketches as a
new modality for class support. The product is a “Doodle
It Yourself” (DIY) FSCIL framework where the users can
freely sketch a few examples of a novel class for the model to
learn to recognise photos of that class. For that, we present
a framework that infuses (i) gradient consensus for domain
invariant learning, (ii) knowledge distillation for preserving
old class information, and (iii) graph attention networks for
message passing between old and novel classes. We experimentally show that sketches are better class support than
text in the context of FSCIL, echoing findings elsewhere in
the sketching literature.

1. Introduction
Fully supervised learning has served us great with performances on ImageNet already surpassing human-level
[18]. In reality, however, such progress is primarily limited to a small number of object classes where labels were
explicitly curated (1000 in ImageNet vs. possibly millions
out there). Class Incremental Learning [29, 21, 23] is one of
the popular fronts that attempt to extend model perception
to novel classes while not “forgetting” about classes learned
already. Amongst its many variants, the recent Few-Shot
Class Incremental Learning (FSCIL) [54] is the most realistic where it also dictates the model to learn new classes with
very few examples, the same as humans do.
* Interned with SketchX

(10+3) Class Classifier

10 Class Classifier
Few-Shot
Incremental Learning

Doodle It Youself

1

2

10

Base Class Photos

1

2

10

11

12

13

Base+Novel Class Photos

Figure 1. Illustration of our DIY-FSCIL framework. For instance,
given sketch exemplars (1-shot here) from 3 novel classes as
support-set, a 10-class classifier gets updated to (10 + 3)-class
classifier that can classify photos from both base and novel classes.

As easy as providing a few samples might sound, questions start to emerge in practice as to (i) what data modality
should the samples take? and (ii) how could these samples
be obtained in practice. These questions, we argue, are key
to the potentially ubiquitous application of FSCIL as (i) humans also learn from a broad range of data modalities that
are not limited to just photo, and (ii) there are scenarios
where photos are not necessarily always readily available
due to privacy and ethical constraints (e.g., copyright).
In this paper, we set out to study the role of human
sketches as a support modality for FSCIL. This results in
a flexible FSCIL system that learns new classes just by observing a few sketches doodled by users themselves. Fig. 1
illustrates schematically our “Doodle It Yourself (DIY)”
FSCIL scenario – “DIY-FSCIL”. This importantly addresses the aforementioned problems in that (i) learning
is no longer fixed to just photos but flexibly cross-modal
with other data forms (just as humans do), and (ii) it works
without asking the users to source photos which might have
practical constraints attached (e.g., copyright, hazardous environments). There is of course also the added benefit of
injecting creativity to the classifier by sketching something
off the user’s imagination [16], e.g., a “flying cow”?
The advocate of sketches is largely motivated by the
line of work examining human-centric characteristics of
sketches in many parallel applications – notably image re-

2293

