Ditto: Building Digital Twins of Articulated Objects from Interaction
Zhenyu Jiang Cheng-Chun Hsu Yuke Zhu
Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
Digitizing physical objects into the virtual world has the
potential to unlock new research and applications in embodied AI and mixed reality. This work focuses on recreating interactive digital twins of real-world articulated objects, which can be directly imported into virtual environments. We introduce Ditto to learn articulation model estimation and 3D geometry reconstruction of an articulated
object through interactive perception. Given a pair of visual observations of an articulated object before and after interaction, Ditto reconstructs part-level geometry and
estimates the articulation model of the object. We employ implicit neural representations for joint geometry and
articulation modeling. Our experiments show that Ditto
effectively builds digital twins of articulated objects in a
category-agnostic way. We also apply Ditto to real-world
objects and deploy the recreated digital twins in physical
simulation. Code and additional results are available at
https://ut-austin-rpl.github.io/Ditto/

1. Introduction
Synthetic data has played a steadily more vital role in
fueling emerging AI applications, from training and prototyping computer vision models [20, 42] to teaching robots
to perform physical tasks [2, 28, 57]. As modern AI models
become larger and increasingly data-hungry, virtual platforms and synthetic datasets supply a massive amount of
cheap training data. For vision models to benefit from synthetic data, realism is key — the distribution mismatch between the real and virtual worlds hinders the generalization
of models trained in simulation. A promising path towards
closing the reality gap is digitizing physical objects and
recreating them in virtual environments. Research on 3D
vision and SLAM [3,12,34,35,53] has made significant advances in capturing realistic objects and scenes with static
3D models. Nonetheless, the burgeoning body of embodied
AI and mixed reality research calls for interactive digital
twins of physical objects that can be spawned in simulated
environments and interact with virtual agents. Building digital twins of articulated objects is particularly challenging

Figure 1. We build digital twins of articulated objects through interactive perception. Given visual observations before and after
interaction, our method jointly reconstructs the part-level geometry and articulation model of the object. Our recreated digital
twins can be spawned in physics engines and are fully interactive
in robot simulation and AR/VR applications.

as it requires not only a good understanding of its overall
geometry but the part compositions as well as the kinematic
relations between the parts.
Recent efforts in embodied AI platforms [22,23,50] have
incorporated interactive articulated objects, such as cabinets
and drawers, in simulated household environments and employed them for training virtual agents. Even so, they heavily rely on graphics designers and engineers to author and
curate the object models, limiting the scalability of the asset acquisition process. Developing vision-based methods
to automate the estimation [1, 17] and reconstruction [33]
of articulated objects has been an active line of research, accelerated by new tools developed from the 3D vision community, including geometric deep learning [19, 37, 39] and
implicit neural representations [10, 36]. The majority of
prior work focuses on solving individual components of the
problem rather than constructing a full-fledged model. Several recent works [24, 52] have studied the joint learning of
part segmentation and joint estimation. However, they infer part-level geometry on the point cloud which cannot be
used for physical simulation, because physical simulation
requires compact geometry of the object such as the mesh

5616

