BE-STI: Spatial-Temporal Integrated Network for Class-agnostic Motion Prediction
with Bidirectional Enhancement
Yunlong Wang1,2 *†, Hongyu Pan1† , Jun Zhu1 , Yu-Huan Wu1,3* , Xin Zhan1 , Kun Jiang2‡ , Diange Yang2‡
1
Alibaba DAMO Academy, 2 Tsinghua University, 3 Nankai University

Abstract
Determining the motion behavior of inexhaustible categories of traffic participants is critical for autonomous driving. In recent years, there has been a rising concern in
performing class-agnostic motion prediction directly from
the captured sensor data, like LiDAR point clouds or the
combination of point clouds and images. Current motion
prediction frameworks tend to perform joint semantic segmentation and motion prediction and face the trade-off between the performance of these two tasks. In this paper, we propose a novel Spatial-Temporal Integrated network with Bidirectional Enhancement, BE-STI, to improve
the temporal motion prediction performance by spatial semantic features, which points out an efficient way to combine semantic segmentation and motion prediction. Specifically, we propose to enhance the spatial features of each
individual point cloud with the similarity among temporal neighboring frames and enhance the global temporal
features with the spatial difference among non-adjacent
frames in a coarse-to-fine fashion. Extensive experiments
on nuScenes and Waymo Open Dataset show that our proposed framework outperforms all state-of-the-art LiDARbased and RGB+LiDAR-based methods with remarkable
margins by using only point clouds as input.1

1. Introduction
Modern self-driving vehicles are expected to operate in
open traffic scenes with highly dynamical moving objects
instead of only in closed scenes [1, 19, 32]. The motion of
inexhaustible categories of traffic participants is critical for
the safety of autonomous driving systems.
Traditional methods tend to formulate this task as trajectory prediction [1–5,11,14,42,44,45], which lacks the ability to handle unexpected categories that have not been seen
in training set due to the dependence on a separate object
* This work was done when Yunlong Wang and Yu-Huan Wu were research interns at Alibaba DAMO Academy.
† Equal contribution.
‡ Corresponding author.
1 The code will be released at https://github.com/be-sti/be-sti.

Motion
Previous
Framework

GTP
Semseg
Backbone

Decoder
Semseg

TeSE

BE-STI

Backbone

SeTE

Semantic
Decoder

Motion

Motion
Decoder

Figure 1. Comparison between BE-STI and previous motion prediction framework. Top row: Previous framework, which adopts
global temporal pooling (GTP) to capture motion clues. Bottom:
Our proposed BE-STI framework.

detector [27–29, 40, 41]. Scene flow [7, 8, 15, 18, 20, 33, 36]
provides an attractive solution by estimating the dense
motion field directly from LiDAR point clouds, which is
computationally prohibitive for practical self-driving systems [17, 35]. Recent works seek to perform joint semantic segmentation and motion prediction based on BEV occupancy grids, which essentially solves a joint optimization problem and thus faces the trade-off between the performances of the above two tasks. Our goal in this paper is to explore a better way to combine the two tasks
of semantics and motion, which utilizes a bidirectional enhancement network to improve the motion prediction performance through more accurate spatial semantic features.
One may ask: whether semantic information can benefit motion prediction? We first seek to answer this question through a toy example. As shown in Tab. 1, we feed
MotionNet [35], previous state-of-the-art (SOTA) LiDARbased motion prediction framework, with semantic ground
truth (GT) as additional input, which outperforms the previous work by a great margin. Specifically, we first use the
segmentation GT of the points in the voxel to count the

17093

