End-to-End Multi-Person Pose Estimation with Transformers
Dahu Shi1 * Xing Wei2 * Liangqi Li1 Ye Ren1 Wenming Tan1†
1
Hikvision Research Institute, Hangzhou, China
2
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
{shidahu, liliangqi, renye, tanwenming}@hikvision.com, weixing@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
SPPE
merging

SPPE

(a) Top-down framework.

Grouping

(b) Bottom-up framework.

...

Encoder

Decoder
...

Current methods of multi-person pose estimation typically treat the localization and association of body joints
separately. In this paper, we propose the ﬁrst fully end-toend multi-person Pose Estimation framework with TRansformers, termed PETR. Our method views pose estimation
as a hierarchical set prediction problem and effectively removes the need for many hand-crafted modules like RoI
cropping, NMS and grouping post-processing. In PETR,
multiple pose queries are learned to directly reason a set
of full-body poses. Then a joint decoder is utilized to further reﬁne the poses by exploring the kinematic relations
between body joints. With the attention mechanism, the
proposed method is able to adaptively attend to the features most relevant to target keypoints, which largely overcomes the feature misalignment difﬁculty in pose estimation
and improves the performance considerably. Extensive experiments on the MS COCO and CrowdPose benchmarks
show that PETR plays favorably against state-of-the-art approaches in terms of both accuracy and efﬁciency. The code
and models are available at https://github.com/
hikvision-research/opera.

(c) Fully end-to-end framework.

Figure 1. Comparison of mainstream pose estimation frameworks. SPPE in (a) indicates single-person pose estimation. We
proposed a fully end-to-end framework as show in (c).

1. Introduction
Multi-person pose estimation (aka, keypoint detection)
aims to detect all the instances and identify the kinematic
joints of each person simultaneously. It is one of the
fundamental computer vision tasks and has a wide range
of applications such as action recognition [9], humancomputer interaction [15], pedestrian tracking [1, 31] and
re-identiﬁcation [22], etc.
Existing mainstream methods solve this challenging
task with two-stage frameworks, including top-down and
bottom-up approaches. Top-down methods [5, 10, 12, 33,
39], as illustrated in Figure 1a, ﬁrst detect each individual
by a person detector and then transfer the task to a sim* Co-ﬁrst authors. † Corresponding author.

11069

pler single-person pose estimation problem. The top-down
pipeline comes with the following drawbacks: 1) the pose
estimation accuracy heavily relies on the performance of
person detector, incurring inferior performance in complex
scenarios [7]; 2) the computational cost is expensive due
to the use of the isolated detector [26, 32] and the running
time depends on the number of instances in the image. On
the other hand, bottom-up methods [3, 17, 27, 30] (shown in
Figure 1b) ﬁrst detect all potential keypoints in the image
in an instance-agnostic manner, and then perform a grouping post-processing to get instance-aware full-body poses.
The grouping process is usually heuristic, hand-crafted and

