On-Sensor Inference

Aggregator Inference

Fusion

Prediction

SplitNets: Designing Neural Architectures
for Efficient Distributed Computing on Head-Mounted Systems
Xin Dong1 , Barbara De Salvo2 , Meng Li2 , Chiao Liu2 , Zhongnan Qu3 , H.T. Kung1 and Ziyun Li2
1

Harvard University,

2

Meta Reality Labs,

3

ETH Zurich

xindong@g.harvard.edu

On-Sensor Inference

Aggregator Inference

Multiple Cameras

Figure 1. AR/VR device with multiple intelligent AI cameras.

Prediction

Fusion

Multi-layer
stacked camera
with AI processing

Light-weight
AR/VR processor

Figure 2. Distributed inference with sensors and an aggregator. In
this work, we focus on single/multi-view classification tasks.

Abstract
We design deep neural networks (DNNs) and corresponding networks’ splittings to distribute DNNs’ workload
to camera sensors and a centralized aggregator on head
mounted devices to meet system performance targets in inference accuracy and latency under the given hardware resource constraints. To achieve an optimal balance among
computation, communication, and performance, a splitaware neural architecture search framework, SplitNets, is
introduced to conduct model designing, splitting, and communication reduction simultaneously. We further extend the
framework to multi-view systems for learning to fuse inputs
from multiple camera sensors with optimal performance
and systemic efficiency. We validate SplitNets for singleview system on ImageNet as well as multi-view system on
3D classification, and show that the SplitNets framework
achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance and system
latency compared with existing approaches.

1. Introduction
Virtual Reality (VR) and Augmented Reality (AR)
are becoming increasingly prevailing as one of the nextgeneration computing platforms [3]. Head mounted devices
(HMD) for AR/VR feature multiple cameras to support various computer vision (CV) / machine learning (ML) powered human-computer interaction functions, such as object
classification [40, 61], hand-tracking [19] and SLAM [38].
Due to the recent advances of camera technologies, tiny

multi-layer stacked cameras with AI computing capability arise
[32, 33], as depicted in Figure 1. Because of
Multiple Cameras
the small form factor, these intelligent cameras have highly
constrained resources compared with general purpose mobile or data center grade AI processors. However, each camMulti-layer
era is still capable of performing pre-processingstacked
directly
afcamera
Light-weight
ter image
acquisition,
significantly
reducing
expensive
raw
with
AI
processing
AR/VR processor
image data movement. In a modern HMD system, the
distributed intelligent stacked image sensors and a central
AR/VR processor (aggregator) form the hardware backbone
to realize complex CV/ML functions on device [3, 13, 14].
Within such systems, it’s natural to split the machine
learning workload for an application between the sensors
and the centralized computer (aggregator). As is shown
in Figure 2, for an application that requires multiple layers of convolutional neural networks and fusion of multiple
input sources, the early layers can be distributed to the onsensor processing. The feature fusion and rest of processing are on the aggregator. This way, overall system latency
can be improved by leveraging direct parallel processing on
sensors and reduced sensor-aggregator communication.
The success of distributed computing for DNNs between
sensors and aggregator heavily relies on the network architecture to satisfy the application and hardware system
constraints such as memory, communication bandwidth, latency target and etc.. Prior work [10, 27, 28, 39] searches
network partitions (i.e., the splitting points) for existing
models in either exhaustive or heuristic manners. Some
work [4, 11, 36, 45, 46] manually injects a bottleneck mod-

12559

