Style-Based Global Appearance Flow for Virtual Try-On
Sen He, Yi-Zhe Song, Tao Xiang
Center for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing, University of Surrey
iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence
{sen.he,y.song,t.xiang}@surrey.ac.uk

Person

Garment

Cloth-flow

PF-AFN

Ours

Person

Garment

Cloth-flow

PF-AFN

Ours

Figure 1. Our global appearance flow based try-on model has a clear advantage over existing local flow based SOTA methods such as
Cloth-flow [13] and PF-AFN [10], especially when there are large mis-alignment between reference and garment images (top row), and
difficult poses/occlusions (bottom row).

Abstract
Image-based virtual try-on aims to fit an in-shop garment into a clothed person image. To achieve this, a key step
is garment warping which spatially aligns the target garment with the corresponding body parts in the person image. Prior methods typically adopt a local appearance flow
estimation model. They are thus intrinsically susceptible
to difficult body poses/occlusions and large mis-alignments
between person and garment images (see Fig. 1). To overcome this limitation, a novel global appearance flow estimation model is proposed in this work. For the first time,
a StyleGAN based architecture is adopted for appearance
flow estimation. This enables us to take advantage of a
global style vector to encode a whole-image context to cope
with the aforementioned challenges. To guide the StyleGAN
flow generator to pay more attention to local garment deformation, a flow refinement module is introduced to add
local context. Experiment results on a popular virtual tryon benchmark show that our method achieves new stateof-the-art performance. It is particularly effective in a ‘inthe-wild’ application scenario where the reference image is
full-body resulting in a large mis-alignment with the garment image (Fig. 1 Top). Code is available at: https:
//github.com/SenHe/Flow-Style-VTON .

1. Introduction
The transition from offline in-shop retail to e-commerce
has been accelerated by the recent pandemic caused lock
downs. In 2020, retail e-commerce sales worldwide
amounted to 4.28 trillion US dollars and e-retail revenues
are projected to grow to 5.4 trillion US dollars in 2022.
However, when it comes to fashion, one of key offline
experiences missed by the on-line shoppers is the changing room where a garment item can be tried-on. To reduce the return cost for the online retailers and give shoppers the same offline experience online, image-based virtual try-on (VTON) has been studied intensively recently
[9, 10, 13, 14, 19, 24, 38, 39, 42, 43].
A VTON model aims to fit an in-shop garment into a person image. A key objective of a VTON model is to align the
in-shop garment with the corresponding body parts in the
person image. This is due to the fact that the in-shop garment is usually not spatially aligned with the person image
(see Fig. 1). Without the spatial alignment, directly applying advanced detail-preserving image to image translation
models [18, 30] to fuse the texture in person image and garment image will result in unrealistic effect in the generated
try-on image, especially in the occluded and misaligned regions.

3470

