Multi-View Mesh Reconstruction with Neural Deferred Shading
Markus Worchel1,2 * Rodrigo Diaz1,3 * Weiwen Hu1
Oliver Schreer1
1

Fraunhofer HHI

2

Ingo Feldmann1

Peter Eisert1,4

TU Berlin 3 Queen Mary University of London 4 HU Berlin

Abstract
We propose an analysis-by-synthesis method for fast
multi-view 3D reconstruction of opaque objects with arbitrary materials and illumination. State-of-the-art methods use both neural surface representations and neural rendering. While flexible, neural surface representations are
a significant bottleneck in optimization runtime. Instead,
we represent surfaces as triangle meshes and build a differentiable rendering pipeline around triangle rasterization
and neural shading. The renderer is used in a gradient descent optimization where both a triangle mesh and a neural
shader are jointly optimized to reproduce the multi-view images. We evaluate our method on a public 3D reconstruction dataset and show that it can match the reconstruction
accuracy of traditional baselines and neural approaches
while surpassing them in optimization runtime. Additionally, we investigate the shader and find that it learns an
interpretable representation of appearance, enabling applications such as 3D material editing.

1. Introduction
The reconstruction of 3D objects based on multiple images is a long standing problem in computer vision. Traditionally, it has been approached by matching pixels between images, often based on photo-consistency constraints
or learned features [16, 25]. More recently, analysis-bysynthesis, a technique built around the rendering operation,
has re-emerged as a promising direction for reconstructing
scenes with complex illumination, materials and geometry [34, 36, 37, 39, 41, 65]. At its core, parameters of a virtual scene are optimized so that its rendered appearance
from the input camera views matches the camera images. If
the reconstruction focuses on solid objects, these parameters usually include a representation of the object surface.
In gradient descent-based optimizations, analysis-bysynthesis for surfaces is approached differently depending
* Equal contribution

Figure 1. We reconstruct an object from images by simultaneously deforming a triangle mesh and optimizing a neural shader,
comparing the renderings to the input images.

on the differentiable rendering operation at hand. Methods
that physically model light transport typically build on prior
information such as light and material models [35, 36]. It is
common to represent object surfaces with triangle meshes
and use differentiable path tracers (e.g., [29, 42, 67]) to
jointly optimize the geometry and parameters like the light
position or material diffuse albedo. Due to the inherent priors, these methods do not generalize to arbitrary scenes.
Other methods instead model the rendering operation
with neural networks [41,43,64], i.e., the interaction of material, geometry and light is partially or fully encoded in the
network weights, without any explicit priors. Surfaces are
often represented with implicit functions or more specifically implicit neural representations [33, 41, 44] where the
indicator function is modeled by a multi-layer perceptron
(MLP) or any other form of neural network and optimized
with the rendering networks in an end-to-end fashion.
While fully neural approaches are general, both in terms
of geometry and appearance, current methods exhibit excessive runtime, making them impractical for domains that

6187

