Video Demoiréing with Relation-Based Temporal Consistency

Moiré patterns, appearing as color distortions, severely
degrade image and video qualities when ﬁlming a screen
with digital cameras. Considering the increasing demands
for capturing videos, we study how to remove such undesirable moiré patterns in videos, namely video demoiréing. To
this end, we introduce the ﬁrst hand-held video demoiréing
dataset with a dedicated data collection pipeline to ensure
spatial and temporal alignments of captured data. Further,
a baseline video demoiréing model with implicit feature
space alignment and selective feature aggregation is developed to leverage complementary information from nearby
frames to improve frame-level video demoiréing. More importantly, we propose a relation-based temporal consistency loss to encourage the model to learn temporal consistency priors directly from ground-truth reference videos,
which facilitates producing temporally consistent predictions and effectively maintains frame-level qualities. Extensive experiments manifest the superiority of our model.
Code is available at https://daipengwa.github.
io/VDmoire_ProjectPage/.

1. Introduction
Video is an important source of entertainment, information recording and dissemination through social media.
When photographing a video on a screen, frequency aliasing leads to moiré patterns (Fig. 1) which appear as colored
stripes, severely degrading the visual quality and ﬁdelity of
captured contents. Although many research efforts have
been made to remove such moiré patterns in a single image [14,15,25,31,40,54] and attained notable progress with
deep learning [14, 15, 25, 40, 54], video demoiréing is still
an unexplored research problem as far as we know, which is
yet of great signiﬁcance due to the ubiquity and importance
of video data in our daily life.
This paper investigates the problem of video demoiréing.
Compared to image demoiréing, this task offers more opportunities for high-quality frame-level restoration through
* Corresponding Author

17622

Our results

Abstract

Moire frames

Peng Dai1 Xin Yu1 Lan Ma2 * Baoheng Zhang1 Jia Li3 Wenbo Li4 Jiajun Shen2 Xiaojuan Qi1 *
2
1
The University of Hong Kong
TCL AI Lab
3
4
Sun Yat-sen University
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

t-20

t

t+20

Figure 1. The ﬁrst row shows moiré frames at different times, and
the second row shows our demoiréd results. Please see our videos,
which are clean and temporally consistent.

leveraging auxiliary information from nearby video frames
but is yet more challenging as it requires not only framelevel visual quality but also temporal consistency.
The state-of-the-art image demoiréing method [54] fails
to recover temporally consistent videos due to its inability to access temporal information/supervision. Using existing post-processing methods such as [18, 22]; in doing
so, however, the chance is lost to utilize video information for enhancing frame-level quality. Besides, these postprocessing methods are susceptible to artifacts in demoiréd
results, and complicate the system design, leading to increased computational costs. Another widely adopted strategy is to incorporate a ﬂow-based consistency regularization [21, 37, 51, 52] on the predicted videos during training, which encourages aligned pixels from nearby frames
to have the same pixel intensity values. While simple, such
regularization ignores natural intensity changes of pixels in
videos (Fig. 3 (a)), is prone to errors in estimated optical
ﬂows (Fig. 3 (b) and (c)), and has the potential to propagate artifacts of one frame to nearby frames. Consequently,
the improved temporal consistency tends to sacriﬁce framelevel quality and ﬁdelity, leading to blurry and low-contrast
results (Fig. 7 (a): blurry textures).
In this work, we present a simple video demoiréing
model to leverage multiple video frames and a new relationbased consistency loss to improve video-level temporal consistency without sacriﬁcing frame-level qualities. Besides,
we construct the ﬁrst hand-held video demoiréing dataset to
facilitate further studies on learning-based approaches.
We analyze the characteristics of moiré patterns in

