Cascade Transformers for End-to-End Person Search
Dawei Du1 ,
Rodney LaLonde1 ,
Daniel Davila1 ,
Rui Yu1,2 ,*
Christopher Funk1 ,
Anthony Hoogs1 ,
Brian Clipp1
1
2
Kitware, Inc., NY & NC, USA,
Pennsylvania State University, PA, USA
https://github.com/Kitware/COAT

Abstract
The goal of person search is to localize a target person from a gallery set of scene images, which is extremely
challenging due to large scale variations, pose/viewpoint
changes, and occlusions. In this paper, we propose the Cascade Occluded Attention Transformer (COAT) for end-toend person search. Our three-stage cascade design focuses
on detecting people in the first stage, while later stages simultaneously and progressively refine the representation for
person detection and re-identification. At each stage the
occluded attention transformer applies tighter intersection
over union thresholds, forcing the network to learn coarseto-fine pose/scale invariant features. Meanwhile, we calculate each detection’s occluded attention to differentiate a
person’s tokens from other people or the background. In
this way, we simulate the effect of other objects occluding a person of interest at the token-level. Through comprehensive experiments, we demonstrate the benefits of our
method by achieving state-of-the-art performance on two
benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Person search aims to localize a particular target person
from a gallery set of scene images, which is an extremely
difficult fine-grained recognition and retrieval problem. A
person search system must both generalize to separate people from the background, and specialize to discriminate
identities from each other.
In real-world applications, person search systems must
detect people across a wide variety of image sizes and
re-identify people despite large changes in resolution and
viewpoint. To this end, modern person search methods, either two-step or one-step (i.e., end-to-end), consist of reliable person detection and discriminative feature embedding
learning. Two-step methods [5, 10, 13, 18, 30, 38] conduct
person re-identification (ReID) on cropped person patches
* Rui Yu’s work on this paper was done when he was a summer intern
at Kitware.

Figure 1. Main challenges of person search, e.g., scale variations,
pose/viewpoint change, and occlusion. The boxes with the same
color represent the same ID. For better viewing, we highlight the
small-scale individuals at bottom-right corners.

found by a separate object detector. In contrast, end-to-end
methods [2, 20, 32–34, 39] jointly solve the detection and
ReID sub-problems in a more efficient, multi-task learning
framework. However, as shown in Figure 1, they still suffer
from three main challenges:
• There is a conflict in feature learning between person
detection and ReID. Person detection aims to learn features which generalize across people to distinguish people from the background, while ReID aims to learn features which do not generalize across people but distinguish people from each other. Previous works follow a
“ReID first” [33] or “detection first” [20] principle to give
priority to one subtask over the other. However, it is difficult to balance the importance of two subtasks in different
situations when relying on either strategy.
• Significant scale or pose variations increase identity
recognition difficulty; see Figure 1. Feature pyramids or
deformable convolutions [14, 18, 33] have been used to
solve scale, pose or viewpoint misalignment in feature
learning. However, simple feature fusion strategies may
introduce additional background noise in feature embeddings, resulting in inferior ReID performance.
• Occlusions with background objects or other people make
appearance representations more ambiguous, as shown in
Figure 1. The majority of previous person search meth-

7267

