Inertia-Guided Flow Completion and Style Fusion for Video Inpainting
Kaidong Zhang1
Jingjing Fu2
1
University of Science and Technology of China

Dong Liu1
2
Microsoft Research Asia

richu@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jifu@microsoft.com, dongeliu@ustc.edu.cn

(a) Input

(b) DFGVI [48]

(c) FGVC [8]

(d) Ours

(e) Ground-truth

Figure 1. Comparison between our results and previous flow-guided video inpainting results. Our method enjoys a visually more pleasing
result with respect to the completed flow (bottom row) and the inpainted video frame (top row).

Abstract
Physical objects have inertia, which resists changes in
the velocity and motion direction. Inspired by this, we introduce inertia prior that optical flow, which reflects object motion in a local temporal window, keeps unchanged
in the adjacent preceding or subsequent frame. We propose a flow completion network to align and aggregate
flow features from the consecutive flow sequences based on
the inertia prior. The corrupted flows are completed under the supervision of customized losses on reconstruction,
flow smoothness, and consistent ternary census transform.
The completed flows with high fidelity give rise to significant improvement on the video inpainting quality. Nevertheless, the existing flow-guided cross-frame warping methods fail to consider the lightening and sharpness variation
across video frames, which leads to spatial incoherence after warping from other frames. To alleviate such problem, we propose the Adaptive Style Fusion Network (ASFN),
which utilizes the style information extracted from the valid
regions to guide the gradient refinement in the warped regions. Moreover, we design a data simulation pipeline to reduce the training difficulty of ASFN. Extensive experiments
show the superiority of our method against the state-of-theart methods quantitatively and qualitatively. The project
This work is supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grant 62036005 and Grant 62022075, and by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant WK3490000006. K.
Zhang performed this work at Microsoft Research Asia.

page is at https://github.com/hitachinsk/ISVI.

1. Introduction
Video inpainting aims at filling-in the corrupted regions
across video frames to maintain the visual coherence of the
restored video [2]. It has wide application scenarios, such
as object removal, watermark removal, video retargeting,
etc. Different from image inpainting [15, 31, 32, 49], video
inpainting highly depends on the utilization of the complementary content across video frames to synthesize video
frames with high visual quality.
Over the past two decades, researchers have committed
significant efforts to video inpainting [10, 27, 36, 42, 45].
In recent years, a number of deep learning-based video inpainting methods are proposed, and they can be classified
into two categories. The first category [5, 6, 12, 18, 20, 21,
29, 42, 54, 57] synthesizes the pixels in the video frames directly, while the second category [8, 48] completes the optical flows to guide the warping procedure from the valid
regions to fill in the corrupted regions. We refer these two
categories to pixel-based methods and flow-based methods,
respectively. Compared with pixel-based methods, flowbased methods are capable of maintaining high-frequency
details in the inpainted video frames, because they mainly
rely on warping video frames rather than synthesizing the
pixels. Therefore, flow-based methods could achieve more
visual pleasing results against the pixel-based rivals [38].

5982

