Rethinking Depth Estimation for Multi-View Stereo: A Unified Representation
Rui Peng 1 Rongjie Wang 2 Zhenyu Wang 1 Yawen Lai 1 Ronggang Wang ,1,2
1
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory
ruipeng@stu.pku.edu.cn

rgwang@pkusz.edu.cn

https://github.com/prstrive/UniMVSNet
Abstract
Depth estimation is solved as a regression or classification problem in existing learning-based multi-view stereo
methods. Although these two representations have recently
demonstrated their excellent performance, they still have
apparent shortcomings, e.g., regression methods tend to
overfit due to the indirect learning cost volume, and classification methods cannot directly infer the exact depth due
to its discrete prediction. In this paper, we propose a novel
representation, termed Unification, to unify the advantages
of regression and classification. It can directly constrain the
cost volume like classification methods, but also realize the
sub-pixel depth prediction like regression methods. To excavate the potential of unification, we design a new loss function named Unified Focal Loss, which is more uniform and
reasonable to combat the challenge of sample imbalance.
Combining these two unburdened modules, we present a
coarse-to-fine framework, that we call UniMVSNet. The
results of ranking first on both DTU and Tanks and Temples
benchmarks verify that our model not only performs the best
but also has the best generalization ability.

1. Introduction
Multi-view stereo (MVS) is a vital branch to extract geometry from photographs, which takes stereo correspondence from multiple images as the main cue to reconstruct
dense 3D representations. Although traditional methods
[2, 7, 25, 26] have achieved excellent performance after occupying researchers for decades, more and more learningbased approaches [4, 5, 9, 34–36] are proposed to promote
the effectiveness of MVS due to their more powerful representation capability in low-texture regions, reflections, etc.
Concretely, they infer the depth for each view from the 3D
cost volume, which is constructed from the warped feature
according to a set of predefined depth hypotheses. Compared with hand-crafted similarity metrics in traditional
methods, the 3D cost volume can capture more discriminative features to achieve more robust matching. Without loss
of integrity, existing learning-based methods can be divided

into two categories: Regression and Classification.
Regression is the most primitive and straightforward implementation of the learning-based MVS method. It’s a
group of approaches [5,9,20,34,35,39] to regress the depth
from the 3D cost volume through Soft-argmin, which softly
weighting each depth hypothesis. More specifically, the
model expects to regress greater weight for the depth hypothesis with a small cost. Theoretically, it can achieve the
sub-pixel estimation of depth by weighted summation of
discrete depth hypotheses. Nevertheless, the model needs
to learn a complex combination of weights under indirect
constraints performed on the weighted depth but not on the
weight combination, which is non-trivial and tends to overfit. You can imagine that there are many weight combinations for a set of depth hypotheses that can be weighted and
summed to the same depth, and this ambiguity also implicitly increases the difficulty of the model convergence.
Classification is proposed in R-MVSNet [36] to infer
the optimal depth hypothesis. Different from the weight estimation in regression, classification methods [10, 33, 36]
predict the probability of each depth hypothesis from the
3D cost volume and take the depth hypothesis with the
maximum probability as the final estimation. Obviously,
these methods cannot infer the exact depth directly from
the model like regression methods. However, classification methods directly constrain the cost volume through the
cross-entropy loss executed on the regularized probability
volume, which is the essence of ensuring the robustness of
MVS. Moreover, the estimated probability distribution can
directly reflect the confidence, which is difficult to derive
from the weight combination intuitively.
In this paper, we seek to unify the advantages of regression and classification, that is, we hope that the model can
accurately predict the depth while maintaining robustness.
There is a fact that the depth hypothesis close to the groundtruth has more potential knowledge, while that of other remaining hypotheses is limited or even harmful due to the
wrong induction of multimodal [42]. Motivated by this, we
present that estimating the weights for all depth hypotheses is redundant, and the model only needs to do regression on the optimal depth hypothesis that the representative depth interval (referring to the upper area until the next

8645

