Semi-Supervised Few-shot Learning via Multi-Factor Clustering
Jie Ling1 ,* Lei Liao1 ,* Meng Yang1,2†, Jia Shuai1
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing (SYSU), Ministry of Education
{lingj8, liaolei3, shuaij}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,yangm6@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
The scarcity of labeled data and the problem of model
overfitting have been the challenges in few-shot learning.
Recently, semi-supervised few-shot learning has been developed to obtain pseudo-labels of unlabeled samples for
expanding the support set. However, the relationship between unlabeled and labeled data is not well exploited
in generating pseudo labels, the noise of which will directly harm the model learning. In this paper, we propose a Clustering-based semi-supervised Few-Shot Learning (cluster-FSL) method to solve the above problems in
image classification. By using multi-factor collaborative
representation, a novel Multi-Factor Clustering (MFC) is
designed to fuse the information of few-shot data distribution, which can generate soft and hard pseudo-labels for
unlabeled samples based on labeled data. And we exploit
the pseudo labels of unlabeled samples by MFC to expand
the support set for obtaining more distribution information. Furthermore, robust data augmentation is used for
support set in the fine-tuning phase to increase the labeled
samples’ diversity. We verified the validity of the clusterFSL by comparing it with other few-shot learning methods on three popular benchmark datasets, miniImageNet,
tieredImageNet, and CUB-200-2011. The ablation experiments further demonstrate that our MFC can effectively
fuse distribution information of labeled samples and provide high-quality pseudo-labels. Our code is available at:
https://gitlab.com/smartllvlab/cluster-fsl

1. Introduction
Deep learning methods based on neural networks [34]
have made great breakthroughs and been widely used in the
field of computer vision [15] [32] [23]. Unfortunately, deep
learning models require a massive amount of labeled data
to learn huge-scale parameters. Moreover, the scenes in
real life are complex and diverse. For instance, in some
* Equal contribution, † Corresponding author.

practical problems, there exist objects that are rarely observed, such as the faces of the suspects, rare animal photos,
and so on, which makes it difficult to collect labeled data.
With the inspiration of the human vision system, much attention has been paid to the development of few-shot learning [29] [38] [27] [7], which can release the strong demand
for data used for training deep models to some extent.
The goal of few-shot learning is to learn a new concept
or behavior from a very small number of samples based
on experience. Due to the particularity of few-shot learning, how to alleviate the overfitting problem that the model
hardly fits the distribution of the categories caused by the
scarcity of samples, has always been the focus and difficulty
of few-shot learning. With the development of few-shot
learning, methods have been proposed to solve the above
difficulty from three perspectives: model, data, and learning algorithm. Model-based methods [28] [39] aim to learn
the interactive information between samples by designing
a model that adapts to the few-shot case. As for data, researchers have explored various methods to enrich training
data, such as data augmentation [28] [1] [48], which preprocesses data through flipping, cropping, translation, rotation,
and zooming. However, data augmentation requires expensive labor costs and relies heavily on domain knowledge,
resulting in some data augmentation methods being specific
to datasets. Few-shot image classification based on learning methods [45] [14] [38] aim to improve the generalization of the model by using meta-learning or transfer learning strategy, which learns meta-knowledge or transferrable
knowledge shared in different subtasks. However, the performance of few-shot learning is still far from satisfactory
because the small set of labeled data cannot provide rich
and essential information for recent model learning.
When the task has few-shot labeled samples and additional unlabeled data for new categories, a straightforward
approach is to utilize the unlabeled samples to alleviate
the scarcity of labeled samples. Unlabeled data has been
effectively explored by semi-supervised learning methods,
including a combination of weak data augmentation and
strong augmentation [37], consistent regularization [16],

14564

