Both Style and Fog Matter:
Cumulative Domain Adaptation for Semantic Foggy Scene Understanding
Xianzheng Ma1,2 , Zhixiang Wang3,4 , Yacheng Zhan1 , Yinqiang Zheng3 , Zheng Wang1,2 *
Dengxin Dai5 , Chia-Wen Lin6
1

National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial Intelligence, School of
Computer Science, Wuhan University 2 Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering
3
The University of Tokyo 4 RIISE 5 MPI for Informatics 6 National Tsing Hua University

dual gap (style+fog)

Abstract
Although considerable progress has been made in semantic scene understanding under clear weather, it is still
a tough problem under adverse weather conditions, such as
dense fog, due to the uncertainty caused by imperfect observations. Besides, difficulties in collecting and labeling
foggy images hinder the progress of this field. Considering
the success in semantic scene understanding under clear
weather, we think it is reasonable to transfer knowledge
learned from clear images to the foggy domain. As such,
the problem becomes to bridge the domain gap between
clear images and foggy images. Unlike previous methods
that mainly focus on closing the domain gap caused by fog
— defogging the foggy images or fogging the clear images,
we propose to alleviate the domain gap by considering fog
influence and style variation simultaneously. The motivation is based on our finding that the style-related gap and
the fog-related gap can be divided and closed respectively,
by adding an intermediate domain. Thus, we propose a new
pipeline to cumulatively adapt style, fog and the dual-factor
(style and fog). Specifically, we devise a unified framework
to disentangle the style factor and the fog factor separately,
and then the dual-factor from images in different domains.
Furthermore, we collaborate the disentanglement of three
factors with a novel cumulative loss to thoroughly disentangle these three factors. Our method achieves the state-ofthe-art performance on three benchmarks and shows generalization ability in rainy and snowy scenes.

1. Introduction
Semantic foggy scene understanding (SFSU) is important for autonomous driving [9, 14, 18, 27, 28, 40]. Although
great progress has been made on semantic understanding
* Corresponding Author

label

s: Clear Cityscapes
style gap

label

m: Clear Zurich

label

t: Foggy Zurich
fog gap

Figure 1. The problem and our main idea. Our goal is to transfer the knowledge from a labeled domain s to an unlabeled domain t. However, direct knowledge transfer is challenging due to
the mixed dual-factor gap (orange arrow). By adding an intermediate domain m as a bridge, we can decompose the mixed dualfactor gap into two single-factor gaps: the style gap and the fog
gap. Since images in both domains s and m are captured in clear
scenes, we assume there is only the style gap between domains
s and m (blue arrow). Likewise, images in both domains m and
t are collected in the same city (Zurich), we assume there exists
only the fog gap between them (green arrow).

of clear scenes, SFSU tends to have unsatisfactory performance due to visibility degradation caused by fog [22, 31].
Besides, unlike the abundant data and annotation under
clear scenes, the lack of data and annotation under dense fog
weather further complicates this problem. Therefore, handling the challenging SFSU problem often requires transferring the segmentation knowledge learned from labeled
clear images to the unlabeled foggy images.
Intuitively, we may tackle this problem by closing the
domain gap between clear images and foggy images with
state-of-the-art domain adaptation methods. However, these
methods mainly align domains in an adversarial [4,6,17,19,
33–37, 41] or a self-training [2, 7, 11, 13, 21, 32, 39] manner,
regardless of how the domain gap is caused. Besides, as
has been validated by [27], they fail to address the SFSU
problem well due to the large domain gap.
Consequently, the attention of SFSU has been focused
on the fog factor, which is regarded as the dominating cause
of the domain gap in the SFSU problem. One solution is to

18922

