Volumetric Bundle Adjustment for Online Photorealistic Scene Capture
Ronald Clark
Imperial College London
ronald.clark@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Efficient photorealistic scene capture is a challenging
task. Current online reconstruction systems can operate
very efficiently, but images generated from the models captured by these systems are often not photorealistic. Recent
approaches based on neural volume rendering can render
novel views at high fidelity, but they often require a long
time to train, making them impractical for applications that
require real-time scene capture. In this paper, we propose
a system that can reconstruct photorealistic models of complex scenes in an efficient manner. Our system processes
images online, i.e. it can obtain a good quality estimate
of both the scene geometry and appearance at roughly the
same rate the video is captured. To achieve the efficiency,
we propose a hierarchical feature volume using VDB grids.
This representation is memory efficient and allows for fast
querying of the scene information. Secondly, we introduce a
novel optimization technique that improves the efficiency of
the bundle adjustment which allows our system to converge
to the target camera poses and scene geometry much faster.
Experiments on real-world scenes show that our method
outperforms existing systems in terms of efficiency and capture quality. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
method that can achieve online photorealistic scene capture.

1. Introduction
Many applications require accurate online estimation
of the geometry and appearance of 3D scenes. In augmented reality, for example, accurate geometry is necessary
for proper handling of occlusions and physics interactions,
while accurate appearance is necessary for rendering convincing novel views.
There are two main paradigms for achieving this goal.
The first paradigm consists of visual simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) systems which are able to
construct a dense model of a scene. These methods typically obtain depth maps either from a depth sensor, in
the case of RGB-D methods [13, 15], or by estimating

nVDB
volume

Input sequence

Novel
view

...
Camera
trajectory

Online reconstruction as images arrive

Figure 1. Our method in operation. We present an approach
for online scene capture from a stream of monocular RGB images. The scene is represented using a neural volumetric dynamic
B+Tree (nVDB) which stores a hierarchy of spatial features. The
dynamic topology of the tree allows it to grow as the camera explores the scene. The camera and the volume parameters are optimized online using a novel volumetric bundle adjustment method
(VBA). This allows our method to efficiently capture scene appearance and geometry. See the supplementary video for an online
demo.

depth keyframes from multiple RGB images, in the case
of monocular SLAM systems [11, 11, 14, 17]. These depth
measurements are then fused into a consistent model in the
form of a voxel grid representing a signed distance function
(SDF) to surfaces which encodes the geometry of the scene.
The colors from the RGB images are projected to the volume to model the appearance. These approaches are very
efficient and operate in real time1 . However, their main disadvantage is that they make simplified assumptions about
scene appearance and can only reconstruct solid surfaces.
1 For the purposes of this paper we define real time to mean the process-

ing time for the reconstruction is comparable to the time taken to capture
the image sequence. We define online to mean allowing for incremental
processing as images arrive from the sensor.

6124

