Ray Priors through Reprojection: Improving Neural Radiance Fields for Novel
View Extrapolation
Jian Zhang1 * Yuanqing Zhang1,2 * Huan Fu1² Xiaowei Zhou2
Bowen Cai1
1
1
1
Jinchi Huang
Rongfei Jia
Binqiang Zhao
Xing Tang1
1

2

Tao Technology Department, Alibaba Group
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [22] have emerged as a
potent paradigm for representing scenes and synthesizing
photo-realistic images. A main limitation of conventional
NeRFs is that they often fail to produce high-quality renderings under novel viewpoints that are significantly different
from the training viewpoints. In this paper, instead of exploiting few-shot image synthesis, we study the novel view
extrapolation setting that (1) the training images can well
describe an object, and (2) there is a notable discrepancy
between the training and test viewpoints’ distributions. We
present RapNeRF (RAy Priors) as a solution. Our insight
is that the inherent appearances of a 3D surface’s arbitrary
visible projections should be consistent. We thus propose
a random ray casting policy that allows training unseen
views using seen views. Furthermore, we show that a ray
atlas pre-computed from the observed rays’ viewing directions could further enhance the rendering quality for extrapolated views. A main limitation is that RapNeRF would
remove the strong view-dependent effects because it leverages the multi-view consistency property.

1. Introduction
A primary target of the computer graphics community
is to enable photo-realistic rendering of virtual worlds efficiently. Physics-inspired graphics techniques well approach
real-time rendering and photo-realistic imagery creation but
suffer from expensive manual content generations of geometries, materials, and other aspects of scenes. The past
several years have seen an explosion of interest in neural rendering [17, 18, 21, 38, 39, 47], which models physical knowledge in deep networks to address reconstruction
and rendering in a single formulation for controllable image
* These authors contribute equally to this work.
² Corresponding author.

generation.
Leveraging neural volume rendering, a recent advance
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF [22]) learn to represent
3D scenes from images and impressively support photorealistic image synthesis. The visual quality of the generated images is even competitive with ones produced by
physically-based rendering pipelines. One of NeRF’s main
limitations is that it requires many images to reconstruct a
scene’s geometry and texture details. Thereby, several subsequent works focus on investigating few-shot or unsupervised radiance fields reconstruction [4,11,52]. These works
assume that we only observe several images of a scene. In
an extreme setting, some geometries and appearances of the
scene are never observed.
In this paper, we investigate NeRF from an object reconstruction perspective like [9, 33, 51], and restrict our
focus on solid and non-transparent objects. We find that,
even with enough images that can well describe an object,
conventional NeRFs often fail to produce high-quality renderings for novel viewpoints that are significantly different
from the training viewpoints. This observation motivates us
to study the novel view extrapolation setting as explained in
Figure 1. We take inspiration from the insight that the inherent appearances of a 3D surface’s arbitrary visible projections should be consistent. It has been well studied in unsupervised 3D object reconstruction and texture optimization
works [10, 15, 41, 55]. We dig into the multi-view consistency property on NeRF’s formulation and present RapNeRF as a solution.
In specific, we propose a random ray casting (RRC) policy that randomly generates rays within a cone for each
training ray in an online fashion. This training strategy is
simple yet effective in creating supervisions for potential
unseen views using seen views. RRC relies on the target objects’ rough 3D meshes (R3DMs), which can be extracted
from their pre-trained NeRFs. Furthermore, we prudently
rethink the tradeoff between strong view-dependent effects

18376

