The DEVIL is in the Details:
A Diagnostic Evaluation Benchmark for Video Inpainting
Ryan Szeto and Jason J. Corso
University of Michigan
{szetor, jjcorso}@umich.edu

Abstract
Quantitative evaluation has increased dramatically
among recent video inpainting work, but the video and mask
content used to gauge performance has received relatively
little attention. Although attributes such as camera and
background scene motion inherently change the difficulty
of the task and affect methods differently, existing evaluation schemes fail to control for them, thereby providing
minimal insight into inpainting failure modes. To address
this gap, we propose the Diagnostic Evaluation of Video
Inpainting on Landscapes (DEVIL) benchmark, which consists of two contributions: (i) a novel dataset of videos and
masks labeled according to several key inpainting failure
modes, and (ii) an evaluation scheme that samples slices
of the dataset characterized by a fixed content attribute,
and scores performance on each slice according to reconstruction, realism, and temporal consistency quality. By revealing systematic changes in performance induced by particular characteristics of the input content, our challenging benchmark enables more insightful analysis into video
inpainting methods and serves as an invaluable diagnostic tool for the field. Our code and data are available at
github.com/MichiganCOG/devil.

1. Introduction
Video inpainting, i.e., the task of filling in missing pixels in a video with plausible values, pushes the boundaries
of modern video editing techniques and enables remarkable
applications for film and social media such as watermark
and foreground object removal [1, 29]. Compared to image
inpainting, video inpainting is more challenging due to the
additional temporal dimension, which not only increases the
complexity of the solution space, but also places additional
constraints on what constitutes a high-quality prediction—
in particular, predictions must be coherent in terms of both
spatial structure and motion. Despite the difficulty of the
task, modern results have become quite compelling thanks
to the increasing amount of attention that the problem has

received as of late [4, 9, 16, 20, 25, 28, 30, 31].
Quantitative evaluation has increased dramatically
among recent video inpainting work; however, existing
evaluation schemes underemphasize the importance of the
contents of the videos and masks used to gauge performance. Typically, video inpainting is evaluated as a reconstruction problem: performance is quantified by masking
out arbitrary regions from the video (i.e., “corrupting” it)
and scoring the model’s ability to recover the masked-out
values [4, 18, 28]. However, the difficulty of reconstruction
depends on the mask’s shape and motion, as well as the content present in the “uncorrupted” video. For example, given
a static mask, it is harder to inpaint a video captured by a
fixed camera than one captured by a moving camera. In the
former case, the region beneath the mask is never visible, so
the model effectively needs to “hallucinate” its appearance;
in the latter case, the model could transfer appearance information from other frames, a strategy that lies at the heart of
many video inpainting approaches [14, 18, 20, 26].
The difficulty of video inpainting is inherently tied to the
content of the videos and masks being inpainted; with this
principle in mind, we push for more emphasis on contentinformed diagnostic evaluation, which can help identify the
strengths and weaknesses of modern inpainting methods
and improve ablative analysis. To date, the videos used for
evaluation have been underappreciated in this regard, having been sourced from datasets for other tasks (e.g., facial
analysis [22, 23] and object localization [21, 27]) rather than
selected to represent important inpainting scenarios. In particular, they contain biases that are essential for the original
task, but hinder fine-grained analysis for video inpainting.
For example, object localization videos consistently include
prominent, moving foreground objects; as a result, standard inpainting evaluation schemes inevitably underrepresent performance on foreground-free videos. Furthermore,
other types of motion, e.g., camera and background scene
motion, noticeably impact video inpainting performance,
but are not controlled for in standard datasets.
In this work, we propose the Diagnostic Evaluation of
Video Inpainting on Landscapes (DEVIL) benchmark. It

21054

