Text2Pos: Text-to-Point-Cloud Cross-Modal Localization
Manuel Kolmet Qunjie Zhou Aljoša Ošep Laura Leal-Taixé
Technical University of Munich, Germany
{manuel.kolmet, qunjie.zhou, aljosa.osep, leal.taixe}@tum.de
text2pos.github.io

“The pose is right of the gray road.
The pose is below the dark-green
parking.
The pose is right of a green
sidewalk.”

Figure 1. We propose Text2Pos for city-scale position localization based on textual descriptions. Given a point cloud that represents our
surroundings and a query position description, Text2Pos provides the most-likely estimate of the described position within that map.

Abstract
Natural language-based communication with mobile devices and home appliances is becoming increasingly popular and has the potential to become natural for communicating with mobile robots in the future. Towards this goal,
we investigate cross-modal text-to-point-cloud localization
that will allow us to specify, for example, a vehicle pickup or goods delivery location. In particular, we propose
Text2Pos, a cross-modal localization module that learns to
align textual descriptions with localization cues in a coarseto-fine manner. Given a point cloud of the environment,
Text2Pos locates a position that is specified via a natural
language-based description of the immediate surroundings.
To train Text2Pos and study its performance, we construct
KITTI360Pose, the first dataset for this task based on the recently introduced KITTI360 dataset. Our experiments show
that we can localize 65% of textual queries within 15m distance to query locations for top-10 retrieved locations. This
is a starting point that we hope will spark future developments towards language-based navigation.
“Alexa, hand me over my special delivery at the
sidewalk in front of the yellow building next to the
blue bus stop.”
Authors of this paper, the future. Hopefully.

1. Introduction
Future mobile robots, such as autonomous vehicles and
delivery drones, will need to cooperate with humans to coordinate actions and plan their trajectories. In this paper we
tackle large scale position localization of the target position
based on natural-language-based position descriptions, as
needed for, e.g., for goods delivery or for vehicle pickup.
For self-localization within a map, mobile agents rely
on visual localization methods [4, 22, 35, 41, 56]. These
methods match observed images either to a database of geotagged images [4, 16, 45] or point-cloud-based maps [33,
35, 39], often obtained using structure-from-motion techniques [38, 40]. By contrast, in this paper, we study
language-based localization of any location, which, importantly, does not require the user to be physically present at
the target location. This would, for example, allow us to
explain the pick-up position or delivery location through
text/voice to a robo-taxi via natural language based communication, that is preferable to humans. Our method can
also be seen as complementary to GPS localization methods, e.g., when a GPS tag is too coarse, unavailable, or
language-based communication is more convenient.
As the main contribution of this paper, we formalize
the task of language-based localization and provide the first
dataset and methods for this task. In this problem setting,
we assume an intelligent agent is given access to the map of

6687

