LiT : Zero-Shot Transfer with Locked-image text Tuning
Xiaohua Zhai?† Xiao Wang? Basil Mustafa? Andreas Steiner? Daniel Keysers Alexander Kolesnikov Lucas Beyer?†

Google Research, Brain Team, Zürich
Design choice comparison
(Data: yfcc100m subset)

Abstract

1. Introduction
Transfer learning [44] has been a successful paradigm in
computer vision [32, 33, 42]. Zero-shot learning [35, 36, 65]
is an alternative approach aiming to develop models that can
handle a new task without task-specific data or adaptation
protocols. Recently it was demonstrated that web-sourced
paired image-text data can be used to pre-train strong models for zero-shot transfer [30, 45]. Zero-shot transfer differs from classical zero-shot learning in that the transfer
setup may see relevant supervised information during pretraining; it is zero-shot insofar as no supervised examples
are used during the transfer protocol. GPT-3 [3] explored a
similar zero-shot transfer setup using model prompting via
natural language.
In [30, 45] authors propose a contrastive learning framework where an image model (or image tower) is trained simultaneously with a text model (or text tower). Both towers
are trained to minimize a contrastive loss, which encourages
? equal technical contribution, † equal advising

ImageNet 0-shot accuracy

This paper presents contrastive-tuning, a simple method
employing contrastive training to align image and text models while still taking advantage of their pre-training. In our
empirical study we find that locked pre-trained image models with unlocked text models work best. We call this instance of contrastive-tuning “Locked-image Tuning” (LiT),
which just teaches a text model to read out good representations from a pre-trained image model for new tasks.
A LiT model gains the capability of zero-shot transfer to
new vision tasks, such as image classification or retrieval.
The proposed LiT is widely applicable; it works reliably
with multiple pre-training methods (supervised and unsupervised) and across diverse architectures (ResNet, Vision
Transformers and MLP-Mixer) using three different imagetext datasets. With the transformer-based pre-trained ViTg/14 model, the LiT model achieves 84.5% zero-shot transfer accuracy on the ImageNet test set, and 81.1% on the
challenging out-of-distribution ObjectNet test set.

LiT

60

Fine-tuned

50

From-scratch

40

CLIP

30
0

250

500

SOTA 0-shot comparison
(Data: private)

90

Supervised fine-tuning
LiT

85
80

ALIGN

CLIP
750

1000

Image-text pairs seen [M]

75

0

5

10

15

Image-text pairs seen [B]

20

Figure 1. Comparison to the previous SOTA methods. Left: results on public YFCC100m subset, with from-scratch, fine-tuned
from a pre-trained image model, and LiT with a pre-trained image
model. The proposed LiT improves over 30% ImageNet zero-shot
transfer accuracy on YFCC100m subset. Right: results on privately gathered data, LiT halves the gap between previous fromscratch methods CLIP [45], ALIGN [30] and supervised finetuning [12, 68].

representations of paired images and texts to be similar, and
representations of non-paired images and texts to be dissimilar. At test time, the resulting model can be used for
zero-shot image classification by comparing the image embedding with embeddings of textual class descriptions.
In this paper, we adopt a contrastive learning framework and propose a more data- and compute-efficient strategy named contrastive-tuning. The key idea is to tune the
text tower using image-text data, while using a pre-trained,
strong image model as the image tower. During training,
both towers’ weights can be locked or unlocked, leading
to different design choices that are illustrated in Figure 2.
Specifically, we find that locking the image tower works
best, as shown in Figure 1. We call this specific instance
of contrastive-tuning “Locked-image Tuning” (LiT), which
just teaches a text model to read out suitable representations
from a pre-trained image model. LiT achieves better results
compared with the from-scratch CLIP [45] or ALIGN [30]
models. With the pre-trained model ViT-g/14 [68], LiT
achieves 84.5% zero-shot transfer accuracy on ImageNet,
halving the gap between previous best zero-shot transfer re-

18123

