Non-isotropy Regularization for Proxy-based Deep Metric Learning
Karsten Roth1 , Oriol Vinyals2 , Zeynep Akata1,3
1
University of Tübingen, 2 DeepMind, 3 MPI for Intelligent Systems

Abstract
Deep Metric Learning (DML) aims to learn representation spaces on which semantic relations can simply be
expressed through predefined distance metrics. Best performing approaches commonly leverage class proxies as
sample stand-ins for better convergence and generalization.
However, these proxy-methods solely optimize for sampleproxy distances. Given the inherent non-bijectiveness of
used distance functions, this can induce locally isotropic
sample distributions, leading to crucial semantic context
being missed due to difficulties resolving local structures
and intraclass relations between samples. To alleviate this
problem, we propose non-isotropy regularization (NIR) for
proxy-based Deep Metric Learning. By leveraging Normalizing Flows, we enforce unique translatability of samples from their respective class proxies. This allows us
to explicitly induce a non-isotropic distribution of samples
around a proxy to optimize for. In doing so, we equip proxybased objectives to better learn local structures. Extensive experiments highlight consistent generalization benefits of NIR while achieving competitive and state-of-theart performance on the standard benchmarks CUB2002011, Cars196 and Stanford Online Products. In addition, we find the superior convergence properties of proxybased methods to still be retained or even improved, making
NIR very attractive for practical usage. Code available at
github.com/ExplainableML/NonIsotropicProxyDML.

1. Introduction
Visual similarity plays a crucial role for applications in
image & video retrieval and clustering [4, 52, 63], face reidentification [7, 19, 32] or general supervised [22] and unsupervised [5, 18] contrastive representation learning. A
majority of approaches used in these fields employ or can
be derived from Deep Metric Learning (DML). DML aims
to learn highly nonlinear distance metrics parametrized by
deep networks. These networks span a representation space
in which semantic relations between images are expressed
as distances between respective representations. In the field
of DML, methods utilizing proxies have shown to provide

Figure 1. Proxy-based Deep Metric Learning methods optimize
for non-bijective similarity measures between proxies (N) and
sample representation (◦), which can introduce local isotropy
around proxies, impeding local structures and non-discriminative
features to be learned. We propose NIR to explicitly resolve this.

among the most consistent and highest performances in addition to fast convergence [23, 38, 56]. While other methods introduce ranking tasks over samples for the network
to solve, proxy-based methods require the network to contrast samples against a proxy representation, commonly approximating generic class prototypes. Their utilization addresses sampling complexity issues [16, 47, 52, 63] inherent
to purely sample-based approaches, resulting in improved
convergence and benchmark performance.
However, there is no free lunch. Relying on sampleproxy relations, relations between samples within a class
can not be explicitly captured. This is exacerbated by
proxy-based objectives optimizing for distances between
samples and proxies using non-bijective distance functions.
This means, for a particular proxy, that alignment to a sample is non-unique - as long as the angle between sample
and proxy is retained, i.e. samples being aligned isotropically around a proxy (see Fig. 1), their distances and respective loss remain the same. This means that samples lie
on a hypersphere centered around a proxy with same distance and thus incurring the same training loss. This incorporates an undesired prior over sample-proxy distributions
which doesn’t allow local structures to be resolved well.
By incorporating multiple classes and proxies (which is automatically done when applying proxy-based losses such
as [23, 38, 43, 56] to training data with multiple classes),
this is extended to a mixture of sample distributions around
proxies. While this offers an implicit workaround to ad-

7420

