RepMLPNet: Hierarchical Vision MLP with Re-parameterized Locality
Xiaohan Ding 1 * Honghao Chen 2 Xiangyu Zhang 3 Jungong Han 4 Guiguang Ding 1†
1
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist);
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
MEGVII Technology
4
Computer Science Department, Aberystwyth University, SY23 3FL, UK
dxh17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

chenhonghao2021@ia.ac.cn

jungonghan77@gmail.com

Abstract
Compared to convolutional layers, fully-connected (FC)
layers are better at modeling the long-range dependencies
but worse at capturing the local patterns, hence usually less
favored for image recognition. In this paper, we propose a
methodology, Locality Injection, to incorporate local priors
into an FC layer via merging the trained parameters of a
parallel conv kernel into the FC kernel. Locality Injection
can be viewed as a novel Structural Re-parameterization
method since it equivalently converts the structures via
transforming the parameters. Based on that, we propose a
multi-layer-perceptron (MLP) block named RepMLP Block,
which uses three FC layers to extract features, and a novel
architecture named RepMLPNet. The hierarchical design
distinguishes RepMLPNet from the other concurrently proposed vision MLPs. As it produces feature maps of different levels, it qualifies as a backbone model for downstream
tasks like semantic segmentation. Our results reveal that
1) Locality Injection is a general methodology for MLP
models; 2) RepMLPNet has favorable accuracy-efficiency
trade-off compared to the other MLPs; 3) RepMLPNet is
the first MLP that seamlessly transfer to Cityscapes semantic segmentation. The code and models are available at
https://github.com/DingXiaoH/RepMLP.

1. Introduction
The locality of images (i.e., a pixel is more related to
its neighbors than the distant pixels) makes Convolutional
* This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of

China (Nos.61925107, U1936202, 62021002) and the Beijing Academy
of Artificial Intelligence (BAAI). This work is done during Xiaohan Ding
and Honghao Chen’s internship at MEGVII Technology.
† Corresponding author.

zhangxiangyu@megvii.com

dinggg@tsinghua.edu.cn

Neural Network (CNN) successful in image recognition, as
a conv layer only processes a local neighborhood. In this
paper, we refer to this inductive bias as the local prior.
Besides, we also desire the ability to build up long-range
dependencies, which is referred to as the global capacity
in this paper. Traditional CNNs model the long-range dependencies by deep stacks of conv layers [40]. However,
repeating local operations may cause optimization difficulties [1, 20, 40]. Some prior works enhance the global capacity with self-attention-based modules [18,39,40], which
have no local prior. For example, due to the lack of local prior, ViT [18] requires an enormous amount of training
data (3 × 108 images in JFT-300M) to converge. On the
other hand, a fully-connected (FC) layer can also directly
model the dependencies between any two input points,
which is as simple as flattening the feature map as a vector, linearly mapping it into another vector, and reshaping the resultant vector back into a feature map. However, this process has no locality either. Without such
an important inductive bias, the concurrently proposed
MLPs [26, 36, 37, 43] usually demand a huge amount of
training data (e.g., JFT-300M), more training epochs (300
or 400 ImageNet [8] epochs) or special training techniques
(e.g., a DeiT-style distillation method [37, 38]) to learn the
inductive bias from scratch. Otherwise, they may not reach
a comparable level of performance with traditional CNNs.
We desire an MLP model that is 1) friendly to small-data,
2) trainable with ordinary training methods, and 3) effective
in visual recognition. To this end, we make contributions in
three aspects: methodology, component and architecture.
Methodology We propose a novel methodology, Locality
Injection, to provide an FC layer with what it demands
for effective visual understanding: the locality. Specifically, we place one or more conv layers parallel to the FC
and add up their outputs. Though the FC simply views

578

