Generative Cooperative Learning for Unsupervised Video Anomaly Detection
M. Zaigham Zaheer1,2,3,5 , Arif Mahmood4 , M. Haris Khan5 , Mattia Segu3 , Fisher Yu3 , Seung-Ik Lee1,2 *
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute1 , Univ. of Science and Technology2 , ETH
Zurich3 , Information Technology Univ. Punjab4 , Mohamed bin Zayed Univ. of Artiﬁcial Intelligence5
Normal Frame

Abstract
Video anomaly detection is well investigated in weaklysupervised and one-class classiﬁcation (OCC) settings.
However, unsupervised video anomaly detection methods
are quite sparse, likely because anomalies are less frequent
in occurrence and usually not well-deﬁned, which when
coupled with the absence of ground truth supervision, could
adversely affect the performance of the learning algorithms.
This problem is challenging yet rewarding as it can completely eradicate the costs of obtaining laborious annotations and enable such systems to be deployed without human intervention. To this end, we propose a novel unsupervised Generative Cooperative Learning (GCL) approach
for video anomaly detection that exploits the low frequency
of anomalies towards building a cross-supervision between
a generator and a discriminator. In essence, both networks
get trained in a cooperative fashion, thereby allowing unsupervised learning. We conduct extensive experiments on two
large-scale video anomaly detection datasets, UCF crime
and ShanghaiTech. Consistent improvement over the existing state-of-the-art unsupervised and OCC methods corroborate the effectiveness of our approach.

1. Introduction
In the real world, learning-based anomaly detection tasks
are extremely challenging mainly because of the rare occurrence of such events. The challenge further exacerbates
owing to the unconstrained nature of these events. Obtaining sufﬁcient anomaly examples is thus quite cumbersome,
while one may safely assume that an exhaustive set, particularly required for training fully-supervised models, will
never be collected. To make learning tractable, anomalies
have often been attributed as signiﬁcant deviations from
the normal data. Therefore, a popular approach towards
anomaly detection is to train a one-class classiﬁer which
learns the dominant data representations using only normal
training examples [14,17,25,28,41,42,45,47,60,64,66,72]
* Corresponding Author. ∗∗ Part of this work was done while Zaigham
was a visiting researcher at ETH Zurich and an intern at MBZUAI.

...

Anomalous Frame A Anomalous Video
...

...

Unlabeled Video
...

A

(a) Fully Supervised

(b) One-class

(c) Weakly-supervised

(d) Unsupervised

Figure 1. Different training modes for video anomaly detection:
(a) Fully supervised mode requires frame-level normal/abnormal
annotations in the training data. (b) One-Class Classiﬁcation
(OCC) requires only normal training data. (c) Weakly supervised
mode requires video-level normal/abnormal annotations. (d) Unsupervised mode requires no training data annotations.

(Fig. 1). A noticeable drawback of one-class classiﬁcation (OCC) methods is the limited availability of the normal training data, not capturing all normalcy variations [9].
In addition, the OCC approaches are usually unsuitable for
complex problems with diverse multiple classes and a wide
range of dynamic situations often found in video surveillance. In such cases, an unseen normal activity may deviate
signiﬁcantly from the learned normal representations to be
predicted as anomalous, resulting in false alarms [14, 67].
Recently, weakly supervised anomaly detection methods
have gained signiﬁcant popularity [24,26,34,46,56,63] that
reduce the cost of obtaining manual ﬁne-grained annotations by employing video-level labels [50, 65, 67, 69, 74].
Speciﬁcally, a video is labeled as anomalous if some of its
contents are anomalous and normal if all of its contents are
normal, requiring manual inspection of the full videos. Although such annotations are relatively cost-effective, yet remain impractical in many real-world applications. There is
a plethora of video data, speciﬁcally raw footage, that can
be leveraged for anomaly detection training if no annotation
cost is incurred. Unfortunately, to the best of our knowledge, there are hardly any notable attempts in leveraging
the unlabelled training data for video anomaly detection.
In this work, we explore unsupervised mode for video
anomaly detection that is certainly more challenging than
fully, weakly or one-class supervision (Fig. 1). However,
it is also more rewarding due to minimal assumptions and
hence will encourage the development of novel and more
practical algorithms. Note that, the term ‘unsupervised’
in literature often refers to OCC approaches which assume
all normal training data [11, 37, 64, 66]. However, it ren-

14744

