Templates for 3D Object Pose Estimation Revisited:
Generalization to New Objects and Robustness to Occlusions
Van Nguyen Nguyen1 , Yinlin Hu2 , Yang Xiao1 , Mathieu Salzmann2 , Vincent Lepetit1
1
LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, France
2
CVLab, EPFL, Switzerland
{van-nguyen.nguyen, yang.xiao, vincent.lepetit}@enpc.fr
{yinlin.hu, mathieu.salzmann}@epfl.ch

Training objects
New objects
w/o occlusion w/ occlusion w/o occlusion w/ occlusion

Abstract
We present a method that can recognize new objects and
estimate their 3D pose in RGB images even under partial
occlusions. Our method requires neither a training phase
on these objects nor real images depicting them, only their
CAD models. It relies on a small set of training objects
to learn local object representations, which allow us to locally match the input image to a set of “templates”, rendered images of the CAD models for the new objects. In
contrast with the state-of-the-art methods, the new objects
on which our method is applied can be very different from
the training objects. As a result, we are the first to show
generalization without retraining on the LINEMOD and
Occlusion-LINEMOD datasets. Our analysis of the failure
modes of previous template-based approaches further confirms the benefits of local features for template matching.
We outperform the state-of-the-art template matching methods on the LINEMOD, Occlusion-LINEMOD and T-LESS
datasets. Our source code and data are publicly available
at https://github.com/nv-nguyen/template-pose.

1. Introduction
3D object pose estimation has significantly improved
over the past decade in terms of both robustness and accuracy [17, 29, 33, 19, 43]. In particular, the robustness
to partial occlusions has greatly increased [27, 16, 23], and
the need for large amounts of real annotated training images
has been relaxed thanks to domain transfer [1], domain randomization [35, 18, 30], and self-supervised learning [32]
techniques that leverage synthetic images for training.
Nevertheless, the use of image-based 3D object pose estimation remains limited in the industry, despite its huge
potential for robotics and augmented reality. Scalable industrial applications would, for example, require the ability to handle arbitrary, previously-unseen objects without retraining and with access only to the objects’ CAD

Query
image

Template
recovered

Query
image

Template
recovered

Figure 1: Our method can estimate the 3D pose of new objects in query images by matching them with templates created from their 3D models. These new objects can be very
different from the ones, and can be partially occluded in
the query images.
models, thus saving both training and data capture time.
While a few works have already tackled this challenging
task [30, 28, 38, 2], most of them impose some additional
constraints by assuming that the new objects belong to a
known category [37], remain similar to the training ones as
in the T-LESS dataset [30], or have prominent corners [28].
By contrast, template-based approaches [38, 2] offer the
promise of generalizing to arbitrary new objects by learning
an image embedding used to match the input image to a series of templates generated from their CAD models. Unfortunately, their use with new objects has been demonstrated
only anecdotally, and we show in our experiments that these
methods struggle in this challenging scenario, particularly
in the presence of occlusions. We indeed notice that the

6771

