AIM: an Auto-Augmenter for Images and Meshes
Vinit Veerendraveer Singh and Chandra Kambhamettu
Video/Image Modeling and Synthesis (VIMS) Lab, Department of Computer and Information Sciences,
University of Delaware, Newark, Delaware, United States of America, 19716
{vinitvs,chandrak}@udel.edu

Abstract
Data augmentations are commonly used to increase the
robustness of deep neural networks. In most contemporary research, the networks do not decide the augmentations; they are task-agnostic, and grid search determines
their magnitudes. Furthermore, augmentations applicable
to lower-dimensional data do not easily extend to higherdimensional data and vice versa. This paper presents an
auto-augmenter for images and meshes (AIM) that easily
incorporates into neural networks at training and inference
times. It jointly optimizes with the network to produce constrained, non-rigid deformations in the data. AIM predicts
sample-aware deformations suited for a task, and our experiments confirm its effectiveness with various networks.

AIM
AIM increases spatial
coverage of the pixels in
the image where the dog is
present

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are prevailing in various computer
vision tasks. They are commonplace for the analysis of digital images [15, 16, 38] and 3D graphics [8, 14]. These networks try to emulate human cognition in a computerized
environment. However, despite the success of deep learning
in recent years, it is still not as robust as human vision.
Learning methods for vision-based tasks need to disassociate between what an object looks like and where it
lies in space. To this end, it is common to pre-process input data to neural networks with augmentation approaches.
Some augmentations make neural networks more tolerant
of geometric changes in data. For instance, augmentation
techniques such as affine transformations, random horizontal flipping, and random cropping are standard for image
processing. For mesh analysis, jittering of mesh elements
is performed along with affine transformations. These augmentations also form the basis of other advanced data
augmentation strategies [5, 11, 21, 32, 42, 55] and frameworks [2, 54]. The augmentations mentioned above do not
directly participate in the learning process and are not dependent on a task’s objective. Thus, they are non-learnable
and task-agnostic.

AIM
AIM increases spatial
coverage of the head, back,
and tail in the 3D mesh of
the dinosaur

Image
Classification
Network

Mesh
Classification
Network

German
Shorthaired!

Dinosaur!

Figure 1. AIM performs non-rigid deformations on the input data
to a task network during training and testing. AIM learns to detect
critical regions in the samples to solve a task and increases their
spatial coverage. As shown, it applies to both images and meshes.

Conversely, task-aware augmentation approaches [5, 12,
20, 26, 37] jointly optimize with neural networks. A common theme to this set of approaches is to sequentially learn
which transformations suit a task, where to employ them,
and to what extent they should be applied. However, at
present, many learnable augmentation methods are constrained to the dimensions of their underlying representations. Methods applicable to 2D images are either unsuitable or have no clear way to extend to 3D data and vice
versa. In this work, we build upon these insights and shortcomings to propose an Auto-Augmenter for Images and
Meshes (AIM).

722

