High-Fidelity Human Avatars from a Single RGB Camera
Hao Zhao1 Jinsong Zhang1 Yu-Kun Lai2 Zerong Zheng3 Yingdi Xie4 Yebin Liu3 Kun Li1 *
1
Tianjin University, China 2 Cardiff University, United Kingdom
3
Tsinghua University, China 4 VRC Inc., Japan
{zhaohao120,jinszhang,lik}@tju.edu.cn LaiY4@cardiff.ac.uk
{zzr18,liuyebin}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn {yingdi.xie}@vrcjp.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a coarse-to-fine framework
to reconstruct a personalized high-fidelity human avatar
from a monocular video. To deal with the misalignment
problem caused by the changed poses and shapes in different frames, we design a dynamic surface network to recover pose-dependent surface deformations, which help to
decouple the shape and texture of the person. To cope
with the complexity of textures and generate photo-realistic
results, we propose a reference-based neural rendering
network and exploit a bottom-up sharpening-guided finetuning strategy to obtain detailed textures. Our framework also enables photo-realistic novel view/pose synthesis and shape editing applications. Experimental results on both the public dataset and our collected dataset
demonstrate that our method outperforms the state-of-theart methods. The code and dataset will be available at
http://cic.tju.edu.cn/faculty/likun/projects/HF-Avatar.

1. Introduction
Automatic generation of personalized human avatars has
a wide range of applications in virtual/augmented reality,
virtual try-on, entertainment and gaming. Especially technologies using a single RGB camera will enable To C (customer) applications instead of To B (business).
High-quality human models can be reconstructed with
expensive 3D scanners [1], multi-view studios with controlled lighting [10], or depth cameras [6, 8, 53]. These
systems are usually costly or using non-consumer devices,
leading to restricted applications. Therefore, avatar acquisition from a single RGB camera is the most practical but
challenging. Some methods [38, 39, 51] based on implicit
representations reconstruct both geometry and texture from
a single image, which can handle arbitrary topology but
cannot support animation. Moreover, the reconstructed unseen regions tend to be smooth due to the limited observation. Therefore, many work proposed to reconstruct an
* Corresponding author

Ground
Truth

SOTA

Ours

Figure 1. Given a self-captured RGB video, the state-of-the-art
method [2] fails to produce seamless and reasonable texture maps.
To address this, we propose a coarse-to-fine framework with dynamic surface deformation and reference-based neural rendering,
which can generate seamless and sharp texture maps.

avatar from an RGB video. Alldieck et al. [2–4] proposed
to generalize visual hull methods to monocular videos of
people in motion, which optimized a fixed displacement for
each vertex across the video. Although this method is computationally cheap and memory-saving, such a single offset shared across all the frames is unreasonable, because
the pose and geometry of the person change with the moving. Besides the reconstructed geometry, a high-quality texture map is also an essential component for a personalized
avatar. Alldieck et al. [4] proposed to get a full texture
map by calculating the median of unwrapped texture maps,
which leads to a coarse texture map due to direct averaging. To obtain a sharp texture map, they further proposed to
solve the texture stitching based on graph cut [2, 3]. However, all the above methods suffer from either blurred textures or texture artifacts/mistakes, due to the intrinsic complexity of textures and unreasonable processing (shown in

15904

