KeyTr: Keypoint Transporter for 3D Reconstruction
of Deformable Objects in Videos
David Novotny

Ignacio Rocco

Samarth Sinha

Alexandre Carlier

dnovotny@fb.com

irocco@fb.com

sinhasam@fb.com

alexandre.carlier01@gmail.com

Gael Kerchenbaum

Roman Shapovalov

Nikita Smetanin

gael.kerchenbaum@gmail.com

romansh@fb.com

nikitasmetanin@fb.com

Natalia Neverova

Benjamin Graham

Andrea Vedaldi

nneverova@fb.com

benjamingraham@fb.com

vedaldi@fb.com

Meta AI
Frame 1

1. Introduction
We are interested in the problem of reconstructing 3D
dynamic scenes from casually recorded videos. A scene is
dynamic if it contains moving objects, including deforming

time t2

Shape predictor

Shape predictor

Frame N
time tN

...

Shape predictor

2D
projections

Flow
consistency

...

Optimal transport
2D keypoint
candidates

We consider the problem of reconstructing the depth of
dynamic objects from videos. Recent progress in dynamic
video depth prediction has focused on improving the output of monocular depth estimators by means of multi-view
constraints while imposing little to no restrictions on the
deformation of the dynamic parts of the scene. However,
the theory of Non-Rigid Structure from Motion prescribes to
constrain the deformations for 3D reconstruction. We thus
propose a new model that departs significantly from this
prior work. The idea is to fit a dynamic point cloud to the
video data using Sinkhorn’s algorithm to associate the 3D
points to 2D pixels and use a differentiable point renderer
to ensure the compatibility of the 3D deformations with the
measured optical flow. In this manner, our algorithm, called
Keypoint Transporter, models the overall deformation of the
object within the entire video, so it can constrain the reconstruction correspondingly. Compared to weaker deformation models, this significantly reduces the reconstruction
ambiguity and, for dynamic objects, allows Keypoint Transporter to obtain reconstructions of the quality superior or
at least comparable to prior approaches while being much
faster and reliant on a pre-trained monocular depth estimator network. To assess the method, we evaluate on new
datasets of synthetic videos depicting dynamic humans and
animals with ground-truth depth. We also show qualitative
results on crowd-sourced real-world videos of pets.

Frame 2

time t1

3D keypoints

Abstract

...
Optimal transport

Optimal transport

...

Figure 1. Keypoint Transporter reconstructs the depth of 3D
non-rigid objects from a casually recorded video. Unlike prior
work, we model the deformations of the object globally from the
beginning to the end of the video. The key technical contribution is
a robust mechanism to track these long-range deformations. This
is based on estimating a dynamic cloud of 3D keypoints that are
(1) encouraged to optimally cover a set of candidate 2D points in
every frame via differentiable optimal transport and (2) to describe
a 2D trajectory compatible with the measured optical flow.

ones such as people or animals. This is a very challenging reconstruction scenario which has traditionally been addressed by making use of specialized hardware, such as
multi-camera domes or 3D scanners. However, with advancements in virtual and augmented reality, we can envisage a future in which non-experts may wish to create
content to experience in 3D. In these scenarios, dynamic

5595

