EyePAD++: A Distillation-based approach for joint Eye Authentication and
Presentation Attack Detection using Periocular Images
Prithviraj Dhar1 , Amit Kumar2 , Kirsten Kaplan2 , Khushi Gupta2 , Rakesh Ranjan2 , Rama Chellappa1
1
Johns Hopkins University, 2 Reality Labs, Meta
{pdhar1,rchella4}@jhu.edu, {akumar14,kkaplan,khushigupta,rakeshr}@fb.com

Abstract
A practical eye authentication (EA) system targeted for
edge devices needs to perform authentication and be robust to presentation attacks, all while remaining compute
and latency efficient. However, existing eye-based frameworks a) perform authentication and Presentation Attack
Detection (PAD) independently and b) involve significant
pre-processing steps to extract the iris region. Here, we introduce a joint framework for EA and PAD using periocular
images. While a deep Multitask Learning (MTL) network
can perform both the tasks, MTL suffers from the forgetting effect since the training datasets for EA and PAD are
disjoint. To overcome this, we propose Eye Authentication
with PAD (EyePAD), a distillation-based method that trains
a single network for EA and PAD while reducing the effect
of forgetting. To further improve the EA performance, we
introduce a novel approach called EyePAD++ that includes
training an MTL network on both EA and PAD data, while
distilling the ‘versatility’ of the EyePAD network through an
additional distillation step. Our proposed methods outperform the SOTA in PAD and obtain near-SOTA performance
in eye-to-eye verification, without any pre-processing. We
also demonstrate the efficacy of EyePAD and EyePAD++
in user-to-user verification with PAD across network backbones and image quality.

1. Introduction
Eye Authentication (EA) using irises has been widely
used for biometric authentication. With the current advancements in head-mounted technology, eye-based authentication is likely to become an essential part of authenticating users against their wearable devices. While highly
accurate, EA systems are also vulnerable to ’Presentation
Attacks’ (PA) [14, 47]. These attacks seek to fool the authentication system by presenting artificial eye images, such
as printed iris images of an individual [5, 16], or cosmetic
contacts [21]. While researchers have proposed methods
to train networks that achieve SOTA performance in either

Eye Authentication
using iris region

Iris PAD

ID?

Live or Spoof?

A single network for
Eye Authentication and PAD
If Live, ID?
Live or Spoof?

Normalization and enhancement

Iris segmentation/detection
Spoof

Same image
modality
for EA/PAD

No
segmentation/
detection

Iris segmentation

Live

Eye Authentication data

Print

PAD data

Pattern lens

Eye Authentication/PAD data

Figure 1. EA pipelines segment out the iris region from the periocular image and normalize the iris image before feeding it to
the network. Segmentation/detection is also used in most PAD
pipelines. We train a single network for both EA and PAD without
any pre-processing steps, using the entire periocular image.

EA or PAD, a practical eye-based biometric system that can
be used on edge devices must be able to perform both of
these tasks accurately and simultaneously, with low latency
and in an energy efficient manner. Therefore, in this work
we propose strategies to develop a single deep network for
both EA and PAD using periocular images.
One of the key steps in EA is pre-processing. Most EA
frameworks [45, 53] use an auxiliary segmentation network
to extract the iris region from the periocular image. The
iris is then unwrapped into a rectangular image and is fed
to the eye authentication system. This geometric normalization step was first proposed in [7]. Pre-processing is also
an important step in iris PAD pipelines that requires another
segmentation network [14, 47], or a third party iris detection
software [38, 41]. Such pre-processing steps potentially
make the EA and PAD pipelines computationally expensive, making it impractical to embed these biometric systems on edge devices with limited computational resources.
We investigate and propose techniques to perform EA and
PAD using the entire periocular image without any active
pre-processing. In doing so, we adhere to our goal of using
a single network in a truer sense.

20218

