Group R-CNN for Weakly Semi-supervised Object Detection with Points
Shilong Zhang1 *, Zhuoran Yu2 *, Liyang Liu3 *, Xinjiang Wang4 , Aojun Zhou4 , Kai Chen 1,4
1
3

Shanghai AI Laboratory

2

Georgia Institute of Technology

Tencent AI Platform Department, China

4

SenseTime Research

zhangshilong@pjlab.org.cn, zhuoranyu@gatech.edu, leonlyliu@tencent.com,
{wangxinjiang,zhouaojun,chenkai}@sensetime.com

Abstract
We study the problem of weakly semi-supervised object detection with points (WSSOD-P), where the training
data is combined by a small set of fully annotated images
with bounding boxes and a large set of weakly-labeled images with only a single point annotated for each instance.
The core of this task is to train a point-to-box regressor
on well-labeled images that can be used to predict credible bounding boxes for each point annotation. We challenge the prior belief that existing CNN-based detectors
are not compatible with this task. Based on the classic RCNN architecture, we propose an effective point-to-box regressor: Group R-CNN. Group R-CNN first uses instancelevel proposal grouping to generate a group of proposals
for each point annotation and thus can obtain a high recall rate. To better distinguish different instances and improve precision, we propose instance-level proposal assignment to replace the vanilla assignment strategy adopted
in original R-CNN methods. As naive instance-level assignment brings converging difficulty, we propose instanceaware representation learning which consists of instanceaware feature enhancement and instance-aware parameter generation to overcome this issue. Comprehensive experiments on the MS-COCO benchmark demonstrate the
effectiveness of our method. Specifically, Group R-CNN
significantly outperforms the prior method Point DETR by
3.9 mAP with 5% well-labeled images, which is the most
challenging scenario. The source code can be found at
https://github.com/jshilong/GroupRCNN.

1. Introduction
Object detection has witnessed great improvements with
the development of network architectures and dataset construction in the past few years. However, advanced object detectors usually require training on a large number
* Equal contribution

of images with accurate bounding box annotations, which
are very time-consuming and expensive to obtain. To relieve the burden of human labeling, previous studies propose weakly- [2, 11, 13, 21, 32] and semi-supervised methods [8, 18, 24, 31] for object detection, which adopts a
small portion of well-annotated images alongside abundant weakly-annotated images and unlabeled images, respectively. Weakly semi-supervised object detection (WSSOD) [28] takes goods from both worlds. By replacing the unlabeled images in semi-supervised detection with
weakly-labeled images, it achieves a good balance between
labeling costs and model performance. One step further,
WSSOD with point annotations (WSSOD-P) labels an instance with a single point so as to provide both category
and location information with minimal labeling cost. The
time cost of labeling points is comparable with that of providing image-level annotations [1, 4], which is substantially
lower than bounding box annotations.
Prior work [4] proposes the following pipeline to leverage point annotations. (1) train a point-to-box regressor using images with only bounding box annotations. To simulate the process of translating points into bounding boxes,
points are randomly sampled within bounding boxes of instances as point annotations. (2) After training, the regressor is used to transform point annotations on weakly-labeled
images to pseudo bounding box annotations. (3) Finally,
any object detector can be trained with both well-labeled
images and pseudo-labeled images in a supervised fashion.
The core of this task then boils down to designing an accurate point-to-box regressor.
Point DETR [4] claims that the CNN-based detector performs poorly as a point-to-box regressor, but we argue it
does not hold true based on the following in-depth analysis.
On one hand, we find that CNN models in prior work only
generate a single proposal with the feature vector located
at the annotated point (projected on the feature map). The
quality of such a proposal can be quite low, resulting in a
low recall rate since annotated points can deviate from object centers and are less informative for box regression. To

9417

