BCOT: A Markerless High-Precision 3D Object Tracking Benchmark
Jiachen Li1 , Bin Wang1 , Shiqiang Zhu2 , Xin Cao1 , Fan Zhong1 , Wenxuan Chen2 ,
Te Li2 ∗ , Jason Gu3 and Xueying Qin1 *
1
Shandong University 2 Zhejiang Lab 3 Dalhousie University

Abstract
Template-based 3D object tracking still lacks a highprecision benchmark of real scenes due to the difficulty of
annotating the accurate 3D poses of real moving video objects without using markers. In this paper, we present a
multi-view approach to estimate the accurate 3D poses of
real moving objects, and then use binocular data to construct a new benchmark for monocular textureless 3D object tracking. The proposed method requires no markers,
and the cameras only need to be synchronous, relatively
fixed as cross-view and calibrated. Based on our objectcentered model, we jointly optimize the object pose by minimizing shape re-projection constraints in all views, which
greatly improves the accuracy compared with the singleview approach, and is even more accurate than the depthbased method. Our new benchmark dataset contains 20 textureless objects, 22 scenes, 404 video sequences and 126K
images captured in real scenes. The annotation error is
guaranteed to be less than 2mm, according to both theoretical analysis and validation experiments. We re-evaluate
the state-of-the-art 3D object tracking methods with our
dataset, reporting their performance ranking in real scenes.
Our BCOT benchmark and code can be found at https:
//ar3dv.github.io/BCOT-Benchmark/.

1. Introduction
Template-based 3D object tracking aims to estimate the
accurate 6DOF pose of moving objects with known 3D
models. It is an essential task of computer vision [21], and
is widely used in applications that desire high-precision 3D
object pose, such as augmented reality, robotic grasping,
etc. Despite the rapid development of single-frame 6DOF
pose estimation methods [32, 41], for video analysis 3D
tracking can be more accurate and more efficient, and thus
is indispensable.
Because it is difficult to annotate the accurate 3D pose
of a moving object in the real video, it is a great challenge
* Corresponding author: Xueying Qin (qxy@sdu.edu.cn) and Te Li
(lite@zhejianglab.com)

Figure 1. The capturing camera set is composed of two approximately orthogonal cameras. Based on the binocular data and proposed joint optimization framework, we can organize the benchmark with precise annotated pose as rendered in red contour.

to evaluate 3D tracking methods in real scenes. Previous
works use only synthetic datasets or datasets with low precision, the movement of object and camera is also limited.
Currently the main adopted datasets include RBOT [38],
OPT [45] and YCB-Video [47]. The RBOT dataset is semisynthetic with rendered moving objects in the real background image sequences, which may be different from real
video in camera effects and object movement. The OPT
dataset is real captured, but with numerous artificial markers
around the object, and the objects are not allowed to move.
The YCB-Video is a real RGB-D dataset without markers;
however, it contains only static objects, and the pose annotation contains a significant error that prevents it from being
used in high-precision scenarios (as required by many AR
applications). The above limitations are especially important for the learning-based tracking methods [43,44], due to
the domain difference as well as the bias to the visual cues
and object movements in the training dataset.
Table 1 lists and compares related datasets, including
some datasets for single-frame pose estimation [1, 13, 14,
18, 47]. Note that even with the depth camera, it is still difficult to annotate the accurate 3D pose, due to the depth er-

6697

