Predict, Prevent, and Evaluate: Disentangled Text-Driven Image Manipulation
Empowered by Pre-Trained Vision-Language Model
Zipeng Xu1 * Tianwei Lin2 Hao Tang3 Fu Li2 Dongliang He2
Nicu Sebe1 Radu Timofte3 Luc Van Gool3 Errui Ding2
1
MHUG, University of Trento 2 VIS, Baidu Inc. 3 CVL, ETH Zürich

Ours

StyleCLIP

Original

zipeng.xu@unitn.it

with bangs

double chin

black hair

with wrinkles

pale

Figure 1. Comparisons on disentangled image manipulation between the StyleCLIP [31] baseline and our Predict, Prevent, and Evaluate
(PPE). Ours manages to manipulate only the command-attribute (as indicated under each column) while remaining unchanged to the others.

Abstract

available at https://github.com/zipengxuc/PPE.

To achieve disentangled image manipulation, previous
works depend heavily on manual annotation. Meanwhile,
the available manipulations are limited to a pre-defined set
the models were trained for. We propose a novel framework,
i.e., Predict, Prevent, and Evaluate (PPE), for disentangled
text-driven image manipulation that requires little manual
annotation while being applicable to a wide variety of manipulations. Our method approaches the targets by deeply
exploiting the power of the large-scale pre-trained visionlanguage model CLIP [32]. Concretely, we firstly Predict
the possibly entangled attributes for a given text command.
Then, based on the predicted attributes, we introduce an entanglement loss to Prevent entanglements during training.
Finally, we propose a new evaluation metric to Evaluate
the disentangled image manipulation. We verify the effectiveness of our method on the challenging face editing task.
Extensive experiments show that the proposed PPE framework achieves much better quantitative and qualitative results than the up-to-date StyleCLIP [31] baseline. Code is
* The work was done during Zipeng Xu’s internship at VIS, Baidu.

1. Introduction
Disentangled image manipulation [1, 8, 10, 12, 21, 23, 37,
38, 43, 44] aiming at changing the desired attributes of the
image while keeping the others unchanged, has long been
studied for its research significance and application value.
Reaching this target is not easy, especially when attributes
naturally entangle in the real world. Therefore, concrete
attribute annotations are of vital importance, making disentangled image manipulation a labor-consuming task.
Several works [8, 10, 21, 23] use an encoder-decoder
architecture and need manual annotations on multiple attributes of images. The models encode the original image
and the manipulating attribute, then decode the manipulated image. Specifically, they use an attribute-specific loss
to encourage the manipulation of a specific attribute while
discouraging the others. The loss comes from pre-trained
classifiers for all annotated attributes. Many recent works
focus on latent space image manipulation since large-scale
pre-trained GANs, e.g., StyleGANs [15, 16], can generate

18229

