Advancing High-Resolution Video-Language Representation
with Large-Scale Video Transcriptions
Hongwei Xue*, Tiankai Hang*, Yanhong Zeng*, Yuchong Sun*,
Bei Liu, Huan Yang, Jianlong Fu, Baining Guo
Microsoft Research Asia
{v-honxue,v-tiahang,t-yazen,v-yuchongsun,bei.liu,huayan,jianf,bainguo}@microsoft.com

Abstract
We study joint video and language (VL) pre-training to
enable cross-modality learning and benefit plentiful downstream VL tasks. Existing works either extract low-quality
video features or learn limited text embedding, while neglecting that high-resolution videos and diversified semantics can significantly improve cross-modality learning. In this paper, we propose a novel High-resolution
and Diversified VIdeo-LAnguage pre-training model (HDVILA) for many visual tasks. In particular, we collect a
large dataset with two distinct properties: 1) the first highresolution dataset including 371.5k hours of 720p videos,
and 2) the most diversified dataset covering 15 popular
YouTube categories. To enable VL pre-training, we jointly
optimize the HD-VILA model by a hybrid Transformer
that learns rich spatiotemporal features, and a multimodal
Transformer that enforces interactions of the learned video
features with diversified texts. Our pre-training model
achieves new state-of-the-art results in 10 VL understanding tasks and 2 more novel text-to-visual generation tasks.
For example, we outperform SOTA models with relative
increases of 40.4% R@1 in zero-shot MSR-VTT text-tovideo retrieval task, and 55.4% in high-resolution dataset
LSMDC. The learned VL embedding is also effective in generating visually pleasing and semantically relevant results
in text-to-visual editing and super-resolution tasks.

1. Introduction
Recent years we have witnessed an increasing number
of videos with the popularity of appealing video websites
and mobile apps (e.g., YouTube, TikTok). As the rapid development of smartphone cameras, device storage, and 5G
* Equal contribution in alphabetical order. This work was performed
when Hongwei Xue, Tiankai Hang, Yanhong Zeng and Yuchong Sun were
visiting Microsoft Research Asia as research interns. Corresponding authors: Bei Liu, Huan Yang, Jianlong Fu.

networks, high-quality video creation, and diverse content
sharing like travel, sports, and music become a new fashion. Therefore, the capability of video analytic and joint
high-level understanding with language play a key role in
many video tasks, such as video search [3,39], video recommendation [6], and video editing [38,48]. To facilitate video
understanding, we study joint video and language (VL) pretraining, which is a new paradigm in both natural language
processing [8] and computer vision [19, 52].
Existing video-language understanding models are
highly limited in either scale or scope of video-language
datasets. Early datasets (e.g., MSR-VTT [53], DiDeMo [2])
consist of videos and descriptions that are manually annotated by humans. The heavy and expensive annotation cost
limits the scale of data. Moreover, datasets with only descriptive sentences are limited in complexity and variability
that largely hinders generalization power. Recently, several
datasets [3, 37] are proposed by transcriptions along with
videos using ASR (automatic speech recognition), so that
the data scale can be greatly enlarged. One most representative work is HowTo100M [37] which consists of millionscale instructional videos. However, there are still large
gaps between these video datasets and real-scenario videos
in terms of video quality and semantic diversity.
To tackle the above limitations, we propose the HDVILA-100M dataset (i.e., High-resolution and Diversified
VIdeo and LAnguage) which covers a wide range of video
categories and benefits a plenty of VL tasks, such as textto-video retrieval [39] and video QA [27]. This dataset has
the following key properties: (1) Large: we have collected
one of the largest video-language datasets, which consists of
100M video clip and sentence pairs from 3.3 million videos
with 371.5K hours in total (2.8× video hour and 8× average sentence length than HowTo100M [37]). (2) High
resolution: all the videos are 720p which is much higher
quality than existing datasets that are mostly 240p or 360p.
(3) Diverse and balanced: we cover a wide range of topics
from the YouTube, with 15 popular categories (e.g., sports,
music, autos). Meanwhile, we ensure a balanced video clip

5036

