RecDis-SNN: Rectifying Membrane Potential Distribution for Directly Training
Spiking Neural Networks
Yufei Guo*, Xinyi Tong*, Yuanpei Chen, Liwen Zhang, Xiaode Liu, Zhe Ma, Xuhui Huang†
X LAB, The Second Academy of CASIC, China
yfguo@pku.edu.cn, tongxinyi@buaa.edu.cn, starhxh@126.com

Abstract
The brain-inspired and event-driven Spiking Neural Network (SNN) aiming at mimicking the synaptic activity of
biological neurons has received increasing attention. It
transmits binary spike signals between network units when
the membrane potential exceeds the firing threshold. This
bio-mimetic mechanism of SNN appears energy-efficiency
with its power sparsity and asynchronous operations on
spike events. Unfortunately, with the propagation of binary
spikes, the distribution of membrane potential will shift,
leading to degeneration, saturation, and gradient mismatch
problems, which would be disadvantageous to the network
optimization and convergence. Such undesired shifts would
prevent the SNN from performing well and going deep. To
tackle these problems, we attempt to rectify the membrane
potential distribution (MPD) by designing a novel distribution loss, MPD-Loss, which can explicitly penalize the undesired shifts without introducing any additional operations
in the inference phase. Moreover, the proposed method can
also mitigate the quantization error in SNNs, which is usually ignored in other works. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method can directly train a deeper,
larger, and better-performing SNN within fewer timesteps.

1. Introduction
Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) have achieved huge
success in many application fields, including image classification [16, 44, 45], object detection [14, 31, 39], machine translation [2], gaming [43, 46], etc. However, the
increased computing resource required by ANNs poses a
burden on latency-sensitive applications and energy-limited
devices [28,30,51]. Recently, The Spiking Neural Networks
(SNN) has received increasing attention and been regarded
as a potential competitor of ANNs, due to their biologyinspired neural behavior and efficient computation [40].
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

SNNs utilize binary spike activity i.e., 0 for nothing and
1 for spike event, to transmit information. This transmitting
mode bridges the gap between real value-based information
processing of ANNs and spike-based information processing of brains. With the characteristics of binary spike-based
and sparse temporal communicating mechanisms, SNNs
enjoy power-efficiency for implementation on specific neuromorphic hardwares [3, 7, 21, 33], and have been increasingly promising in neuromorphic computation [7], pattern
recognition [20], robotics [18], brain-inspired devices [33],
etc.
However, the discontinuous and non-differentiable spike
activity poses difficulty to directly train SNNs using gradient descent in back-propagation. The current SNN training
algorithms for avoiding the dilemma of non-differentiability
can be categorized as (i) the ANN-to-SNN conversionand
(ii) the surrogate gradient (SG) descent method. The conversion methods usually convert a pre-trained non-spike
ANN to its SNN counterpart with the same architecture [4,
5,9,11,15,26,38,42]. Although the converted networks can
achieve comparable performances to the original ANNs,
they come at the cost of numerous inference timesteps,
which are much more time and energy-consuming. The
SG descent method adopts SGs (i.e., 1|x−Vth |<0.5 or 0,
otherwise, where Vth is the firing threshold and usually
is 0.5) to replace the all-or-nothing gradients of the spike
activity function [10, 17, 24, 29, 34, 41, 49]. It provides a
chance to directly train SNNs with several timesteps. However, it also suffers from the problem of gradient vanishing or explosion. These problems will lead to performance
degradation and shallow network architectures. Many efforts [12,13,23,37,52] have been made to solve these problems and drive the models to achieve state-of-the-art performance. Nevertheless, due to the lack of comprehensive analysis of the difficulty of training SNNs directly,
there still has room for improvement in these works. Here,
we provide a novel perspective to understand the dilemma
of training an SNN by analyzing the membrane potential
shifts. The brief analysis for a single channel is as follows.
As the binary spikes propagating through layers, the dis-

326

