Deep orientation-aware functional maps:
Tackling symmetry issues in Shape Matching
Nicolas Donati
LIX, École Polytechnique

Etienne Corman
CNRS, Inria

Maks Ovsjanikov
LIX, École Polytechnique

nicolas.donati@polytechnique.edu

etienne.corman@cnrs.fr

maks@lix.polytechnique.fr

Abstract
State-of-the-art fully intrinsic network for non-rigid
shape matching are unable to disambiguate between shape
inner symmetries. Meanwhile, recent advances in the functional map framework allow to enforce orientation preservation using a functional representation for tangent vector
field transfer, through so-called complex functional maps.
Using this representation, we propose a new deep learning
approach to learn orientation-aware features in a fully unsupervised setting. Our architecture is built on DiffusionNet,
which makes our method robust to discretization changes,
while adding a vector-field-based loss, which promotes orientation preservation without using (often unstable) extrinsic descriptors. Our source code is available at: https:
//github.com/nicolasdonati/DUO-FM .

Scalar & vector valued descriptors

1. Introduction
Learning for non-rigid shape correspondence is a key
problem in 3D shape analysis with applications ranging
from statistical shape analysis [6, 36] to deformation or texture transfer [4]. Early approaches have focused either on
learning informative features so that corresponding points
have similar feature descriptors, e.g., [26], or modeling
shape correspondence as a semantic segmentation problem.
Approaches in the latter category, e.g., [28, 31, 37, 51] aim
to predict, for every point on the surface, the corresponding vertex id on some ground truth template shapes. Unfortunately both approaches impose very little consistency
between individual point correspondence predictions, while
possibly being sensitive to the underlying shape discretization [43].
More recently, techniques have focused on both predicting and imposing a training loss on the entire map between
each pair of shapes. This has been greatly facilitated by
spectral approaches and especially the functional map representation [33], which encodes a map as a small matrix
using the spectral (Laplacian) eigen-basis. A wide range of

Orientation-aware correspondence

Figure 1. Our method aims at producing orientation preserving
maps for non-rigid 3D shape matching in a fully unsupervised
setting through the estimation of descriptors whose gradients also
align on source and target shape.

approaches based on both supervised [9, 13, 23] and unsupervised losses [22, 40] have been proposed using the functional map representation. Key to all of these methods is
learning feature functions that are then used to predict the
functional map as a whole. As was shown across multiple
recent works, this reduces the amount of necessary training
data [13], provides strong regularization promoting smooth
maps, makes the learned features robust to changes in discretization [43], and alleviates the requirement of the existence of a fixed template shape.

742

