Mask-guided Spectral-wise Transformer for
Efficient Hyperspectral Image Reconstruction
Yuanhao Cai 1,2,∗ , Jing Lin 1,2, * , Xiaowan Hu 1,2 , Haoqian Wang 1,2,† ,
Xin Yuan 3 , Yulun Zhang 4 , Radu Timofte 4 , and Luc Van Gool 4
1
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University,
2
Shenzhen Institute of Future Media Technology, 3 Westlake University, 4 ETH Zürich

Abstract

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral imaging refers to multi-channel imaging
where each channel captures the information at a specific
spectral wavelength for a real-world scene. Generally, hyperspectral images (HSIs) have more spectral bands than
normal RGB images to store richer information and delineate more detailed characteristics of the imaged scene.
Relying on this property, HSIs have been widely applied
to many computer vision related tasks, e.g., remote sensing [5, 34, 59], object tracking [21, 40], medical image pro* Equal Contribution, † Corresponding Author

34

PSNR (dB)

Hyperspectral image (HSI) reconstruction aims to recover the 3D spatial-spectral signal from a 2D measurement in the coded aperture snapshot spectral imaging
(CASSI) system. The HSI representations are highly similar
and correlated across the spectral dimension. Modeling the
inter-spectra interactions is beneficial for HSI reconstruction. However, existing CNN-based methods show limitations in capturing spectral-wise similarity and long-range
dependencies. Besides, the HSI information is modulated
by a coded aperture (physical mask) in CASSI. Nonetheless,
current algorithms have not fully explored the guidance effect of the mask for HSI restoration. In this paper, we propose a novel framework, Mask-guided Spectral-wise Transformer (MST), for HSI reconstruction. Specifically, we
present a Spectral-wise Multi-head Self-Attention (S-MSA)
that treats each spectral feature as a token and calculates
self-attention along the spectral dimension. In addition, we
customize a Mask-guided Mechanism (MM) that directs SMSA to pay attention to spatial regions with high-fidelity
spectral representations. Extensive experiments show that
our MST significantly outperforms state-of-the-art (SOTA)
methods on simulation and real HSI datasets while requiring dramatically cheaper computational and memory costs.
https://github.com/caiyuanhao1998/MST/

36

MST-M
(1.50M)
MST-S
(0.93M)

MST-L
(2.03M)

32

TSA-Net
(44.25M)
DIP-HSI
(33.85M)

30

DNU
(1.19M)
𝜆-Net
(62.64M)

28

26
10 1

DGSMP
(3.76M)

U-Net
(31.32M)
10 2

10 3

FLOPS (G)

Figure 1. PSNR-Params-FLOPS comparisons with CNN-based
HSI reconstruction methods. The vertical axis is PSNR (in dB performance), the horizontal axis is FLOPS (computational cost), and
the circle radius is Params (memory cost). Our proposed Maskguided Spectral-wise Transformers (MSTs) outperform previous
methods while requiring significantly cheaper FLOPS and Params.

cessing [3, 33, 37], etc. To collect HSIs, conventional imaging systems with spectrometers scan the scenes along the
spatial or spectral dimension, usually requiring a long time.
Therefore, these traditional imaging systems are unsuitable
for capturing and measuring dynamic scenes. Recently, researchers have used snapshot compressive imaging (SCI)
systems to capture HSIs. These SCI systems compress information of snapshots along the spectral dimension into
one single 2D measurement [58]. Among current existing
SCI systems [10,16,32,45,47], the coded aperture snapshot
spectral imaging (CASSI) [36,45] stands out and forms one
promising mainstream research direction.
Based on CASSI, a large number of reconstruction algorithms have been proposed to recover the 3D HSI cube from
the 2D measurement. Conventional model-based methods
adopt hand-crafted priors such as sparsity [23, 29, 46], total
variation [24, 51, 57], and non-local similarity [30, 52, 61]
to regularize the reconstruction procedure. However, these

17502

