Rethinking the Augmentation Module in Contrastive Learning: Learning
Hierarchical Augmentation Invariance with Expanded Views
Junbo Zhang Kaisheng Ma*
Tsinghua University
kaisheng@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Contrastive learning has been proved to be able to learn
meaningful visual representations without human annotations [4, 10]. Original methods regard two views transformed from the same example as a positive pair and other
examples in the batch or the memory bank as negative sam* Corresponding Author.

11
0.92
0.77

0.6
0.6

0.62

0.4
0.4

Co

er

ra

al

e

Ro
n

c
ys

ip

g

t at

e

ta

in

Ro

r
tte

ur

00
lo

ji tt

0.41

0.2
0.2

i
rJ

lor
Co

0.56

tio

0.8
0.8

Fl

A data augmentation module is utilized in contrastive
learning to transform the given data example into two
views, which is considered essential and irreplaceable.
However, the pre-determined composition of multiple data
augmentations brings two drawbacks. First, the artificial
choice of augmentation types brings specific representational invariances to the model, which have different degrees of positive and negative effects on different downstream tasks. Treating each type of augmentation equally
during training makes the model learn non-optimal representations for various downstream tasks and limits the flexibility to choose augmentation types beforehand. Second,
the strong data augmentations used in classic contrastive
learning methods may bring too much invariance in some
cases, and fine-grained information that is essential to some
downstream tasks may be lost. This paper proposes a general method to alleviate these two problems by considering
“where” and “what” to contrast in a general contrastive
learning framework. We first propose to learn different augmentation invariances at different depths of the model according to the importance of each data augmentation instead of learning representational invariances evenly in the
backbone. We then propose to expand the contrast content
with augmentation embeddings to reduce the misleading effects of strong data augmentations. Experiments based on
several baseline methods demonstrate that we learn better
representations for various benchmarks on classification,
detection, and segmentation downstream tasks.

Proportion of categories

Abstract

Bl

zhangjb21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

G
Augmentation type

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. The influence of augmentation types. (a) The proportion
of categories in ImageNet where the data augmentation has a positive effect. (b) An example of the flower where color invariance
has a negative effect and rotation invariance has a positive effect.
The conclusion is reversed for most categories in ImageNet.

ples [30], then the model is trained with the contrastive loss.
Many techniques were previously considered important in
this process, such as strong data augmentations [3], the selection of negative samples [14, 34], momentum-update encoder [10,11], and training details like large batch sizes and
long training epochs [3]. However, recent works prove that
useful visual representations can be learned without negative pairs, the momentum-update of parameters or large
batch size [4, 10, 39]. The most indispensable process in
contrastive learning is the data augmentation module. The
essential principle of contrastive learning is to learn the representational invariance by making the network learn to be
invariant to a set of data augmentations [29].
Previous works show that the composition of multiple types of data augmentations is crucial for contrastive
learning [3]. A specific set of augmentations is determined after extensive experiments to achieve the best results on large-scale datasets (e.g., ImageNet). In most recent works [1,11,16,26,33], the data augmentation pipeline
consists of random cropping and resizing, horizontal flipping, color jittering, converting to grayscale, and Gaussian
blurring. However, the pre-determined and artificial choices
of augmentation types and augmentation strength bring the
corresponding problems as follows.
In terms of the augmentation type, after selecting specific

16650

