Do Explanations Explain? Model Knows Best
Ashkan Khakzar1 *, Pedram Khorsandi1* , Rozhin Nobahari2* , Nassir Navab1
ashkan.khakzar@tum.de
1

2

Technical University of Munich, Germany
Mila, Quebec Artificial Intelligence Institute, Canada

Abstract
It is a mystery which input features contribute to a neural network’s output. Various explanation (feature attribution) methods are proposed in the literature to shed light
on the problem. One peculiar observation is that these explanations (attributions) point to different features as being
important. The phenomenon raises the question, which explanation to trust? We propose a framework for evaluating
the explanations using the neural network model itself. The
framework leverages the network to generate input features
that impose a particular behavior on the output. Using the
generated features, we devise controlled experimental setups to evaluate whether an explanation method conforms
to an axiom. Thus we propose an empirical framework for
axiomatic evaluation of explanation methods. We evaluate
well-known and promising explanation solutions using the
proposed framework. The framework provides a toolset to
reveal properties and drawbacks within existing and future
explanation solutions.1

1. Introduction
Considering a neural network function, how do we
know which features (patterns) within the input are important for its output? The problem is called feature attribution [16, 35], and the solutions are commonly known
as explanation, attribution, or saliency methods. There is
an extensive list of explanation methods in the literature
[8,9,13,15,16,19,26,27,29,32,33,35,39,41]. One peculiar
observation is that these solutions point to different features
as being important. Though they are solutions to the same
problem, feature attribution, the resulting explanations are
curiously dissimilar. The phenomenon raises the question,
which explanation is correct? Or are the explanations correct but revealing the problem in a different light?
* denotes equal contribution
1 https : / / github . com / CAMP - eXplain - AI / Do -

Explanations-Explain

One approach is to compare the explanations against
ground truth (e.g., bounding box) annotations on the dataset
[27,38,41]. But how do we know what is important for a human is also important for the model? There is no guarantee
(or reason) that the model would use the same features as
humans. To resolve this issue, we need to take a step back
and ask what it means for a feature to be “important” for
an output. The intuitive approach is to remove the feature
and observe the output behavior [8, 11, 25]. Such removal
of evidence is indeed the foundation of many explanation
approaches [8, 9, 16, 26, 35]. However, such a conception
could lead to ambiguities. Consider the scenario of having equivalent features (e.g., repeated features), where the
existence of each feature alone suffices for a specific output value. Add to the scenario that the removal of any of
these features does not affect the output value. In this case,
the conception based on removal assigns zero importance
to each feature. However, a desirable property, in this case,
could be assigning equal importance to each feature.
The concept of importance can thus be further chiseled
by specifying desirable properties that an importance assignment method ought to satisfy. Such desirable properties are formalized via axioms [16, 34, 35]. The axiomatic
view provides a complementary framework for evaluating
feature attribution solutions. Explanation methods can be
evaluated whether they conform to an axiom. The axiomatic
view has the advantage that the methods can be mathematically proven to comply with a particular axiom. For instance, solutions such as the Shapley value [16, 28] and integrated gradients [34, 35] are proven to conform with particular axioms. However, proofs can be broken in practical implementations. For instance, [34] show that inherent
assumptions within methods that approximate the Shapley
value result in methods not conforming with the axioms.
Moreover, certain conditions might be overlooked in proofs.
Thus experiments are required to test whether final solutions comply with the axioms. Even if methods are accompanied by elegant and solid mathematical derivations and
proofs, they must comply with the axioms in observations

10244

