Evading the Simplicity Bias:
Training a Diverse Set of Models Discovers
Solutions with Superior OOD Generalization
Damien Teney1,2 Ehsan Abbasnejad2 Simon Lucey2 Anton van den Hengel2,3
1
Idiap Research Institute 2 Australian Institute for Machine Learning, University of Adelaide 3 Amazon
damien.teney@idiap.ch,{ehsan.abbasnejad,simon.lucey,anton.vandenhengel}@adelaide.edu.au

Training set

Abstract
Neural networks trained with SGD were recently shown
to rely preferentially on linearly-predictive features and can
ignore complex, equally-predictive ones. This simplicity
bias can explain their lack of robustness out of distribution
(OOD). The more complex the task to learn, the more likely
it is that statistical artifacts (i.e. selection biases, spurious
correlations) are simpler than the mechanisms to learn.
We demonstrate that the simplicity bias can be mitigated
and OOD generalization improved. We train a set of similar
models to fit the data in different ways using a penalty on the
alignment of their input gradients. We show theoretically
and empirically that this induces the learning of more complex predictive patterns.
OOD generalization fundamentally requires information
beyond i.i.d. examples, such as multiple training environments, counterfactual examples, or other side information.
Our approach shows that we can defer this requirement to
an independent model selection stage. We obtain SOTA results in visual recognition on biased data and generalization across visual domains. The method – the first to evade
the simplicity bias – highlights the need for a better understanding and control of inductive biases in deep learning.

1. Introduction
Inductive biases in deep learning. At the core of every
learning algorithm are a set of inductive biases [45]. They
define the learned function outside of training examples and
they allow extrapolation1 to novel test points. Deep neural networks are remarkably effective because their inductive biases happen to reflect properties of real-world data,
1 Contrary to popular belief, deep neural networks rarely perform interpo-

lation even in i.i.d. settings. In high dimensions, test points are extremely
unlikely to lie within the convex hull of training points [24, 34].

OOD Test set

(a) ImageNet-9 [83]

(b) MNIST/CIFAR Collages [70]

Figure 1. Training data often contains multiple predictive patterns.
(a) In ImageNet-9, bird shapes and blue backgrounds are both predictive of the bird label. (b) In MNIST/CIFAR collages, both parts
are equally predictive of training labels. Neural networks display
a simplicity bias: they latch on the MNIST digit for example, and
completely ignore the CIFAR part. We show that we can mitigate
the simplicity bias by training a collection of models, allowing us
to discover a diverse set of predictive patterns.

although the reasons are still poorly understood [87]. In
particular, the simplicity bias [27, 47, 51, 57, 70] has been
proposed as a reason of their success. It makes networks
trained with SGD2 represent preferentially simple, approximately piecewise linear functions.3 But the simplicity bias
can also prevent the learning of complex patterns that are
the actual mechanisms of the task of interest. This effect
is problematic when the learned simple patterns correspond
to spurious correlations a.k.a. statistical shortcuts [17]. In
image recognition, an example of a shortcut is to use the
2 The simplicity bias is not a property of neural networks themselves, but

also of their training with SGD, since it is possible to manually construct
networks with arbitrarily poor generalization [87] i.e. no simplicity bias.
3 We adopt the definition of simplicity of a feature from [70]: it is the minimum number of linear pieces in the decision boundary that achieves optimal classification accuracy using this feature. The definition naturally
extends to the simplicity of a model implementing this decision boundary.

16761

