Revisiting AP Loss for Dense Object Detection: Adaptive Ranking Pair Selection
Dongli Xu, Jinhong Deng, Wen Li *
School of Computer Science and Engineering & Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{dongliixu,jhdeng1997,liwenbnu}@gmail.com

Abstract

dicting the category probability for every patch in an image. However, it often suffers from an extreme imbalance
problem, as huge numbers of background patches (i.e., negative samples) can overwhelm the sufﬁcient loss gradients
for foreground patches (i.e., positive samples). Recently, to
alleviate this sensitivity to the ratio of negative and positive
samples, Average Precision Loss [4] converts the classiﬁcation task into a ranking task by explicitly modeling sample
relationships that are calculated by comparing all sample
pairs.

Average precision (AP) loss has recently shown promising performance on the dense object detection task. However, a deep understanding of how AP loss affects the detector from a pairwise ranking perspective has not yet been developed. In this work, we revisit the average precision (AP)
loss and reveal that the crucial element is that of selecting the ranking pairs between positive and negative samples. Based on this observation, we propose two strategies to improve the AP loss. The ﬁrst of these is a novel
Adaptive Pairwise Error (APE) loss that focusing on ranking pairs in both positive and negative samples. Moreover,
we select more accurate ranking pairs by exploiting the
normalized ranking scores and localization scores with a
clustering algorithm. Experiments conducted on the MSCOCO dataset support our analysis and demonstrate the
superiority of our proposed method compared with current
classiﬁcation and ranking loss. The code is available at
https://github.com/Xudangliatiger/APE-Loss.

Despite AP loss performing well at addressing the sample imbalance problem, the essential mechanism of how
AP loss affects the detector is still veiled. Accordingly, in
this paper, we delve into AP loss from a pairwise ranking
perspective [2]; speciﬁcally, the crucial part of AP loss is
the minimizing of the pairwise error between the positive
and negative samples. To ﬁnd out the essential properties
of AP loss, we analyze components of pairwise error separately and reveal that the key factor is the accurate and
complete ranking pair selection. Consequently, we improve
the AP loss by adjusting the way in which ranking pairs
are constructed and selected. Proper ranking pair selection
achieves notable performance gains for object detection.

1. Introduction

More speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst derive a reformulation of the
AP loss and show that it contains three main components of
generalized pairwise error: distance function, balance constant and ranking pair selection. We conduct detailed experiments to verify these different components’ effects and determine that proper ranking pair selection plays a vital role
in producing accurate detection results. We then investigate
the barriers to good performance encountered by existing
ranking pair selection strategies and identify the following
issues: (1) Traditional strategies [13, 19, 30, 38] ignore the
ranking pairs between positive samples, which may lead to
inaccurate category probability prediction, and harms the
Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS) result; (2) The probability of image content in the ranking task and accuracy
in the localization task, i.e., ranking score and localization
score have different distributions, which brings imbalanced
attentions to those two tasks during the pair selection pro-

Object detection is one of the fundamental computer vision tasks and aims to predict both the category labels and
the bounding-box coordinates of all objects in a given image [3, 19, 21, 27, 30]. It also plays an important role in
many down-stream applications such as instance segmentation [1, 9, 31, 33] and face detection [6]. Modern object detectors can be divided into two-stage approaches [3,27] and
one-stage approaches [35, 39]. One-stage detectors adopt
dense prediction without a region proposal phase; thus they
are also known as dense object detectors. One-stage object detectors are also naturally faster than two-stage detectors and popular in real-world applications such as that
on edge devices [35, 39]. Most one-stage object detectors [16, 19, 21, 26, 30, 38, 40] rely on a classiﬁcation task
to discriminate the category of objects, i.e., directly pre* Corresponding author.

14187

