Segment-Fusion: Hierarchical Context Fusion for
Robust 3D Semantic Segmentation
Anirud Thyagharajan1 , Benjamin Ummenhofer2 , Prashant Laddha1 , Om Ji Omer1 , Sreenivas Subramoney1
{1 Processor Architecture Research Lab India, 2 Autonomous Agents Lab Germany}, Intel Labs

Abstract
3D semantic segmentation is a fundamental building
block for several scene understanding applications such as
autonomous driving, robotics and AR/VR. Several state-ofthe-art semantic segmentation models suffer from the partmisclassification problem, wherein parts of the same object
are labelled incorrectly. Previous methods have utilized hierarchical, iterative methods to fuse semantic and instance
information, but they lack learnability in context fusion, and
are computationally complex and heuristic driven. This
paper presents Segment-Fusion, a novel attention-based
method for hierarchical fusion of semantic and instance information to address the part misclassifications. The presented method includes a graph segmentation algorithm for
grouping points into segments that pools point-wise features
into segment-wise features, a learnable attention-based network to fuse these segments based on their semantic and
instance features, and followed by a simple yet effective
connected component labelling algorithm to convert segment features to instance labels. Segment-Fusion can be
flexibly employed with any network architecture for semantic/instance segmentation. It improves the qualitative and
quantitative performance of several semantic segmentation
backbones by upto 5% on the ScanNet and S3DIS datasets.

1. Introduction
The growing resolution and availability of 3D visual sensors in recent years (e.g. Kinect, RealSense, Xtion) have enabled high fidelity representation of real world scenes using
3D data, allowing machines to understand 3D scenes with
higher accuracy. One of the most important tasks in scene
understanding includes 3D semantic segmentation, which
aims to recognize the object class that each point in the
scene belongs to. 3D semantic segmentation is fundamental
to various applications, such as autonomous driving, robotic
navigation and AR/VR [11, 28, 31, 38].
∗1,2 Contact us at:
{anirud.thyagharajan, benjamin.ummenhofer,
prashant.laddha, om.j.omer, sreenivas.subramoney}@intel.com

Part misclassification
with baseline

+Segment-Fusion

Figure 1. Semantic labels with baseline [37] and our SegmentFusion approach on a sample point cloud from ScanNet Validation
set [5]. The circled regions highlight how well Segment-Fusion
addresses the part misclassification problem prevailing in many
state-of-the-art semantic segmentation methods.

Recent advancements in 3D scene understanding have
been greatly influenced by deep neural networks achieving
state-of-the-art results [3,9,10,15–17,20,23,34,37] on multiple benchmarks and wide range of datasets [1, 5]. However, many of these methods are often plagued by the partmisclassification problem, where parts of the same object
are labelled incorrectly as shown in Figure 1. This problem
can be better addressed if object instance boundaries can be
correctly estimated, which includes annotating points with
object instance identifiers. This helps to group all points
associated with an object instance and utilize consensus to
rectify semantic mispredictions.
Jointly solving semantic and instance segmentation has
been explored by several previous works [2, 7, 12, 13, 18,
22, 24, 35, 36]. Many of these methods [13, 18, 24, 35, 36]
focus on employing models for instance and semantic segmentation, before fusing pointwise features. However, they
require higher compute resources as they fuse at a finegrained level and do not exploit local continuities in scene
structure. Methods such as [2, 7, 12, 22] include hierarchical pooling of features over a spatial region addressing the
part misclassification problem by fusing these regions, with
an assumption that these regions do not stretch over object
boundaries. Such hierarchical methods are more efficient
since they work with regions and not directly with points.
While such methods are more efficient, they employ itera-

1236

