Future Transformer for Long-term Action Anticipation
Dayoung Gong1

Joonseok Lee1

Manjin Kim1

POSTECH1

Seong Jong Ha2

Minsu Cho1

NCSOFT2

http://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/FUTR

action anticipation

Abstract
The task of predicting future actions from a video is crucial for a real-world agent interacting with others. When
anticipating actions in the distant future, we humans typically consider long-term relations over the whole sequence
of actions, i.e., not only observed actions in the past but also
potential actions in the future. In a similar spirit, we propose an end-to-end attention model for action anticipation,
dubbed Future Transformer (FUTR), that leverages global
attention over all input frames and output tokens to predict
a minutes-long sequence of future actions. Unlike the previous autoregressive models, the proposed method learns to
predict the whole sequence of future actions in parallel decoding, enabling more accurate and fast inference for longterm anticipation. We evaluate our method on two standard benchmarks for long-term action anticipation, Breakfast and 50 Salads, achieving state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
Long-term action anticipation from a video is recently
emerging as an essential task for advanced intelligent systems. It aims to predict a sequence of actions in the future
from a limited observation of past actions in a video. While
there exists a growing body of research on action anticipation, most of the recent work focuses on predicting a single action in a few seconds [14–17, 30, 35–37]. In contrast,
long-term action anticipation [2, 13, 19, 36] aims to predict
a minutes-long sequence of multiple actions in the future.
This task is challenging since it requires learning long-range
dependencies between past and future actions.
Recent long-term anticipation methods [13, 36] encode
observed video frames into condensed vectors and decode
them via recurrent neural networks (RNNs) to predict a sequence of future actions in an autoregressive manner. Despite the impressive performance on the standard benchmarks [21, 38], they have several limitations. First, the encoder excessively compresses the input frame features so
that fine-grained temporal relations between the observed
frames are not preserved. Second, the RNN decoder is

action segmentation
A1

A1

A2

A2

A2

MLP

MLP

MLP

MLP

MLP

A3

A4

A5

NONE

NONE

MLP

MLP

MLP

MLP

MLP

multi-head cross-attention

multi-head self-attention

Emb
Q

Emb

: action query

Emb
A

Emb

Emb

: action class Emb : input

multi-head self-attention

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

Q5

parallel decoding

Figure 1. Future Transformer (FUTR). The proposed method
is an end-to-end attention neural network to anticipate actions in
parallel decoding, leveraging global interactions between past and
future actions for long-term action anticipation.

limited in modeling long-term dependencies over the input
sequence and also in considering global relations between
past and future actions. Third, the sequential prediction
of autoregressive decoding may accumulate errors from the
precedent results and also increase inference time.
To resolve the limitations, we introduce an end-to-end
attention neural network, Future Transformer (FUTR), for
long-term action anticipation. The proposed method effectively captures long-term relations over the whole sequence
of actions. i.e., not only observed actions in the past but also
potential actions in the future. FUTR is an encoder-decoder
structure [6,42] as illustrated in Fig. 1; the encoder learns to
capture fine-grained long-range temporal relations between
the observed frames from the past, while the decoder learns
to capture global relations between upcoming actions in the
future along with the observed features from the encoder.
Different from the previous autoregressive models, FUTR
anticipates a sequence of future actions in parallel decoding, enabling more accurate and faster inference without error accumulations. Furthermore, we employ an action segmentation loss for input frames to learn distinctive feature
representations in the encoder. We evaluate FUTR on the

3052

