BTS: A Bi-lingual Benchmark for Text Segmentation in the Wild
Xixi Xu1 , Zhongang Qi1 ,* Jianqi Ma4 , Honglun Zhang1 , Ying Shan1 , Xiaohu Qie2,3
1
ARC Lab, 2 Tencent PCG; 3 Tsinghua University; 4 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{axixixu,zhongangqi,honlanzhang,yingsshan,tigerqie}@tencent.com; jianqi.ma@connect.polyu.hk

Abstract
As a prerequisite of many text-related tasks such as text
erasing and text style transfer, text segmentation arouses
more and more attention recently. Current researches
mainly focus on only English characters and digits, while
few work studies Chinese characters due to the lack of public large-scale and high-quality Chinese datasets, which
limits the practical application scenarios of text segmentation. Different from English which has a limited alphabet of
letters, Chinese has much more basic characters with complex structures, making the problem more difficult to deal
with. To better analyze this problem, we propose the Bilingual Text Segmentation (BTS) dataset, a benchmark that
covers various common Chinese scenes including 14, 250
diverse and fine-annotated text images. BTS mainly focuses
on Chinese characters, and also contains English words
and digits. We also introduce Prior Guided Text Segmentation Network (PGTSNet) , the first baseline to handle bilingual and complex-structured text segmentation. A plugin text region highlighting module and a text perceptual discriminator are proposed in PGTSNet to supervise the model
with text prior, and guide for more stable and finer text segmentation. A variation loss is also employed for suppressing background noise under complex scene. Extensive experiments are conducted not only to demonstrate the necessity and superiority of the proposed dataset BTS, but also to
show the effectiveness of the proposed PGTSNet compared
with a variety of state-of-the-art text segmentation methods.

1. Introduction
Text segmentation is a fundamental and important task
in computer vision. Different from other segmentation tasks
such as semantic segmentation and instance segmentation,
it is required to parse text instead of objects from complex
scenes. With the text mask, it can be applied to various
downstream tasks including scene text removal for cover
generation and material recreation, font style transfer for
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. The top block: example images and annotations from
the proposed BTS dataset. From left to right are images, characterlevel bounding boxes, word-level bounding boxes, and pixel-level
segmentation masks. The left bottom block: qualitative results.
From top to down are original image, result using the SOTA
method (TexRNet [66]) trained on only English dataset (TextSeg
[66]), result using TexRNet trained on TextSeg and our bi-lingual
dataset BTS, and result using our proposed method PGTSNet
trained on TextSeg and BTS. The right bottom block: quantitative results on the testing set of the bi-lingual dataset. The circle
represents the SOTA method TextRNet; the square represents different variations of our proposed PGTSNet. The points below the
dash line are results using only English dataset TextSeg, and using
TextSeg with a synthetic bi-lingual dataset, respectively; the points
above the dash line are results using TextSeg with our bi-lingual
dataset BTS. The results demonstrate that the fine-annotated bilingual dataset is necessary, which improves the performance of
the existing SOTA method with a large margin, and boosts the
overall performance in the area of bi-lingual text segmentation to
a new level.

AI design, interactive text image editing, etc.
Text segmentation presents two distinct characteristics.
First, as the strokes and structure of text are looser and incoherent (unlike object segmentation), it is more challenging
to capture fine-grained features of every stroke in a word.
For example, some strokes like the lowercase L or the dot on

19152

