Dense Learning based Semi-Supervised Object Detection
Binghui Chen1 , Pengyu Li1 , Xiang Chen1 , Biao Wang1 , Lei Zhang2 , Xian-Sheng Hua1
1
Alibaba Group, 2 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
chenbinghui@bupt.cn, lipengyu007@gmail.com, xchen.cx@alibaba-inc.com, wangbiao225@foxmail.com
cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk, huaxiansheng@gmail.com

Abstract
Semi-supervised object detection (SSOD) aims to facilitate the training and deployment of object detectors with
the help of a large amount of unlabeled data. Though
various self-training based and consistency-regularization
based SSOD methods have been proposed, most of them
are anchor-based detectors, ignoring the fact that in many
real-world applications anchor-free detectors are more demanded. In this paper, we intend to bridge this gap
and propose a DenSe Learning (DSL) based anchor-free
SSOD algorithm. Specifically, we achieve this goal by
introducing several novel techniques, including an Adaptive Filtering strategy for assigning multi-level and accurate dense pixel-wise pseudo-labels, an Aggregated Teacher
for producing stable and precise pseudo-labels, and an
uncertainty-consistency-regularization term among scales
and shuffled patches for improving the generalization capability of the detector. Extensive experiments are conducted on MS-COCO and PASCAL-VOC, and the results show that our proposed DSL method records new
state-of-the-art SSOD performance, surpassing existing
methods by a large margin. Codes can be found at
https://github.com/chenbinghui1/DSL.

1. Introduction
The recent rapid development of object detection (OD)
methods [5, 17, 40] largely owes to the availability of
large-scale and well-annotated datasets, such as MS-COCO
benchmark [27]. With the increasing demand for more
powerful and accurate detection models, the need to collect and label more data also increases. However, manually
labeling the class labels and bounding-boxes for large-scale
datasets is a very expensive and tedious job, which is not
cost-effective in practical applications. As a remedy, semisupervised [38,48] and self-supervised [28] OD algorithms,
which aim to employ the large amount of unlabeled data to
improve the performance of OD, have been attracting much
attention in recent years. In this paper, we focus on the

Figure 1. The SSOD performance comparisons between the proposed anchor-free based DSL and anchor-based methods STAC
[38] and ISMT [48]. One can observe that anchor-based detector Faster-RCNN [36] and anchor-free based detector FCOS [44]
have similar baseline performance under the supervised settings,
while our proposed DSL achieves the state-of-the-art SSOD performance, outperforming the existing methods by a large margin.

semi-supervised objection detection (SSOD) methods.
The current state-of-the-art SSOD methods are pseudolabel based approaches [31, 38, 48, 51], while most of them
are based on a two-stage anchor-based detector such as
Faster-RCNN [36]. Specifically, they first use a teacher
model to generate pseudo-labels for unlabeled images and
then train a two-stage anchor-based detector with both labeled and unlabeled images. However, in real-world applications, the one-stage anchor-free based detectors (e.g.,
FCOS [44]) are more attractive and practical since they are
much easier and efficient to be deployed on resource limited
devices without heavy pre/post-processing except NMS.
Different from Faster-RCNN, the learning of FCOS is established on dense feature predictions; that is, each pixel
is directly supervised by the corresponding label. Without
the help of predefined anchors and multiple refinements of
the predictions, the learning of anchor-free based detectors
requires more careful guidance, especially under the SSOD
settings. Unfortunately, few works on anchor-free SSOD

4815

