Learning to Prompt for Open-Vocabulary Object Detection with
Vision-Language Model
Yu Du1 Fangyun Wei2†
1
Tsinghua University

Zihe Zhang1 Miaojing Shi3† Yue Gao2 Guoqi Li1
2
Microsoft Research Asia 3 King’s College London

{duyu20, zh-zhang17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{fawe, yuegao}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Recently, vision-language pre-training shows great potential in open-vocabulary object detection, where detectors trained on base classes are devised for detecting new
classes. The class text embedding is firstly generated by
feeding prompts to the text encoder of a pre-trained visionlanguage model. It is then used as the region classifier to supervise the training of a detector. The key element that leads to the success of this model is the proper
prompt, which requires careful words tuning and ingenious
design. To avoid laborious prompt engineering, there are
some prompt representation learning methods being proposed for the image classification task, which however can
only be sub-optimal solutions when applied to the detection task. In this paper, we introduce a novel method, detection prompt (DetPro), to learn continuous prompt representations for open-vocabulary object detection based on
the pre-trained vision-language model. Different from the
previous classification-oriented methods, DetPro has two
highlights: 1) a background interpretation scheme to include the proposals in image background into the prompt
training; 2) a context grading scheme to separate proposals in image foreground for tailored prompt training. We
assemble DetPro with ViLD, a recent state-of-the-art openworld object detector, and conduct experiments on the LVIS
as well as transfer learning on the Pascal VOC, COCO,
Objects365 datasets. Experimental results show that our
DetPro outperforms the baseline ViLD [7] in all settings,
e.g., +3.4 APbox and +3.0 APmask improvements on the
novel classes of LVIS. Code and models are available at
https://github.com/dyabel/detpro.

1. Introduction
Object detection aims at locating bounding boxes of objects in an image as well as assigning labels to them. In last
† Corresponding author.

liguoqi@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

miaojing.shi@kcl.ac.uk

few years, object detection [19, 20] achieves great success
in solving the closed-set problem, i.e., detectors can detect
classes present in the training set. To increase the detection vocabulary, the common practice is by collecting more
data with desired classes. Besides the expensive labeling
cost in this process, it often leads to a long-tailed distribution [8, 13] of object classes: detectors need to be carefully designed to avoid overfitting on frequently-occurred
categories in the dataset. In contrast, an alternative way for
increasing the detection vocabulary is open-vocabulary object detection (OVOD), where detectors are trained on base
classes and equipped with ability to detect new classes.
Recently, ViLD [7] introduces a framework for openvocabulary object detection, which distills the knowledge
from a pre-trained vision-language model into a detector. It
is inspired by the recent progress of vision-language pretraining, e.g, CLIP [18] and ALIGN [10], where two separate encoders, namely image encoder and text encoder, are
used to maximize the alignment between images and corresponding texts. In ViLD’s implementation, they feed text
descriptions of base classes, known as prompt, into the text
encoder of CLIP to generate the class text embedding. The
embedding is then utilized to classify object proposals and
supervise the detector training. To perform open-set object detection, the base class text embedding is replaced
with the embedding of both base and novel classes. The
prompt design, also known as prompt engineering, is crucial in this process as we observe a slight word change in it
would end up with clear positive or negative impact on the
detection performance. Designing proper prompts requires
domain expertise and carefully word tuning from human,
as of [7]. To avoid such high-end and rather laborious demand from human, the alternative way is to automatically
learn prompt’s context using continuous representations, we
name it as prompt representation learning in our work.
In this paper, we propose a novel method named detection prompt (DetPro) to learn prompt representations, in the
setting of open-vocabulary object detection with pre-trained

14084

