One Step at a Time:
Long-Horizon Vision-and-Language Navigation with Milestones
Chan Hee Song1

Jihyung Kil1

Tai-Yu Pan1
Brian M. Sadler2
Wei-Lun Chao1
1
Yu Su
1
The Ohio State University 2 U.S. Army Research Laboratory
{song.1855, kil.5, pan.667, chao.209, su.809}@osu.edu
brian.m.sadler6.civ@army.mil

Goal: "Put a hot potato on the counter to the right of the sink"

Abstract
1

We study the problem of developing autonomous agents
that can follow human instructions to infer and perform a
sequence of actions to complete the underlying task. Significant progress has been made in recent years, especially
for tasks with short horizons. However, when it comes
to long-horizon tasks with extended sequences of actions,
an agent can easily ignore some instructions or get stuck
in the middle of the long instructions and eventually fail
the task. To address this challenge, we propose a modelagnostic milestone-based task tracker (M-T RACK) to guide
the agent and monitor its progress. Specifically, we propose a milestone builder that tags the instructions with navigation and interaction milestones which the agent needs to
complete step by step, and a milestone checker that systemically checks the agent’s progress in its current milestone
and determines when to proceed to the next. On the challenging ALFRED dataset, our M-T RACK leads to a notable
33% and 52% relative improvement in unseen success rate
over two competitive base models.

1. Introduction
As autonomous agents (e.g., robots) become more integrated into our daily life, it is increasingly important to develop autonomous agents that can understand natural language commands and carry out the corresponding tasks. To
facilitate such a goal, various benchmarks have been proposed in the realm of robot instruction following such as
vision-and-language navigation (VLN) [1, 3, 4, 9, 13, 28, 29,
38, 44], together with a number of novel algorithms that
consistently push forward the state of the art [20,21,34,37].
Specifically, to succeed in VLN, an agent must comprehend the language instruction, ground it into the partiallyobservable environment with only visual perception, and
plan and perform navigation and interaction actions in the

Navigation: Fridge

2 Interaction: Potato, Fridge

"Turn around and face the fridge"

"Take a cold potato out of the fridge"

4

Interaction: Microwave

"Cook the potato in the microwave"

5

Navigation: Counter

"Turn left and go to the counter
to the right of the sink"

3 Navigation: Microwave

"Take the potato to the microwave"

6

Interaction: Counter

"Put the cooked potato on the counter"

Figure 1. Illustration of our M-T RACK approach. We show
an ALFRED task [30], which consists of an overall goal (text on
the top) and six subtasks (text below each image). The blue/red
text box within each image is our extracted navigation/interaction
milestones from the subtask instructions. An agent needs to reach
the milestone of the current subtask (e.g., reaching proximity to
the target object for navigation milestones, or having interacted
with the target objects for interaction milestone; green masks for
target objects) before it can proceed to the next subtask.

environment to complete the task.
One critical challenge in VLN arises when the task horizon becomes substantially longer [30]. That is, a task is so
complex that it essentially consists of multiple “subtasks”
that need to be completed sequentially to fulfill the whole
task. For example, in Figure 1 the task “put a hot potato
on the counter to the right of the sink” can be decomposed
into six subtasks. Moreover, the subtask “heat the potato”
must be carried out before the subtask “put the potato on
the counter”; otherwise, the final task is doomed to fail no
matter how accurate the subsequent planning is. Such a sequential dependency requires the agent to closely monitor
its progress and ensure it is staying on the right track when
carrying out a long-horizon task.

15482

