De-rendering 3D Objects in the Wild
Felix Wimbauer1,2
Shangzhe Wu2
Christian Rupprecht2
1
Technical University Munich, 2 University of Oxford
wimbauer@in.tum.de {szwu, chrisr}@robots.ox.ac.uk
Training

Inference
Albedo

Single Images & Coarse Shape

Normals

Input

Diffuse

Specular

De-rendering

Rendering

Diffuse

Specular

Rendering

New light

Figure 1. De-rendering 3D objects from in-the-wild images. Left: Our method is trained on unconstrained images with coarse shape
estimates which can be obtained using off-the-shelf methods or classical structure from motion. Right: Our method de-renders an image
into precise shape, material (diffuse albedo, specularity, specular intensity), and lighting (direction, intensity). The image can then be rerendered and re-lit based on our illumination model. The model generalizes to objects beyond the training categories (e.g. parkingmeter).

Abstract
With increasing focus on augmented and virtual reality
(XR) applications comes the demand for algorithms that
can lift objects from images into representations that are
suitable for a wide variety of related 3D tasks. Large-scale
deployment of XR devices and applications means that we
cannot solely rely on supervised learning, as collecting and
annotating data for the unlimited variety of objects in the
real world is infeasible. We present a weakly supervised
method that is able to decompose a single image of an object into shape (depth and normals), material (albedo, reflectivity and shininess) and global lighting parameters. For
training, the method only relies on a rough initial shape estimate of the training objects to bootstrap the learning process. This shape supervision can come for example from
a pretrained depth network or—more generically—from a
traditional structure-from-motion pipeline. In our experiments, we show that the method can successfully de-render
2D images into a decomposed 3D representation and generalizes to unseen object categories. Since in-the-wild evaluation is difficult due to the lack of ground truth data, we
also introduce a photo-realistic synthetic test set that allows
for quantitative evaluation. Please find our project page at:
https://github.com/Brummi/derender3d

1. Introduction
From a single 2D image, humans can easily reason about
the underlying 3D properties of an object, such as the 3D
shape, the surface material and its illumination properties.
Being able to infer “object intrinsics” from a single image
has been a long standing goal in Computer Vision and is
often referred to as “inverse rendering” or “de-rendering”
as it reverses the well-known rendering step of Computer
Graphics, where an image is generated from a similar set of
object and material descriptors.
De-rendering an image into its physical components, not
only plays an important role for general image understanding, but is also key to many applications, such as Augmented/Virtual Reality (XR) and Visual Effects (VFX). In
these applications, a decomposed 3D representation can be
used to increase the realism by enabling post-processing
steps, such as relighting or changing the texture or material properties, which further blurs the line between real and
synthetic objects in these environments.
As XR is moving from research and commercial use to
consumer devices, a de-rendering method should work on a
wide variety of images in the wild to allow a broad adoption
of these technologies. While the history of image decomposition literature is long [13,14], recent learning-based ap18490

