Temporal Complementarity-Guided Reinforcement Learning for Image-to-Video
Person Re-Identification
Wei Wu† , Jiawei Liu† , Kecheng Zheng, Qibin Sun, Zheng-Jun Zha*
University of Science and Technology of China, China
{wuvy,zkcys001}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {jwliu6,qibinsun,zhazj}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Image-to-video person re-identification aims to retrieve
the same pedestrian as the image-based query from a videobased gallery set. Existing methods treat it as a crossmodality retrieval task and learn the common latent embeddings from image and video modalities, which are both
less effective and efficient due to large modality gap and redundant feature learning by utilizing all video frames. In
this work, we first regard this task as point-to-set matching
problem identical to human decision process, and propose
a novel Temporal Complementarity-Guided Reinforcement
Learning (TCRL) approach for image-to-video person reidentification. TCRL employs deep reinforcement learning
to make sequential judgments on dynamically selecting suitable amount of frames from gallery videos, and accumulate adequate temporal complementary information among
these frames by the guidance of the query image, towards
balancing efficiency and accuracy. Specifically, TCRL formulates point-to-set matching procedure as Markov decision process, where a sequential judgement agent measures
the uncertainty between the query image and all historical
frames at each time step, and verifies that sufficient complementary clues are accumulated for judgment (same or different) or one more frames are requested to assist judgment.
Moreover, TCRL maintains a sequential feature extraction
module with complementary residual detectors to dynamically suppress redundant salient regions and thoroughly
mine diverse complementary clues among these selected
frames for enhancing frame-level representation. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the superiority of our method.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) is the task of searching the target samples from the gallery set which have the
same identity with the given query. [5, 35]. It has been
† Equal contribution.
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Image-to-video person Re-ID essentially belongs to
point-to-set matching problem, identical to human decision process for pedestrian matching. Due to abundant redundant information and even noisy information within consecutive frames, the
best similarity score between a query image and a gallery video is
often not obtained when employing all frames of the video.

widely studied in the computer vision community during
the past few years, due to its large potential in the intelligent surveillance, video analysis and human-robot interaction, etc [5, 42]. It is a quite challenging task, derived from
the dramatic variations in camera viewpoint, body pose, illumination, as well as the influence of cluttered background
and partial occlusion.
In general, person Re-ID can be mainly divided into
two categories: image-based Re-ID [8, 19, 43] and videobased Re-ID [3, 36, 39]. The main difference between them
is that for the former, the query and gallery samples are
both images, while the query and gallery samples are both
videos for the latter. In these two categories, the samples to
be matched are homogeneous. Recently, image-based and
video-based Re-ID have achieved impressive progress, benefiting from the development of deep learning technique.
However, in many practical scenarios, person Re-ID requires to find the target pedestrian in numerous videos according to a query image. One situation is that, given an im-

7319

