A Unified Query-based Paradigm for Point Cloud Understanding
Zetong Yang1,4∗
1
CUHK

Li Jiang2∗
Yanan Sun3
Bernt Schiele2
Jiaya Jia1
2
3
4
MPI Informatics
HKUST
SmartMore

{tomztyang, now.syn}@gmail.com

{lijiang, schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
3D point cloud understanding is an important component in autonomous driving and robotics. In this paper,
we present a novel Embedding-Querying paradigm (EQParadigm) for 3D understanding tasks including detection,
segmentation and classification. EQ-Paradigm is a unified
paradigm that enables combination of existing 3D backbone architectures with different task heads. Under the EQParadigm, the input is first encoded in the embedding stage
with an arbitrary feature extraction architecture, which is
independent of tasks and heads. Then, the querying stage
enables the encoded features for diverse task heads. This
is achieved by introducing an intermediate representation,
i.e., Q-representation, in the querying stage to bridge the
embedding stage and task heads. We design a novel Q-Net
as the querying stage network. Extensive experimental results on various 3D tasks show that EQ-Paradigm in tandem with Q-Net is a general and effective pipeline, which
enables flexible collaboration of backbones and heads. It
further boosts performance of state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
3D point cloud understanding is an essential line in computer vision since it could benefit many applications, such
as autonomous driving [14], robotics [12], and augmented
reality [31].
In point cloud understanding, there are two dominant
input representations: points and voxels. Specifically designed for these two representations, mainstream models can be grouped into point- [19, 23, 28, 36, 51, 56, 69]
and voxel-based [7, 16, 61, 71] networks. In both cases,
state-of-the-art models consist of an encoder network to
gradually downsample the points/voxels by sampling algorithms / strided convolution. There are also a decoder network to propagate features of the subsampled
points/voxels into original ones and a task-specific head
for making predictions. We call these methods EncoderDecoder paradigm (ED-Paradigm) models. Due to the
∗ Equal contribution. Work done during internship at SmartMore.

leojia@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Various Task Heads
classification
head

segmentation
head

BEV-based
detection
head

point-based
detection
head

…

Q-representation
Query
Positions

Querying Stage
Embedding Stage
voxel-based networks

or

point-based networks

Input Point Cloud

Figure 1. Illustration of the unified query-based EQ-Paradigm.
The query position can be randomly designated in the 3D scene,
thus making it possible to combine any backbone embedding networks with different task heads.

downsampling-upsampling design, ED-Paradigm models
extract features for some fixed positions appearing in the
downsampling process.
In this paper, we propose a novel Embedding-Querying
paradigm (EQ-Paradigm) for 3D understanding tasks.
Compared to the ED-Paradigm, which extracts features for
fixed positions, EQ-Paradigm enables feature generation
for any position in the 3D scene. Thus, the EQ-paradigm
is generalization of the ED-Paradigm. Any ED-Paradigm
model has an EQ-Paradigm counterpart. An EQ-Paradigm
model consists of three stages: an Embedding stage, a
Querying stage, and a task-specific head.
The embedding stage can be implemented with any feature extraction architecture, including voxel- and pointbased networks, regardless of tasks and heads. We use the
embedding network to extract support features for following stages. The querying stage then takes a set of positions
as query positions and generates their intermediate representation, i.e., Q-representation, based on the support features. Note that the query positions could be any point in the
contiguous 3D space, thus enabling feature generation for
any location. We further present a novel querying stage net-

8541

