Contrastive Dual Gating: Learning Sparse Features With Contrastive Learning
Jian Meng,* Li Yang,* Jinwoo Shin†,
*Arizona State University, USA

Deliang Fan,* Jae-sun Seo*
KAIST, South Korea

†

†

*{jmeng15, lyang166, dfan, jaesun.seo}@asu.edu

98

1. Introduction
The success of the conventional supervised learning
relies on the large-scale labeled dataset to minimize the
loss and achieve high accuracy. However, manually annotating millions of data samples is labor-intensive and
time-consuming. This promotes the self-supervised learning (SSL) to be an attractive solution, since artiﬁcial labels
are used instead of human-annotated ones for training.
The state-of-the-art self-supervised learning frameworks, such as SimCLR [3] and MoCo [11], utilize the concept of contrastive learning (CL) [9] with wide and deep
models to achieve comparable performance as the supervised training counterpart. Figure 1 shows the CIFAR-10
inference accuracy vs. the number of ﬂoating-point opera-

CIFAR-10 Inference Accuracy (%)

Abstract
Contrastive learning (or its variants) has recently become a promising direction in the self-supervised learning domain, achieving similar performance as supervised
learning with minimum ﬁne-tuning. Despite the labeling efﬁciency, wide and large networks are required to achieve
high accuracy, which incurs a high amount of computation
and hinders the pragmatic merit of self-supervised learning. To effectively reduce the computation of insigniﬁcant
features or channels, recent dynamic pruning algorithms
for supervised learning employed auxiliary salience predictors. However, we found that such salience predictors
cannot be easily trained when they are naı̈vely applied to
contrastive learning from scratch. To address this issue,
we propose contrastive dual gating (CDG), a novel dynamic pruning algorithm that skips the uninformative features during contrastive learning without hurting the trainability of the networks. We demonstrate the superiority
of CDG with ResNet models for CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100,
and ImageNet-100 datasets. Compared to our implementations of state-of-the-art dynamic pruning algorithms for
self-supervised learning, CDG achieves up to 15% accuracy improvement for CIFAR-10 dataset with higher computation reduction.

{jinwoos}@kaist.ac.kr

96

ResNet-18 (2X)

94
92
90

FLOPs ­: 16 X

ResNet-18 (1X)

ResNet-20 (2X)

ResNet-18 (4X)
SimCLR: ResNet-18 (4X)

SimCLR: ResNet-18 (2X)

SimCLR: ResNet-18 (1X)
ResNet-20 (1X)
SimCLR: ResNet-20 (2X)

88
86
84

Supervised Learning
Contrastive Learning: SimCLR

SimCLR: ResNet-20 (1X)

0.0E+0

2.0E+3

4.0E+3

6.0E+3

FLOPs (Millions)

8.0E+3

1.0E+4

Figure 1. Inference accuracy of various ResNet models with supervised and self-supervised training [3] from scratch. After contrastive pre-training, models are ﬁne-tuned on 50% of training set.

tions (FLOPs). By training from scratch, SimCLR [3] requires a model that is 4 times wider (ResNet-18 (4×)) to
achieve similar accuracy as the baseline model trained with
supervised learning (ResNet-18 (1×)). On the other hand,
it is also difﬁcult to achieve good accuracy with the compact model architecture (e.g., ResNet-20). The extraordinary computation cost necessitates efﬁcient computation reduction techniques for self-supervised learning.
Under the context of supervised learning, network sparsiﬁcation has been widely studied. Both static weight pruning [10, 21] and dynamic computation skipping [1, 8, 14, 16,
20] have achieved high accuracy with pruned architecture or
sparse features. A recent work [2] reported the transferability of applying the lottery ticket hypothesis [7] to SSL for
the downstream tasks. However, the requirements of selfsupervised pretraining and iterative searching greatly limit
the practicality of the algorithm. Sparsifying the SSL models that are trained from scratch is still largely unexplored,
despite its importance.
To address this research gap, we investigate efﬁcient dynamic sparse feature learning by training the model from
scratch in a self-supervised fashion. Most of the prior
works on dynamic computation reduction [1, 8, 16, 20] exploit the spatial sparsity by using an auxiliary mini neu-

12257

