Active Learning for Open-set Annotation
Sheng-Jun Huang1†
Xun Zhao2†
Yu Li3 *
Kun-Peng Ning1 *
1
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
2
3
Applied Research Center, Tencent PCG
International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA)
{ningkp,huangsj}@nuaa.edu.cn

emmaxunzhao@tencent.com

Abstract

liyu@idea.edu.cn

Query Set

Unlabeled Open-set
𝑲 known classes 𝑳 unknown classes

Existing active learning studies typically work in the
closed-set setting by assuming that all data examples to
be labeled are drawn from known classes. However, in real
annotation tasks, the unlabeled data usually contains a large
amount of examples from unknown classes, resulting in the
failure of most active learning methods. To tackle this openset annotation (OSA) problem, we propose a new active
learning framework called LfOSA, which boosts the classification performance with an effective sampling strategy to
precisely detect examples from known classes for annotation.
The LfOSA framework introduces an auxiliary network to
model the per-example max activation value (MAV) distribution with a Gaussian Mixture Model, which can dynamically
select the examples with highest probability from known
classes in the unlabeled set. Moreover, by reducing the temperature T of the loss function, the detection model will be
further optimized by exploiting both known and unknown supervision. The experimental results show that the proposed
method can significantly improve the selection quality of
known classes, and achieve higher classification accuracy
with lower annotation cost than state-of-the-art active learning methods. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
work of active learning for open-set annotation.

1. Introduction
The remarkable success of deep learning is largely attributed to the collection of large datasets with human annotated labels [12, 15]. Nevertheless, it is extremely expensive and time-consuming to label large scale data with
high-quality annotations [26, 29]. It is thus a significant
challenge to learn with limited labeled data.
Active learning (AL) is a primary approach to tackle this
problem. It iteratively selects the most useful examples
from the unlabeled data to query their labels from the oracle,
* This work is done when Kun-Peng Ning and Yu Li worked at Applied
Research Center, Tencent PCG.
† Corresponding authors.

Select

Annotate
Football
Basketball

Volleyball
Skiing

Train
…

Classifier

Figure 1. The illustration of open-set annotation (OSA) problem.
The unlabeled open-set contains K known classes (color images
with border) and L unknown classes (gray-scale images without
border). The goal is to find and annotate the examples from known
classes for training the classifier.

achieving competitive performance while reducing annotation costs [10, 26, 28]. Existing AL methods typically work
in a closed-set setting where the labeled and unlabeled data
are both drawn from the same class distribution.
However, in some real world scenarios, the unlabeled
data are usually uncontrolled and large amounts of data examples are from unknown classes. Figure 1 displays an
example of training a new sports image classification model
for an image-sharing social platform, in which the database
contains trillions of images from unconstrained categories
uploaded by users. A large proportion of images in the unlabeled open-set are actually from irrelevant classes (e.g.,
cats, pianos, etc.). As these irrelevant images are not necessary for training the desired classifier, labelling these images
would lead to a waste of annotation budget. On the other
hand, existing closed-set AL system cannot precisely distinguish these irrelevant images from unknown classes but
tends to choose them for annotation as they contain more
uncertainty or information. Hence, in the real-world openset scenario, an effective and practical AL system is highly
desired, which can precisely identify the examples of un-

41

