AutoLoss-GMS: Searching Generalized Margin-based Softmax Loss Function
for Person Re-identification
Hongyang Gu1,2 Jianmin Li2 * Guangyuan Fu1 Chifong Wong2 Xinghao Chen3 Jun Zhu2
1
Xi’an Research Institute of High Technology, Xi’an, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Technology and Systems, BNRist, Institute for AI,
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, Beijing, China
guhy18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn lijianmin@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn fugy402@gmail.com
hzf19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn xinghao.chen@outlook.com dcszj@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Person re-identification is a hot topic in computer vision,
and the loss function plays a vital role in improving the discrimination of the learned features. However, most existing models utilize the hand-crafted loss functions, which
are usually sub-optimal and challenging to be designed.
In this paper, we propose a novel method, AutoLoss-GMS,
to search the better loss function in the space of generalized margin-based softmax loss function for person reidentification automatically. Specifically, the generalized
margin-based softmax loss function is first decomposed into
two computational graphs and a constant. Then a general searching framework built upon the evolutionary algorithm is proposed to search for the loss function efficiently. The computational graph is constructed with a forward method, which can construct much richer loss function
forms than the backward method used in existing works.
In addition to the basic in-graph mutation operations, the
cross-graph mutation operation is designed to further improve the offspring’s diversity. The loss-rejection protocol, equivalence-check strategy and the predictor-based
promising-loss chooser are developed to improve the search
efficiency. Finally, experimental results demonstrate that
the searched loss functions can achieve state-of-the-art performance and be transferable across different models and
datasets in person re-identification.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) [1–3] aims at retrieving an interested person across multiple, non-overlapping
cameras. With the advancement of deep neural networks
* Corresponding author.

(DNNs) and the increasing demand for intelligent video
surveillance, ReID attracts more and more attention from
the computer vision community. Although DNN-based
models have made a significant breakthrough in ReID,
learning discriminative features to identify the person from
the large-scale gallery set is still challenging due to significant intra-class variance caused by pose variations, occlusions, or cluttered backgrounds.
Recently, most works [2, 4–7] have been based on the
network design to obtain the discriminative features and ignore the importance of the loss function. As we all know,
a high-performance DNN model is inseparable from the
well-designed network architecture and the appropriate loss
function. However, most existing works still adopt the
paradigm of cross-entropy loss and triplet loss, and there are
very few works exploring other forms of loss function on
the ReID problem. Inspired by NormFace [8] in face recognition (FR), Fan et al. [3] proposed SphereReID to learn a
hypersphere manifold embedding, which is better at extracting the discriminative features than the cross-entropy loss
function. But according to recent researches in FR, NormFace is not the best choice among the margin-based softmax
(MS) loss functions [9–11]. Sun et al. [12] proposed a more
flexible loss function named CircleLoss, which is superior
to the other MS loss functions in FR and ReID tasks. The
loss functions mentioned above are all special cases in the
generalized margin-based softmax (GMS) loss function and
just the tip of the iceberg. Likely, they are not optimal in
this space. Therefore, we aim to explore whether there is a
better loss function than these classical loss functions in the
GMS loss function space.
With the development of AutoML, more and more automated methods are proposed. Especially in the fields of data
augmentation [13–16] and networks architecture [17–19],
automated methods have surpassed hand-crafted methods.

4744

