Clustering Plotted Data by Image Segmentation
Tarek Naous1 , Srinjay Sarkar2 , Abubakar Abid3 , James Zou4
1
American University of Beirut, 2 VinAI Research, 3 Hugging Face, 4 Stanford University
tnn11@aub.edu.lb, v.sarkar@vinai.io, abubakar@hf.co, jamesz@stanford.edu

Abstract
Clustering is a popular approach to detecting patterns
in unlabeled data. Existing clustering methods typically
treat samples in a dataset as points in a metric space and
compute distances to group together similar points. In this
paper, we present a different way of clustering points in 2dimensional space, inspired by how humans cluster data:
by training neural networks to perform instance segmentation on plotted data. Our approach, Visual Clustering,
has several advantages over traditional clustering algorithms: it is much faster than most existing clustering algorithms (making it suitable for very large datasets), it agrees
strongly with human intuition for clusters, and it is by default hyperparameter free (although additional steps with
hyperparameters can be introduced for more control of the
algorithm). We describe the method and compare it to ten
other clustering methods on synthetic data to illustrate its
advantages and disadvantages. We then demonstrate how
our approach can be extended to higher-dimensional data
and illustrate its performance on real-world data. Our implementation of Visual Clustering is publicly available as
a python package that can be installed and used on any
dataset in a few lines of code1 . A demo on synthetic datasets
is provided2 .

1. Introduction
Numerous applications require the classification of unlabeled samples in a dataset into disjointed clusters such that
samples within the same cluster are similar, yet samples
in different clusters differ meaningfully. Many such clustering algorithms have been developed satisfying different
desiderata for applications in fields such as image processing [10], biomedicine [13], and spatial data [3].
The most commonly used clustering algorithms, such
as K-means clustering [5], Gaussian mixture clustering [4],
and DBSCAN [12], treat samples as points in a metric (usually Euclidean) space and group together points based on
1 https://github.com/tareknaous/visual-clustering
2 https://huggingface.co/spaces/CVPR/visual-clustering

distances to other points or to computed exemplars. For
example, the K-means clustering algorithm identifies optimal centroids in the metric space to which the distance of
all samples in the dataset is minimized. The Gaussian mixture algorithm assumes the data is sampled from a mixture
of Gaussians and produces clusters in the data to maximize
the likelihood, which happens when data points are close
to the centers of the Gaussian distributions. DBSCAN is
a density-based clustering algorithm that does not assume
the number of clusters for the given dataset but considers a
group of points belonging to the same cluster if there are a
certain number of points in the neighborhood of the selected
point. The clusters are expanded by recursively considering
distances to all other points.
Since most of these algorithms involve measuring distances between points, they scale poorly to large datasets
with millions or billions of samples. In our work, we introduce a completely different kind of clustering algorithm,
designed for two-dimensional large datasets. Our approach,
which we call Visual Clustering, is inspired by how humans
cluster data: rather than computing distances, we segment
data points into clusters based on the shape of large regions
within the dataset. We simulate this process by training neural networks to perform instance segmentation on plotted
data. Our approach has several advantages over traditional
clustering algorithms: (1) Because the main step in the algorithm is running a prediction from one neural network, it
is much faster than most existing clustering algorithms and
scales easily to datasets with millions or billions of samples.
(2) As we show on many kinds of datasets, it agrees strongly
with human intuition for clusters, more so than many other
clustering algorithms. (3) The core algorithm is hyperparameter free, although we suggest additional steps with hyperparameters that can be introduced for more control of the
algorithm.
Clustering has been applied in the literature to solve various problems in deep learning and computer vision such
as unsupervised image segmentation [14], facial landmark
detection [9], and image grouping [1, 2]. However, no previous work has leveraged the fast inference time of trained
neural network models to perform clustering. Developing

