On the Instability of Relative Pose Estimation and RANSAC’s Role
Hongyi Fan
School of Engineering
Brown University

Joe Kileel
Department of Mathematics
University of Texas at Austin

Benjamin Kimia
School of Engineering
Brown University

hongyi fan@brown.edu

jkileel@math.utexas.edu

benjamin kimia@brown.edu

Abstract
Relative pose estimation using the 5-point or 7-point
Random Sample Consensus (RANSAC) algorithms can fail
even when no outliers are present and there are enough inliers to support a hypothesis. These cases arise due to numerical instability of the 5- and 7-point minimal problems.
This paper characterizes these instabilities, both in terms
of minimal world scene configurations that lead to infinite
condition number in epipolar estimation, and also in terms
of the related minimal image feature pair correspondence
configurations. The instability is studied in the context of
a novel framework for analyzing the conditioning of minimal problems in multiview geometry, based on Riemannian manifolds. Experiments with synthetic and real-world
data reveal that RANSAC does not only serve to filter out
outliers, but RANSAC also selects for well-conditioned image data, sufficiently separated from the ill-posed locus that
our theory predicts. These findings suggest that, in future
work, one could try to accelerate and increase the success
of RANSAC by testing only well-conditioned image data.

1. Introduction
The past two decades have seen an explosive growth of
multiview geometry applications such as the reconstruction
of 3D object models for use in video games [1], film [19],
archaeology [28], architecture [22], and urban modeling
(e.g., Google Street View); match-moving in augmented reality and cinematography for mixing virtual content and real
video [11]; the organization of a collection of photographs
with respect to a scene known as Structure-from-Motion
[27] (e.g., as pioneered in photo tourism [2]); robotic manipulation [16]; and meteorology from cameras in automobile manufacture and autonomous driving [22]. One key
building block of a multiview system is the relative pose
estimation of two cameras [15, 35]. A methodology that is
dominant in applications is RANSAC [29]. This forms hypotheses from a few randomly selected correspondences in
two views, e.g., 5 in calibrated camera pose estimation [26]

(a)

(b)
Figure 1. The typical relative pose estimation can fail catastrophically, even with a large number of correspondences (100 correspondences shown in the figure) all of which are inliers. (a)
Ground truth epipolar geometry. (b) Erroneous estimated epipolar
geometry from the 7-point algorithm and LO-RANSAC [8]. The
prime cause of such failure is numerical instability as shown in
this paper.

and 7 in uncalibrated camera pose estimation [31, 33], and
validates these hypotheses using the remaining putative correspondences. The chief stated reason for using RANSAC
is robustness against outliers, see [3, 5, 24]. The pose of
multiple cameras can then be recovered in either a locally
incremental [30] or globally averaging manner [18]. This
approach has been quite successful in many applications.
There are, however, a non-negligible number of scenarios where this RANSAC-based approach fails, e.g., in producing the relative pose between two cameras. As an example, when the number of candidate correspondences drops
to say 50 to 100 correspondences, as is the case for images
of homogeneous and low textured surfaces, the pose estimation process fails. Similarly, when there is repeated texture in the scene, there is a large number of outlier candidate
correspondences and again the process can fail. It is curious
why the estimation should fail, even if only a few correspondences are
 available: after all RANSAC can select 5 from
50 in 50
5 ≈ 2.1 million combinations, so there are plenty

8935

