Learning to Solve Hard Minimal Problems*
Petr Hruby
ETH Zürich
Department of Computer Science

Timothy Duff
University of Washington
Department of Mathematics

petr.hruby@inf.ethz.ch

timduff@uw.edu

Anton Leykin
Georgia Institute of Technology
School of Mathematics

Tomas Pajdla
Czech Technical University in Prague
Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics

leykin@math.gatech.edu

pajdla@cvut.cz

Abstract
We present an approach to solving hard geometric optimization problems in the RANSAC framework. The hard
minimal problems arise from relaxing the original geometric optimization problem into a minimal problem with many
spurious solutions. Our approach avoids computing large
numbers of spurious solutions. We design a learning strategy for selecting a starting problem-solution pair that can
be numerically continued to the problem and the solution
of interest. We demonstrate our approach by developing a
RANSAC solver for the problem of computing the relative
pose of three calibrated cameras, via a minimal relaxation
using four points in each view. On average, we can solve
a single problem in under 70 µs. We also benchmark and
study our engineering choices on the very familiar problem
of computing the relative pose of two calibrated cameras,
via the minimal case of five points in two views.

Sample p
↓
Solve & Pick

Sample p
↓
Pick & Solve

Solve a minimal
problem p → S
↓
Pick the best s ∈ S
↓
Score s, update s∗

Pick a = σ(p)
↓
Homotopy from
a to s
↓
Score s, update s∗

(a) The standard use of minimal
problems in RANSAC calls for
solving and scoring a large number of spurious solutions in S.

(b) We suggest to learn a picking
function σ that finds start parameters a from which the homotopy
continuation reaches s.

Figure 1. The inner RANSAC loop finds the best solution for a
data sample p. This is very expensive when a minimal problem
has many spurious solutions. Our efficient homotopy continuation
combined with machine learning avoids solving for the spurious
solutions. Thus, using minimal problems in RANSAC becomes
effectively independent from the number of spurious solutions.

1. Introduction
Minimal problems arise from geometrical problems in
3D reconstruction [59, 61, 62], image matching [55], visual
oodometry,and localization [3, 49, 57, 66]. Many geometrical problems have been successfully formulated and solved
as minimal problems [1,4–6,11,12,18,27,34–37,45,46,48,
54, 56, 58, 64, 67]. Technically, minimal problems are systems of polynomial equations which depend on the input
data and have a finite number of solutions.
* This work was partially supported by projects: EU RDF IMPACT
No. CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/15 003/0000468, EU H2020 ARtwin No. 856994.
The research of AL is partially supported by NSF DMS-2001267. TD
acknowledges support from an NSF Mathematical Sciences Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship (DMS-2103310). We thank Dmytro Mishkin, Viktor
Larsson, and Zuzana Kukelova for their thoughtful comments.

1.1. Motivation
Many geometrical problems are optimization problems
that have only one optimal solution. Minimal problems,
however, often have many additional spurious solutions.
The optimal solution is typically real, satisfies inequality
constraints, and fits well all data. Such constraints, however,
can not be used by methods of nonlinear algebra [13, 65]
which have no ability to bypass finding (or incurring the
cost of finding) all solutions of polynomial systems.
RANSAC [23, 53] approximates the optimal solution to
a geometrical problem by computing candidate solutions
from data samples and picking a solution with maximal
data support. This is done by iterating over the samples in

5532

