Learning Affordance Grounding from Exocentric Images
Hongchen Luo1‡ * Wei Zhai1‡ Jing Zhang2† Yang Cao1,4† Dacheng Tao3,2
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
3
The University of Sydney
JD Explore Academy
4
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{lhc12, wzhai056}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, jing.zhang1@sydney.edu.au,
forrest@ustc.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract
Affordance grounding, a task to ground (i.e., localize)
action possibility region in objects, which faces the challenge of establishing an explicit link with object parts due to
the diversity of interactive affordance. Human has the ability that transform the various exocentric interactions to invariant egocentric affordance so as to counter the impact of
interactive diversity. To empower an agent with such ability,
this paper proposes a task of affordance grounding from exocentric view, i.e., given exocentric human-object interaction and egocentric object images, learning the affordance
knowledge of the object and transferring it to the egocentric
image using only the affordance label as supervision. To
this end, we devise a cross-view knowledge transfer framework that extracts affordance-specific features from exocentric interactions and enhances the perception of affordance
regions by preserving affordance correlation. Specifically,
an Affordance Invariance Mining module is devised to extract specific clues by minimizing the intra-class differences
originated from interaction habits in exocentric images.
Besides, an Affordance Co-relation Preserving strategy is
presented to perceive and localize affordance by aligning
the co-relation matrix of predicted results between the two
views. Particularly, an affordance grounding dataset named
AGD20K is constructed by collecting and labeling over 20K
images from 36 affordance categories. Experimental results
demonstrate that our method outperforms the representative models in terms of objective metrics and visual quality.
Code: github.com/lhc1224/Cross-View-AG.

1. Introduction
The goal of affordance grounding is to locate the region
of “action possibilities” of an object. For an intelligent
* This work was done during an internship at JD Explore Academy.
† Corresponding author. ‡ Equal contributions.

Figure 1. Observation. By observing the exocentric diverse interactions, the human learns affordance knowledge determined by the
object’s intrinsic properties and transfer it to the egocentric view.

agent, it is necessary to know not only what the object is
but also to understand how it can be used [11]. Perceiving
and reasoning about possible interactions in local regions of
objects is the key to the shift from passive perception systems to embodied intelligence systems that actively interact
with and perceive their environment [1, 33, 34, 38]. It has a
wide range of applications for robot grasping, scene understanding, action prediction [12, 13, 19, 23, 28, 31, 47, 49].
As affordance is a dynamic property closely related to
the interaction between humans and environment [13], it is
difficult to understand how to interact with objects and establish an explicit link between the objects’ intrinsic properties and affordances [29]. However, humans can easily
perceive the object’s affordance region by observing exocentric human-object interactions, and give an egocentric
definition. As shown in Fig. 1, although different persons
hold the racket in different positions due to their individual
habits, the human observer can perceive swingable regions
determined by the intrinsic properties (e.g., the long handle

2252

