Probing Representation Forgetting in Supervised and Unsupervised Continual
Learning
MohammadReza Davari1,2 * Nader Asadi1,2 ⇤
Sudhir Mudur1
3
Rahaf Aljundi
Eugene Belilovsky1,2
1
Concordia University 2 Mila – Quebec AI Institute 3 Toyota Motor Europe
Abstract

tions while not forgetting previous knowledge. A common
scenario is CL in the classification setting, where the class
labels presented to the learner change over time. In this scenario, a phenomenon known as catastrophic forgetting has
been observed [11,31]. This phenomenon is often described
as a loss of knowledge about previously seen data and is observed in the classification setting as a decrease in accuracy.

Continual Learning (CL) research typically focuses on
tackling the phenomenon of catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Catastrophic forgetting is associated with an
abrupt loss of knowledge previously learned by a model
when the task, or more broadly the data distribution, being trained on changes. In supervised learning problems
this forgetting, resulting from a change in the model’s representation, is typically measured or observed by evaluating
the decrease in old task performance. However, a model’s
representation can change without losing knowledge about
prior tasks. In this work we consider the concept of representation forgetting, observed by using the difference in
performance of an optimal linear classifier before and after
a new task is introduced. Using this tool we revisit a number of standard continual learning benchmarks and observe
that, through this lens, model representations trained without any explicit control for forgetting often experience small
representation forgetting and can sometimes be comparable
to methods which explicitly control for forgetting, especially
in longer task sequences. We also show that representation
forgetting can lead to new insights on the effect of model capacity and loss function used in continual learning. Based
on our results, we show that a simple yet competitive approach is to learn representations continually with standard
supervised contrastive learning while constructing prototypes of class samples when queried on old samples.1

1. Introduction
Continual Learning (CL) is concerned with methods for
learners to manage changing training data distributions. The
goal is to acquire new knowledge from new data distribu* Equal contribution, name order randomized.
This research was partially funded by NSERC Discovery Grant RGPIN2021-04104 and RGPIN-2019-05729.
We acknowledge resources
provided by Compute Canada and Calcul Quebec. Correspondence to:
m davari@live.concordia.ca, nader.asadi@concordia.ca,
eugene.belilovsky@concordia.ca
1 The code to reproduce our results is publicly available at:
https://github.com/rezazzr/Probing-Representation-Forgetting

Deep learning has been traditionally motivated as an approach, which can automatically learn representations [4],
forgoing the need to design handcrafted features. Indeed
representation learning is at the core of deep learning methods in supervised and unsupervised settings [10]. In the
case of many practical scenarios we may not simply be interested in the final performance of the model, but also the
usefulness of the learned features for various downstream
tasks [42]. Although a model’s representation may change,
sometimes drastically at task boundaries [5], this does not
necessarily imply a loss of useful information and may instead correspond to a simple transformation. For example,
consider a standard multi-head CL setting, where each task
shares a representation and only differs through task specific “heads”. A permutation of the features leading into
the classification heads leads to total catastrophic forgetting
as measured by standard approaches as the task heads no
longer match with the representations. However, this does
not correspond to a loss of knowledge about the data, nor a
less useful representation. Indeed recent works have highlighted the importance of fast remembering versus catastrophic forgetting [14, 17], a looser continual learning requirement where in the task performance may decrease but
the agent is able to recover rapidly upon observing a few
samples from the previous task. In this light, maintaining a
useful representation, which facilitates rapid recovery, is as
important as maintaining high performance for the task.
CL envisions having learners operate over long time
horizons while continually maintaining old knowledge and
integrating new knowledge. Hence, in addition to directly
measuring the performance on previous tasks using the last
layer classifiers, it is sensible to consider the usefulness of

16712

