Representation Compensation Networks for Continual Semantic Segmentation
Xialei Liu 1†
Ying-Cong Chen 2,3
Ming-Ming Cheng 1
Chang-Bin Zhang 1∗
Jia-Wen Xiao 1 *
1
2
TMCC, CS, Nankai University
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract

1. Introduction
Data-driven deep neural networks [64, 72, 96, 108] have
made many milestones in semantic segmentation. However,
these fully-supervised models [16, 23, 93] can only handle
a fixed number of classes. In real-world applications, it is
preferable that a model can be dynamically extended to identify new classes. A straightforward solution is to rebuild
the training set and retrain the model with all data available,
known as Joint Training. However, considering the cost of retraining models, sustainable development of algorithms and
privacy issues, it is particularly crucial to update the model
with only current data to achieve the goal of recognizing
both new and old classes. Nevertheless, naively fine-tuning
a trained model with new data can result in catastrophic
forgetting [48]. Therefore, in this paper, we seek continual
learning, which can potentially enable a model to recognize
new categories without catastrophic forgetting.
In the scenario of continual semantic segmentation [8, 27,
* The first two authors contribute equally.
† Corresponding author (xialei@nankai.edu.cn)

Pooled Cube Distillation

In this work, we study the continual semantic segmentation problem, where the deep neural networks are required to
incorporate new classes continually without catastrophic forgetting. We propose to use a structural re-parameterization
mechanism, named representation compensation (RC) module, to decouple the representation learning of both old and
new knowledge. The RC module consists of two dynamically evolved branches with one frozen and one trainable.
Besides, we design a pooled cube knowledge distillation
strategy on both spatial and channel dimensions to further
enhance the plasticity and stability of the model. We conduct
experiments on two challenging continual semantic segmentation scenarios, continual class segmentation and continual domain segmentation. Without any extra computational
overhead and parameters during inference, our method outperforms state-of-the-art performance. The code is available
at https://github.com/zhangchbin/RCIL.

frozen
conv

trained
conv

non-linear

training
merged
conv
non-linear

ft−1

ft

inference
RC Module

Figure 1. Illustration of our proposed training framework for continual semantic segmentation to avoid catastrophic forgetting. We
design two mechanisms in our method, representation compensation (RC) module and pooled cube distillation (PCD).

62, 63], given the previously trained model and the training
data of the new classes, the model is supposed to distinguish
all seen classes, including previous classes (old classes) and
new classes. However, to save the labeling cost, the new
training data often only has labels for the new classes, treating old classes as background. Learning with the new data
directly without any additional designs is very challenging,
which can easily lead to catastrophic forgetting [48].
As indicated in [28, 48, 51], fine-tuning the model on
new data may lead to catastrophic forgetting, i.e., the model
quickly fits the data distribution of the new classes, while
losing the discrimination for the old classes. Some methods [43,48,56,66,67,80,95] play regularization on model parameters to improve its stability. However, all parameters are
updated on the training data of the new classes. This is however challenging, as new and old knowledge are entangled
together in model parameters, making it extremely difficult
to keep the fragile balance of learning new knowledge and
keeping old ones. Some other methods [45, 57, 75, 76, 82, 91]
increase the capacity of the model to have a better tradeoff of stability and plasticity, but with the cost of growing
memory of the network.
In this work, we propose an easy-to-use representation
compensation module, aiming at remembering the old knowl-

7053

