DLFormer: Discrete Latent Transformer for Video Inpainting
Jingjing Ren1,2 ,* Qingqing Zheng3†, Yuanyuan Zhao2 , Xuemiao Xu1†, Chen Li2
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
WeChat, Tencent Inc. 3 Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
Video inpainting remains a challenging problem to
fill with plausible and coherent content in unknown areas in video frames despite the prevalence of data-driven
methods. Although various transformer-based architectures yield promising result for this task, they still suffer
from hallucinating blurry contents and long-term spatialtemporal inconsistency. While noticing the capability of
discrete representation for complex reasoning and predictive learning, we propose a novel Discrete Latent Transformer (DLFormer) to reformulate video inpainting tasks
into the discrete latent space rather the previous continuous feature space. Specifically, we first learn a unique
compact discrete codebook and the corresponding autoencoder to represent the target video. Built upon these representative discrete codes obtained from the entire target
video, the subsequent discrete latent transformer is capable to infer proper codes for unknown areas under a selfattention mechanism, and thus produces fine-grained content with long-term spatial-temporal consistency. Moreover, we further explicitly enforce the short-term consistency to relieve temporal visual jitters via a temporal aggregation block among adjacent frames. We conduct comprehensive quantitative and qualitative evaluations to demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms other stateof-the-art approaches in reconstructing visually-plausible
and spatial-temporal coherent content with fine-grained
details.Code is available at https://github.com/
JingjingRenabc/dlformer.

1. Introduction
Video inpainting aims to fill in corrupted regions with
meaningful details such that the completed video is consistent both spatially and temporally. It can be applied
to various industrial applications, including video restoration [15, 34], unwanted object removal [18, 19] and video
retargeting [32].
1 This work was done while Jingjing Ren was an intern at Tencent.
2 Qingqing Zheng and Xuemiao Xu are the joint corresponding authors.

(a) Input

(b) VINet

(c) STTN

(d) Ours

Figure 1. Previous methods, like (b) VINet [9] and (c) STTN [34]
formulate in a continuous feature space and usually produce artifacts and blurry results around the occluded bars and background.
In contrast, our method (d) fills the unknown region with plausible content even in the swift movement case by formulating this
problem in a global discrete latent space (please zoom in for better
visualization).

Recently, methods [2, 9, 37] have made great progress in
this task thanks to the powerful CNN-based deep features
extractors. These methods still suffer from limited receptive field along temporal domain and produce blurry and
misplacement artifacts in the completed video, as shown in
Figure 1 (b). The state-of-the-art methods [12, 16, 34] tend
to capture long-term correspondences with attention mechanism, so the available content at distant frames can be globally propagated to the unknown regions. Although these
attention-based methods yield promising results, trivially
using pair-wise similarity in a continuous feature space,
e,g., STTN [34], still suffers from blurry contents (refer to
Figure 1 (c)) degrading the visual quality in high frequency
areas. It is still challenging to generate plausible and coherent contents with fine-grained details, especially under
complex and dynamic scenarios.
To tackle the aforementioned challenges, we propose a
novel Discrete Latent Transformer (DLFormer) to model
the video inpainting task as a code inference problem in a
discrete latent space rather than in the continuous feature

3511

