Revisiting the Transferability of Supervised Pretraining: an MLP Perspective
Yizhou Wang1,3∗† , Shixiang Tang2† , Feng Zhu3 , Lei Bai2‡ , Rui Zhao3,4 , Donglian Qi1 , Wanli Ouyang2
1
Zhejiang University, 2 The University of Sydney,3 SenseTime Research,
4
Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
{yizhouwang, qidl}@zju.edu.cn, stan3906@uni.sydney.edu.au, baisanshi@gmail.com,
{zhufeng, zhaorui}@sensetime.com, wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
The pretrain-finetune paradigm is a classical pipeline
in visual learning. Recent progress on unsupervised pretraining methods shows superior transfer performance to
their supervised counterparts. This paper revisits this phenomenon and sheds new light on understanding the transferability gap between unsupervised and supervised pretraining from a multilayer perceptron (MLP) perspective.
While previous works [6, 8, 17] focus on the effectiveness
of MLP on unsupervised image classification where pretraining and evaluation are conducted on the same dataset,
we reveal that the MLP projector is also the key factor to
better transferability of unsupervised pretraining methods
than supervised pretraining methods. Based on this observation, we attempt to close the transferability gap between supervised and unsupervised pretraining by adding
an MLP projector before the classifier in supervised pretraining. Our analysis indicates that the MLP projector can
help retain intra-class variation of visual features, decrease
the feature distribution distance between pretraining and
evaluation datasets, and reduce feature redundancy. Extensive experiments on public benchmarks demonstrate that
the added MLP projector significantly boosts the transferability of supervised pretraining, e.g. +7.2% top-1 accuracy
on the concept generalization task, +5.8% top-1 accuracy
for linear evaluation on 12-domain classification tasks, and
+0.8% AP on COCO object detection task, making supervised pretraining comparable or even better than unsupervised pretraining.

1. Introduction
While Supervised Learning with the cross-entropy loss1
(SL) were the de facto pretraining paradigm in computer vision [14, 20, 26, 39] for a long period, recent unsupervised

learning methods [3–9, 15, 17, 18, 49, 52] show better transfer learning performance on various visual tasks [17,22,53].
This raised the question of why unsupervised pretraining
surpasses supervised pretraining even though supervised
pretraining uses annotations with rich semantic information.
Several works have attempted to explain the better transferability of unsupervised pretraining than supervised pretraining by the following two reasons: (1) Learning without
semantic information in annotations [16, 37, 45, 53], which
makes the backbone less overfit to semantic labels to preserve instance-specific information which may be useful
in transfer tasks, and (2) Special design of the contrastive
loss [22, 23, 53], which helps the learned features to contain more low/mid-level information for effective transfer
to downstream tasks. Starting from the perspective of supervision and loss design, these works provide intuitive explanations for better transferability.
In this paper, we shed new light on understanding transferability by considering the multilayer perception (MLP)
projector. While previous works [6, 8, 17] verified its effectiveness on the unsupervised image classification task: unsupervised training and evaluating the model on the same
ImagNet-1K dataset, they did not explore its effectiveness on transfer tasks thoroughly and rigorously. It is not
straightforward to extend the effectiveness of MLP on the
unsupervised image classification task to downstream tasks
if not supported by rigorous experiments or theoretical analysis, because the performance on the pretraining task is not
always predictive of the performance on transfer tasks when
there exists a large semantic gap [16, 35, 43]. To our best
knowledge, we are the first to identify the MLP projector
as the core factor for the transferability with deep empirical and theoretical analysis. With this new viewpoint, we
find that a simple yet effective method, adding an MLP projector, can promote the transferability of the conventional
∗ The work was done during an internship at SenseTime.
† Equal Contribution.
‡ Corresponding author.

1 In the paper, we specifically use the notation “SL” to indicate the con-

ventional supervised learning with the cross-entropy loss.

9183

