Learning What Not to Segment: A New Perspective on Few-Shot Segmentation
Chunbo Lang
Gong Cheng*
Binfei Tu
Junwei Han
School of Automation, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
{langchunbo, binfeitu}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, {gcheng, jhan}@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently few-shot segmentation (FSS) has been extensively developed. Most previous works strive to achieve
generalization through the meta-learning framework derived from classification tasks; however, the trained models
are biased towards the seen classes instead of being ideally class-agnostic, thus hindering the recognition of new
concepts. This paper proposes a fresh and straightforward
insight to alleviate the problem. Specifically, we apply an
additional branch (base learner) to the conventional FSS
model (meta learner) to explicitly identify the targets of base
classes, i.e., the regions that do not need to be segmented.
Then, the coarse results output by these two learners in parallel are adaptively integrated to yield precise segmentation
prediction. Considering the sensitivity of meta learner, we
further introduce an adjustment factor to estimate the scene
differences between the input image pairs for facilitating
the model ensemble forecasting. The substantial performance gains on PASCAL-5i and COCO-20i verify the effectiveness, and surprisingly, our versatile scheme sets a new
state-of-the-art even with two plain learners. Moreover, in
light of the unique nature of the proposed approach, we also
extend it to a more realistic but challenging setting, i.e.,
generalized FSS, where the pixels of both base and novel
classes are required to be determined. The source code is
available at github.com/chunbolang/BAM.

Figure 1. Comparison of our BAM and previous work. (a) Conventional approaches typically employ meta-learning frameworks
to train the FSS models, which is inevitably biased towards base
classes rather than being ideally class-agnostic, thus hindering the
recognition of target objects for novel class (e.g., cat ( )). (b)
Our BAM introduces an additional branch, namely base learner,
to explicitly predict the regions of base classes. In this way, the
distractor objects (e.g., person ( ) and sofa ( )) in the query image can be suppressed significantly after the ensemble module. (c)
Extension of our BAM under the generalized FSS settings, where
the pixels of both base and novel classes are required to be determined. The refined results are again merged with the output of the
base learner to generate comprehensive predictions.

•

•

1. Introduction
Benefiting from the well-established large-scale datasets
[8, 9, 29], a wealth of convolutional neural network (CNN)
based computer vision techniques have undergone rapid development over the past few years [15–17, 27, 28, 35, 43–
45, 48]. However, collecting sufficient labeled data is notoriously time-consuming and labor-intensive, especially
for dense prediction tasks, such as instance segmentation
[2,3,15,21,59] and semantic segmentation [1,25,35,40,45].
In striking contrast with the machine learning paradigms,
* Gong Cheng is the corresponding author.

•

humans can easily recognize new concepts or patterns from
a handful of examples, which greatly stimulates the research
interest of the community [39,52,53]. Thus, few-shot learning (FSL) is proposed to address this problem by building
a network that can be generalized to unseen domains with
scarce annotated samples available [7, 42, 54, 57].
In this paper, we undertake the application of FSL in

8057

