UNIST: Unpaired Neural Implicit Shape Translation Network
Qimin
Chen
Teaser (final
result)

1

Johannes Merz1 Aditya Sanghi2 Hooman Shayani2
Ali Mahdavi-Amiri1 Hao Zhang1
2
1
Simon Fraser University
Autodesk AI Lab

(c) Letter H to A

(a) Letter R to G

(b) Table to Chair

(e) Italic to Regular

(d) Chair to Table

(g) Regular to Bold

(f) w Armrest to w/o Armrest

(i) Solid to Dotted

(h) Tall to Short

Figure 1. We present UNIST, a model built on neural implicit representation that is able to learn both style-preserving content alteration
(a-d) and content-preserving style transfer (e-i) between two unpaired domains of shapes, using the same network architecture.

Abstract
We introduce UNIST, the first deep neural implicit model
for general-purpose, unpaired shape-to-shape translation,
in both 2D and 3D domains. Our model is built on autoencoding implicit fields, rather than point clouds which
represents the state of the art. Furthermore, our translation
network is trained to perform the task over a latent grid representation which combines the merits of both latent-space
processing and position awareness, to not only enable drastic shape transforms but also well preserve spatial features
and fine local details for natural shape translations. With
the same network architecture and only dictated by the input domain pairs, our model can learn both style-preserving
content alteration and content-preserving style transfer. We
demonstrate the generality and quality of the translation results, and compare them to well-known baselines. Code is
available at https://qiminchen.github.io/unist/.

1. Introduction
Unpaired image-to-image translation has become one of
the most extensively studied problems in computer vision
since the advent of CycleGAN [29], DualGAN [26], and
UNIT [16] in 2017. Somewhat surprisingly, there have been
much fewer works on the same problem for shapes, i.e.,
unpaired shape-to-shape translation. To date, most image

translation networks have been designed for style transfers
that are localized, without large structural alterations. For
shape translations, however, one may naturally expect more
of the latter, e.g., to change the shape of a letter ‘R’ to that
of a ‘G’, or a table to a chair; see Figures 1(a-d).
Recently, Yin et al. [27] proposed LOGAN, an unpaired
shape translation network that can be trained to execute
both style and content, i.e., shape- and structure-level, transforms. However, their network was designed to operate on
low-resolution point clouds (up to 2,048 points), which can
severely limit the quality of the reconstructed and translated
shapes, especially in the 3D case. In addition, the translation network is trained to operate on ªholisticº latent codes
which encode global information that is multi-scale but not
position-aware. A consequence of such a lack of positional
information in the encoding is losing control of spatial features, as well as local details, during shape translation. For
example, when the translation is supposed to only italicize
a letter shape, which is a pose change, the local details of a
source shape (e.g., thickness/sharpness of certain tips of the
shape) may be unexpectedly altered as well, as shown in the
second row of Figure 4 on the letter A translation.
In this paper, we present a method for unpaired shapeto-shape translation that is built on autoencoding neural implicit fields [3, 18, 20], rather than point clouds [27]. In recent years, advantages of learning continuous implicit functions over discrete representations such as voxels, mesh

18614

