DASO: Distribution-Aware Semantics-Oriented Pseudo-label
for Imbalanced Semi-Supervised Learning
Youngtaek Oh1
Dong-Jin Kim2
In So Kweon1
1
2
KAIST, South Korea.
UC Berkeley / ICSI, CA.

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) [7] has shown to be
promising for leveraging unlabeled data to reduce the cost
of constructing labeled data [4, 5, 36, 40, 57] and even boost
the performance at scale [29, 49, 67, 68]. The common
approach of these algorithms is to produce pseudo-labels
for unlabeled data based on model’s predictions and utilize them for regularizing model training [29, 38, 57]. Although adopted in a variety of tasks, these algorithms often
assume class-balanced data, while many real-world datasets
exhibit long-tailed distributions [3, 18, 31, 32]. With classimbalanced data, the class distribution of pseudo-labels
from unlabeled data becomes severely biased to the majority classes due to confirmation bias [2]. Such biased
pseudo-labels can further bias the model during training.

djkim93@berkeley.edu

Class size
Head

Pseudo-label(PL) generation
Linear
Classifier

Tail

Head

Class size
Head

Similarity
Classifier
Tail

1

DASO
Blending

Sem. PL
Label

DASO
Label

Tail

Eqn. (3)

Linear PL

Labeled

Unlabeled

PL Blending

Lin. PL
Label

Eqn. (2)

Head

1

Tail

Semantic PL

Rel. PL size

SSL dataset

Abstract
The capability of the traditional semi-supervised learning (SSL) methods is far from real-world application due
to severely biased pseudo-labels caused by (1) class imbalance and (2) class distribution mismatch between labeled
and unlabeled data. This paper addresses such a relatively under-explored problem. First, we propose a general
pseudo-labeling framework that class-adaptively blends the
semantic pseudo-label from a similarity-based classifier to
the linear one from the linear classifier, after making the
observation that both types of pseudo-labels have complementary properties in terms of bias. We further introduce
a novel semantic alignment loss to establish balanced feature representation to reduce the biased predictions from the
classifier. We term the whole framework as DistributionAware Semantics-Oriented (DASO) Pseudo-label. We conduct extensive experiments in a wide range of imbalanced
benchmarks: CIFAR10/100-LT, STL10-LT, and large-scale
long-tailed Semi-Aves with open-set class, and demonstrate
that, the proposed DASO framework reliably improves SSL
learners with unlabeled data especially when both (1) class
imbalance and (2) distribution mismatch dominate.

2

Rel. PL size

{youngtaek.oh, iskweon}@kaist.ac.kr

Rel. PL size

1

Head

1

Tail

DASO PL

Figure 1. Glimpse of the DASO framework. DASO reduces the
overall bias in pseudo-labels (PL) from unlabeled data by blending two complementary PLs from different classifiers. Note that
bias is conceptually illustrated as relative PL size (Rel. PL size),
meaning that pseudo-label size is normalized by actual label size.

Many methods of handling class-imbalanced labels have
been proposed in the supervised learning community, but
little interest has been made in re-balancing pseudo-labels
in SSL. Recent studies have explored this imbalanced SSL
setting, where as a reference to the class distribution of unlabeled data, it is often assumed that it is the same as the class
distribution of labels [33,64], or a separate distribution estimate is required [33]. However, the actual class distribution
of unlabeled data is unknown without the labels. For example, unlabeled data may have large class distribution gap
from labeled data, including many samples in novel classes
not defined in the label set [58]. As we elaborate in Sec. 4,
the bias of pseudo-labels also depends on such class distribution mismatch between labeled and unlabeled data, and
using inaccurate estimates or wrong assumptions about the
unlabeled data cannot be helpful under imbalanced SSL.
In this work, we present a new imbalanced SSL method
specifically tailored for alleviating the bias in pseudo-labels
under class-imbalanced data, while discarding the common
assumption that the class distribution of unlabeled data is
the same with the label distribution. To this end, as shown
in Fig. 1, we observe that semantic pseudo-labels [22] obtained from a similarity-based classifier [56] are biased towards minority classes as opposed to linear classifier-based

9786

