DetectorDetective: Investigating the Effects of Adversarial Examples on
Object Detectors
Sivapriya Vellaichamy, Matthew Hull, Zijie J. Wang, Nilaksh Das, ShengYun Peng,
Haekyu Park, Duen Horng (Polo) Chau
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, Georgia, USA
[svellaichamy3, matthewhull, jayw, nilakshdas, speng65, haekyu, polo]@gatech.edu

Abstract
With deep learning based systems performing exceedingly
well in many vision-related tasks, a major concern with their
widespread deployment especially in safety-critical applications is their susceptibility to adversarial attacks. We
propose DetectorDetective, an interactive visual tool that
aims to help users better understand the behaviors of a model
as adversarial images journey through an object detector.
DetectorDetective enables users to easily learn about how
the three key modules of the Faster R-CNN object detector —
Feature Pyramidal Network, Region Proposal Network, and
Region Of Interest Head — respond to a user-selected benign
image and its adversarial version. Visualizations about the
progressive changes in the intermediate features among such
modules help users gain insights into the impact of adversarial attacks, and perform side-by-side comparisons between
the benign and adversarial responses. Furthermore, DetectorDetective displays saliency maps for the input images
to comparatively highlight image regions that contribute to
attack success. DetectorDetective complements adversarial
machine learning research on object detection by providing
a user-friendly interactive tool for inspecting and understanding model responses. DetectorDetective is available
at the following public demo link: https://poloclub.
github.io/detector-detective . A video demo
is available at https://youtu.be/5C3Klh87CZI.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are now used in many computer vision tasks and have reached human-level accuracy in image
classification [4, 9], object detection [19, 20], and semantic
segmentation [8, 11]. With its phenomenal accuracy and
applicability in various domains, they form a class of models
that deserve greater understanding. Accuracy and robustness
of models play a key role in their widespread deployment.

Several works show that deep neural networks are vulnerable to digital perturbation [7, 13, 16] and physical realizable
attacks [3, 6, 18]. Szegedy et al. [16] showed that adding
visually imperceptible but structured noises are capable of
fooling the deep learning system into making wrongful predictions. This can be especially disastrous in scenarios like
self-driving cars with failed detection of a pedestrian or
wrongful detection of stop sign as any other object. With
the existence of such vulnerability, it is important to be able
to visually understand and explain the process by which a
system arrives at the predictions for the users to have trust in
the system.
We propose DetectorDetective (Figure 1), an interactive
tool that helps users understand how an original benign image and its adversarially-attacked version is processed as it
goes from a collection of pixels through different modules
of the object detector and finally to a collection of bounding
boxes and classification labels. We generate the adversarial image from a user-chosen input image using Projected
Gradient Descent [12] to enable this comparative visualization. The user then engages with the tool to interactively
explore the key modules within the object detector, and
those modules’ components, with a side-by-side comparative visualization for the original and adversarial example.
DetectorDetective also provides overall saliency maps based
on Gradients [5] and GradCAM [15] to help users better
understand the important pixels for both the images on the
whole. GradCAM++ [2], a generalization of GradCAM
is also found to work well for multiple detections. In addition, both techniques have been able to pass the basic sanity
checks for saliency maps [1]. DetectorDetective is available
at the following public demo link: https://poloclub.
github.io/detector-detective . A video demo
is available at https://youtu.be/5C3Klh87CZI.
DetectorDetective’s primary contributions include:
• Visual interpretation of adversarial examples on object detector. DetectorDetective helps users interpret

