Noise Distribution Adaptive Self-Supervised Image Denoising using
Tweedie Distribution and Score Matching

1

Kwanyoung Kim1 Taesung Kwon2 Jong Chul Ye1,2
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, 2 Department of Bio and Brain Engineering, KAIST
{cubeyoung, star.kwon, jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr

Figure 1. Our image denoising results in Kodak dataset. Top: Gaussian noise (σ =25, σ = 50), Middle: Poisson noise (ζ = 0.01, 0.05),
Bottom: Gamma noise (k = 100, 50).

Abstract
Tweedie distributions are a special case of exponential
dispersion models, which are often used in classical statistics as distributions for generalized linear models. Here,
we show that Tweedie distributions also play key roles in
modern deep learning era, leading to a distribution adaptive self-supervised image denoising formula without clean
reference images. Specifically, by combining with the recent
Noise2Score self-supervised image denoising approach and
the saddle point approximation of Tweedie distribution, we
provide a general closed-form denoising formula that can
be used for large classes of noise distributions without ever
knowing the underlying noise distribution. Similar to the
original Noise2Score, the new approach is composed of two
successive steps: score matching using perturbed noisy images, followed by a closed form image denoising formula

via distribution-independent Tweedie’s formula. In addition, we reveal a systematic algorithm to estimate the noise
model and noise parameters for a given noisy image data
set. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that
the proposed method can accurately estimate noise models and parameters, and provide the state-of-the-art selfsupervised image denoising performance in the benchmark
dataset and real-world dataset.

1. Introduction
Image denoising is a fundamental problem in low-level
computer vision problems. Nowadays, typical supervised
learning approaches easily outperform classical denoising algorithms such as Block-Matching and 3D filtering
(BM3D) [2] and Weighted Nuclear Norm Minimization
(WNNM) [5]. Nonetheless, the supervised approaches are

2008

