Portrait Eyeglasses and Shadow Removal by Leveraging 3D Synthetic Data
Junfeng Lyu Zhibo Wang Feng Xu
School of Software and BNRist, Tsinghua University

Abstract
In portraits, eyeglasses may occlude facial regions and
generate cast shadows on faces, which degrades the performance of many techniques like face verification and expression recognition. Portrait eyeglasses removal is critical in handling these problems. However, completely removing the eyeglasses is challenging because the lighting
effects (e.g., cast shadows) caused by them are often complex. In this paper, we propose a novel framework to remove eyeglasses as well as their cast shadows from face
images. The method works in a detect-then-remove manner,
in which eyeglasses and cast shadows are both detected and
then removed from images. Due to the lack of paired data
for supervised training, we present a new synthetic portrait dataset with both intermediate and final supervisions
for both the detection and removal tasks. Furthermore,
we apply a cross-domain technique to fill the gap between
the synthetic and real data. To the best of our knowledge,
the proposed technique is the first to remove eyeglasses
and their cast shadows simultaneously. The code and synthetic dataset are available at https://github.com/
StoryMY/take-off-eyeglasses.

1. Introduction
A large portion of people wears eyeglasses in their daily
lives. In their face photos, eyeglasses usually bring unwanted occlusions and cast shadows on faces, which lead
to inaccuracy in many useful techniques like image-based
face verification [42, 46], expression recognition [47], fatigue detection [13, 17, 40], etc. Besides, in photography,
removing eyeglasses from portraits could be needed for aesthetic reasons, giving users a choice to edit their portraits.
Therefore, it is beneficial to develop an automatic technique
for portrait eyeglasses removal.
However, completely removing eyeglasses suffers some
key challenges. First, to recover the occluded facial region and keep it consistent with the remaining regions is
a difficult task as facial skin has rich details and complex
reflectance. Second, only recovering the occluded region
cannot ensure visually convincing results as eyeglasses also

Figure 1. Our method allows to remove eyeglasses and their shadows simultaneously. It produces photo-realistic results under various illuminations, head poses and eyeglasses with different shapes
and textures.

bring various lighting effects (e.g., cast shadows, reflections
and distortions) on face regions. Explicitly modeling these
effects is extremely difficult as the physical rules to generate these effects are complicated. And it requires a delicate
perception of the eyeglasses geometry, face geometry and
lighting conditions, which are also difficult to obtain from a
single portrait.
Recently, deep learning [30, 44] has shown its great potential in handling tasks related to face editing [14, 33],
and has been successfully applied to portrait eyeglasses removal [22] with the help of the face datasets [27, 35] containing eyeglasses labels. However, these techniques only
focus on the eyeglasses but not the corresponding lighting
effects. ByeGlassesGAN [32] constructs paired data con-

3429

