Class Re-Activation Maps for Weakly-Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Zhaozheng Chen1 Tan Wang2 Xiongwei Wu1
Xian-Sheng Hua3 Hanwang Zhang2 Qianru Sun1
1

Singapore Management University

2

Nanyang Technological University

zzchen.2019@phdcs.smu.edu.sg

{xwwu,qianrusun}@smu.edu.sg

Val Accuracy

Abstract

1. Introduction
Weakly-supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) aims
to lower the high cost in annotating “strong” pixel-level
masks by using “weak” labels instead, such as scribbles [29, 36], bounding boxes [7, 35], and image-level class
labels [1, 19, 27, 28, 42, 46]. The last one is the most economic yet challenging budget and thus is our focus in this
paper. A common pipeline has three steps: 1) training a

Damo Academy, Alibaba Group

{tan317, hanwangzhang}@ntu.edu.sg

xiansheng.hxs@alibaba-inc.com

Extracting class activation maps (CAM) is arguably the
most standard step of generating pseudo masks for weaklysupervised semantic segmentation (WSSS). Yet, we find that
the crux of the unsatisfactory pseudo masks is the binary
cross-entropy loss (BCE) widely used in CAM. Specifically,
due to the sum-over-class pooling nature of BCE, each pixel
in CAM may be responsive to multiple classes co-occurring
in the same receptive field. As a result, given a class, its
hot CAM pixels may wrongly invade the area belonging
to other classes, or the non-hot ones may be actually a
part of the class. To this end, we introduce an embarrassingly simple yet surprisingly effective method: Reactivating the converged CAM with BCE by using softmax crossentropy loss (SCE), dubbed ReCAM. Given an image, we
use CAM to extract the feature pixels of each single class,
and use them with the class label to learn another fullyconnected layer (after the backbone) with SCE. Once converged, we extract ReCAM in the same way as in CAM.
Thanks to the contrastive nature of SCE, the pixel response
is disentangled into different classes and hence less mask
ambiguity is expected. The evaluation on both PASCAL
VOC and MS COCO shows that ReCAM not only generates high-quality masks, but also supports plug-and-play in
any CAM variant with little overhead. Our code is public at
https://github.com/zhaozhengChen/ReCAM.

3

1

BCE

mIoU of CAM
0.7

SCE
0.95

0.6

0.9

0.5

0.85

0.4

0.8

Train Set

Val Set

9.2%

8.8%

5.9%

4.7%

0.3

80‐class 5‐hoofed
(a)

80‐class 5‐hoofed

80‐class 5‐hoofed

(b)

Figure 1. We train two models respectively using binary cross entropy (BCE) and softmax cross entropy (SCE) losses. Our train
and val sets contain only single-label images of MS COCO [30].
“80-class” model uses the complete label set. “5-hoofed” model
is trained on only the samples of 5 hoofed animals each causing
false positive flaws to another, e.g., between cow and horse.

multi-label classification model with the image-level class
labels; 2) extracting the class activation map (CAM) [51]
of each class to generate a 0-1 mask, with potential refinement such as erosion and expansion [1, 23]; and 3) taking all-class masks as pseudo labels to learn the segmentation model in a standard fully-supervised fashion [5, 6, 41].
There are different factors affecting the performance of the
final segmentation model, but the classification model in the
first step is definitely the root. We often observe two common flaws. In the CAM of an object class A, there are 1)
false positive pixels that are activated for class A but have
the actual label of class B, where B is usually a confusing class to A rather than background—a special class in
semantic segmentation; and 2) false negative pixels that belong to class A but are wrongly labeled as background.
Findings. We point out that these flaws are particularly obvious when the model is trained with the binary
cross-entropy (BCE) loss with sigmoid activation function.
x
Specifically, the sigmoid function is exe+1 where x denotes
the prediction logit of any individual class. The output is

969

