OrphicX: A Causality-Inspired Latent Variable Model for Interpreting Graph
Neural Networks
Wanyu Lin1

Hao Lan2
Hao Wang3
2
Baochun Li
1
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 2 University of Toronto, 3 Rutgers University
wan-yu.lin@polyu.edu.hk, hao.lan@mail.utoronto.ca, bli@ece.toronto.edu, hoguewang@gmail.com

Abstract
This paper proposes a new eXplanation framework,
called OrphicX, for generating causal explanations for
any graph neural networks (GNNs) based on learned latent causal factors. Specifically, we construct a distinct
generative model and design an objective function that encourages the generative model to produce causal, compact,
and faithful explanations. This is achieved by isolating the
causal factors in the latent space of graphs by maximizing
the information flow measurements. We theoretically analyze
the cause-effect relationships in the proposed causal graph,
identify node attributes as confounders between graphs and
GNN predictions, and circumvent such confounder effect by
leveraging the backdoor adjustment formula. Our framework is compatible with any GNNs, and it does not require
access to the process by which the target GNN produces
its predictions. In addition, it does not rely on the linearindependence assumption of the explained features, nor require prior knowledge on the graph learning tasks. We
show a proof-of-concept of OrphicX on canonical classification problems on graph data. In particular, we analyze
the explanatory subgraphs obtained from explanations for
molecular graphs (i.e., Mutag) and quantitatively evaluate
the explanation performance with frequently occurring subgraph patterns. Empirically, we show that OrphicX can effectively identify the causal semantics for generating causal
explanations, significantly outperforming its alternatives1 .

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have found various applications in many scientific domains, including iamge
classification [10], 3D-shape analysis [17], video analysis [36], speech recognition [6], and social information sys1 This project is supported by the Internal Research Fund at The Hong
Kong Polytechnic University P0035763. HW is partially supported by NSF
Grant IIS-2127918 and an Amazon Faculty Research Award.

tems [9, 12]. The decisions of powerful GNNs for graphstructural data are difficult to interpret. In this paper, we
focus on providing post-hoc explanations for any GNN
by parameterizing the process of generating explanations.
Specifically, given a pre-trained GNN of interest, an explanation model, or called explainer, is trained for generating
compact subgraphs, leading to the model outcomes. However, learning the explanation process can be difficult as
no ground-truth explanations exist. If an explanation highlights subjectively irrelevant subgraph patterns of the input
instance, this may correctly reflect the target GNN’s unexpected way of processing the data, or the explanation may
be inaccurate.
Recently, a few recent works have been proposed
to explain GNNs via learning the explanation process.
XGNN [34] was proposed to investigate the graph patterns
that lead to a specific class by learning a policy network.
PGExplainer [14] was proposed to learn a mask predictor to
obtain the edge masks for providing explanations. However,
XGNN fails to explain individual instances and therefore
lacks local fidelity [22], while PGExplainer heavily relies
on the learned embeddings of the target model, and has the
restrictive assumption of having domain knowledge over the
learning tasks (e.g., the explicit subgraph patterns are provided). The closest to ours is Gem [11], wherein an explainer
is learned based on the concept of Granger causality. The
distillation process of ground-truth explanation naturally implies the independent assumptions of the explained features2 ,
which might be problematic as the graph-structured data is
inherently interdependent [31].
In this work, we define a distinct generative model as an
explainer that can provide interpretable explanations for any
GNNs through the lens of causality, in particular from the
notion of the structural causal model (SCM) [19, 29]. In
principle, generating causal explanations require reasoning
about how changing different concepts of the input instance
2 We are aware of the drawbacks of reusing the term “feature.” Specifically, nodes and edges are the explained features in an explanatory subgraph.

13729

