TransMVSNet: Global Context-aware Multi-view Stereo Network with
Transformers
Yikang Ding1,2 * Wentao Yuan1,3 * Qingtian Zhu1 Haotian Zhang1
Xiangyue Liu1 Yuanjiang Wang1† Xiao Liu1‡
1

Megvii Research

2

Tsinghua University

3

Peking University

Abstract
In this paper, we present TransMVSNet, based on our
exploration of feature matching in multi-view stereo (MVS).
We analogize MVS back to its nature of a feature matching task and therefore propose a powerful Feature Matching Transformer (FMT) to leverage intra- (self-) and inter(cross-) attention to aggregate long-range context information within and across images. To facilitate a better adaptation of the FMT, we leverage an Adaptive Receptive Field
(ARF) module to ensure a smooth transit in scopes of features and bridge different stages with a feature pathway
to pass transformed features and gradients across different scales. In addition, we apply pair-wise feature correlation to measure similarity between features, and adopt
ambiguity-reducing focal loss to strengthen the supervision. To the best of our knowledge, TransMVSNet is the
first attempt to leverage Transformer into the task of MVS.
As a result, our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on DTU dataset, Tanks and Temples benchmark,
and BlendedMVS dataset. Code is available at https:
//github.com/MegviiRobot/TransMVSNet.

1. Introduction
Multi-view stereo (MVS) aims to recover the dense 3D
presentation with a series of calibrated images, which is an
important task of computer vision. Learning-based MVS
networks [10, 31, 32] have achieved remarkable progress in
terms of reconstruction quality and efficiency. Typically, a
MVS network extracts image features by a CNN and constructs cost volume via plane sweep algorithm [5] in which
source images are warped to the reference view. This cost
* Equal Contribution. This work is done by the author as interns at
Megvii Research.
† Project lead.
‡ Corresponding author (liuxiao@foxmail.com).

Figure 1. Comparison with state-of-the-art learning-based MVS
methods [3,10,19,26,27,34] on DTU dataset [1] (lower is better)
and Tanks and Temples benchmark [12] (higher is better).

volume is regularized afterwards to estimate the final depth.
The nature of MVS is a one-to-many feature matching
task, in which each pixel of the reference image is supposed
to search along the epipolar line in all warped source images
and find an optimal depth with the lowest matching cost.
Some recent studies [22, 24] have proven the importance of
long-range global context in feature matching tasks. However, given the aforementioned MVS pipeline, there are two
main problems. (a) Local features are well captured by convolutions. The locality of convolved features prevents the
perception of global context information, which is essential
for robust depth estimation at challenging regions in MVS,
e.g. poor texture, repetitive patterns, and non-Lambertian
surfaces. (b) Besides, when computing matching costs, the
features to be compared are simply extracted respectively
from each image itself, which is to say, potential inter-image
correspondences are not taken into consideration.
Recently, Transformer [25], which is initially proposed
for natural language processing, has drawn considerable attention from the computer vision community for their great
performance on vision tasks. Since Transformer utilizes the
mechanism of attention and positional encoding for context
aggregation, rather than convolutions, it is capable of perceiving global and positionally relevant context information

8585

