Dual Adversarial Adaptation for
Cross-Device Real-World Image Super-Resolution
Xiaoqian Xu1 Pengxu Wei* 1 Weikai Chen2 Yang Liu1 Mingzhi Mao1 Liang Lin1 Guanbin Li1
1
Sun Yat-sen University 2 Tencent America
LR

Abstract
Due to the sophisticated imaging process, an identical
scene captured by different cameras could exhibit distinct
imaging patterns, introducing distinct proficiency among
the super-resolution (SR) models trained on images from
different devices. In this paper, we investigate a novel and
practical task coded cross-device SR, which strives to adapt
a real-world SR model trained on the paired images captured by one camera to low-resolution (LR) images captured
by arbitrary target devices. The proposed task is highly
challenging due to the absence of paired data from various imaging devices. To address this issue, we propose an
unsupervised domain adaptation mechanism for real-world
SR, named Dual ADversarial Adaptation (DADA), which
only requires LR images in the target domain with available real paired data from a source camera. DADA employs the Domain-Invariant Attention (DIA) module to establish the basis of target model training even without HR
supervision. Furthermore, the dual framework of DADA facilitates an Inter-domain Adversarial Adaptation (InterAA)
in one branch for two LR input images from two domains,
and an Intra-domain Adversarial Adaptation (IntraAA) in
two branches for an LR input image. InterAA and IntraAA together improve the model transferability from the
source domain to the target. We empirically conduct experiments under six Real→Real adaptation settings among
three different cameras, and achieve superior performance
compared with existing state-of-the-art approaches. We
also evaluate the proposed DADA to address the adaptation to the video camera, which presents a promising research topic to promote the wide applications of real-world
super-resolution. Our source code is publicly available at
https://github.com/lonelyhope/DADA.

SR

(captured by Sony)

(Sony model)

HR

(Sony)

SR

(Panasonic model)

Difference Map

Difference Map

LR

(captured by Panasonic)

SR

HR

(Panasonic model) (Panasonnic)

SR

(Sony model)

Figure 1. Comparison of real SR results across different trained
models from different camera data in the DRealSR dataset [18].
The Difference Map denotes the absolute difference between
ground-truth HR and SR image (The brightness in the map reflects
the magnitude of the difference).

(a) Bicubic

(b) Panasonic

(c) Sony

(d) Olympus

Figure 2. Degradation kernels for bicubic down-sampling and
three different cameras in DRealSR [18]. USRNet [22] is employed to estimate those kernels by minimizing ∥(HR ⊗ k) ↓s
−LR∥, where ⊗ means convolution, and ↓s means downsampling for scaling factor s by choosing the upper left item for
every s ∗ s grid. The kernel size is set to 25 ∗ 25 and the scaling
factor s is 4.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR), which superresolves low-resolution images (LRs) and reconstructs their
* Corresponding author: weipx3@mail.sysu.edu.cn

high-resolution counterparts (HRs), is a fundamental task in
low-level computer vision. The emergence of deep learning
significantly contributes to the SR progress and SISR is usually cast as a supervised learning task with paired LR-HR

5667

