RFNet: Unsupervised Network for Mutually Reinforcing Multi-modal Image
Registration and Fusion
Han Xu1 , Jiayi Ma1∗ , Jiteng Yuan1 , Zhuliang Le1 , and Wei Liu2
1
2
Wuhan University, China
Tencent Data Platform, China
{xu han,yuanjiteng,lezhuliang}@whu.edu.cn, jyma2010@gmail.com, wl2223@columbia.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel method to realize multimodal image registration and fusion in a mutually
reinforcing framework, termed as RFNet. We handle the
registration in a coarse-to-fine fashion. For the first time,
we exploit the feedback of image fusion to promote the
registration accuracy rather than treating them as two
separate issues. The fine-registered results also improve the
fusion performance. Specifically, for image registration,
we solve the bottlenecks of defining registration metrics
applicable for multi-modal images and facilitating the
network convergence. The metrics are defined based on
image translation and image fusion respectively in the
coarse and fine stages. The convergence is facilitated by
the designed metrics and a deformable convolution-based
network. For image fusion, we focus on texture preservation, which not only increases the information amount
and quality of fusion results but also improves the feedback
of fusion results. The proposed method is evaluated on
multi-modal images with large global parallaxes, images
with local misalignments and aligned images to validate
the performances of registration and fusion. The results in
these cases demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
Multi-modal image fusion aims to merge the information from different imaging modalities to generate a single image with rich information and high quality. Because the fused images can describe scenes comprehensively by merging the complementary information, image
fusion serves as a powerful tool for wide applications, such
as security, remote sensing, clinical treatment, etc.
As multi-modal images are taken from different devices/sensors, it inevitably leads to parallaxes due to biased positions, angles, etc. However, almost all the fusion
methods fail to consider parallaxes. They require an ac∗ Corresponding author

unaligned multimodal images

unaligned multimodal images

image
registration

coarse image
registration

remaining
misalignments

image
fusion

(a) Separate issues

remaining misalignments

image
fusion

criterion to improve
registration accuracy

fine image

promote fusion results registration

(b) Proposed method

Figure 1. Treating registration and fusion as separate issues in existing methods and the proposed mutually reinforcing framework.

curate registration before fusion can take place, as shown
in Fig. 1(a). Unfortunately, the diversity between different modalities poses a great challenge to improve the registration accuracy, still resulting in mitigated misalignments
in the pre-registered images. When registration and fusion
are separate issues, existing fusion methods have to “tolerate” rather than “fight” the pre-registration misalignments.
Thus, multi-modal image registration and fusion become an
urgent issue for the practical application of image fusion.
Meanwhile, in existing separate branches, image fusion
is a downstream task of registration, and fails to provide
feedbacks to improve registration accuracy. Nevertheless,
considering the characteristics of fused images, it is possible for image fusion to inversely eliminate misalignments.
First, the fused images integrate the information from both
modalities. When the fused image is registered with either
source image, the alleviated modal diversity reduces the difficulty of registration. Second, the misalignments in fused
images undoubtedly lead to more but repeated salient structures, i.e., dense gradients. By comparison, an accurate registration encourages the sparseness of gradients. Thus, the
gradient sparsity of fusion results can act as a criterion to
improve registration accuracy in a feedback fashion without losing the scene information in source images. Third,
the fused images retain the obvious salient structures in a
single image and discard some superfluous and useless information during the fusion process. It reduces the negative impact of superfluous information on image registra-

19679

