Multiview Transformers for Video Recognition
Shen Yan‡ * Xuehan Xiong† Anurag Arnab† Zhichao Lu† Mi Zhang‡
Chen Sun†§ Cordelia Schmid†
†
Google Research ‡ Michigan State University § Brown University
{xxman, aarnab, lzc, chensun, cordelias}@google.com

{yanshen6, mizhang}@msu.edu
MLP Head

Class

Abstract
Global Encoder

1. Introduction
Vision architectures based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs), and now more recently transformers, have
made great advances in numerous computer vision tasks.
A central idea, that has remained constant across classical methods based on handcrafted features [9, 14, 38] to
CNNs [42, 43, 84] and now transformers [11, 44, 73], has
been to analyze input signals at multiple resolutions.
In the image domain, multiscale processing is typically
performed with pyramids as the statistics of natural images
are isotropic (all orientations are equally likely) and shift invariant [30, 66]. To model multiscale temporal information
in videos, previous approaches such as SlowFast [23] have
processed videos with two streams, using a “Fast” stream
operating at high frame rates and a “Slow” stream at low
frame rates, or employed graph neural networks to model
long-range interactions [4, 76].
When creating a pyramidal structure, spatio-temporal in* This work was done while the first author was an intern at Google.

Multiview Transformer
View 1 Encoder
Encoder block
L(") ×
Encoder block

View N Encoder
Cross View
Fusion

…

Encoder block
L($)×
Encoder block

Hidden
size

Video understanding requires reasoning at multiple spatiotemporal resolutions – from short fine-grained motions
to events taking place over longer durations. Although
transformer architectures have recently advanced the stateof-the-art, they have not explicitly modelled different spatiotemporal resolutions. To this end, we present Multiview
Transformers for Video Recognition (MTV). Our model consists of separate encoders to represent different views of
the input video with lateral connections to fuse information across views. We present thorough ablation studies of our model and show that MTV consistently performs better than single-view counterparts in terms of accuracy and computational cost across a range of model
sizes. Furthermore, we achieve state-of-the-art results on
six standard datasets, and improve even further with largescale pretraining. Code and checkpoints are available at:
https://github.com/google-research/scenic.

# tokens

Embed

Embed

…
Figure 1. Overview of our Multiview Transformer. We create multiple input representations, or “views”, of the input, by tokenizing
the video using tubelets of different sizes (for clarity, we show
two views here). These tokens are then processed by separate encoder streams, which include lateral connections and a final global
encoder to fuse information from different views. Note that the
tokens from each view may have different hidden sizes, and the
encoders used to process them can vary in architecture too.

formation is partially lost due to its pooling or subsampling
operations. For example, when constructing the “Slow”
stream, SlowFast [23] subsamples frames, losing temporal
information. In this work, we propose a simple transformerbased model without relying on pyramidal structures or subsampling the inputs to capture multi-resolution temporal
context. We do so by leveraging multiple input representations, or “views” of the input video. As shown in Fig. 1, we
extract tokens from the input video over multiple temporal
durations. Intuitively, tokens extracted from long time intervals capture the gist of the scene (such as the background
where the activity is taking place), whilst tokens extracted
from short segments can capture fine-grained details (such
as the gestures performed by a person).
We propose a multiview transformer (Fig. 1) to process these tokens, and it consists of separate transformer

3333

