Primitive3D: 3D Object Dataset Synthesis from Randomly Assembled Primitives
Xinke Li1, * Henghui Ding2,3, * Zekun Tong1 Yuwei Wu1,† Yeow Meng Chee1
1
National University of Singapore 2 ByteDance 3 ETH Zürich
{xinke.li, zekuntong}@u.nus.edu

henghui.ding@vision.ee.ethz.ch

{wyw, ymchee}@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Numerous advancements in deep learning can be attributed to the access to large-scale and well-annotated
datasets. However, such a dataset is prohibitively expensive
in 3D computer vision due to the substantial collection cost.
To alleviate this issue, we propose a cost-effective method
for automatically generating a large amount of 3D objects
with annotations. In particular, we synthesize objects simply by assembling multiple random primitives. These objects are thus auto-annotated with part labels originating
from primitives. This allows us to perform multi-task learning by combining the supervised segmentation with unsupervised reconstruction. Considering the large overhead
of learning on the generated dataset, we further propose
a dataset distillation strategy to remove redundant samples
regarding a target dataset. We conduct extensive experiments for the downstream tasks of 3D object classification.
The results indicate that our dataset, together with multitask pretraining on its annotations, achieves the best performance compared to other commonly used datasets. Further
study suggests that our strategy can improve the model performance by pretraining and fine-tuning scheme, especially
for the dataset with a small scale. In addition, pretraining
with the proposed dataset distillation method can save 86%
of the pretraining time with negligible performance degradation. We expect that our attempt provides a new datacentric perspective for training 3D deep models.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has been shown to surpass prior state-ofthe-art machine learning techniques in applications of 2D
computer vision in the past several years [17–19]. Such success is often attributed to the ease of acquiring large-scale,
richly-annotated and diverse 2D image datasets, e.g., ImageNet [16] and COCO [35]. In the field of 3D, a broad variety of applications, such as self-driving vehicles [9], augmented reality [22], and urban construction [7], can ben* Equal contribution, Henghui was Xinke’s internship mentor.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Compared to the CAD model and real-world data, the
Primitive3D dataset has richer annotations, lower collection cost,
and higher sample diversity. These advantages help facilitate the
learning of general knowledge for understanding 3D objects.

efit from advancing 3D object understanding, which has
long awaited high-quality datasets. Indeed, unlike the 2D
counterparts, existing 3D object datasets are often limited
in scale or lack of variety in annotation and instance diversity, thus hindering the advances of many applications.
The main reason for the limitation of 3D object datasets
is the substantial cost related to data collection and annotation. In the current practice of real-world 3D object data
acquisition, LiDAR or RGB-D scans often necessitate considerable labour and device costs [10, 14, 28], while imagederived data requires much computation efforts [33,51]. On
the other hand, although synthesis datasets often consist of
3D CAD models with rich online data sources [6, 31, 63],
they still involve manual design works and also have limited
generalization for real-world objects recognition [55]. Ultimately, tremendous human efforts have to be made in the
annotation and maintenance of large-scale labeled datasets
(e.g., voxel or point based label), especially considering the
bulky size and the extra dimension of 3D data compared to
2D. To alleviate these problems, attempts have been made
to automatically generate 3D objects via generative models
built from existing datasets [2, 29, 40, 60]. Although these
approaches are capable of generating high-quality 3D data

15947

