TCTrack: Temporal Contexts for Aerial Tracking
Ziang Cao1 , Ziyuan Huang2 , Liang Pan3 , Shiwei Zhang4 , Ziwei Liu3 , Changhong Fu1,∗
1
Tongji University 2 National University of Singapore 3 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
4
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
caoang233@gmail.com, ziyuan.huang@u.nus.edu, {liang.pan, ziwei.liu}@ntu.edu.sg
zhangjin.zsw@alibaba-inc.com changhongfu@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract

Online Feature Extraction
#k-1

Timeline

Temporal contexts among consecutive frames are far
from being fully utilized in existing visual trackers. In this
work, we present TCTrack1 , a comprehensive framework to
fully exploit temporal contexts for aerial tracking. The temporal contexts are incorporated at two levels: the extraction
of features and the reﬁnement of similarity maps. Speciﬁcally, for feature extraction, an online temporally adaptive
convolution is proposed to enhance the spatial features using temporal information, which is achieved by dynamically
calibrating the convolution weights according to the previous frames. For similarity map reﬁnement, we propose an
adaptive temporal transformer, which ﬁrst effectively encodes temporal knowledge in a memory-efﬁcient way, before the temporal knowledge is decoded for accurate adjustment of the similarity map. TCTrack is effective and efﬁcient: evaluation on four aerial tracking benchmarks shows
its impressive performance; real-world UAV tests show its
high speed of over 27 FPS on NVIDIA Jetson AGX Xavier.

#k

Similarity Map Refinement

#1
TAdaCNN

AT-Trans

Temporal
Contexts

Temporal
Contexts

TAdaCNN

AT-Trans

#1

(a)

For Prediction

For Prediction

(b)

Figure 1. Overview of our framework namely TCTrack. It exploits temporal information at two levels: (a) the extraction of
features by the temporally adaptive convolutional neural networks
(TAdaCNN) and (b) the reﬁnement of similarity maps by the adaptive temporal transformer (AT-Trans).

detection framework and perform detection for each frame
independently. Among these trackers, discriminative correlation ﬁlter (DCF)-based methods are widely applied on
aerial platforms because of their high efﬁciency and low
resource requirements originated from the operations in
the Fourier domain [16, 31, 38]. However, these trackers
struggle when there are fast motions and severe appearance variations. Recently, the Siamese-based network has
emerged as a strong framework for accurate and robust
tracking [2, 4, 11, 41, 42]. Its efﬁciency is also optimized
in [7,21,22] for the real-time deployment of Siamese-based
trackers on aerial platforms.
However, the strong correlations inherently existing
among consecutive frames, i.e., the temporal information,
are neglected by these frameworks, which makes it difﬁcult for these approaches to perceive the motion information of the target objects. Therefore, those trackers are
more likely to fail when the target undergoes severe appearance change caused by different complex conditions such
as large motions and occlusions. This has sparked the recent research into how to make use of temporal information
for visual tracking. For DCF-based approaches, the variation in the response maps along the temporal dimension is
penalized [33, 47], which guides the current response map

1. Introduction
Visual tracking is one of the most fundamental tasks in
computer vision. Owing to the superior mobility of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), tracking-based applications
are experiencing rapid developments, e.g., motion object
analysis [57], geographical survey [61], and visual localization [47]. Nevertheless, aerial tracking still faces two
difﬁculties: 1) aerial conditions inevitably introduce special
challenges including motion blur, camera motion, occlusion, etc; 2) the limited power of aerial platforms restricts
the computational resource, impeding the deployment of
time-consuming state-of-the-art methods [6]. Hence, an
ideal tracker for aerial tracking must be robust and efﬁcient.
Most existing trackers adopt the standard tracking-by∗ Corresponding author
1 https://github.com/vision4robotics/TCTrack

14798

