MDAN: Multi-level Dependent Attention Network for Visual Emotion Analysis
Liwen Xu Zhengtao Wang Bin Wu Simon Lui
Innovative Technology Center, Tencent Music Entertainment
Shenzhen, China
s1052262195@gmail.com, moyanwang@tencent.com, benbinwu@tencent.com, nomislui@gmail.com

Root

Abstract
𝒍𝒂 = 𝟏

Anger

Low

Sadness

Fear

Affective Level

Horror

Nervousness

Suffering

Shame

Sympathy

Neglect

Sadness

Disappointment

Exasperation

Rage

Irritability

Envy

Disgust

Lust

Surprise

Surprise

Gratitude

Love

Affection

Zest

Pride

Relief

Optimism

Contentment

Visual Emotion Analysis (VEA) is a high-level abstraction task, which aims to recognize the emotion induced via

𝒍𝒂 = 𝟑

Enthrallment

1. Introduction

Joy

𝒍𝒂 = 𝟐
Cheerfulness

Visual Emotion Analysis (VEA) is attracting increasing
attention. One of the biggest challenges of VEA is to bridge
the affective gap between visual clues in a picture and the
emotion expressed by the picture. As the granularity of emotions increases, the affective gap increases as well. Existing
deep approaches try to bridge the gap by directly learning
discrimination among emotions globally in one shot. They
ignore the hierarchical relationship among emotions at different affective levels, and the variation in the affective level
of emotions to be classified. In this paper, we present the
multi-level dependent attention network (MDAN) with two
branches to leverage the emotion hierarchy and the correlation between different affective levels and semantic levels.
The bottom-up branch directly learns emotions at the highest affective level and largely prevents hierarchy violation
by explicitly following the emotion hierarchy while predicting emotions at lower affective levels. In contrast, the topdown branch aims to disentangle the affective gap by oneto-one mapping between semantic levels and affective levels, namely, Affective Semantic Mapping. A local classifier
is appended at each semantic level to learn discrimination
among emotions at the corresponding affective level. Then,
we integrate global learning and local learning into a unified deep framework and optimize it simultaneously. Moreover, to properly model channel dependencies and spatial
attention while disentangling the affective gap, we carefully designed two attention modules: the Multi-head Cross
Channel Attention module and the Level-dependent Class
Activation Map module. Finally, the proposed deep framework obtains new state-of-the-art performance on six VEA
benchmarks, where it outperforms existing state-of-the-art
methods by a large margin, e.g., +3.85% on the WEBEmo
dataset at 25 classes classification accuracy.

Negative

Positive

High

Figure 1. Illustration of a three-level emotion hierarchy defined by
Parrott in psychological studies.

visual content. Recently, it raises more and more research
attention due to the trend that social network users become
more likely to express their opinions and emotions via visual content. VEA has many practical applications, such
as opinion mining [27], business intelligence, entertainment
assistant [32] and personalized emotion prediction [31].
One of the biggest challenges of VEA is to bridge the
affective gap between pixel-level information and the highlevel emotion semantics [10, 29, 32]. To bridge the affective gap, the key is to extract discriminative features [30].
Recent efforts have been devoted to improving the discrimination of learned features for fine-grained emotion classification in one shot globally, i.e., learning one discriminative
feature through one global classifier [16, 28, 30, 34].
However, as the granularity of emotions increases, the
affective gap becomes larger because of the higher affective
level, described by the arrow in Fig. 1, making the global
learning in one shot difficult and unreliable. In this work,
we try to disentangle the affective gap into several smaller
steps. Instead of merely learning the discriminative feature
for fine-grained emotions globally, we introduce an extra
top-down branch to learn level-wise discrimination. Specifically, we append a local classifier at each semantic level of
the top-down branch and each of the local classifiers concentrates on learning the discrimination among emotions
at a particular affective level. In this paper, the term ‘local’ is equivalent to ‘level-wise’, since both of them refer
to a particular affective level in an emotion hierarchy. The
above-mentioned setting for the top-down branch is based
on an assumption that there is a correlation between differ-

9479

