Reference-based Video Super-Resolution Using Multi-Camera Video Triplets
Junyong Lee

Myeonghee Lee
Sunghyun Cho
POSTECH

Seungyong Lee

{junyonglee, myeonghee, s.cho, leesy}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
We propose the first reference-based video superresolution (RefVSR) approach that utilizes reference videos
for high-fidelity results. We focus on RefVSR in a triplecamera setting, where we aim at super-resolving a lowresolution ultra-wide video utilizing wide-angle and telephoto videos. We introduce the first RefVSR network that recurrently aligns and propagates temporal reference features
fused with features extracted from low-resolution frames. To
facilitate the fusion and propagation of temporal reference
features, we propose a propagative temporal fusion module. For learning and evaluation of our network, we present
the first RefVSR dataset consisting of triplets of ultra-wide,
wide-angle, and telephoto videos concurrently taken from
triple cameras of a smartphone. We also propose a twostage training strategy fully utilizing video triplets in the
proposed dataset for real-world 4× video super-resolution.
We extensively evaluate our method, and the result shows
the state-of-the-art performance in 4× super-resolution.

Input frame (ultra-wide) at 𝑡𝑡

Bicubic 4×
(inside the overlap)

Bicubic 4×
(outside the overlap)

Reference frame (wide-angle) at 𝑡𝑡

SOTA 4×SR result

SOTA 4×SR result

Neighboring reference frames

Our 4×SR result

Our 4×SR result

𝑡𝑡 + 1

𝑡𝑡 + 2

𝑡𝑡 + 3

Figure 1. Comparison on 8K 4×SR video results from a real
HD video between state-of-the-art (SOTA) RefSR approach [26]
and the proposed RefVSR approach. Our method learns to superresolve an LR video by utilizing relevant high-quality patches of
reference frames and robustly recovers sharp textures of both inside and outside the overlapped FoV between the input ultra-wide
and reference wide-angle frames (white dashed box).

1. Introduction
Recent mobile devices such as Apple iPhone or Samsung Galaxy series are manufactured with at least two or
three asymmetric multi-cameras typically having different
but fixed focal lengths. In a triple camera setting, each ultrawide, wide-angle, and telephoto camera has a different field
of view (FoV) and optical zoom factor. One advantage of
such configuration is that, compared to an ultra-wide camera, a wide-angle camera captures a subject with more details and higher resolution, and the advantage escalates even
further with a telephoto camera. A question naturally follows is why not leverage higher-resolution frames of a camera with a longer focal length to improve the resolution of
frames of a camera with a short focal length.
Utilizing a reference (Ref) image to reconstruct a highresolution (HR) image from a low-resolution (LR) image
has been widely studied in previous reference-based image
Code and dataset: https://github.com/codeslake/RefVSR

super-resolution (RefSR) approaches [2,23,26,28,29,32,34,
35]. However, it has not been explored yet to utilize a Ref
video for video super-resolution (VSR). In this paper, we
expand the RefSR to the VSR task and introduce referencebased video super-resolution (RefVSR) that can be applied
for videos captured in an asymmetric multi-camera setting.
RefVSR inherits objectives of both RefSR and VSR
tasks and utilizes a Ref video for reconstructing an HR
video from an LR video. Applying RefVSR for a video captured in an asymmetric multi-camera setting requires consideration of the unique relationship between LR and Ref
frames in multi-camera videos. In the setting, a pair of LR
and Ref frames at each time step shares almost the same
content in their overlapped FoV (top and middle rows of the
leftmost column in Fig. 1). Moreover, as a video exhibits a
motion, neighboring Ref frames might contain high-quality
contents useful for recovering the outside the overlapped
FoV (the bottom row of the leftmost column in Fig. 1).

17824

