Pyramid Adversarial Training Improves ViT Performance
Charles Herrmann* Kyle Sargent* Lu Jiang Ramin Zabih
Huiwen Chang Ce Liu† Dilip Krishnan Deqing Sun
Google Research

Abstract
Aggressive data augmentation is a key component of
the strong generalization capabilities of Vision Transformer
(ViT). One such data augmentation technique is adversarial training (AT); however, many prior works [28, 45] have
shown that this often results in poor clean accuracy. In
this work, we present pyramid adversarial training (PyramidAT), a simple and effective technique to improve ViT’s
overall performance. We pair it with a “matched” Dropout
and stochastic depth regularization, which adopts the same
Dropout and stochastic depth configuration for the clean
and adversarial samples. Similar to the improvements on
CNNs by AdvProp [61] (not directly applicable to ViT), our
pyramid adversarial training breaks the trade-off between
in-distribution accuracy and out-of-distribution robustness
for ViT and related architectures. It leads to 1.82% absolute improvement on ImageNet clean accuracy for the ViTB model when trained only on ImageNet-1K data, while
simultaneously boosting performance on 7 ImageNet robustness metrics, by absolute numbers ranging from 1.76%
to 15.68%. We set a new state-of-the-art for ImageNet-C
(41.42 mCE), ImageNet-R (53.92%), and ImageNet-Sketch
(41.04%) without extra data, using only the ViT-B/16 backbone and our pyramid adversarial training. Our code is
publicly available at pyramidat.github.io.

1. Introduction
One fascinating aspect of human intelligence is the ability to generalize from limited experiences to new environments [30]. While deep learning has made remarkable
progress in emulating or “surpassing” humans on classification tasks, deep models have difficulty generalizing to outof-distribution data [31]. Convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) may fail to classify images with challenging contexts [22], unusual colors and textures [16, 19, 58] and common or adversarial corruptions [17, 20]. To reliably deploy
neural networks on diverse tasks in the real world, we must
* Equal contribution, ordered alphabetically.
† Currently affiliated with Microsoft Azure AI.

Figure 1. Top: Visualization of our learned multi-scale pyramid
perturbations. We show the original image, multiple scales of a
perturbation pyramid, and the perturbed image. Bottom: We show
thumbnails of in-distribution and out-of-distribution datasets, and
the gains from applying our technique on each dataset. (Note that
lower is better for ImageNet-C.)

improve their robustness to out-of-distribution data.
One major line of research focuses on network design.
Recently the Vision Transformer (ViT) [14] and its variants [2, 32, 46, 55] have advanced the state of the art on
a variety of computer vision tasks. In particular, ViT
models are more robust than comparable CNN architectures [36, 38, 49, 49]. With a weak inductive bias and powerful model capacity, ViT relies heavily on strong data augmentation and regularization to achieve better generalization [51, 55]. To further push this envelope, we explore using adversarial training [29, 65] as a powerful regularizer to
improve the performance of ViT models.
Prior work [56] suggests that there exists a performance
trade-off between in-distribution generalization and robustness to adversarial examples. Similar trade-offs have been

13419

