FedCorr: Multi-Stage Federated Learning for Label Noise Correction
Tony Q.S. Quek1
Kai Fong Ernest Chong1†
Jingyi Xu1∗
Zihan Chen1,2 *
1
Singapore University of Technology and Design 2 National University of Singapore
{jinyi xu,zihan chen}@mymail.sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) is a privacy-preserving distributed learning paradigm that enables clients to jointly
train a global model. In real-world FL implementations,
client data could have label noise, and different clients
could have vastly different label noise levels. Although
there exist methods in centralized learning for tackling label noise, such methods do not perform well on heterogeneous label noise in FL settings, due to the typically smaller
sizes of client datasets and data privacy requirements in FL.
In this paper, we propose FedCorr, a general multi-stage
framework to tackle heterogeneous label noise in FL, without making any assumptions on the noise models of local
clients, while still maintaining client data privacy. In particular, (1) FedCorr dynamically identifies noisy clients
by exploiting the dimensionalities of the model prediction
subspaces independently measured on all clients, and then
identifies incorrect labels on noisy clients based on persample losses. To deal with data heterogeneity and to increase training stability, we propose an adaptive local proximal regularization term that is based on estimated local
noise levels. (2) We further finetune the global model on
identified clean clients and correct the noisy labels for the
remaining noisy clients after finetuning. (3) Finally, we apply the usual training on all clients to make full use of all
local data. Experiments conducted on CIFAR-10/100 with
federated synthetic label noise, and on a real-world noisy
dataset, Clothing1M, demonstrate that FedCorr is robust
to label noise and substantially outperforms the state-ofthe-art methods at multiple noise levels.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is a promising solution for largescale collaborative learning, where clients jointly train a
machine learning model, while still maintaining local data
privacy [18, 24, 34]. However, in real-world FL implementations over heterogeneous networks, there may be differ* Equal contributions. † Corresponding author.

Code: https://github.com/Xu-Jingyi/FedCorr

{tonyquek,ernest chong}@sutd.edu.sg

ences in the characteristics of different clients due to diverse annotators’ skill, bias, and hardware reliability [4,35].
Client data is rarely IID and frequently imbalanced. Also,
some clients would have clean data, while other clients may
have data with label noise at different noise levels. Hence,
the deployment of practical FL systems would face challenges brought by discrepancies in two aspects i): local data
statistics [5, 12, 19, 24], and ii): local label quality [4, 35].
Although recent works explored the discrepancy in local
data statistics in FL, and learning with label noise in centralized learning (CL), there is at present no unified approach
for tackling both challenges simultaneously in FL.
The first challenge has been explored in recent FL works,
with a focus on performance with convergence guarantees
[20, 25]. However, these works have the common implicit
assumption that the given labels of local data are completely
correct, which is rarely the case in real-world datasets.
The second challenge can be addressed by reweighting [4, 7, 28] or discarding [33] those client updates that are
most dissimilar. In these methods, the corresponding clients
are primarily treated as malicious agents. However, dissimilar clients are not necessarily malicious and could have label
noise in local data that would otherwise still be useful after
label correction. For FL systems, the requirement of data
privacy poses an inherent challenge for any label correction
scheme. How can clients identify their noisy labels to be
corrected without needing other clients to reveal sensitive
information? For example, [35] proposes label correction
for identified noisy clients with the guidance of extra data
feature information exchanged between clients and server,
which may lead to privacy concerns.
Label correction and, more generally, methods to deal
with label noise, are well-studied in CL. Yet, even state-ofthe-art CL methods for tackling label noise [3, 8, 9, 16, 27,
30, 32, 37], when applied to local clients, are inadequate in
mitigating the performance degradation in the FL setting,
due to the limited sizes of local datasets. These CL methods cannot be applied on the global sever or across multiple
This work is supported by the National Research Foundation, Singapore under its AI Singapore Program (AISG Award No: AISG-RP-2019015), and under its NRFF Program (NRFFAI1-2019-0005). This work is
also supported in part by the SUTD Growth Plan Grant for AI.

10184

