Sylph: A Hypernetwork Framework
for Incremental Few-shot Object Detection
Li Yin

Juan M Perez-Rua
Meta AI

Kevin J Liang

{liyin, jmpr, kevinjliang} @fb.com

Abstract
We study the challenging incremental few-shot object detection (iFSD) setting. Recently, hypernetwork-based approaches have been studied in the context of continuous
and finetune-free iFSD with limited success. We take a
closer look at important design choices of such methods,
leading to several key improvements and resulting in a
more accurate and flexible framework, which we call Sylph.
In particular, we demonstrate the effectiveness of decoupling object classification from localization by leveraging
a base detector that is pretrained for class-agnostic localization on large-scale dataset. Contrary to what previous
results have suggested, we show that with a carefully designed class-conditional hypernetwork, finetune-free iFSD
can be highly effective, especially when a large number of
base categories with abundant data are available for metatraining, almost approaching alternatives that undergo testtime-training. This result is even more significant considering its many practical advantages: (1) incrementally learning new classes in sequence without additional training, (2)
detecting both novel and seen classes in a single pass, and
(3) no forgetting of previously seen classes. We benchmark
our model on both COCO and LVIS, reporting as high as
17% AP on the long-tail rare classes on LVIS, indicating
the promise of hypernetwork-based iFSD.

1. Introduction
While advances in deep learning have led to significant
progress in computer vision [18, 23, 24, 31], much of this
success has relied upon large-scale data collection and annotation [7, 20, 22, 36], a process that is both labor-intensive
and time-consuming, and does not scale well with the number of categories. This is especially true for object detection [18, 23, 37], particularly for the long tail of object categories, where data may be scarcer [22]. As a result, fewshot learning of object detectors (FSD) [28, 65, 70, 72] has
become a recent topic of interest.
While learning a novel class from only a few samples

alone is a challenging problem, the task can be made simpler by leveraging known classes with abundant data (commonly referred to as base classes), whose structure can
be used as a prior for knowledge transfer. The few previous FSD works have approached this primarily in two
ways. The first is fine-tuning [47, 65], where a model is
first pretrained on the base classes and then fine-tuned on
a small balanced set of data from both the base and novel
classes, a form of test-time training [59]. Although simple, it has difficulty scaling to many real-world applications
due to its computational and memory requirements. An
alternate strategy is taking a meta-learning approach [72].
Meta-learning approaches frame the problem as “learning
to learn” [4,10,32,44,61,69,72], training the model episodically to induce fast adaptation to novel classes.
However, many FSD methods focus on the limited set-up
where only novel categories are to be detected. These methods often fail to preserve the original detector performance
on base categories [4, 10, 32, 72] or forget about the ones
it was initially trained on [65]. Given the ever-changing
nature of the real-world, a desirable property of machine
learning systems is the ability to incrementally learn new
concepts without revisiting previous ones and not forgetting
them [40, 42]. Humans are able to achieve such feat, learning novel concepts not only without forgetting but reusing
such knowledge [45]. Conventional supervised learning
struggles with incrementally presented data, tending to suffer catastrophic forgetting [39, 51]. An alternative is studying all the available data every time new concepts arrive,
commonly referred to as “joint training” [22], but such a
paradigm imposes a slow development cycle, requiring significant data collection efforts for the new concepts and expensive large-scale training (and re-training).
Instead, we seek an object detection model capable of
learning new classes from a few shots in a fast, scalable
manner without forgetting previously seen classes, a setting commonly referred to as incremental few-shot detection (iFSD). ONCE [44], a meta-learning approach to FSD,
is of particular interest due to its hypernetwork-based classconditional design. ONCE is able to enroll novel categories

9035

