Deep Image-based Illumination Harmonization
Zhongyun Bao1 , Chengjiang Long2 ,* Gang Fu1 , Daquan Liu1 , Yuanzhen Li1 , Jiaming Wu1 , Chunxia Xiao1∗†
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei, China
2
Meta Reality Labs, Burlingame, CA, USA
clong1@fb.com, xyzgfu@gmail.com, {zhongyunbao, daquanliu, cxxiao}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Integrating a foreground object into a background scene
with illumination harmonization is an important but challenging task in computer vision and augmented reality community. Existing methods mainly focus on foreground and
background appearance consistency or the foreground object shadow generation, which rarely consider global appearance and illumination harmonization. In this paper,
we formulate seamless illumination harmonization as an
illumination exchange and aggregation problem. Specifically, we firstly apply a physically-based rendering method
to construct a large-scale, high-quality dataset (named IH)
for our task, which contains various types of foreground objects and background scenes with different lighting conditions. Then, we propose a deep image-based illumination
harmonization GAN framework named DIH-GAN, which
makes full use of a multi-scale attention mechanism and illumination exchange strategy to directly infer mapping relationship between the inserted foreground object and the
corresponding background scene. Meanwhile, we also use
adversarial learning strategy to further refine the illumination harmonization result. Our method can not only
achieve harmonious appearance and illumination for the
foreground object but also can generate compelling shadow
cast by the foreground object. Comprehensive experiments
on both our IH dataset and real-world images show that
our proposed DIH-GAN provides a practical and effective
solution for image-based object illumination harmonization
editing, and validate the superiority of our method against
state-of-the-art methods. Our IH dataset is available at
https://github.com/zhongyunbao/Dataset.

1. Introduction
As a part of scene editing, editing illumination for inserted object to achieve scene illumination harmonization
* This work was co-supervised by Chengjiang Long and Chunxia Xiao.
† Corresponding author.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Illumination editing for an inserted object in a single
image. (a) Foreground object imagr with a illumination condition. (b) Background image with a new illumination condition. (c)
Naive composite image. (d) Illumination harmonized image.

is really important in computer vision [3, 9, 8, 39] and augmented reality (AR) as the unsatisfactory illumination harmonization greatly affect the user sense of reality. One
example is illustrated in Figure 1. It is still difficulty to
achieve a satisfactory result for illumination editing even
by a experienced professional retoucher. Apparently, it is
very challenging to automatically edit illumination harmonization without any human intervention.
Some prior efforts have been made to solve this challenging task. In particular, Karsch et al. [22] presented an image
editing system that supports drag-and-drop 3D object insertion, and Liao et al. [27, 28] proposed an approximate shading model for image-based object modeling and insertion.
Although these methods produce perceptually convincing
results, their performances highly depend on the quality of
the estimated geometry, shading, albedo and material properties. However, in some cases, any errors or inaccurate estimation in either geometry, illumination, or materials may
result in unappealing editing effects.
Such a shortcoming strongly motivates us to explore a
deep learning-based method to directly learn mapping relationship between the inserted image-based foreground object and the real-world scene, and achieve scene illumination harmonization without any explicit inverse rendering
(recovering 3D geometry, illumination, albedo and material). Obviously, a dataset with a lot of training image pairs
of composite images without illumination harmonization
and corresponding ground truth with illumination harmonization is strongly desired for the training purpose.

18542

