Structure-Aware Motion Transfer with Deformable Anchor Model
Jiale Tao1 * Biao Wang2
1

Borun Xu1 * Tiezheng Ge2

Yuning Jiang2

Wen Li1† Lixin Duan1

School of Computer Science and Engineering & Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Alibaba Group

{jialetao.std, liwenbnu, lxduan}@gmail.com, xbr 2017@std.uestc.edu.cn
{eric.wb, tiezheng.gtz, mengzhu.jyn}@alibaba-inc.com

Figure 1. Examples of structures learned by our proposed approach for the motion transfer task. We present results on three different
datasets: TaiChiHD, MGIF and VoxCeleb1. It is worth noting that no prior structural information (e.g., skeleton) is used in our approach.

Abstract
Given a source image and a driving video depicting the
same object type, the motion transfer task aims to generate
a video by learning the motion from the driving video while
preserving the appearance from the source image. In this
paper, we propose a novel structure-aware motion modeling approach, the deformable anchor model (DAM), which
can automatically discover the motion structure of arbitrary
objects without leveraging their prior structure information.
Specifically, inspired by the known deformable part model
(DPM), our DAM introduces two types of anchors or keypoints: i) a number of motion anchors that capture both
appearance and motion information from the source image
and driving video; ii) a latent root anchor, which is linked
to the motion anchors to facilitate better learning of the
representations of the object structure information. Moreover, DAM can be further extended to a hierarchical ver* Work done during an internship at Alibaba Group
† The corresponding author
‡ Codes will be available at https://github.com/JialeTao/DAM.git

sion through the introduction of additional latent anchors
to model more complicated structures. By regularizing motion anchors with latent anchor(s), DAM enforces the correspondences between them to ensure the structural information is well captured and preserved. Moreover, DAM can be
learned effectively in an unsupervised manner. We validate
our proposed DAM for motion transfer on different benchmark datasets. Extensive experiments clearly demonstrate
that DAM achieves superior performance relative to existing state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Recently, motion transfer has gained increasing attention
from computer vision researchers, due to its numerous potential applications in the fields of video re-enactment [4],
fashion design [7], face swapping [24], and so on. Given a
source image and a driving video of the same object type,
the goal of motion transfer is to generate a video that depicts
the motion pattern contained in the driving video while preserving the appearance from the source image.

3637

