Zero-Shot Text-Guided Object Generation with Dream Fields
Ajay Jain1,2∗

Ben Mildenhall2

Jonathan T. Barron2

LT

Pieter Abbeel1

Ben Poole2

Transmittance loss
encouraging sparsity

Transmittance

ViT
Neural Radiance Field

LCLIP

Differentiabl
Augmented
Rendering
e

Caption: “Washing blueberries”

Text
encoder

Figure 1. Given a caption, we learn a Dream Field, a continuous volumetric
representation of an object’s geometry and appearance learned with guidance
from a pre-trained model. We optimize the Dream Field by rendering images
of the object from random camera poses that are scored with frozen pretrained image and text encoders trained on web images and alt-text. 2D
views share the same underlying radiance field for consistent geometry.

Abstract
We combine neural rendering with multi-modal image and
text representations to synthesize diverse 3D objects solely
from natural language descriptions. Our method, Dream
Fields, can generate the geometry and color of a wide range
of objects without 3D supervision. Due to the scarcity of
diverse, captioned 3D data, prior methods only generate objects from a handful of categories, such as ShapeNet. Instead,
we guide generation with image-text models pre-trained on
large datasets of captioned images from the web. Our method
optimizes a Neural Radiance Field from many camera views
so that rendered images score highly with a target caption according to a pre-trained CLIP model. To improve fidelity and
visual quality, we introduce simple geometric priors, including sparsity-inducing transmittance regularization, scene
bounds, and new MLP architectures. In experiments, Dream
Fields produce realistic, multi-view consistent object geometry and color from a variety of natural language captions.
1 UC Berkeley, 2 Google Research.
∗ Work done at Google.

Correspondence to ajayj@berkeley.edu.
Project website and code: https://ajayj.com/dreamfields

Figure 2. Example Dream Fields rendered from four
perspectives. On the right, we show transmittance from
the final perspective. We create diverse outputs using
the compositionality of language; these captions from
MSCOCO describe three flower arrangements with different properties like context and color.

1. Introduction
Detailed 3D object models bring multimedia experiences
to life. Games, virtual reality applications and films are each
populated with thousands of object models, each designed
and textured by hand with digital software. While expert
artists can author high-fidelity assets, the process is painstakingly slow and expensive. Prior work leverages 3D datasets
to synthesize shapes in the form of point clouds, voxel grids,
triangle meshes, and implicit functions using generative models like GANs [4, 21, 57, 65]. These approaches only support a few object categories due to small labeled 3D shape
datasets. But multimedia applications require a wide variety
of content, and need both 3D geometry and texture.
In this work, we propose Dream Fields, a method to
automatically generate open-set 3D models from natural
language prompts. Unlike prior work, our method does
not require any 3D training data, and uses natural language
prompts that are easy to author with an expressive interface
for specifying desired object properties. We demonstrate that
the compositionality of language allows for flexible creative
control over shapes, colors and styles.
A Dream Field is a Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) trained
to maximize a deep perceptual metric with respect to both

867

