Escaping Data Scarcity for High-Resolution Heterogeneous Face Hallucination
Yiqun Mei*, Pengfei Guo* , Vishal M. Patel
Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
In Heterogeneous Face Recognition (HFR), the objective
is to match faces across two different domains such as visible and thermal. Large domain discrepancy makes HFR
a difficult problem. Recent methods attempting to fill the
gap via synthesis have achieved promising results, but their
performance is still limited by the scarcity of paired training data. In practice, large-scale heterogeneous face data
are often inaccessible due to the high cost of acquisition
and annotation process as well as privacy regulations. In
this paper, we propose a new face hallucination paradigm
for HFR, which not only enables data-efficient synthesis but
also allows to scale up model training without breaking any
privacy policy. Unlike existing methods that learn face synthesis entirely from scratch, our approach is particularly
designed to take advantage of rich and diverse facial priors
from visible domain for more faithful hallucination. On the
other hand, large-scale training is enabled by introducing a
new federated learning scheme to allow institution-wise collaborations while avoiding explicit data sharing. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the advantages of our approach in
tackling HFR under current data limitations. In a unified
framework, our method yields the state-of-the-art hallucination results on multiple HFR datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks have led to unprecedented success on visual face recognition [5, 58, 61, 66],
where state-of-the-art methods achieve more than 99% accuracy on multiple benchmarks. These near-perfect performances come from both well-elaborated architectures and
exhaustive training on massive datasets. Nevertheless, in
many real-world scenarios with low-visibility, such as lowlight and night-time, it is often infeasible to obtain clear
visible (VIS) images. Under these circumstances, sensors
deployed for other imaging spectra, e.g. Thermal (TH), can
capture more discriminative information and serve as a more
reliable solution. This raises a great need of heterogeneous
face recognition (HFR) [32, 33, 40], an important task in
* equal contribution

computer vision and biometrics, that matches images from
TH modality to its VIS counterpart 1 . The HFR problem
has numerous applications in surveillance, monitoring and
security.
Unfortunately, due to the large domain discrepancy,
naively deploying a state-of-the-art face recognition algorithm trained on VIS images often leads to poor performance
on a TH dataset [21]. Over the past decade, tremendous efforts have been spent to address the HFR problem by either
learning domain-invariant features [10, 14, 15, 37] or finding
a common subspace [28, 49, 59, 72]. Owing to the rapid
progress in Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [16],
most recent methods [7, 8, 12, 60, 73, 75] reformulate HFR as
a face synthesis/translation problem. The resulting “recognition via hallucination” scheme embraces a huge benefit that
any off-the-shelf recognizer can be directly applied on the
synthesised images.
While these synthesis-based approaches fill the gap to
some extent, the produced VIS images are still unsatisfactory, often accompanied with distorted and incorrect facial
structures (shown in Figure 4), which significantly degrades
the recognition accuracy. We found that the bottleneck is
likely due to the limited size of the dataset which fails to
offer sufficient information to guide image synthesis. Unlike
visible images that are easy to obtain and widely available
over the Internet [20], collecting and annotating a large-scale
high-quality TH dataset is difficult. Challenges stem from
many aspects. First, the acquisition process is both timeconsuming and costly, which often requires laborious setup
and non-trivial calibrations [52, 63]. Second, the diversity of
collected data can be limited. Due to the physical constraints,
it is typically infeasible for a single institution to collect a
comprehensive dataset that covers a diverse set of identities
with various attributes, such as race, gender and age. Most
existing datasets [1, 9, 42, 47] are confined to a small number
of subjects, leading to biased results and over-fitting. Third,
face data is privacy sensitive. Since it contains subjects’
personal identification information, one has to deal with privacy concerns when collecting and storing them, making it
1 Note that HFR is a general term that is used for matching two face

images taken in two different domains such as TH, VIS or sketch. In this
paper, we refer to HFR as a specific problem of matching TH images with
VIS images.

18676

