Eigenlanes: Data-Driven Lane Descriptors for Structurally Diverse Lanes
Dongkwon Jin1 , Wonhui Park1 , Seong-Gyun Jeong2 , Heeyeon Kwon2 , Chang-Su Kim1
Korea University1 , 42dot.ai2
{dongkwonjin, whpark}@mcl.korea.ac.kr, {seonggyun.jeong, heeyeon.kwon}@42dot.ai, changsukim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
A novel algorithm to detect road lanes in the eigenlane space is proposed in this paper. First, we introduce
the notion of eigenlanes, which are data-driven descriptors
for structurally diverse lanes, including curved, as well as
straight, lanes. To obtain eigenlanes, we perform the best
rank-M approximation of a lane matrix containing all lanes
in a training set. Second, we generate a set of lane candidates by clustering the training lanes in the eigenlane space.
Third, using the lane candidates, we determine an optimal
set of lanes by developing an anchor-based detection network, called SIIC-Net. Experimental results demonstrate
that the proposed algorithm provides excellent detection
performance for structurally diverse lanes. Our codes are
available at https://github.com/dongkwonjin/Eigenlanes.

1. Introduction
Lane detection is essential for understanding driving environments, in which autonomous or human drivers should
abide by trafﬁc rules. To control vehicle maneuvers, boundaries of road lanes and sidewalks should be detected reliably. There are various challenging factors to interfere with
the detection of those lanes. For example, lanes may be unobvious or even invisible due to weather and illumination
conditions or due to the occlusion by nearby vehicles, as
illustrated in Figure 1(a).
For lane detection, traditional methods extract handcrafted features, such as image gradients or color features
[2, 10, 11, 35]. This feature engineering may fail to discriminate actual lanes from noisy ones. Recently, various CNNbased techniques have been developed to detect lanes in real
environments more reliably. Most such techniques adopt
the semantic segmentation framework [5, 12, 13, 21, 22, 34],
in which each pixel in an image is dichotomized into either
lane or no-lane category. To preserve continuous lane structure in detection results, several attempts have been made,
including curve ﬁtting [21], polynomial regression [32], and
adversarial training [5]. However, even these algorithms
may fail to detect less visible lanes in cluttered scenes,
17163

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. There are two challenging factors in lane detection. First,
in (a), lanes may be implicit due to adverse weather conditions
or occlusion by nearby vehicles. Second, in (b), it is difﬁcult to
design lane anchors due to the structural diversity of lanes. The
ground-truth lanes are shown in cyan within the insets.

because they use only local features and may miss parts
of lanes. Meanwhile, the anchor-based detection framework, which has been used extensively in object detection [15, 20, 27, 28], has been recently adopted for lane detection [18, 30]. These anchor-based algorithms consider
straight lines as anchors (or lane candidates). Then, they
declare each anchor as a lane or not. By exploiting longrange contextual information, they can detect implied lanes
effectively. However, because of the straight lane assumption, it may not deal with complicated lanes, such as curved
and winding ones in Figure 1(b).
In this paper, we propose a novel algorithm to detect
structurally diverse road lanes in the eigenlane space. It enables to process curved, as well as straight, lanes reliably in
the anchor-based detection framework. First, we introduce
the notion of eigenlanes, which are data-driven lane descriptors. To obtain eigenlanes, we approximate a lane matrix,
which contains all lanes in a training set, based on the lowrank approximation property of singular value decomposition (SVD) [4]. Then, each lane is represented by a linear
combination of M eigenlanes. Second, we generate a set of
lane candidates, including complicated and curved ones, by
clustering the training lanes in the eigenlane space. Third,
we develop an anchor-based detector, called SIIC-Net, to
detect lanes from the candidates. It consists of two modules:

