LARGE: Latent-Based Regression through GAN Semantics
Yotam Nitzan∗
Tel-Aviv University

Rinon Gal∗
Tel-Aviv University

Abstract
We propose a novel method for solving regression tasks using few-shot or weak supervision. At the core of our method
is the fundamental observation that GANs are incredibly successful at encoding semantic information within their latent
space, even in a completely unsupervised setting. For modern generative frameworks, this semantic encoding manifests
as smooth, linear directions which affect image attributes in
a disentangled manner. These directions have been widely
used in GAN-based image editing. In this work, we leverage them for few-shot regression. Specifically, we make the
simple observation that distances traversed along such directions are good features for downstream tasks – reliably
gauging the magnitude of a property in an image. In the
absence of explicit supervision, we use these distances to
solve tasks such as sorting a collection of images, and ordinal regression. With a few labels — as little as two — we
calibrate these distances to real-world values and convert a
pre-trained GAN into a state-of-the-art few-shot regression
model. This enables solving regression tasks on datasets
and attributes which are difficult to produce quality supervision for. Extensive experimental evaluations demonstrate
that our method can be applied across a wide range of domains, leverage multiple latent direction discovery frameworks, and achieve state-of-the-art results in few-shot and
low-supervision settings, even when compared to methods
designed to tackle a single task.
Code is available on our project website.

1. Introduction
In recent years, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
[17] have been at the forefront of deep learning research.
GANs revolutionized countless generative tasks, such as
unconditional image synthesis [6, 28], cross-domain imageto-image translation [24, 72] and super-resolution [30]. Beyond generative tasks, numerous works have proposed to
use GANs for downstream discriminative objectives, such
as classification. Their shared premise is that a generator
can synthesize novel samples - often in a controllable man-

Ofir Brenner
Tel-Aviv University

Daniel Cohen-Or
Tel-Aviv University

ner. These generated samples can then serve as a dataset for
training models for downstream tasks. While this approach
appears promising on paper [4, 33, 43, 53], this simple idea
has enjoyed fairly limited success [12, 40].
We propose an alternative approach to harnessing the
rapid advancement of GANs for downstream tasks. Specifically, we deviate from previous attempts to generate or
augment training data. Instead, we focus on extracting information from the incredibly well-behaved latent space of modern GAN architectures, and specifically StyleGAN [27, 28].
The latent spaces of StyleGAN have been studied extensively [63], and were shown to be highly semantic and disentangled, properties which led to their wide use across a
range of generative tasks. In this work, we leverage these
properties in order to train few-shot regression models.
Specifically, we consider distances traversed along the
normal vector of semantic hyperplanes (see fig. 1(a) for an
illustration) and demonstrate that they are incredibly discriminative features for the task of regression. These normal
vectors are commonly referred to as linear editing directions and many previous works proposed methods to identify
them [20, 37, 45, 46].
What makes these latent-space distances useful features?
First, the distances are globally consistent: all latent codes at
a distance d from a semantic hyperplane resolve into images
with similar attribute strengths (e.g. the same age). Hence,
the link between distance and the corresponding attribute
can be described with a function f . Second, distance is a
scalar, allowing us to work with lower dimensional functions
f : R → R. Third, the relationship between the distances
and attribute strength is monotone. Therefore, a total order
of the distances corresponds to a total order on attribute
strength. These attributes are already sufficient to make
latent-space distances applicable as direct regression scores
for applications where no conventional units are required or
exist, e.g. ordinal regression.
To produce results with conventional units, such as head
pose in degrees, we need to find an explicit approximation
for f . Surprisingly, we find that a simple linear function:
f (d) = a · d + b produces the best results for all attributes
tested (see Figure 1(b)). Thus, we are able to fit an incredibly

19239

