MNSRNet: Multimodal Transformer Network for 3D Surface Super-Resolution
Wuyuan Xie, Tengcong Huang
College of Computer Science and Software
Engineering, Shenzhen University

Miaohui Wang*
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Intelligent
Information Processing, Shenzhen University

wuyuan.xie@gmail.com

wang.miaohui@gmail.com

Abstract
With the rapid development of display technology, it has
become an urgent need to obtain realistic 3D surfaces with
as high-quality as possible. Due to the unstructured and
irregular nature of 3D object data, it is usually difficult
to obtain high-quality surface details and geometry textures at a low cost. In this article, we propose an effective multimodal-driven deep neural network to perform 3D
surface super-resolution in 2D normal domain, which is
simple, accurate, and robust to the above difficulty. To
leverage the multimodal information from different perspectives, we jointly consider the texture, depth, and normal
modalities to simultaneously restore fine-grained surface
details as well as preserve geometry structures. To better
utilize the cross-modality information, we explore a twobridge normal method with a transformer structure for feature alignment, and investigate an affine transform module for fusing multimodal features. Extensive experimental results on public and our newly constructed photometric
stereo dataset demonstrate that the proposed method delivers promising surface geometry details compared with nine
competitive schemes.

1. Introduction
With the increasing improvements of the capability and
demand in the sensing and analyzing of real-world objects,
more and more 3D vision-based applications require the input of high-quality object surface [11, 43]. However, most
current 3D acquisition devices do not provide high-quality
3D data. In view of this practical difficulty, it is desirable to
develop low-cost computer vision methods to enhance the
acquisition quality for 3D data collectors.
Intuitively, the most straightforward way to improve the
quality of an acquired 3D surface data is to directly perform
* This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (No. 61902251 and No. 61701310), in part by
Natural Science Foundation of Shenzhen City (No. 20200805200145001
and No. JCYJ20180305124209486), and in part by Natural Science
Foundation of Guangdong Province (No. 2019A1515010961 and No.
2021A1515011877). (Corresponding author: Miaohui Wang)

Normal

Texture
Depth

MNSR

Normal
Original

Reconstructed

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed multimodal transformer
framework for 3D surface super-resolution. The texture, depth,
and normal modalities are jointly investigated to perform 3D surface super-resolution in 2D domain.

the up-sampling operation in 3D domain. The existing studies can be classified as voxel-based, point cloud-based, and
mesh-based methods according to the representation of a
3D surface. 1) The voxel-based methods [6] have been used
in 3D surface processing for many years, which commonly
have high requirements for equipment and computation. 2)
Point cloud is the most simple way to represent a 3D object,
which has been directly up-sampled [26, 40, 44] based on a
special convolutional neural network (CNN) structure [29].
Due to the intrinsic irregularity of point cloud, it is difficult to achieve dense and high-quality 3D surface enhancement results. 3) Mesh-based methods, as the most wildlyused 3D representation, have been studied based on mesh
subdivision and vertex interpolation [3]. With the development of deep neural networks, mesh-based CNN structures [12, 14, 32] have inspired several data-driven methods
for the up-sampling operation on mesh-based 3D surfaces
[24]. Nevertheless, these traditional schemes can only optimize some mathematical properties of the mesh data, while
learning-based methods face the problem of large amounts
of insufficient data.
Due to the aforementioned difficulties in improving surface quality in 3D domain, some preliminary investigations
have aimed to enhance the surface quality in 2D domain. By

12703

