Regional Semantic Contrast and Aggregation for Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Tianfei Zhou1,∗ , Meijie Zhang2,∗ , Fang Zhao3 , Jianwu Li2,†
1

Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich

2

Beijing Institute of Technology

3

Inception Institute of AI

https://github.com/maeve07/RCA.git

Abstract
Learning semantic segmentation from weakly-labeled
(e.g., image tags only) data is challenging since it is hard to
infer dense object regions from sparse semantic tags. Despite being broadly studied, most current efforts directly
learn from limited semantic annotations carried by individual image or image pairs, and struggle to obtain integral
localization maps. Our work alleviates this from a novel
perspective, by exploring rich semantic contexts synergistically among abundant weakly-labeled training data for
network learning and inference. In particular, we propose
regional semantic contrast and aggregation (RCA) . RCA is
equipped with a regional memory bank to store massive, diverse object patterns appearing in training data, which acts
as strong support for exploration of dataset-level semantic
structure. Particularly, we propose i) semantic contrast to
drive network learning by contrasting massive categorical
object regions, leading to a more holistic object pattern understanding, and ii) semantic aggregation to gather diverse
relational contexts in the memory to enrich semantic representations. In this manner, RCA earns a strong capability
of fine-grained semantic understanding, and eventually establishes new state-of-the-art results on two popular benchmarks, i.e., PASCAL VOC 2012 and COCO 2014.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation continues to be a fundamental
task in computer vision, with numerous applications in autonomous driving, robotics, human-computer interactions
and medical imaging analysis. While fully supervised systems have achieved tremendous progress, they are limited
by the availability of pixel-level annotations, often harvested at great cost, even with smart interfaces [3]. Weakly
supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) alternatively investigates whether this task can be adequately addressed
with efficient and weak supervisory signals (e.g., image
labels [2, 25, 37, 66], scribbles [39, 40, 54], bounding
boxes [14, 34, 44, 51]). This work studies the form of
image-level labels which can be obtained effortlessly, and
∗ Equal contributions; † Corresponding author: Jianwu Li.

(e.g., [2, 25, 35, 59, 66, 71])

(e.g., [17, 37, 52])

Figure 1. The main idea promoted throughout the paper is that
semantic contexts subserve localization of individual objects in
WSSS. Our RCA thus performs dataset-level relation learning (c)
to mine rich contextual knowledge from massive (ideally all) training samples, rather than from an individual image (a) or image pair
(b). This enables our model to procure in-depth semantic pattern
understanding, improving object localization eventually.

thus have been widely embraced in mainstream approaches.
In the absence of the true “image label” to “object region” correspondence in training data, learning to map
visual concepts to pixel regions is particularly challenging. The seminal work, i.e., class activation mapping
(CAM) [81], solves this by mining regions from internal
activation of an image classifier. However, the technique
is prone to give sparse and incomplete object estimations,
since the classifier is only driven to activate a small proportion of features with strong discriminative capability. To
address this, a prevalent of subsequent efforts strive to learn
more complete object regions by, e.g., region growing to expand initial responses [24, 30, 60], adversarial erasing in a
hide-and-seek fashion [23, 32, 33, 64], feature enrichment
to collect within-image contexts [66, 72], seeking auxiliary
saliency supervisions [35, 71, 74], or self-supervised learning with pre-designed pretext tasks [6, 47, 63].
Though impressive, these methods use only singleimage information for object localization (Fig. 1 (a)), neglecting inter-image contextual information. Image-level
labels not only tell the categories appearing in each individual image, but also unveil the semantic structure of all

4299

