AME: Attention and Memory Enhancement in Hyper-Parameter Optimization
Nuo Xua,b , Jianlong Changc , Xing Niea,b , Chunlei Huo ∗a,b , Shiming Xianga,b and Chunhong Pana,b
a

b

NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
c
Huawei Cloud & AI, Beijing, China

nuo.xu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, jianlong.chang@huawei.com, niexing2019@ia.ac.cn, {clhuo, smxiang,
chpan}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

Sampling by
Acquisition Function

Evaluated Configuration

New Configuration

Training Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) is inherently
subject to sensitive hyper-parameters and untimely feedbacks of performance evaluation. To solve these two difficulties, an efficient parallel hyper-parameter optimization
model is proposed under the framework of Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL). Technically, we develop Attention
and Memory Enhancement (AME), that includes multi-head
attention and memory mechanism to enhance the ability
to capture both the short-term and long-term relationships between different hyper-parameter configurations, yielding an attentive sampling mechanism for searching highperformance configurations embedded into a huge search
space. During the optimization of transformer-structured
configuration searcher, a conceptually intuitive yet powerful strategy is applied to solve the problem of insufficient
number of samples due to the untimely feedback. Experiments on three visual tasks, including image classification,
object detection, semantic segmentation, demonstrate the
effectiveness of AME.

1. Introduction
Hyper-Parameter Optimization (HPO) [53] is a crucial
subfield in Automatic Machine Learning (AutoML), which
is formulated as a bi-level optimization problem. Recently,
the rise of deep learning has promoted giant development
of machine learning and computer vision, but it also places
higher requirements on computing resources. The optimization of large-scale neural networks often takes days or even
weeks and a large number of GPUs to train, thus manual tuning of hyper-parameters has gradually become expensive. At the same time, the networks are highly sensitive to
∗ Corresponding author

Random Sampling

(a) Random Search

Search Space

(b) Bayesian Optimization

Attentive Sampling by Transformer-structured Configuration Searcher
Configuration Encoder
Decision Making

(c) Attention and Memory Enhancement (Ours)

Figure 1. Comparison of different configuration searchers. (a)
Random Search. The selection of the new configuration is independent of other evaluated configurations. (b) Bayesian Optimization. Under the given distribution assumption, the new configuration is finally obtained by acquisition function which models
the relationship between evaluated configurations. (c) Attention
and Memory Enhancement (AME). The relationship is captured
by attentive sampling without distribution assumptions, and is employed for the prediction of all types of new configurations.

the choice of hyper-parameters. Improper hyper-parameters
directly lead to the failure of training, e.g., gradient explosion. In addition, when training modern neural networks, a
large number of hyper-parameters are required to be set, including architecture hyper-parameters (e.g., network depth
and types), optimization hyper-parameters (e.g., learning
rate, batch size), and regularization hyper-parameters (e.g.,
weight decay), which result in a huge search space. Moreover, the challenge of HPO varies greatly in various subfields of machine learning. In the field of computer vision,
hyper-parameters in detection and segmentation are more
sensitive than classification. Therefore, a practical modern
HPO algorithm must be able to easily handle the selection
of several to dozens of hyper-parameters for different tasks
within an acceptable time.

480

