Boosting View Synthesis with Residual Transfer
Xuejian Rong

Jia-Bin Huang

Ayush Saraf

Changil Kim

Johannes Kopf

Reality Labs, Meta
boosting-view-synth.github.io

NeRF [25]

Boosted NeRF (ours)

NeX [42]

Boosted NeX (ours)

2.5k / 300k iterations
21.38dB / 29.31dB PSNR

2.5k / 300k iterations
25.29dB / 31.56dB PSNR

40 / 4,000 epochs
24.87dB / 31.24dB PSNR

40 / 4,000 epochs
29.00dB / 33.14dB PSNR

Figure 1. Boosting View Synthesis. We present a simple yet effective approach for injecting residual details (the difference between the
ground truth training views and their reconstruction) into the rendering procedure of pre-trained base view synthesis models to boost their
rendering quality.

Abstract
Volumetric view synthesis methods with neural representations, such as NeRF and NeX, have recently demonstrated
high-quality novel view synthesis. However, optimizing
these representations is slow, and even fully trained models cannot reproduce all fine details in the input views. We
present a simple but effective technique to boost the rendering quality, which can be easily integrated with most view
synthesis methods. The core idea is to transfer color residuals (the difference between the input images and their reconstruction) from training views to novel views. We blend
the residuals from multiple views using a heuristic weighting scheme depending on ray visibility and angular differences. We integrate our technique with several state-of-theart view synthesis methods and evaluate the Real Forwardfacing and the Shiny datasets. Our results show that at
about 1/10th the number of training iterations, we achieve
the same rendering quality as fully converged NeRF and
NeX models, and when applied to fully converged models,
we significantly improve their rendering quality.

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art neural view synthesis methods such as
NeRF [25] and NeX [42], to name just two, have recently shown near-photorealistic novel view synthesis results. These methods model a scene using a 5D radiance
field (3 spatial and 2 view direction dimensions) of continuous volumetric density and color. Novel views are synthesized using numerical quadrature for approximating the
volume rendering integral. The radiance field is represented
using neural methods, particularly a multilayer perceptron
(MLP) in the case of NeRF and feature coefficients on a
multi-plane image in the case of NeX. Because volume rendering is differentiable, it is straightforward to optimize
the parameters of these representations from a sparse set
of posed training images by minimizing the difference between these ground truth views and their reconstructions.
However, the training typically requires a long optimization time on the order of several hours to achieve good
visual quality. Even a fully trained model struggles with
capturing high-frequency details in the training images for
complex scenes. Figure 2 shows an example highlighting

19760

