Towards Understanding Adversarial Robustness of Optical Flow Networks
Simon Schrodi
Tonmoy Saikia
Thomas Brox
University of Freiburg, Germany
{schrodi, saikiat, brox}@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Attacked frame 1

Abstract
Recent work demonstrated the lack of robustness of optical flow networks to physical patch-based adversarial attacks. The possibility to physically attack a basic component of automotive systems is a reason for serious concerns.
In this paper, we analyze the cause of the problem and show
that the lack of robustness is rooted in the classical aperture
problem of optical flow estimation in combination with bad
choices in the details of the network architecture. We show
how these mistakes can be rectified in order to make optical
flow networks robust to physical patch-based attacks. Additionally, we take a look at global white-box attacks in the
scope of optical flow. We find that targeted white-box attacks can be crafted to bias flow estimation models towards
any desired output, but this requires access to the input images and model weights. However, in the case of universal attacks, we find that optical flow networks are robust.
Code is available at https://github.com/lmbfreiburg/understanding_flow_robustness.

1. Introduction
While deep learning has been conquering many new application domains, it has become increasingly evident that
deep networks are vulnerable to distribution shifts. Adversarial attacks are a particular way to showcase this vulnerability, where one finds the minimal input perturbation that
is sufficient to corrupt the network output. As the small perturbation moves the sample out of the training distribution,
the network is detached from its learned patterns and follows the suggestive pattern of the attack. Although many
methods have been proposed to improve robustness [34],
they only alleviate the problem but do not solve it [1].
While most white-box adversarial attacks are mainly of
academic relevance as they reveal the weaknesses of deep
networks w.r.t. out-of-distribution data, physical adversarial
attacks have serious consequences for safe deployment. In
physical attacks, the input is not perturbed artificially, but a
confounding pattern is placed in the real world to derail the
machine learning approach.

Ground truth

FlowNetC

Robust FlowNetC

Figure 1. Overview. Physical patch-based adversarial attacks
on optical flow can be avoided by minor architectural changes.
First row: attacked first frame. Second row: ground truth optical flow. Third and fourth rows: the resulting optical flow estimates of FlowNetC [8] and our proposed Robust FlowNetC.
FlowNetC is strongly affected by the adversarial patch, whereas
Robust FlowNetC is barely affected. For the robust version we
make simple design changes based on causes of the attack; see
Section 6.

Most work on adversarial attacks has been concerned
with recognition problems, and it looked for a while as if
correspondence problems are not a good target for adversarial attacks. However, Ranjan et al. [25] showed that
they can successfully perform physical adversarial patch attacks on optical flow networks. They optimized an adversarial local patch that they can paste into both images, such
that large errors appear in the estimated optical flow field
even far away from the affected image location. They also
showed that the same adversarial patch worked on all vulnerable architectures, and even demonstrated physical attacks, where the printed patch is physically added to a scene
and derails the optical flow estimation. Ranjan et al. found
that different network architectures show different levels
of vulnerability, whereas conventional optical flow methods are not vulnerable at all. They hypothesized the cause
for the vulnerability to be in the common encoder-decoder
architecture of FlowNet [8] and its derivatives but did not
provide a conclusive analysis.

8916

