Learning Invisible Markers for Hidden Codes in Ofﬂine-to-online Photography
Jun Jia1 *, Zhongpai Gao2 *, Dandan Zhu2 , Xiongkuo Min1 , Guangtao Zhai1†, Xiaokang Yang2
1
Institute of Image Communication and Network Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{jiajun0302, gaozhongpai, ddz, minxiongkuo, zhaiguangtao, xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
QR (quick response) codes are widely used as an ofﬂineto-online channel to convey information (e.g., links) from
publicity materials (e.g., display and print) to mobile devices. However, QR codes are not favorable for taking up
valuable space of publicity materials. Recent works propose invisible codes/hyperlinks that can convey hidden information from ofﬂine to online. However, they require
markers to locate invisible codes, which fails the purpose
of invisible codes to be visible because of the markers.
This paper proposes a novel invisible information hiding architecture for display/print-camera scenarios, consisting of
hiding, locating, correcting, and recovery, where invisible
markers are learned to make hidden codes truly invisible.
We hide information in a sub-image rather than the entire
image and include a localization module in the end-to-end
framework. To achieve both high visual quality and high recovering robustness, an effective multi-stage training strategy is proposed. The experimental results show that the proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art information
hiding methods in both visual quality and robustness. In
addition, the automatic localization of hidden codes significantly reduces the time of manually correcting geometric
distortions for photos, which is a revolutionary innovation
for information hiding in mobile applications.

1. Introduction
Scanning QR codes with smartphones provides convenience for people to obtain information from ofﬂine to online anytime and anywhere. However, with the increasing
demand for the quality of experience (QoE), the unaesthetic
appearance limits the application of QR codes in many scenarios, such as interactive visual media, and IP protection
of user-generated (UGG). To achieve ofﬂine-to-online experiences while maintaining good QoE, invisible information hiding becomes a novel alternative [11, 20]. The core
* Equal contribution

† Corresponding author

requirement of information hiding in display/print-camera
scenarios is to make the information invisible to human eyes
but detectable by mobile devices.
The general process of invisible information hiding in
display/print-camera scenarios includes ﬁve steps as Figure 1: (i) encoding information in images, (ii) displaying/printing, (iii) capturing, (iv) locating the encoded information and correcting geometric distortion, and (v) decoding. The main challenge of the above process is that the decoding procedure needs to recover the hidden information
from photos that contains distortions caused by the camera imaging process. These distortions can be divided into
three categories according to their sources: (i) from environments, e.g., brightness, contrast, and color distortions),
(ii) from camera sides, e.g., defocus blur, noise, and compression, (iii) from photographer sides, e.g., motion blur
and geometric distortion. We deﬁne the image containing
hidden information as the encoded image. Existing methods [7, 8, 11, 20, 25] can recover hidden information under
the above-mentioned distortions. However, these methods
assume that the coordinates of the encoded image’s four
vertices in photos are provided such that the geometric distortion can be corrected by performing perspective transformation. Thus, these methods require preprocessing to
locate the encoded image’s four vertices and rectify the encoded image from photos taken from different perspectives,
which is essential for the success of decoding [8].
Existing preprocessing methods commonly used to remove geometric distortions include two categories: manual
locating [8, 25] and automatic locating [7, 11, 20]. Manual
locating is to ﬁnd the four vertices of the encoded image
manually, as Figure 1. However, manually locating the vertex coordinates is time-consuming and sometimes is difﬁcult when hidden codes are invisible. Traditional automatic
locating requires additional markers such that encoded images with distortions are distinguishable from backgrounds.
These methods add visible markers, such as bounding boxes
[11] and barcodes [7], around the encoded image. However, the markers break the invisibility of invisible codes. In
addition to the traditional automatic methods, Tancik et al.

2273

