Occlusion-Aware Cost Constructor for Light Field Depth Estimation
Yingqian Wang1 , Longguang Wang1 , Zhengyu Liang1 , Jungang Yang1 , Wei An1 , Yulan Guo1
1
National University of Defense Technology
https://github.com/YingqianWang/OACC-Net

1. Introduction
Light field (LF) cameras can encode 3D scenes into 4D
LF images. By using the abundant spatial and angular information in the LF images, the scene depth can be obtained by
performing LF depth estimation. As a fundamental task in
LF image processing, depth estimation benefits many subsequent applications such as refocusing [33], view synthesis [3, 13], 3D reconstruction [14], and virtual reality [37].
With the advances of deep neural networks, many deep
learning-based methods [2, 6, 7, 9, 17, 19, 26, 29] have been
proposed and boosted the performance of LF depth estimation. Recent deep learning-based methods achieve LF depth
estimation in a four-step pipeline including feature extraction, cost construction, cost aggregation, and depth regression. To achieve higher accuracy, these methods designed
different modules for feature extraction [29] and cost aggregation [2,9]. However, as a key step in LF depth estimation,

u=2

occluded pixel

u=3

Matching cost construction is a key step in light field
(LF) depth estimation, but was rarely studied in the deep
learning era. Recent deep learning-based LF depth estimation methods construct matching cost by sequentially
shifting each sub-aperture image (SAI) with a series of predefined offsets, which is complex and time-consuming. In
this paper, we propose a simple and fast cost constructor to
construct matching cost for LF depth estimation. Our cost
constructor is composed by a series of convolutions with
specifically designed dilation rates. By applying our cost
constructor to SAI arrays, pixels under predefined disparities can be integrated and matching cost can be constructed
without using any shifting operation. More importantly, the
proposed cost constructor is occlusion-aware and can handle occlusions by dynamically modulating pixels from different views. Based on the proposed cost constructor, we
develop a deep network for LF depth estimation. Our network ranks first on the commonly used 4D LF benchmark
in terms of the mean square error (MSE), and achieves a
faster running time than other state-of-the-art methods.

non-occluded pixel

u=1

Abstract

v=1

v=2

v=3

(a) an example 3×3 LF

v=1

v=2

v=3

(b) our OACC

Figure 1. An illustration of the proposed occlusion-aware cost
constructor (OACC). (a) A toy example of a 3×3 LF, in which
the yellow star is partially occluded by the green triangle. (b) Our
OACC constructs matching cost via convolutions and can handle
occlusions by assigning smaller weights to occluded pixels.

matching cost construction was rarely studied.
To construct matching costs for LF depth estimation, existing methods [2, 29] shift each sub-aperture image (SAI)
with a series of predefined offsets, and then concatenate the
shifted SAIs to form a cost volume. Although this shiftand-concat scheme is easy to implement, the large number
of shifting operation1 reduces the efficiency of these methods. Moreover, during matching cost construction, pixels
at different spatial locations are processed equally, which
cannot handle the spatially-varying occlusions where some
views are less informative and can even deteriorate the estimation results.
To handle the aforementioned challenges, in this paper,
we propose an occlusion-aware cost constructor (OACC)
for LF depth estimation. Our cost constructor is composed
by a series of convolutions with specifically designed dilation rates. By applying our OACC to SAI arrays, pixels
under predefined disparities can be integrated without performing shifting operation. More importantly, our OACC
can handle occlusions by dynamically modulating pixels
from different views, as shown in Fig. 1. Based on the
proposed OACC, we develop a deep network for LF depth
estimation. Our network achieves state-of-the-art depth estimation accuracy with a significant acceleration.
The contributions of this paper can be summarized as:
1 For example, in LFAttNet [29], totally 80 views are shifted by 8 disparity levels, resulting in 640 sequential shifting operations.

19809

