GroupViT: Semantic Segmentation Emerges from Text Supervision
Jiarui Xu1 * Shalini De Mello2 Sifei Liu2 Wonmin Byeon2
Thomas Breuel2 Jan Kautz2 Xiaolong Wang1
1
2
UC San Diego
NVIDIA

Abstract
Grouping and recognition are important components of
visual scene understanding, e.g., for object detection and
semantic segmentation. With end-to-end deep learning
systems, grouping of image regions usually happens implicitly via top-down supervision from pixel-level recognition labels. Instead, in this paper, we propose to bring
back the grouping mechanism into deep networks, which
allows semantic segments to emerge automatically with
only text supervision. We propose a hierarchical Grouping Vision Transformer (GroupViT), which goes beyond
the regular grid structure representation and learns to
group image regions into progressively larger arbitraryshaped segments. We train GroupViT jointly with a text encoder on a large-scale image-text dataset via contrastive
losses. With only text supervision and without any pixellevel annotations, GroupViT learns to group together semantic regions and successfully transfers to the task of semantic segmentation in a zero-shot manner, i.e., without
any further fine-tuning. It achieves a zero-shot accuracy
of 52.3% mIoU on the PASCAL VOC 2012 and 22.4%
mIoU on PASCAL Context datasets, and performs competitively to state-of-the-art transfer-learning methods requiring greater levels of supervision. We open-source our code
at https://github.com/NVlabs/GroupViT.

1. Introduction
Visual scenes are naturally composed of semanticallyrelated groups of pixels. The relationship between grouping and recognition has been studied extensively in visual
understanding even before the deep learning era [52, 53]. In
bottom-up grouping, the idea is to first re-organize pixels
into candidate groups and then to process each group with
a recognition module. This pipeline has been successfully
applied in image segmentation from superpixels [60], constructing region proposals for object detection [75, 94] and
semantic segmentation [3]. Beyond bottom-up inference,
top-down feedback from recognition can also provide signals to perform better visual grouping [74, 93].
* Jiarui Xu was an intern at NVIDIA during the project.

Training

Zero-shot Transfer

…

Cat walking in the
snow. Grey cat
walking in the …

Royal Caribbean
International
Oasis of the …

Student on the
Quad with a dog
and Frisbee

Contrastive Loss

GroupViT

Text Encoder

chair
potted
dog plant

dog

boat

cat

person

cat

…

A delivery worker
on a motorcycle.

motorbike

boat

motorbike

Figure 1. Problem Overview. First, we jointly train GroupViT
and a text encoder using paired image-text data. With GroupViT,
meaningful semantic grouping automatically emerges without any
mask annotations. Then, we transfer the trained GroupViT model
to the task of zero-shot semantic segmentation.

However, on moving to the deep learning era, the ideas
of explicit grouping and recognition have been much less
separated and more tightly coupled in end-to-end training systems. Semantic segmentation, e.g., is commonly
achieved via a Fully Convolutional Network [47], where
pixel grouping is only revealed at the output by recognizing
each pixel’s label. This approach eliminates the need to perform explicit grouping. While this method is very powerful
and still delivers state-of-the-art performance, there are two
major limitations that come with it: (i) learning is limited by
the high cost of per-pixel human labels; and (ii) the learned
model is restricted only to a few labeled categories and cannot generalize to unseen ones.
Recent developments in learning visual representations
from text supervision have shown tremendous success on

18134

