Self-Supervised Transformers for Unsupervised Object Discovery using
Normalized Cut
Yangtao Wang1 , Xi Shen2,3, * , Shell Xu Hu4 , Yuan Yuan5 , James L. Crowley1 , Dominique Vaufreydaz1
1
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LIG, 38000 Grenoble, France
2
3
Tencent AI Lab
LIGM (UMR 8049) - Ecole des Ponts, UPE
4
5
Samsung AI Center, Cambridge
MIT CSAIL

Abstract
Transformers trained with self-supervision using selfdistillation loss (DINO) have been shown to produce attention maps that highlight salient foreground objects. In this
paper, we show a graph-based method that uses the selfsupervised transformer features to discover an object from
an image. Visual tokens are viewed as nodes in a weighted
graph with edges representing a connectivity score based on
the similarity of tokens. Foreground objects can then be segmented using a normalized graph-cut to group self-similar
regions. We solve the graph-cut problem using spectral
clustering with generalized eigen-decomposition and show
that the second smallest eigenvector provides a cutting solution since its absolute value indicates the likelihood that
a token belongs to a foreground object.
Despite its simplicity, this approach significantly boosts
the performance of unsupervised object discovery: we improve over the recent state-of-the-art LOST by a margin of 6.9%, 8.1%, and 8.1% respectively on the VOC07,
VOC12, and COCO20K. The performance can be further
improved by adding a second stage class-agnostic detector (CAD). Our proposed method can be easily extended to
unsupervised saliency detection and weakly supervised object detection. For unsupervised saliency detection, we improve IoU for 4.9%, 5.2%, 12.9% on ECSSD, DUTS, DUTOMRON respectively compared to state-of-the-art. For
weakly supervised object detection, we achieve competitive
performance on CUB and ImageNet. Our code is available
at: https://www.m-psi.fr/Papers/TokenCut2022/

1. Introduction
Object detection is a key enabling technology for realworld vision systems for tasks such as robotics, autonomous
driving, traffic monitoring, manufacturing, and embodied
artificial intelligence [21, 63, 64]. However, the perfor* Corresponding Author

(a) DINO [6]

(b) LOST [45].

(c) TokenCut (ours)

(d) Attention maps associated to different patches

Figure 1. The attention map of the class token used in
DINO [6] (a) and the map of the inverse degrees used in
LOST [45] (b) are noisy for foreground / background separation. Our proposed method provides a clean attention map
that can be used to segment salient objects (c). Considering
the attention map associated to different patches highlight
different regions of the object (d), it is reasonable to build a
graph computing attention maps from multiple patches.

mance of current state-of-the-art object detectors is limited
by the high cost of annotating sufficient training data [33]
for supervised learning. This limitation becomes even more
apparent when using transfer learning to adapt a pre-trained
object detector to a new application domain. Approaches
such as active learning [1], semi-supervised learning [34],
and weakly-supervised learning [39] have attempted to
overcome this barrier by providing more efficient learning,
but with only limited success.
In this work, we focus on object discovery in natural
images with no human annotations. This is an important

14543

