Towards Noiseless Object Contours for Weakly Supervised Semantic
Segmentation
Jing Li1,2,4
Junsong Fan1,2,3,4
Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2,3,4∗
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
3
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI CAS
4
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR)
{lijing2018, fanjunsong2016, zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Image-level label based weakly supervised semantic segmentation has attracted much attention since image labels are very easy to obtain. Existing methods usually
generate pseudo labels from class activation map (CAM)
and then train a segmentation model. CAM usually highlights partial objects and produce incomplete pseudo labels. Some methods explore object contour by training a
contour model with CAM seed label supervision and then
propagate CAM score from discriminative regions to nondiscriminative regions with contour guidance. The propagation process suffers from the noisy intra-object contours, and inadequate propagation results produce incomplete pseudo labels. This is because the coarse CAM seed
label lacks sufficient precise semantic information to suppress contour noise. In this paper, we train a SANCE model
which utilizes an auxiliary segmentation module to supplement high-level semantic information for contour training by backbone feature sharing and online label supervision. The auxiliary segmentation module also provides
more accurate localization map than CAM for pseudo label generation. We evaluate our approach on Pascal VOC
2012 and MS COCO 2014 benchmarks and achieve stateof-the-art performance, demonstrating the effectiveness of
our method. The source code can be found at https:
//github.com/BraveGroup/SANCE

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation has made great progress in recent years thanks to the rapid development of deep neural networks [7, 8, 31, 34, 50]. However, per-pixel anno∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1. Pseudo label generation of IRNet and ours. (a) IRNet’s contour map contains many intra-object edges and misses
some true contours, CAM score can not propagate from discriminative region to non-discriminative region. (b) Our SANCE predicts noiseless contour and more complete segmentation map, thus
generates better pseudo labels.

tation for training semantic segmentation network requires
huge economic investment and is a time-consuming task.
To reduce the heavy burden of precise pixel-level annotation, weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS)
is adopted, which uses weak annotations to supervise semantic segmentation network, including but not limited to
bounding boxes [9, 22, 35, 40], scribbles [30, 43], pointlevel [3] and image-level labels [2, 23, 36, 37, 38, 49, 53].
Among all the annotations, image-level label is the most
widely used as it is much easier to obtain than other formats, it is available in almost all the datasets. In this paper,
we focus on studying image-level label based WSSS problem.
Image class label doesn’t provide localization, scale or
shape information of ground truth objects. Existing approaches usually adopt CAM [55] to estimate localization
maps for target objects, the localization maps are then processed to generate pseudo labels for standard segmentation
model training. To be specific, these works first train a

16856

