Exploiting Rigidity Constraints for LiDAR Scene Flow Estimation
Guanting Dong∗ Yueyi Zhang∗ Hanlin Li Xiaoyan Sun Zhiwei Xiong†
University of Science and Technology of China

(b) Indirect Constraints
(a) No Alignment
(c) Direct Rigidity Constraints
(d) Direct Constraints + EAO
Figure 1. The inference examples of different recurrent neural networks. From left to right: (a) source (red) and target (blue) input
point clouds from lidarKITTI scene flow dataset [23], (b) FlowStep3D that indirectly introduces Laplacian constraints on the optimization
objective [16], (c) our method that directly introduces multi-body rigidity constraints, and (d) our method that introduces an error awarded
optimization (EAO) strategy based on (c). Interesting artifacts are circled and zoomed-in at the bottom.

Abstract
Previous LiDAR scene flow estimation methods, especially recurrent neural networks, usually suffer from structure distortion in challenging cases, such as sparse reflection and motion occlusions. In this paper, we propose a
novel optimization method based on a recurrent neural network to predict LiDAR scene flow in a weakly supervised
manner. Specifically, our neural recurrent network exploits
direct rigidity constraints to preserve the geometric structure of the warped source scene during an iterative alignment procedure. An error awarded optimization strategy
is proposed to update the LiDAR scene flow by minimizing
the point measurement error instead of reconstructing the
cost volume multiple times. Trained on two autonomous
driving datasets, our network outperforms recent state-ofthe-art networks on lidarKITTI by a large margin. The
code and models will be available at https://github.
com/gtdong-ustc/LiDARSceneFlow.

1. Introduction
LiDAR scene flow estimation is a fundamental task in
3D scene understanding, which is vital to autonomous driving and many other computer vision applications. Compared with optical flow estimation, which focuses on fea∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author: zwxiong@ustc.edu.cn

ture matching for ordered RGB data, scene flow estimation poses an extra challenge as it involves aggregating unordered data from the LiDAR sensor.
To deal with unordered data, several convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for scene flow estimation have been
proposed. In term of convolution operation, these CNNbased methods can be divided into two categories, 2D convolution based methods [1, 11, 32] and 3D convolution
based methods [16, 19, 26, 35, 36]. Typically, the 2D convolution based methods convert 3D point clouds into 2D
representations, e.g. depth map and bird’s-eye-view map,
which inevitably brings in quantification errors. With recent advances in point cloud convolution [27], methods utilizing the 3D convolution operations are proposed to directly operate unordered point cloud data and achieve success [16, 19, 34–36].
HPLFlowNet [10] and FlowNet3D [19] introduced different 3D convolutions to operate the unordered point
clouds directly. They both employed an end-to-end network
to learn deep hierarchical features of point clouds and correlation embeddings for scene flow estimation. For small
displacements between two consecutive point clouds, these
works are effective but not satisfying in large displacements.
Then PointPWC-Net, utilizing a coarse-to-fine strategy, was
proposed to handle large displacements [36]. The scene
flow is first computed at low resolution to estimate large
displacements and then gradually refined at high resolution.
One drawback of PointPWC-Net lies in the error accumula-

12776

