Uni-Perceiver: Pre-training Unified Architecture for Generic Perception for
Zero-shot and Few-shot Tasks
Xizhou Zhu1∗ , Jinguo Zhu2∗† , Hao Li4∗† , Xiaoshi Wu4∗†
Hongsheng Li4 , Xiaohua Wang2 , Jifeng Dai3B
1
SenseTime Research 2 Xi’an Jiaotong University 3 Tsinghua University
4
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
zhuwalter@sensetime.com, lechatelia@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {haoli, wuxiaoshi}@link.cuhk.edu.hk
hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk, xhw@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, daijifeng001@gmail.com

Abstract

Previous Task-specific Perception Models
Text

Video

Biological intelligence systems of animals perceive the
world by integrating information in different modalities and
processing simultaneously for various tasks. In contrast,
current machine learning research follows a task-specific
paradigm, leading to inefficient collaboration between tasks
and high marginal costs of developing perception models
for new tasks. In this paper, we present a generic perception
architecture named Uni-Perceiver, which processes a variety of modalities and tasks with unified modeling and shared
parameters. Specifically, Uni-Perceiver encodes different
task inputs and targets from arbitrary modalities into a unified representation space with a modality-agnostic Transformer encoder and lightweight modality-specific tokenizers. Different perception tasks are modeled as the same
formulation, that is, finding the maximum likelihood target
for each input through the similarity of their representations. The model is pre-trained on several uni-modal and
multi-modal tasks, and evaluated on a variety of downstream tasks, including novel tasks that did not appear in
the pre-training stage. Results show that our pre-trained
model without any tuning can achieve reasonable performance even on novel tasks. The performance can be improved to a level close to state-of-the-art methods by conducting prompt tuning on 1% of downstream task data.
Full-data fine-tuning further delivers results on par with or
better than state-of-the-art results. Code and pre-trained
weights shall be released.

1. Introduction
Biological intelligence systems of animals perceive the
world by receiving information in different modalities, inte* Equal contribution. † This work is done when Jinguo Zhu, Hao Li, and
Xiaoshi Wu are interns at SenseTime Research. B Corresponding author.

Model A

Text

Image

Model C

Model B

Task head 1
Video Classification

Uni-Perceiver (Ours)

Task head 2

Task head 3

Task head 4

VQA

Image Retrieval

Sentence Classification

Joint Probability Estimation

Input

applicable to various tasks, e.g.,

Target

Video

Video Classification

Classname

Image
Text
Text

Image Classification

Unified
Model

Image Retrieval
Video Retrieval

Classname

Unified
Model

Image
Video

Image Text

VQA

Answer

Video Text

Video Caption

Word

…

…

…

share weight for various modalities and tasks

Figure 1. Comparing previous task-specific perception models
with our proposed Uni-Perceiver, which processes various modalities and tasks with a single siamese model and shared parameters.

grating with the complex central nervous system, and processing simultaneously for different tasks. However, designing a generic artificial perception model that handles
multiple modalities and numerous tasks has always been
considered too difficult. To simplify this problem, previous machine learning research has focused on developing specialized models for inputs from certain restricted
modality, e.g., Convolutional Neural Networks [45] for visual recognition and Transformers [80] for natural language
processing. Recently, Transformers have been proved to
have competitive performance in more scenarios such as
image [10, 20, 51, 76, 78, 82, 84, 90] and video [4, 6, 87]
recognition, which triggers a new paradigm of designing
unified architectures for different modalities. Following this
paradigm, recent works [1, 27, 33, 64] adopt Transformers as the backbone for multi-modal applications such as

16804

