HandOccNet: Occlusion-Robust 3D Hand Mesh Estimation Network
JoonKyu Park1∗

Yeonguk Oh1∗ Gyeongsik Moon1∗ Hongsuk Choi1 Kyoung Mu Lee1,2
1
Dept. of ECE & ASRI, 2 IPAI, Seoul National University, Korea

jkpark0825@snu.ac.kr,namepllet1@gmail.com,{mks0601,redarknight,kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Hands are often severely occluded by objects, which
makes 3D hand mesh estimation challenging. Previous
works often have disregarded information at occluded regions. However, we argue that occluded regions have strong
correlations with hands so that they can provide highly beneficial information for complete 3D hand mesh estimation.
Thus, in this work, we propose a novel 3D hand mesh estimation network HandOccNet, that can fully exploits the
information at occluded regions as a secondary means to
enhance image features and make it much richer. To this
end, we design two successive Transformer-based modules, called feature injecting transformer (FIT) and selfenhancing transformer (SET). FIT injects hand information
into occluded region by considering their correlation. SET
refines the output of FIT by using a self-attention mechanism. By injecting the hand information to the occluded
region, our HandOccNet reaches the state-of-the-art performance on 3D hand mesh benchmarks that contain challenging hand-object occlusions. The codes are available in:
https://github.com/namepllet/HandOccNet.

1. Introduction
Despite promising results of 3D hand mesh estimation
from a single RGB image [6, 12, 20, 26–30], making 3D
hand mesh estimation method robust to occlusion is still an
open challenge. One promising approach for the occlusionrobust system is using a spatial attention mechanism. Although the spatial attention mechanism has not been used
for the occlusion-robust 3D hand mesh estimation, several
2D human body pose estimation methods [8, 39, 40] have
utilized such attention mechanism for the occlusion-robust
results. They estimate a spatial attention map and multiply
it with a feature map to tell the networks where to focus.
The attention map tends to have high scores on human regions and low scores on occluded regions. Therefore, it attenuates the magnitude of features at occluded regions and
∗ Authors contributed equally.

Primary features

(a)

Secondary features

Feature
injection

(b)

Injected features

Figure 1. Example of the operation of the proposed HandOccNet. (a) The output feature map of spatial attention mechanism
for the case of severe occlusion, which consists of sparse primary
and secondary features . (b) Our feature injection module finds the
primary features related to the secondary features, and then injects
the information of primary features into the locations of secondary
features.

makes networks focus on human regions.
Although the spatial attention-based methods have
shown noticeable results under the occlusions, there are several limitations. First, they are mostly for the 2D human
body pose estimation, which aims to localize 2D body joint
coordinates. Hence, the validity of their spatial attention
mechanism is not proved for the occlusion-robust 3D hand
mesh estimation. In particular, as hands have quite complicated articulations and are often severely occluded by objects, the widely used spatial attention mechanism might
fail to produce robust results. Unlike the methods [24, 25]
using a depth map, additional depth ambiguity, which arises
from 2D image-to-3D hand estimation, is another bottleneck. Second, when the occlusions are severe, activations
of the spatial attention mechanism become sparse because
most of the hand regions are occluded. The sparse regions
contain limited information of hand; hence, relying only on

1496

