Fine-Grained Object Classification via Self-Supervised Pose Alignment
Xuhui Yang1 , Yaowei Wang1∗ , Ke Chen2,1 *, Yong Xu1,2,3 , Yonghong Tian1
1
Peng Cheng Laboratory 2 South China University of Technology
3
China Communication and Computer Network Laboratory of Guangdong
{yangxh, wangyw}@pcl.ac.cn, {chenk, yxu}@scut.edu.cn, tianyh@pcl.ac.cn

Abstract
Semantic patterns of fine-grained objects are determined
by subtle appearance difference of local parts, which thus
inspires a number of part-based methods. However, due
to uncontrollable object poses in images, distinctive details carried by local regions can be spatially distributed
or even self-occluded, leading to a large variation on object representation. For discounting pose variations, this
paper proposes to learn a novel graph based object representation to reveal a global configuration of local parts
for self-supervised pose alignment across classes, which is
employed as an auxiliary feature regularization on a deep
representation learning network. Moreover, a coarse-tofine supervision together with the proposed pose-insensitive
constraint on shallow-to-deep sub-networks encourages
discriminative features in a curriculum learning manner.
We evaluate our method on three popular fine-grained object classification benchmarks, consistently achieving the
state-of-the-art performance. Source codes are available
at https://github.com/yangxh11/P2P-Net.

1. Introduction
Semantic patterns in image-based object classification
are determined by visual appearance and shape of object classes. The problem of classifying fine-grained objects is made more challenging due to the inherently subtle shape difference across the subordinate categories (e.g.
bird breeds [34] and vehicle brands [18]). As a result, finegrained classification relies on distinguished appearance details on local parts, which typically desires detection on
those specific parts additionally using expensive part annotations [19, 38]. Learning a discriminative representation
for fine-grained objects remains non-trivial in the context
of deep learning. Generally, a good representation in finegrained classification should not only be sensitive to the
subtle detail changes that usually anchored on specific parts
* Corresponding authors

Figure 1. Different from direct concatenation of local and global
features in conventional part-based methods, the main idea of the
proposed P2P-Net is to incorporate a pose-insensitive configuration of local distinctive details into object representation via utilizing self-supervised pose alignment as feature regularization to
narrow intra-category variance and enlarge inter-category margin.

but also be invariant to the deformations of object parts and
the changes of viewing angles.
On the one hand, a large number of deep approaches
were devoted to the former challenge of capturing finegrained details in local regions, which relied on detecting
discriminative parts to extract local features to complement
the global one [31, 41, 46]. On the other hand, another
group of deep methods [17, 39, 45] avoided explicitly localizing object parts but tried to enhance the object representation’s discrimination by applying bilinear pooling operation
on feature vectors from two independent network streams.
However, only a few works have paid attention to the challenge of feature inconsistency caused by the changes of object pose or viewing angle.
Similar to other pose estimation problems [1, 16], poses
of fine-grained objects can approximately be described as a
geometric configuration of discrete object parts. As a result,
we argue that reliable object parts localization and parts
alignment are essential to model object poses, which can be
utilized to generate pose insensitive object representations

7399

