Gravitationally Lensed Black Hole Emission Tomography
Aviad Levis1∗ ,
1

Pratul P. Srinivasan2∗ ,

California Institute of Technology

Andrew A. Chael3† ,
2

Google Research

Ren Ng4 ,
3

Princeton

Katherine L. Bouman1
4

UC Berkeley

Abstract
Measurements from the Event Horizon Telescope enabled the visualization of light emission around a black hole
for the first time. So far, these measurements have been
used to recover a 2D image under the assumption that the
emission field is static over the period of acquisition. In
this work, we propose BH-NeRF, a novel tomography approach that leverages gravitational lensing to recover the
continuous 3D emission field near a black hole. Compared to other 3D reconstruction or tomography settings,
this task poses two significant challenges: first, rays near
black holes follow curved paths dictated by general relativity, and second, we only observe measurements from a single viewpoint. Our method captures the unknown emission
field using a continuous volumetric function parameterized
by a coordinate-based neural network, and uses knowledge
of Keplerian orbital dynamics to establish correspondence
between 3D points over time. Together, these enable BHNeRF to recover accurate 3D emission fields, even in challenging situations with sparse measurements and uncertain
orbital dynamics. This work takes the first steps in showing
how future measurements from the Event Horizon Telescope
could be used to recover evolving 3D emission around the
supermassive black hole in our Galactic center.

1. Introduction
The Event Horizon Telescope (EHT), which recently
captured the first image of a black hole, opens the door to
a new era in black hole research [42]. We are now able to
image the direct environment around a black hole and resolve image features on the scale of an event horizon. This
unprecedented resolution is achieved by linking radio telescopes across the globe to synchronously observe an astronomical source [1, 5, 11], a technique known as Very Large
Baseline Interferometry [43]. Although a black hole itself
is not visible, its imprint or “shadow” on the emission from
the surrounding hot gas is what the EHT aims to image.
The two candidate black holes within reach of the EHT
are M87∗ and Sagittarius A∗ (SgrA∗ ). The first black hole
∗ Authors contributed equally to this work.
† NASA Hubble Fellowship Program, Einstein Fellow.

Figure 1. We formulate and present an approach for a novel tomography: recovering the emission distribution of flares in orbit around a black hole using observations captured from a single viewpoint over time. This is achieved by leveraging expected
physics around a black hole: gravitational lensing and emission
flow modeled by Keplerian orbital dynamics. In this example,
observations are simulated telescope measurements that place a
sparse set of constraints on the Fourier components of the 2D images images over time (top row); The image formation model accounts for ray trajectories that are curved due to gravitational lensing. The orientation of the observed projection plane is indicated
in green. Our method, BH-NeRF, recovers a representation of the
underlying 3D emission from the sparse telescope measurements.

image of M87∗ [42] was constructed from measurements
collected over an entire night, with the underlying assumption that its emission is static throughout acquisition. In
contrast, SgrA∗ , the black hole in our Galactic center, is far
more dynamic and displays strong flares of emission up to
several times a day [19]. A potential explanation for these
flares are compact bright emission spots [8] in orbit around
the black hole, referred to as hot-spots.
In this work, we formulate and propose an approach for
a novel tomography problem to reconstruct these dynamic
events (Fig. 1). In contrast to previous works [4, 23, 27],
which focus on recovering 2D image plane dynamics, our

19841

