Reconstructing Surfaces for Sparse Point Clouds with On-Surface Priors
Baorui Ma, Yu-Shen Liu∗
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

Zhizhong Han
Wayne State University
Detroit, USA

mbr18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn

h312h@wayne.edu

Abstract

generalization ability. Therefore, the data-driven strategy
becomes more promising to resolve this problem.

It is an important task to reconstruct surfaces from 3D
point clouds. Current methods are able to reconstruct surfaces by learning Signed Distance Functions (SDFs) from
single point clouds without ground truth signed distances
or point normals. However, they require the point clouds
to be dense, which dramatically limits their performance in
real applications. To resolve this issue, we propose to reconstruct highly accurate surfaces from sparse point clouds with an on-surface prior. We train a neural network to
learn SDFs via projecting queries onto the surface represented by the sparse point cloud. Our key idea is to infer signed distances by pushing both the query projections
to be on the surface and the projection distance to be the
minimum. To achieve this, we train a neural network to
capture the on-surface prior to determine whether a point
is on a sparse point cloud or not, and then leverage it as
a differentiable function to learn SDFs from unseen sparse
point cloud. Our method can learn SDFs from a single sparse point cloud without ground truth signed distances or
point normals. Our numerical evaluation under widely used
benchmarks demonstrates that our method achieves stateof-the-art reconstruction accuracy, especially for sparse
point clouds. Code and data are available at https:
//github.com/mabaorui/OnSurfacePrior.

Recent learning based methods [11, 26, 32, 37, 54] leverage this strategy to learn signed distance functions (SDFs) from 3D point clouds, and further leverage the learned
SDFs to reconstruct surfaces using the marching cubes algorithm [35]. One kind of these methods [11, 26, 32] requires supervision including ground truth signed distances
or point normals during training, and infers SDFs for unseen 3D point clouds during test. To remove the requirement of the ground truth supervision, another kind of methods [1, 12, 37] can directly learn SDFs from single unseen
3D point cloud with geometric constraints [1, 12] or neural pulling [37]. One key factor that makes these methods
successful without the ground truth supervision is that the
single point cloud should be dense, which supports to estimate the zero level set [12] or search accurate pulling targets [37]. However, due to the high cost of dense point clouds
capturing, the assumption of dense point clouds fails in real
applications. Therefore, it is appealing but challenging to
learn SDFs from sparse point clouds without ground truth
signed distances or normals.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing surfaces from 3D point clouds is a vital task in 3D computer vision. It bridges the gap between
the data capturing and the surface editing for various downstream applications. It has been studied for decades using
geometric approaches [5, 28, 35, 44]. However, these methods require extensive human interaction to set proper parameters for different 3D point clouds, which leads to poor
∗ The corresponding author is Yu-Shen Liu. This work was supported

by National Key R&D Program of China (2018YFB0505400, 2020YFF0304100), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (62072268),
and in part by Tsinghua-Kuaishou Institute of Future Media Data.

To resolve this issue, we introduce to learn SDFs from
single sparse point clouds with an on-surface prior. For a
surface represented by a sparse point cloud, we aim to perceive its surrounding signed distance field via projecting an
arbitrary query location onto the surface. Our novelty lies
in the two constraints that we add on the projections, so that
each projection locates on the surface and is the nearest to
the query. This leads to two losses to train a neural network
to learn SDFs. One loss is provided by the on-surface prior,
which determines whether a projection is on the surface represented by the sparse point cloud or not, even if the projection is not a point of the sparse point cloud. While the other
loss encourages the projection distance is the minimum to
the surface. To achieve this, we train a neural network using
a data-driven strategy to capture the on-surface prior from
a dataset during training, and leverage the trained network
as a differentiable function to learn SDFs for unseen sparse
point clouds. For the learning of SDFs, our method does not

6315

