PolyWorld: Polygonal Building Extraction with Graph Neural Networks in
Satellite Images
Stefano Zorzi 1 3

Shabab Bazrafkan 2

Stefan Habenschuss 2

stefano.zorzi@icg.tugraz.at

sbazrafkan@blackshark.ai

shabenschuss@blackshark.ai

Friedrich Fraundorfer 1
fraundorfer@icg.tugraz.at

1

Graz University of Technology
2
Blackshark.ai 3 VRVis

Abstract
While most state-of-the-art instance segmentation methods produce binary segmentation masks, geographic and
cartographic applications typically require precise vector
polygons of extracted objects instead of rasterized output.
This paper introduces PolyWorld, a neural network that directly extracts building vertices from an image and connects
them correctly to create precise polygons. The model predicts the connection strength between each pair of vertices
using a graph neural network and estimates the assignments by solving a differentiable optimal transport problem.
Moreover, the vertex positions are optimized by minimizing a combined segmentation and polygonal angle difference loss. PolyWorld significantly outperforms the state of
the art in building polygonization and achieves not only notable quantitative results, but also produces visually pleasing building polygons. Code and trained weights are publicly available at https://github.com/zorzi-s/
PolyWorldPretrainedNetwork.

Figure 1. Polygonal object extraction with PolyWorld. The
method uses a CNN backbone to detect vertex candidates from an
image, and aggregates the information of the visual descriptors exploiting a graph neural network. The connections between vertices
are generated solving a differentiable optimal transport problem.

1. Introduction
The extraction of vector representations of building polygons from aerial and satellite imagery has been growing in
importance in many remote sensing applications, such as
cartography, city modelling and reconstruction, as well as
map generation. Most building extraction and polygonization methods rely on the vectorization of probability maps
produced by a segmentation network. These approaches are
not end-to-end learned, which means that imperfections and
artifacts produced by the segmentation model are carried
through the entire pipeline with the consequent generation
of unregular polygons.
In this paper, we present a new way of tackling the building polygonization problem. Rather than learning a segmentation network which is then followed by a polygonization method, we propose a novel neural network architec-

ture called PolyWorld that detects building corners from
a satellite image and uses a learned matching procedure
to connect them in order to form polygons. Thereby, our
method allows the generation of valid polygons in an endto-end fashion.
PolyWorld extracts positions and visual descriptors of
building corners using a Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) and generates polygons by evaluating whether the
connections between vertices are valid. This procedure
finds the best connection assignment between the detected
vertex descriptors, which means that every corner must be
matched with the subsequent vertex of the polygon. The
connections between polygon vertices can be represented as
the solution of a linear sum assignment problem. In PolyWorld, an important role is played by a Graph Neural Net-

1848

