MonoDTR: Monocular 3D Object Detection with Depth-Aware Transformer
Kuan-Chih Huang1 Tsung-Han Wu1
1
National Taiwan University

Abstract

Hung-Ting Su1 Winston H. Hsu1,2
2
Mobile Drive Technology

(a)
Pseudo LiDAR

Monocular 3D object detection is an important yet challenging task in autonomous driving. Some existing methods leverage depth information from an off-the-shelf depth
estimator to assist 3D detection, but suffer from the additional computational burden and achieve limited performance caused by inaccurate depth priors. To alleviate this,
we propose MonoDTR, a novel end-to-end depth-aware
transformer network for monocular 3D object detection. It
mainly consists of two components: (1) the Depth-Aware
Feature Enhancement (DFE) module that implicitly learns
depth-aware features with auxiliary supervision without requiring extra computation, and (2) the Depth-Aware Transformer (DTR) module that globally integrates context- and
depth-aware features. Moreover, different from conventional pixel-wise positional encodings, we introduce a novel
depth positional encoding (DPE) to inject depth positional
hints into transformers. Our proposed depth-aware modules can be easily plugged into existing image-only monocular 3D object detectors to improve the performance. Extensive experiments on the KITTI dataset demonstrate that our
approach outperforms previous state-of-the-art monocularbased methods and achieves real-time detection. Code is
available at https:// github.com/ kuanchihhuang/ MonoDTR.

1. Introduction
Three-dimensional (3D) object detection is a fundamental problem and enables various applications such as autonomous driving. Previous methods have achieved superior performance based on the accurate depth information
from multiple sensors, such as LiDAR signal [16,22,39,40]
or stereo matching [6, 23, 44, 52]. In order to lower the
sensor costs, some image-only monocular 3D object detection methods [2, 7, 20, 31, 33, 50] have been proposed and
made impressive progress relying on geometry constraints
between 2D and 3D. However, the performance is still far
from satisfactory without the aid of depth cues.
Recently, several works have tried to produce estimated
depth from the pre-trained depth estimation models to assist monocular 3D object detection. Pseudo-LiDAR-based

3D detection

(b)
3D detection

Backbone
Fusion

Backbone

(c)
MonoDTR

3D detection

Depth Supervision

Figure 1. Comparison of different depth-assisted monocular
3D object detection frameworks.
(a) Pseudo-LiDAR-based
methods [31, 52, 53] lift images to 3D coordinate via monocular
depth estimation, followed by a 3D LiDAR-based detector to recover object locations. (b) Fusion-based methods [10, 34, 48] extract features from images and estimated depth maps, then fuse
them to predict objects. (c) Our MonoDTR learns depth-aware
features via additional depth supervision and performs 3D object
detection in an end-to-end manner. Note that our depth supervision is only leveraged in the training stage.

approaches [31, 52, 53] convert estimated depth maps into
3D point clouds to imitate LiDAR signals, followed by the
existing LiDAR-based detector for 3D object detection (see
Figure 1(a)). Some fusion-based approaches [10,34,48] apply several fusion strategies to combine features extracted
from depths and images to detect objects (see Figure 1(b)).
These methods, though better localize objects with the help
of estimated depth, may suffer from the risk of learning 3D
detection on inaccurate depth maps. Also, the additional
computational cost of the depth estimator makes it impractical for real-world applications [32].
To address the above issues, we propose MonoDTR,
a novel end-to-end depth-aware transformer network for
monocular 3D object detection (see Figure 1(c)). A depthaware feature enhancement (DFE) module is introduced to

4012

