DAFormer: Improving Network Architectures and Training Strategies for
Domain-Adaptive Semantic Segmentation
Lukas Hoyer
ETH Zurich

Dengxin Dai
MPI for Informatics

Luc Van Gool
ETH Zurich & KU Leuven

lhoyer@vision.ee.ethz.ch

ddai@mpi-inf.mpg.de

vangool@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
65

1. Introduction
In the last few years, neural networks have achieved
overwhelming performance on many computer vision tasks.
However, they require a large amount of annotated data in
order to be trained properly. For semantic segmentation,
annotations are particularly costly as every pixel has to be
labeled. For instance, it takes 1.5 hours to annotate a single

55

DeepLabV2, ResNet-101
DeepLabV2, ResNet-38
DeepLabV3+, ResNet-101
DAFormer, MiT-B5

50

CBST

60

mIoU

As acquiring pixel-wise annotations of real-world images for semantic segmentation is a costly process, a model
can instead be trained with more accessible synthetic data
and adapted to real images without requiring their annotations. This process is studied in unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA). Even though a large number of methods propose new adaptation strategies, they are mostly based on
outdated network architectures. As the influence of recent
network architectures has not been systematically studied,
we first benchmark different network architectures for UDA
and newly reveal the potential of Transformers for UDA semantic segmentation. Based on the findings, we propose a
novel UDA method, DAFormer. The network architecture of
DAFormer consists of a Transformer encoder and a multilevel context-aware feature fusion decoder. It is enabled
by three simple but crucial training strategies to stabilize
the training and to avoid overfitting to the source domain:
While (1) Rare Class Sampling on the source domain improves the quality of the pseudo-labels by mitigating the
confirmation bias of self-training toward common classes,
(2) a Thing-Class ImageNet Feature Distance and (3) a
learning rate warmup promote feature transfer from ImageNet pretraining. DAFormer represents a major advance
in UDA. It improves the state of the art by 10.8 mIoU for
GTA→Cityscapes and 5.4 mIoU for Synthia→Cityscapes
and enables learning even difficult classes such as train,
bus, and truck well. The implementation is available at
https://github.com/lhoyer/DAFormer .

Network Architecture

45

AdaptSegNet
2018

MRKLD

DAFormer

BDL CAG
2019

ProDA
CTF
CorDA CAMix
DACS IAST

FDA

2020

2021

Date of Publication
Figure 1. Progress of UDA over time on GTA→Cityscapes.
Most previous UDA methods are evaluated using the outdated
DeepLabV2 architecture. We rethink the design of the network
architecture as well as its training strategies for UDA and propose
DAFormer, significantly outperforming previous methods.

image of Cityscapes [12] while, for adverse weather conditions, it is even 3.3 hours [58]. One idea to circumvent
this issue is training with synthetic data [55, 57]. However,
commonly used CNNs [38] are sensitive to domain shift
and generalize poorly from synthetic to real data. This issue is addressed in unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA)
by adapting the network trained with source (synthetic) data
to target (real) data without access to target labels.
Previous UDA methods mostly evaluated their contributions using a DeepLabV2 [6] or FCN8s [46] network architecture with ResNet [24] or VGG [60] backbone in order
to be comparable to previously published works. However,
even their strongest architecture (DeepLabV2+ResNet101)
is outdated in the area of supervised semantic segmentation.
For instance, it only achieves a supervised performance of
65 mIoU [68] on Cityscapes while recent networks reach
up to 85 mIoU [64, 86]. Due to the large performance gap,
it stands to question whether using outdated network architectures can limit the overall performance of UDA and can
also misguide the benchmark progress of UDA. In order to
answer this question, this work studies the influence of the
network architecture for UDA, compiles a more sophisticated architecture, and successfully applies it to UDA with
a few simple, yet crucial training strategies. Naively using a

9924

