Noise2NoiseFlow: Realistic Camera Noise Modeling without Clean Images
∗

Ali Maleky1,3,*, Shayan Kousha1,3, , Michael S. Brown3 , Marcus A. Brubaker1,2,3
1
York University 2 Vector Institute 3 Samsung AI Center–Toronto

Abstract
Denoiser

Image noise modeling is a long-standing problem with
many applications in computer vision. Early attempts that
propose simple models, such as signal-independent additive white Gaussian noise or the heteroscedastic Gaussian
noise model (a.k.a., camera noise level function) are not sufficient to learn the complex behavior of the camera sensor
noise. Recently, more complex learning-based models have
been proposed that yield better results in noise synthesis
and downstream tasks, such as denoising. However, their
dependence on supervised data (i.e., paired clean images) is
a limiting factor given the challenges in producing groundtruth images. This paper proposes a framework for training
a noise model and a denoiser simultaneously while relying
only on pairs of noisy images rather than noisy/clean paired
image data. We apply this framework to the training of the
Noise Flow architecture. The noise synthesis and density estimation results show that our framework outperforms previous signal-processing-based noise models and is on par
with its supervised counterpart. The trained denoiser is
also shown to significantly improve upon both supervised
and weakly supervised baseline denoising approaches. The
results indicate that the joint training of a denoiser and a
noise model yields significant improvements in the denoiser.

1. Introduction
Image noise modeling is a long-standing problem in
computer vision that has relevance for many applications
[6, 9, 10, 21, 22, 29]. Recently, data-driven noise models based on deep learning have been proposed [2, 12, 23].
Unfortunately, these models generally require clean (i.e.,
noise-free) images, which are practically challenging to collect in real scenarios [1]. In this work we propose a new approach, Noise2NoiseFlow, which can accurately learn noise
models without the need for clean images. Instead, only
pairs of noisy images of a fixed scene are required.
While efforts are made to reduce noise during capture, post-capture modeling is a critical piece of many
* Work performed while interns at the Samsung AI Center–Toronto.

Noise2NoiseFlow

Noisy image pairs

Noise model
Noise
model
Camera NLF

Noise Flow

Noise2NoiseFlow

KLD=0.0621

KLD=0.0152

KLD=0.0059

KLD=0.0707

KLD=0.0148

KLD=0.0074

Noisy

DnCNN-supervised

Noise2Noise+DnCNN

Real noise

Clean image

Noise2NoiseFlow

Clean image

PSNR=53.65

PSNR=54.18

PSNR=55.80

PSNR=51.07

PSNR=51.31

PSNR=53.40

Figure 1. Overview of Noise2NoiseFlow. (top) Given pairs of
noisy images of the same scene, Noise2NoiseFlow simultaneouly
trains both a noise model and a denoiser. (middle) Noise synthesis results from Camera NLF, Noise Flow, and Noise2NoiseFlow
compared to the real noise in the SIDD dataset. Noise generated
by Noise2NoiseFlow is the most similar to the real noise both visually and in KL divergence but without requiring clean, noisefree images. (bottom) Example denoising results from the jointly
trained denoiser compared to its supervised DnCNN baseline, and
a DnCNN trained with Noise2Noise loss.

downstream tasks and in many domains large amounts of
noise are intrinsic to the problem—for example, astrophotography and medical imaging. As a result, noise is
an integral and significant part of signal capture in many
imaging domains, and modeling it accurately is critical. For
instance, noise model estimation is necessary for removing fixed pattern effects from CMOS sensors [11] and enhancing video in extreme low-light conditions [32]. Noise

17632

