Dynamic Dual-Output Diffusion Models
Yaniv Benny
Tel Aviv University

Lior Wolf
Tel Aviv University

yanivbenny@mail.tau.ac.il

wolf@cs.tau.ac.il

Abstract
Iterative denoising-based generation, also known as denoising diffusion models, has recently been shown to be
comparable in quality to other classes of generative models, and even surpass them. Including, in particular, Generative Adversarial Networks, which are currently the state
of the art in many sub-tasks of image generation. However,
a major drawback of this method is that it requires hundreds of iterations to produce a competitive result. Recent
works have proposed solutions that allow for faster generation with fewer iterations, but the image quality gradually deteriorates with increasingly fewer iterations being
applied during generation. In this paper, we reveal some
of the causes that affect the generation quality of diffusion
models, especially when sampling with few iterations, and
come up with a simple, yet effective, solution to mitigate
them. We consider two opposite equations for the iterative
denoising, the first predicts the applied noise, and the second predicts the image directly. Our solution takes the two
options and learns to dynamically alternate between them
through the denoising process. Our proposed solution is
general and can be applied to any existing diffusion model.
As we show, when applied to various SOTA architectures,
our solution immediately improves their generation quality,
with negligible added complexity and parameters. We experiment on multiple datasets and configurations and run
an extensive ablation study to support these findings.

1. Introduction
Over the past few years, deep generative models have
reached the ability to generate high-quality samples in various domains, including images [2], speech [25], and natural language [3]. For image generation, generative models can be divided into two main branches: approaches
based on generative adversarial networks (GAN) [7] and
log-likelihood-based methods, such as variational autoencoders (VAE) [15], autoregressive models [26], and normalizing flows [14,29]. Log-likelihood models have the advantage of possessing a straightforward objective, which makes

them easier to optimize, while GANs are known to be unstable during training [8, 31]. However, until recently, well
optimized GAN models outperformed their log-likelihood
counterparts in generation quality [2, 11–13].
This changed when Ho et al. [9] introduced a new type of
log-likelihood model called the Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DDPM). With this model, image quality
surpasses GANs [6], while it is also very stable and easy
to train. DDPMs follow the concept of iterative denoising: given a noisy image xt , it is gradually denoised by
predicting a less noisy image xt−1 . This process, when
done over hundreds (or thousands) of iterations, is able to
generate images with very high quality and diversity, even
when starting from random noise. DDPMs have many computer vision applications, such as super-resolution [18, 30]
and image translation [33], and are also extremely effective
in non-visual domains [4, 21, 28].
DDPM incorporates a probabilistic denoising process
that is dependant on the estimation of the mean component µt−1 . This is done by a neural network parameterized
over θ and denoted as µθ (xt , t). However, it was found that
through the forward and backward equations this process is
better formalized by predicting either the noise θ (xt , t) or
the original image xθ (xt , t) [9]. Their experiments found
the former to be empirically superior, and, as far as we can
ascertain, no further comparisons between the two options
(noise or original image) have been performed as yet.
In this work, we revisit the original implementation of
DDPM, and find that the preference of θ over xθ is circumstantial and depends on the hyperparameters and datasets.
In addition, in certain timesteps, the denoising process has
less error when predicting the noise component θ , while in
others it predicts the original image xθ better. This realization motivated us to design a model capable of predicting
both values and adaptively selecting the more reliable output at each sampling iteration. The modified model has a
negligible number of added parameters and complexity. We
apply this method to various DDPM models and show a
marked improvement in terms of image quality (measured
by FID) for many benchmarks. This addition to the framework is orthogonal to existing advancements (that we know

11482

