Towards Multi-domain Single Image Dehazing via Test-time Training
Huan Liu1 , Zijun Wu1 , Liangyan Li1 , Sadaf Salehkalaibar1 , Jun Chen1 , Keyan Wang2
1
McMaster University, 2 Xidian University
{liuh127, wuz146, lil61, salehkas, chenjun}@mcmaster.ca
kywang@mail.xidian.edu.cn
Abstract
Recent years have witnessed significant progress in the
area of single image dehazing, thanks to the employment of
deep neural networks and diverse datasets. Most of the existing methods perform well when the training and testing
are conducted on a single dataset. However, they are not
able to handle different types of hazy images using a dehazing model trained on a particular dataset. One possible
remedy is to perform training on multiple datasets jointly.
However, we observe that this training strategy tends to
compromise the model performance on individual datasets.
Motivated by this observation, we propose a test-time training method which leverages a helper network to assist the
dehazing model in better adapting to a domain of interest. Specifically, during the test time, the helper network
evaluates the quality of the dehazing results, then directs
the dehazing network to improve the quality by adjusting
its parameters via self-supervision. Nevertheless, the inclusion of the helper network does not automatically ensure the
desired performance improvement. For this reason, a metalearning approach is employed to make the objectives of the
dehazing and helper networks consistent with each other.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method by
providing extensive supporting experiments.

1. Introduction
Single image dehazing is a classic but still active research topic in low-level computer vision, which aims to
restore clean images from the degraded hazy counterparts.
Recently, many deep learning approaches [5, 10, 14, 22, 25,
26, 31, 35, 45, 49, 50] have been proposed to address this
problem by training a neural network to approximate the
mapping from hazy images to haze-free ground truths. As
more and more dehazing datasets have been released, such
as RESIDE [23], O-Haze [3] and NH-Haze [2], these methods are able to demonstrate their outstanding ability in handling different haze patterns. However, one important issue
is left behind for consideration, i.e., handling different types

26.93

26.25
26.11

26.13

25.72
25.58

24.77

24.09
23.98

Figure 1: Average PSNR values of GDN [26], MSBDN [11]
and DW-GAN [14] across four datasets. It can be observed
that the dehazing methods perform better if the training and
validation are conducted on a single dataset.

of hazy images by a single network. To be specific, current
methods are usually trained on the training split of a particular dataset and tested on the corresponding testing split. For
example, the test accuracy on RESIDE indoor test set [23]
is obtained by validating a dehazing model trained on the
RESIDE indoor training set. Such an evaluation strategy allows the neural network to focus on a specific domain but
evades the important problem of learning a general model
across datasets. A seemingly simple remedy is to train a
single dehazing model on all available datasets jointly. Intuitively, with the increase of data, the network can benefit
from considering more kinds of haze patterns, leading to
boosted performance on every single dataset [1].
Somewhat surprisingly, we find that this naive solution
actually compromises the dehazing performance on individual datasets. Indeed, it can be seen from Figure 1 that
the dehazing models perform better when the training and
testing are conducted on a single dataset (as opposed to
all datasets combined). This unusual fact contradicts the
common belief that the increase in data usually leads to improved performance. One possible explanation is that each
15831

