Trustworthy Long-Tailed Classification
Bolian Li
Tianjin University

Zongbo Han
Tianjin University

Haining Li
Xidian University

libolian@tju.edu.cn

zongbo@tju.edu.cn

18200100006@stu.xidian.edu.cn

Huazhu Fu
IHPC, A*STAR

Changqing Zhang*
Tianjin University

hzfu@ieee.org

zhangchangqing@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Classification on long-tailed distributed data is a
challenging problem, which suffers from serious classimbalance and accordingly unpromising performance especially on tail classes. Recently, the ensembling based
methods achieve the state-of-the-art performance and show
great potential. However, there are two limitations for current methods. First, their predictions are not trustworthy for
failure-sensitive applications. This is especially harmful for
the tail classes where the wrong predictions is basically frequent. Second, they assign unified numbers of experts to all
samples, which is redundant for easy samples with excessive
computational cost. To address these issues, we propose
a Trustworthy Long-tailed Classification (TLC) method to
jointly conduct classification and uncertainty estimation to
identify hard samples in a multi-expert framework. Our
TLC obtains the evidence-based uncertainty (EvU) and evidence for each expert, and then combines these uncertainties and evidences under the Dempster-Shafer Evidence
Theory (DST). Moreover, we propose a dynamic expert engagement to reduce the number of engaged experts for easy
samples and achieve efficiency while maintaining promising performances. Finally, we conduct comprehensive experiments on the tasks of classification, tail detection, OOD
detection and failure prediction. The experimental results
show that the proposed TLC outperforms existing methods
and is trustworthy with reliable uncertainty.

1. Introduction
Data in real-world applications are usually long-tailed
distributed over a series of categories [28, 34, 37, 44, 50, 51].
The frequencies of different categories vary a lot, with
the head classes abundant in training samples, and the tail
* Corresponding author.

classes having only few training samples. Besides, there
may also be new categories which models have not seen before [37], exceeding the tail of long-tailed distribution and
being termed as out-of-distribution (OOD) data [32]. The
long-tailed classification is very challenging since models
need to handle the few-shot learning problem (and even
with OOD data sometimes) for the tail classes, and the overall class-imbalance (models are trained on much more head
samples than tail samples) would also deviate the models
to focus extremely on the head classes [7]. These problems
cause the models to perform unpromisingly especially on
the tail classes [5, 19].
Existing algorithms address long-tailed classification
mainly by rebalancing the training of different classes to assign larger importance to tail samples [7, 10, 33, 52], transferring knowledge between the head and tail classes [37,
57], ensembling statically sampled data groups [53, 55]
(complementary ensembling), or ensembling individual
classifiers in a multi-expert framework [51] (redundant ensembling). The redundant ensembling achieves the state-ofthe-art performance mainly by reducing the model variance
to obtain robust predictions [51]. However, there are two
major limitations for redundant ensembling methods. First,
they are usually vulnerable to yielding unreliable prediction
(i.e., over-confident prediction). This also prevents the ensembling methods from perceiving the wrong predictions
and OOD samples, and is especially harmful for the tail
classes where the predictions have averagely more errors
than the head classes [5, 19]. Consequently, their deployment in some failure-sensitive applications (e.g., disease diagnosis [2], automatic driving [54] and robotics [12]) is limited. Second, redundant ensembling usually assumes that
all classifiers should be trained on all samples [51], which
is static and often induces excessive computational cost by
uniformly assigning experts to all classes. The expert redundancy is severe especially on head classes, where competitive classification performance can be achieved with

6970

