Cross-Architecture Self-supervised Video Representation Learning
Sheng Guo1 * Zihua Xiong1∗ Yujie Zhong2 Limin Wang3 Xiaobo Guo1 Bing Han1 Weilin Huang4†
1

3

MYbank, Ant Group 2 Meituan Inc.
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China

4

Alibaba Group

{guosheng.guosheng,xiongzihua.xzh,jefflittleguo.gxb,hanbing.hanbing}@mybank.cn
jaszhong@hotmail.com, lmwang@nju.edu.cn, weilin.hwl@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
In this paper, we present a new cross-architecture contrastive learning (CACL) framework for self-supervised
video representation learning. CACL consists of a 3D CNN
and a video transformer which are used in parallel to generate diverse positive pairs for contrastive learning. This
allows the model to learn strong representations from such
diverse yet meaningful pairs. Furthermore, we introduce a
temporal self-supervised learning module able to predict an
Edit distance explicitly between two video sequences in the
temporal order. This enables the model to learn a rich temporal representation that compensates strongly to the videolevel representation learned by the CACL. We evaluate our
method on the tasks of video retrieval and action recognition on UCF101 and HMDB51 datasets, where our method
achieves excellent performance, surpassing the state-of-theart methods such as VideoMoCo [23] and MoCo+BE [34]
by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Video representation learning is a fundamental task for
video understanding, as it plays an important role on various
tasks, such as action recognition [25, 30, 36, 37, 44], video
retrieval [39, 43], and video temporal detection [18, 27, 46].
Recent efforts have been devoted to improving its performance by using deep neural networks in a supervised learning manner, which often requires a large-scale video dataset
with very expensive human annotations, such as Sports1M [1], Kinetics [12], HACS [45], and MultiSports [17].
The large annotation cost inevitably limits the potential of
deep networks on learning video representation. Therefore,
it is of great importance to improve this task by leveraging
unlabeled videos which are easily accessible at a large scale.
Recently, self-supervised learning has made significant
progress on learning strong image representation, by constructing various supervised learning signals from images
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

themselves. It has also been extended to video domain,
where contrastive learning has been widely-applied. For
example, in recent works such as [23, 28, 35] contrastive
learning was introduced to capture the discrimination between two video instances, which enables it to learn an
invariant representation within each video instance. However, the contrastive learning mainly focuses on learning a
global spatio-temporal representation of videos in these approaches, while it is difficult to capture meaningful temporal details which often provide important cues for discriminating different video instances, e.g., human actions. Therefore, different from learning image representation, modelling temporal information is critical to video representation. In this work, we present a new self-supervised video
representation method able to perform both video-level contrastive learning and temporal modelling simultaneously in
a unique framework, as shown in Figure 1.
The supervised signal of learning temporal information
can be created by exploring the sequential nature of videos,
allowing for performing self-supervised learning. Recent
methods, such as pace predictions [11, 41] and playback
speeds perception [4, 42], followed this line of research by
creating a pretext task that implements self-supervised temporal predictions. In this work, we introduce a new selfsupervised temporal learning by predicting an approximate
Edit distance between a video (i.e. a sequence of frames)
and its temporal shuffle. This allows us to explicitly measure the degree of temporal difference quantitatively in Edit
distance, setting it apart from the existing self-supervised
methods which are often limited to estimate a rough difference of two videos in the temporal domain. For example, they often created a pretext task to predict whether two
video sequences are in the same pace or playback speeds,
but ignore details in such temporal difference.
While most self-supervised contrastive learning methods
generate positive pairs using various data augmentations
which provide different views of an instance, we develop
a new method able to learn stronger representation from diverse architectures via contrastive learning. The family of

19270

