Density-preserving Deep Point Cloud Compression
Yun He1∗

Xinlin Ren1∗

Danhang Tang2 Yinda Zhang2 Xiangyang Xue1
1
Fudan University 2 Google

Yanwei Fu1

Abstract
Local density of point clouds is crucial for representing local details, but has been overlooked by existing point
cloud compression methods. To address this, we propose a
novel deep point cloud compression method that preserves
local density information. Our method works in an autoencoder fashion: the encoder downsamples the points and
learns point-wise features, while the decoder upsamples
the points using these features. Specifically, we propose
to encode local geometry and density with three embeddings: density embedding, local position embedding and
ancestor embedding. During the decoding, we explicitly
predict the upsampling factor for each point, and the directions and scales of the upsampled points. To mitigate
the clustered points issue in existing methods, we design a
novel sub-point convolution layer, and an upsampling block
with adaptive scale. Furthermore, our method can also
compress point-wise attributes, such as normal. Extensive
qualitative and quantitative results on SemanticKITTI and
ShapeNet demonstrate that our method achieves the stateof-the-art rate-distortion trade-off.

1. Introduction
Point cloud is one of the most important and widely
used 3D representation in many applications, such as autonomous driving, robotics and physics simulation [13].
With the rapid development of 3D scanning technology,
complex geometry can now be effectively captured as large
point clouds with fine details. As a consequence, point
cloud compression becomes crucial for storage and transmission. Particularly, to achieve favorable compression ratio, the community has been focusing on lossy methods and
pondering the key question: what properties of point clouds
should be preserved, given limited bitrate budget?
Besides the global geometry, we argue that local density
∗ indicates equal contribution.

Yun He, Xinlin Ren and Xiangyang Xue are with the School of Computer Science, Fudan University.
Yanwei Fu is with the School of Data Science, Fudan University.

\

\

Ours (Bpp: 1.61)

GT

\

G-PCC (Bpp: 1.66)

\

Depoco (Bpp: 1.73)

Figure 1. We argue that local density is an important characteristic of the point cloud and should be preserved during compression. Existing methods that ignore the local density exhibit artifacts such as uniform distribution (G-PCC [12]) and clustered
points (Depoco [40]), resulting in worse reconstruction, especially
when the bitrate is low.

is an important characteristic and should be preserved as
much as possible. Firstly, preserving density usually leads
to less outliers, and thus smaller reconstruction error. Secondly, point clouds captured in practice, e.g. from LiDAR,
are rarely with uniformly distributed points. Losing local
density means losing important traits such as scanning resolution and occlusion. Thirdly, point clouds are often processed or simplified to be denser on regions of interest or
with complex geometry, such as human face, hand, etc. Preserving density during compression means more budget is
spent on these regions. Last but not the least, if the decompressed point cloud has significantly different density from
the raw one, downstream applications such as semantic segmentation may be affected.
Mathematically, a point cloud can be considered as a set,
often with different cardinality and permutation settings [8],
which makes it difficult for image/video compression or
conventional learning-based solutions that assume fixed dimensional and ordered input. A typical strategy of existing lossy methods is to voxelize the points before compres-

2333

