Diversity Matters: Fully Exploiting Depth Clues for Reliable
Monocular 3D Object Detection
Zhuoling Li1 *, Zhan Qu2∗†, Yang Zhou2 , Jianzhuang Liu2 , Haoqian Wang1 , Lihui Jiang2
1
Tsinghua University 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
lzl20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn {quzhan, zhouyang116, liu.jianzhuang, jianglihui1}@huawei.com
wanghaoqian@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
As an inherently ill-posed problem, depth estimation
from single images is the most challenging part of monocular 3D object detection (M3OD). Many existing methods
rely on preconceived assumptions to bridge the missing spatial information in monocular images, and predict a sole
depth value for every object of interest. However, these assumptions do not always hold in practical applications. To
tackle this problem, we propose a depth solving system that
fully explores the visual clues from the subtasks in M3OD
and generates multiple estimations for the depth of each
target. Since the depth estimations rely on different assumptions in essence, they present diverse distributions. Even if
some assumptions collapse, the estimations established on
the remaining assumptions are still reliable. In addition, we
develop a depth selection and combination strategy. This
strategy is able to remove abnormal estimations caused by
collapsed assumptions, and adaptively combine the remaining estimations into a single one. In this way, our depth
solving system becomes more precise and robust. Exploiting the clues from multiple subtasks of M3OD and without
introducing any extra information, our method surpasses
the current best method by more than 20% relatively on the
Moderate level of test split in the KITTI 3D object detection
benchmark, while still maintaining real-time efficiency.

1. Introduction
Significant attention has been drawn by 3D object detection due to its widespread applications in autonomous driving and robotic navigation [2, 13, 14, 42]. Inaccurate detection affects the motion planning process directly and could
lead to serious accidents. Therefore, the industry has great
demand for precise and robust 3D object detection systems.
* Zhuoling Li and Zhan Qu contributed equally. This work was done
when Zhuoling Li was an intern at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.
† Corresponding author.

(a) Direct estimation (1 depth): 0.6220

(b) Depth from height (3 depths): 0.5831

(c) Depth from keypoint (16 depths): 0.3210

(d) Our system (20 depths): 0.2819

Figure 1. Comparison among various depth solving strategies with
different diversity levels. The value below each image is the mean
absolute error of depth estimation on the KITTI validation set [12]
if we always select the most accurate depth from multiple produced estimations. As shown, the error decreases as the diversity
of estimations increases.

Many recently proposed 3D object detection algorithms
heavily rely on LiDARs [47] and stereo cameras [18], because they are able to perceive the depth information of surroundings directly. Nevertheless, LiDAR sensors are expensive while stereo cameras require exact online calibration [22]. These limitations make 3D perception using only
monocular images promising because it is economical and
flexible for deployment.
The monocular 3D object detection community has
achieved prominent progress in recent years. However,
there still exists a huge performance gap between the
monocular and LiDAR-based methods. This gap is caused
by the fact that accurate localization of 3D objects relies on
precise depth estimation, and predicting depth from monocular images is an inherently ill-posed problem [25], which
means the information contained in a single image is insufficient for determining the depths of objects. To compensate the lack of information, current detectors usually resort
to some preconceived assumptions. For example, SMOKE
[21] assumes that depth can be inferred from visual pixels

2791

