Category Contrast for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation in Visual Tasks
Jiaxing Huang 1 , Dayan Guan 1 , Aoran Xiao 1 , Shijian Lu* 1 , Ling Shao 2
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 Terminus Group, China

1

{Jiaxing.Huang, Dayan.Guan, Aoran.Xiao, Shijian.Lu}@ntu.edu.sg, ling.shao@ieee.org

Abstract

ﬁed into three categories: 1) adversarial loss that enforces
source-like target representations [38, 40, 53, 59, 60, 62, 63];
2) image translation loss that translates source images to
have target-like styles and appearance [8,27,36,72,74]; and
3) self-training loss that re-trains networks iteratively with
conﬁdently pseudo-labelled target samples [15, 36, 80, 81].

Instance contrast for unsupervised representation learning has achieved great success in recent years. In this
work, we explore the idea of instance contrastive learning in unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) and propose a novel Category Contrast technique (CaCo) that introduces semantic priors on top of instance discrimination
for visual UDA tasks. By considering instance contrastive
learning as a dictionary look-up operation, we construct a
semantics-aware dictionary with samples from both source
and target domains where each target sample is assigned
a (pseudo) category label based on the category priors of
source samples. This allows category contrastive learning (between target queries and the category-level dictionary) for category-discriminative yet domain-invariant feature representations: samples of the same category (from either source or target domain) are pulled closer while those
of different categories are pushed apart simultaneously. Extensive UDA experiments in multiple visual tasks (e.g., segmentation, classiﬁcation and detection) show that CaCo
achieves superior performance as compared with state-ofthe-art methods. The experiments also demonstrate that
CaCo is complementary to existing UDA methods and generalizable to other learning setups such as unsupervised
model adaptation, open-/partial-set adaptation etc.

Unsupervised representation learning [5,19,41,44,58,68,
73, 77, 78] addresses a related problem, i.e., unsupervised
network pre-training which aims to learn discriminative embeddings from unlabelled data. In recent years, instance
contrastive learning [5, 19, 42, 58, 68, 73] has led to major advances in unsupervised representation learning. Despite different motivations, instance contrast methods can
be thought of as a dictionary look-up task [19] that trains
a visual encoder by matching an encoded query q with a
dictionary of encoded keys k: the encoded query should
be similar to the encoded positive keys and dissimilar to encoded negative keys. With no labels available for unlabelled
data, the positive keys are often randomly augmented versions of query samples, and all other samples are considered
as negative keys.
In this work, we explore the idea of instance contrast
in UDA. Considering contrastive learning as a dictionary
look-up task, we hypothesize that a UDA dictionary should
be category-aware and domain-mixed with keys from both
source and target domains. Intuitively, a category-aware
dictionary with category-balanced keys will encourage to
learn category-discriminative yet category-unbiased representations, while the keys from both source and target domains will allow to learn invariant representations within
and across the two domains, both being aligned with the
objective of UDA.

1. Introduction
Though deep neural networks (DNNs) [20, 57] have revolutionized various computer vision tasks [4, 20, 47, 57],
they generally perform not well on new domains due to the
cross-domain mismatch. Unsupervised domain adaptation
(UDA) aims to mitigate the cross-domain mismatch via exploiting unlabelled target-domain samples. To achieve this
purpose, researchers have designed different unsupervised
training objectives on target-domain samples to train a wellperformed model in target domain [7, 30, 40, 59, 62, 63, 69].
The existing unsupervised losses can be broadly classi-

With above motivation, this paper presents Category
Contrast (CaCo) as a way of building category-aware and
domain-mixed dictionaries with corresponding contrastive
losses for UDA. As shown in Fig. 1, this dictionary includes keys that are evenly sampled in both categories
and domains, where each target key comes with a predicted pseudo category. Take the illustrative dictionary
c
}1≤c≤C,1≤m≤M as an example. Each category c
K = {km
will have M keys while each domain has (C × M )/2 keys.

* Corresponding author.

1203

