Long-term Visual Map Sparsification with Heterogeneous GNN
Ming-Fang Chang1 , Yipu Zhao2 , Rajvi Shah2 , Jakob J. Engel2 , Michael Kaess1 , and Simon Lucey3
1

Carnegie Mellon University

2

Meta Reality Labs Research

3

The University of Adelaide

Figure 1. Given a map built from SfM, our proposed approach leverages GNNs and is able to identifies map points on stable structures (red
points and blue squares), while discarding points that are prone to seasonal change, such as tree foliage (black points and orange squares).

Abstract
We address the problem of map sparsification for longterm visual localization. For map sparsification, a commonly employed assumption is that the pre-build map and
the later captured localization query are consistent. However, this assumption can be easily violated in the dynamic
world. Additionally, the map size grows as new data accumulate through time, causing large data overhead in the
long term. In this paper, we aim to overcome the environmental changes and reduce the map size at the same time
by selecting points that are valuable to future localization.
Inspired by the recent progress in Graph Neural Network
(GNN), we propose the first work that models SfM maps
as heterogeneous graphs and predicts 3D point importance
scores with a GNN, which enables us to directly exploit the
rich information in the SfM map graph. Two novel supervisions are proposed: 1) a data-fitting term for selecting valuable points to future localization based on training queries;
2) a K-Cover term for selecting sparse points with full-map
coverage. The experiments show that our method selected
map points on stable and widely visible structures and outperformed baselines in localization performance.

1. Introduction
In long-term visual localization, a common strategy is
to build and accumulate maps from the captured image
streams, and then localize new incoming queries by match-

ing against the accumulated map. In the presence of environmental changes, the accumulated map contains an increasing number of points and many of which are outdated.
This will affect both the computational cost and the performance of localization in the long run. Therefore, the ability
to identify and remove these invalid points is important for
many applications that target dynamic environments, such
as autonomous driving, field robotics, and Augmented Reality. Additionally, for devices with limited on-board memory, it enables keeping a compact map that only contains the
most valuable information for future localization queries.
Existing works on map sparsification mostly fall into the
category of subset selection, i.e., treating the 3D map as an
over-sampled representation of a static world and aiming to
select the most valuable point subset from them. The selection of point subset is typically formulated as a K-Cover
problem. Assuming the map keyframes cover all the possible camera positions, the K-Cover algorithm encourages
each keyframe in the map to observe K points under a total
point number constraint [7, 14, 15, 17]. These methods are
purely based on the historical data stored in the map, therefore lacking the ability to identify points invalidated due
to environmental changes. When the environment changes,
the map can only be updated by collecting new query data
over the whole mapped area and solve the K-Cover problem
again with the new query data, which is inefficient and expensive. Apart from sparsifying a 3D map, there are some
works on selecting 2D key points, e.g., by predicting the

2406

