Human Hands as Probes for Interactive Object Understanding
Mohit Goyal

Sahil Modi
Rishabh Goyal
Saurabh Gupta
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

Interactive object understanding, or what we can do to
objects and how is a long-standing goal of computer vision. In this paper, we tackle this problem through observation of human hands in in-the-wild egocentric videos. We
demonstrate that observation of what human hands interact
with and how can provide both the relevant data and the
necessary supervision. Attending to hands, readily localizes and stabilizes active objects for learning and reveals
places where interactions with objects occur. Analyzing the
hands shows what we can do to objects and how. We apply
these basic principles on the EPIC - KITCHENS dataset, and
successfully learn state-sensitive features, and object affordances (regions of interaction and afforded grasps), purely
by observing hands in egocentric videos.

1. Introduction
Consider the cupboard in Figure 1. Merely localizing
and naming it is insufficient for a robot to successfully interact with it. To enable interaction we, we need to identify
what are plausible sites for interaction, how should we interact with each site, and what would happens when we do.
The goal of this paper is to acquire such an understanding
about objects. Specifically, we formulate it as a) learning a
feature space that is sensitive to the state of the object (and
thus indicative of what we can do with it) rather than just its
category; and b) identifying what hand-grasps do objects
afford and where. These together provide an interactive
understanding of objects, and could aid learning policies
for robots. For instance, distance in a state-sensitive feature space can be used as reward functions for manipulation
tasks [52,54,64]. Similarly, hand-grasps afforded by objects
and their locations provide priors for exploration [38, 39].
While we have made large strides in building models for
how objects look (the various object recognition problems),
the same recipe of collecting large-scale labeled datasets
Project website: https://s-gupta.github.io/hands-as-probes/.

Output Input

Abstract

Egocentric Videos

{mohit, smodi9, rgoyal6, saurabhg}@illinois.edu

Regions of Interaction
a) State Sensitive Features

0.50

0.38

0.27

0.20

0.55

0.47

0.43

0.31

0.22

0.21

0.20

0.20

Afforded Grasps

b) Object Affordance Prediction

Figure 1. Human hands reveal information about objects as they
interact with them. They tell us where and how we can interact
with an object (the handle of the cupboard via an adducted thumb
grasp), and what happens when we do (cupboard opens to reveals
many more objects within). This paper develops techniques to
extract an interactive understanding of objects through the observation of hands in a corpus of egocentric videos. Specifically, we
produce a) features that are indicative of object states, and b) object affordances (i.e. regions of interaction, and afforded grasps).

for training doesn’t quite apply for understanding how objects work. First of all, no large-scale labeled datasets already exist for such tasks. Second, manually annotating
these aspects on static images is challenging. For instance,
objects states are highly contextual: the same object (e.g.
cupboard in Figure 1) can exist in many different states
(closed, full, on-top-of, has-handle, in-contact-with-hand)
at the same time, depending on the interaction we want to
conduct. Similarly, consciously annotating where and how
one can touch an object can suffer from biases, leading to
data that may not be indicative of how people actually use
objects during normal daily conduct. While one might annotate that we pull on the handle to open the cupboard; in
real life we may very often just flick it open by sliding our
fingers in between the cupboard door and its frame.
Motivated by these challenges, we pursue learning directly from the natural ways in which people interact with
objects in egocentric videos. Since, egocentric data focuses
upon hand-object interaction, it solves both the data and
the supervision problem. Egocentric observation of human
hands reveals information about the objects they are inter-

3293

