Detector-Free Weakly Supervised Group Activity Recognition
Dongkeun Kim1
Jinsung Lee2
Department of CSE, POSTECH1

Minsu Cho1,2
Suha Kwak1,2
Graduate School of AI, POSTECH2

https://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/DFWSGAR/

time

Abstract
Group activity recognition is the task of understanding
the activity conducted by a group of people as a whole in a
multi-person video. Existing models for this task are often
impractical in that they demand ground-truth bounding box
labels of actors even in testing or rely on off-the-shelf object
detectors. Motivated by this, we propose a novel model for
group activity recognition that depends neither on bounding box labels nor on object detector. Our model based
on Transformer localizes and encodes partial contexts of a
group activity by leveraging the attention mechanism, and
represents a video clip as a set of partial context embeddings. The embedding vectors are then aggregated to form a
single group representation that reflects the entire context of
an activity while capturing temporal evolution of each partial context. Our method achieves outstanding performance
on two benchmarks, Volleyball and NBA datasets, surpassing not only the state of the art trained with the same level
of supervision, but also some of existing models relying on
stronger supervision.

1. Introduction
Group activity recognition (GAR) is the task of classifying the activity that a group of people are doing as a whole
in a given video clip. It has attracted increasing attention
due to a variety of its applications including sports video
analysis, video surveillance, and social scene understanding. Unlike the conventional action recognition that focuses
on understanding individual actions [9, 16, 18, 26, 31, 35, 44,
46, 50, 52], GAR demands comprehensive and precise understanding of interactions between multiple actors, which
introduces inherent challenges such as localization of actors
and modeling their spatio-temporal relations.
Due to the difficulty of the task, most of existing methods for GAR [15,17,21,23,29,36,53,55,57] require groundtruth bounding boxes of individual actors for both training
and testing, and their action class labels for training. In particular, the bounding box labels are used to extract features
of individual actors (e.g., RoIPool [39] and RoIAlign [19])

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Visualization of partial contexts captured by a token
across time. The token in this example focuses on how players
behave after they conceded a goal. (a) Right after the event 3psucc, the timer has been reset to 24 secs and a defender stares at
the ball. (b) Players prepare for the next attack, while a referee and
a cameraman point at who takes the ball. (c) A player initiates the
next attack. With such tokens each representing different pieces
of the whole group activity, our model acquires the encapsulated
semantics of the target activity.

and discover their spatio-temporal relations precisely; such
actor features are aggregated while considering the relations
between actors to form a group-level video representation,
which is in turn fed to a group activity classifier. Though
these methods have demonstrated impressive performance
on the challenging task, their dependence on the heavy annotations, especially bounding boxes at inference, is impractical and in consequence restricts their applicability significantly.
One way to resolve this issue is to jointly learn group activity recognition and person detection using bounding box
labels [6, 60] to estimate bounding boxes of actors at inference. This approach however still requires ground-truth
bounding boxes of individual actors for training videos. To
further reduce the annotation cost, Yan et al. [56] introduced
weakly supervised GAR (WSGAR) that does not demand
actor-level labels at both training and inference. They address the lack of bounding box labels by generating actor
box proposals through a detector pretrained on an external
dataset and learning to prune irrelevant proposals.
The detector-based WSGAR however has several drawbacks as follows. First of all, a detector often suffers

20083

