DynamicEarthNet: Daily Multi-Spectral Satellite Dataset
for Semantic Change Segmentation
Aysim Toker1,∗ , Lukas Kondmann1,2,∗ , Mark Weber1 , Marvin Eisenberger1 , Andrés Camero2 ,
Jingliang Hu2 , Ariadna Pregel Hoderlein1 , Çağlar Şenaras3 , Timothy Davis3 ,
Daniel Cremers1 ,Giovanni Marchisio3,† , Xiao Xiang Zhu1,2,†,‡ , Laura Leal-Taixé1,†
Technical University of Munich1 , German Aerospace Center2 , Planet Labs3

Figure 1. Visualization of the DynamicEarthNet dataset. For a specific area of interest, we show two satellite observations, 2019-08-01
and 2019-08-31, as well as the corresponding monthly ground-truth annotation (top left). The complete dataset consists of daily samples
in the range from 2018-01-01 to 2019-12-31. We consider 75 separate areas of interest, spread over six continents (top right).

Abstract
Earth observation is a fundamental tool for monitoring
the evolution of land use in specific areas of interest. Observing and precisely defining change, in this context, requires both time-series data and pixel-wise segmentations.
To that end, we propose the DynamicEarthNet dataset that
consists of daily, multi-spectral satellite observations of 75
selected areas of interest distributed over the globe with imagery from Planet Labs. These observations are paired with
pixel-wise monthly semantic segmentation labels of 7 land
use and land cover (LULC) classes. DynamicEarthNet is
the first dataset that provides this unique combination of
daily measurements and high-quality labels. In our experiments, we compare several established baselines that either
utilize the daily observations as additional training data
(semi-supervised learning) or multiple observations at once
(spatio-temporal learning) as a point of reference for future
research. Finally, we propose a new evaluation metric SCS
that addresses the specific challenges associated with timeseries semantic change segmentation. The data is available
at: https://mediatum.ub.tum.de/1650201.
Making peace with nature is the defining task of the
21st century.
António Guterres, UN Secretary General
* Authors share first authorship. † Authors share senior authorship. ‡
Corresponding author: xiaoxiang.zhu@dlr.de.

1. Introduction
Society is rapidly becoming more aware of the human
footprint on the world’s climate. Overwhelming evidence
shows that climate change has both short-term and longterm effects on almost every aspect of our lives [27]. Using simulations and global climate metrics, it is nowadays
possible to observe changes at a global scale, like the rising sea levels or changes of the gulf stream. In contrast,
precise predictions of local changes are much harder to obtain. Common examples include land use by agriculture,
deforestation, flooding, wildfires, growth of urban areas,
and transportation infrastructure. It is of critical importance
to monitor such local changes since these are the factors that
ultimately exacerbate the global climate crisis.
Satellite images are a powerful tool in this context to
track local changes to the environment in specific regions.
Observing change at a local scale requires two conditions:
high frequency of satellite observations and pixel-precise
understanding of the observed surface. Existing datasets
often fail to provide these conditions. Whenever pixelwise annotations are provided, only static images can be
used [43] or the revisit frequency is limited to once a
year [14, 36]. Datasets with coarser annotations have either an irregular [11] or monthly revisit frequency [38]. As
an example of land changes, in 2020, 46km2 of the rainforest in Brazil were destroyed every day [29]. This suggests
that if we analyze the satellite images of that area once per
month, we potentially miss deforestation of the equivalent
of the city of Los Angeles, California. As Brazil alone has

21158

