STRPM: A Spatiotemporal Residual Predictive Model for High-Resolution
Video Prediction
Zheng Chang1,2 , Xinfeng Zhang1 , Shanshe Wang3 *, Siwei Ma3 , and Wen Gao1,3
1
School of Computer Science and Technology,
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology,
School of Computer Science, Peking University, Beijing, China
changzheng18@mails.ucas.ac.cn, xfzhang@ucas.ac.cn, {sswang, swma, wgao}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Although many video prediction methods have obtained
good performance in low-resolution (64∼128) videos, predictive models for high-resolution (512∼4K) videos have
not been fully explored yet, which are more meaningful due
to the increasing demand for high-quality videos. Compared with low-resolution videos, high-resolution videos
contain richer appearance (spatial) information and more
complex motion (temporal) information. In this paper,
we propose a Spatiotemporal Residual Predictive Model
(STRPM) for high-resolution video prediction. On the one
hand, we propose a Spatiotemporal Encoding-Decoding
Scheme to preserve more spatiotemporal information for
high-resolution videos. In this way, the appearance details
for each frame can be greatly preserved. On the other hand,
we design a Residual Predictive Memory (RPM) which
focuses on modeling the spatiotemporal residual features
(STRF) between previous and future frames instead of the
whole frame, which can greatly help capture the complex
motion information in high-resolution videos. In addition,
the proposed RPM can supervise the spatial encoder and
temporal encoder to extract different features in the spatial
domain and the temporal domain, respectively. Moreover,
the proposed model is trained using generative adversarial
networks (GANs) with a learned perceptual loss (LP-loss)
to improve the perceptual quality of the predictions. Experimental results show that STRPM can generate more satisfactory results compared with various existing methods.
* Corresponding author: Shanshe Wang, sswang@pku.edu.cn. This
work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (62025101, 62072008, 62071449, U20A20184), National
Key Research and Development Project of China (2019YFF0302703,
2021YFF0900503) and High-performance Computing Platform of Peking
University, which are gratefully acknowledged.

CrevNet (ICLR2020)

STRPM

Ground Truth

Figure 1. Qualitative results between the proposed STRPM and
the state-of-the-art method CrevNet [29] on the SJTU4K dataset
(4K: 2160×3840 resolution, 4 frames → 1 frame). STRPM has
generated much better visual details compared with CrevNet.

1. Introduction
Video prediction is a key component of representation
learning due to its great ability in modeling meaningful
representations for natural videos and has been applied to
various video processing applications, such as video coding [14], precipitation nowcasting [20], robotic control [6],
autonomous driving [2] and so on. Different from video interpolation [16,17], video prediction (extrapolation) is more
challenging by merely utilizing limited information from
previous frames to predict the unknown future frames. Motivated by the advantages of deep learning technologies in
extracting deep features, in recent years, various learningbased methods have been proposed for video prediction
which can be summarized into three types.
The first type of methods [20, 22, 25–27, 29] utilize Recurrent neural networks (RNN) to progressively predict
video frames due to their unique advantages in sequence
learning and have obtained some satisfactory results. However, the predictions from RNN-based methods are typically
blurry due to the standard mean square error based loss
function. To solve this problem, the second type of meth-

13946

