Vision Transformer with Deformable Attention
Xuran Pan1 *

Zhuofan Xia1 *

Shiji Song1

Li Erran Li2†

Gao Huang1,3‡

1

2

Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University
AWS AI, Amazon 3 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence

Abstract
Transformers have recently shown superior performances on various vision tasks. The large, sometimes even
global, receptive field endows Transformer models with
higher representation power over their CNN counterparts.
Nevertheless, simply enlarging receptive field also gives
rise to several concerns. On the one hand, using dense
attention e.g., in ViT, leads to excessive memory and computational cost, and features can be influenced by irrelevant parts which are beyond the region of interests. On the
other hand, the sparse attention adopted in PVT or Swin
Transformer is data agnostic and may limit the ability to
model long range relations. To mitigate these issues, we
propose a novel deformable self-attention module, where
the positions of key and value pairs in self-attention are
selected in a data-dependent way. This flexible scheme
enables the self-attention module to focus on relevant regions and capture more informative features. On this basis,
we present Deformable Attention Transformer, a general
backbone model with deformable attention for both image
classification and dense prediction tasks. Extensive experiments show that our models achieve consistently improved
results on comprehensive benchmarks. Code is available at
https://github.com/LeapLabTHU/DAT.

1. Introduction
Transformer [29] is originally introduced to solve natural language processing tasks. It has recently shown great
potential in the field of computer vision [11,23,31]. The pioneer work, Vision Transformer [11] (ViT), stacks multiple
Transformer blocks to process non-overlapping image patch
(i.e. visual token) sequences, leading to a convolutionfree model for image classification. Compared to their
CNN counterparts [17,18], Transformer-based models have
larger receptive fields and excel at modeling long-range dependencies, which are proved to achieve superior perfor* Equal contribution.
† Work done outside of Amazon.
‡ Corresponding author.

Query

Receptive Field

Deformed Point

(a) ViT

(b) Swin Transformer

(c) DCN

(d) DAT (ours)

Figure 1. Comparison of DAT with other Vision Transformer models and DCN in CNN model. The red star and the blue star denote the different queries, and masks with solid line boundaries
denote the regions to which the queries attend. In a data-agnostic
way: (a) ViT [11] adopts full attention for all queries. (b) Swin
Transformer [23] uses partitioned window attention. In a datadependent way: (c) DCN [8] learns different deformed points for
each query. (d) DAT learns shared deformed points for all queries.

mance in the regime of a large amount of training data and
model parameters. However, the superfluous attention in visual recognition is a double-edged sword, and has multiple
drawbacks. Specifically, the excessive number of keys to
attend per query patch yields high computational cost and
slow convergence, and increases the risk of overfitting.
In order to avoid excessive attention computation, existing works [6, 10, 23, 31, 37, 40] have leveraged carefully
designed efficient attention patterns to reduce the computation complexity. As two representative approaches among

4794

