Style Transformer for Image Inversion and Editing
Xueqi Hu1 , Qiusheng Huang1 , Zhengyi Shi1 , Siyuan Li1 , Changxin Gao3 , Li Sun1,2 ,* Qingli Li1
1
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing,
2
Key Laboratory of Advanced Theory and Application in Statistics and Data Science,
East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
3
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
Label-based Editing

Inversion

Smile

Eyeglasses

Reference-based Editing

Gender

Source

Reference

Edit

Gender

Bangs

Mouth

Source

Figure 1. Image inversion and editing results of our model on CelebA-HQ dataset. From left to right, we show the inversion, label-based
editing and reference-based editing. For the reference-based editing, the three columns are the source, reference and edit images, and each
edit image takes the style of the reference while maintaining the source content.

Abstract
Existing GAN inversion methods fail to provide latent
codes for reliable reconstruction and ﬂexible editing simultaneously. This paper presents a transformer-based image
inversion and editing model for pretrained StyleGAN which
is not only with less distortions, but also of high quality
and ﬂexibility for editing. The proposed model employs a
CNN encoder to provide multi-scale image features as keys
and values. Meanwhile it regards the style code to be determined for different layers of the generator as queries. It ﬁrst
initializes query tokens as learnable parameters and maps
them into W + space. Then the multi-stage alternate selfand cross-attention are utilized, updating queries with the
purpose of inverting the input by the generator. Moreover,
based on the inverted code, we investigate the referenceand label-based attribute editing through a pretrained la-

tent classiﬁer, and achieve ﬂexible image-to-image translation with high quality results. Extensive experiments are
carried out, showing better performances on both inversion
and editing tasks within StyleGAN. Codes are available at
https://github.com/sapphire497/style-transformer.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [5, 25, 27] has
been signiﬁcantly improved during recent years. Particularly, with the help of AdaIN [15] or it variation ModulatedConv, StyleGAN [17, 18] is able to synthesize high resolution images with moderate quality. Therefore, utilizing
* Corresponding author, email:

sunli@ee.ecnu.edu.cn. This work is
supported by the Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality (No.19511120800) and Natural Science Foundation of China
(No.61302125).

11337

