DN-DETR: Accelerate DETR Training by Introducing Query DeNoising
Feng Li1,2 *†, Hao Zhang1,2∗† , Shilong Liu2,3† , Jian Guo2 , Lionel M. Ni1,4 , Lei Zhang2‡
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.
2
International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA).
3
Tsinghua University.
4
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou).
{fliay,hzhangcx}@connect.ust.hk
{liusl20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{ni}@ust.hk
{guojian,leizhang}@idea.edu.cn

Abstract
We present in this paper a novel denoising training
method to speedup DETR (DEtection TRansformer) training and offer a deepened understanding of the slow convergence issue of DETR-like methods. We show that the slow
convergence results from the instability of bipartite graph
matching which causes inconsistent optimization goals in
early training stages. To address this issue, except for the
Hungarian loss, our method additionally feeds ground-truth
bounding boxes with noises into Transformer decoder and
trains the model to reconstruct the original boxes, which
effectively reduces the bipartite graph matching difficulty
and leads to a faster convergence. Our method is universal
and can be easily plugged into any DETR-like methods by
adding dozens of lines of code to achieve a remarkable improvement. As a result, our DN-DETR results in a remarkable improvement (+1.9AP) under the same setting and
achieves the best result (AP 43.4 and 48.6 with 12 and 50
epochs of training respectively) among DETR-like methods
with ResNet-50 backbone. Compared with the baseline under the same setting, DN-DETR achieves comparable performance with 50% training epochs. Code is available at
https://github.com/FengLi-ust/DN-DETR.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental task in computer vision which aims to predict the bounding boxes and classes
of objects in an image. While having made remarkable
* Indicates equal contribution.
† This work was done when Feng Li, Hao Zhang, and Shilong Liu were

interns at IDEA.
‡ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Convergence curve between our model DN-DeformableDETR built upon Deformable DETR with denoising training and
previous models under ResNet-50 backbone.

progress, classical detectors [14, 15] were mainly based
on convolutional neural networks, until Carion et al. [1] recently introduced Transformers [17] into object detection
and proposed DETR (DEtection TRansformer).
In contrast to previous detectors, DETR uses learnable
queries to probe image features from the output of Transformer encoders and bipartite graph matching to perform
set-based box prediction. Such a design effectively eliminates hand-designed anchors and non-maximum supperession (NMS) and makes object detection end-to-end optimizable. However, DETR suffers from prohibitively slow
training convergence compared with previous detectors. To
obtain a good performance, it usually takes 500 epochs of
training on the COCO detection dataset, in contrast to 12
epochs used in the original Faster-RCNN training.
Much work [3, 11, 12, 16, 18, 20] has tried to identify the root cause and mitigate the slow convergence issue. Some of them address the problem through improving the model architecture. For example, Sun et al. [16]
attribute the slow convergence issue to the low efficiency

13619

