ADAS: A Direct Adaptation Strategy for Multi-Target Domain Adaptive
Semantic Segmentation
Seunghun Lee, Wonhyeok Choi, Changjae Kim, Minwoo Choi, and Sunghoon Im
Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science, DGIST, Daegu, Korea
{lsh5688, smu06117, chang5434, subminu, sunghoonim}@dgist.ac.kr

Figure 1. Multi-target domain transfer results of our single MTDT-Net in the driving scenes. The top row and leftmost column represent
source domain images and multiple target domain images, respectively. The other images are the domain transferred images generated by
passing the source image at each column through our MTDT-Net.

Abstract
In this paper, we present a direct adaptation strategy
(ADAS), which aims to directly adapt a single model to multiple target domains in a semantic segmentation task without pretrained domain-specific models. To do so, we design
a multi-target domain transfer network (MTDT-Net) that
aligns visual attributes across domains by transferring the
domain distinctive features through a new target adaptive
denormalization (TAD) module. Moreover, we propose a bidirectional adaptive region selection (BARS) that reduces
the attribute ambiguity among the class labels by adaptively selecting the regions with consistent feature statistics.
We show that our single MTDT-Net can synthesize visually
pleasing domain transferred images with complex driving
datasets, and BARS effectively filters out the unnecessary
region of training images for each target domain. With the
collaboration of MTDT-Net and BARS, our ADAS achieves
state-of-the-art performance for multi-target domain adaptation (MTDA). To the best of our knowledge, our method
is the first MTDA method that directly adapts to multiple
domains in semantic segmentation.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) [14, 20, 26, 27,
49] aims to alleviate the performance drop caused by the
distribution discrepancy between domains. It is widely utilized in synthetic-to-real adaptation for various computer
vision applications that require a large number of labeled
data. Most of the works are designed for single-target domain adaptation (STDA), which allows a single network to
adapt to a specific target domain. It rarely addresses the variability in the real-world, particularly changes in driving region, illumination, and weather conditions in autonomous
driving scenarios. This issue can be tackled by adopting
multiple target-specific adaptation models, but this limits
the memory efficiency, scalability, and practical utility of
embedded autonomous systems.
Recently, multi-target domain adaptation (MTDA) methods [11,18,40,43,48,58] have been proposed, which enables
a single model to adapt a labeled source domain to multiple unlabeled target domains. Most of works train multiple STDA models and then distill the knowledge into a
single multi-target domain adaptation network. Recent approaches [18, 40, 48] transfer the knowledge from label pre-

19196

