Protecting Celebrities from DeepFake with Identity Consistency Transformer
Xiaoyi Dong1 ,* Jianmin Bao2 , Dongdong Chen3†, Ting Zhang2 , Weiming Zhang1 ,
Nenghai Yu1 , Dong Chen2 , Fang Wen2 , Baining Guo2
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Microsoft Research Asia 3 Microsoft Cloud + AI
{dlight@mail., zhangwm@, ynh@}.ustc.edu.cn cddlyf@gmail.com
{jianbao, Ting.Zhang, doch, fangwen, bainguo }@microsoft.com

Abstract
In this work we propose Identity Consistency Transformer, a novel face forgery detection method that focuses
on high-level semantics, speciﬁcally identity information,
and detecting a suspect face by ﬁnding identity inconsistency in inner and outer face regions. The Identity Consistency Transformer incorporates a consistency loss for identity consistency determination. We show that Identity Consistency Transformer exhibits superior generalization ability not only across different datasets but also across various
types of image degradation forms found in real-world applications including deepfake videos. The Identity Consistency
Transformer can be easily enhanced with additional identity
information when such information is available, and for this
reason it is especially well-suited for detecting face forgeries involving celebrities. 1

1. Introduction
Deepfake techniques [1–5,9,32,46,47] have been largely
advanced to be able to create incredibly realistic fake images of which the face is replaced with someone else in
another image. The malicious usage and spread of deepfake have raised serious societal concerns and posed an increasing threat to our trust in online media. Therefore, face
forgery detection is in urgent need and has gained a considerable amount of attention recently.
Notably, the overwhelming majority among all cases of
face forgeries involve politicians, celebrities and corporate
leaders, as their photos and videos are easier to ﬁnd on the
web and hence easily manipulated to generate impressively
photo-realistic deepfake. Yet previous detection algorithms
make predictions about the forgery based only on the suspect images, and neglect to exploit those freely available
* Work done during an internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
† Dongdong Chen is the corresponding author.
1 Code will be released at https://github.com/LightDXY/
ICT_DeepFake

ICT:1.10

ICT:1.06

ICT:1.15

ICT:1.24

ICT:1.04

ICT:0.68

ICT:0.66

ICT:0.78

ICT:0.68

ICT:0.70

Figure 1. Five fake (1st row) and real (2nd row) faces and their
identity consistency scores. Higher ICT score indicates the inner
and outer face more likely from two people, i.e. DeepFake face.

data. In this paper, we argue that the images / videos available online can not only be used in generating face forgeries
but also be utilized to detect them, and try to protect people
whose face is accessible online and thus vulnerable for face
manipulation, i.e., celebrities in a broad sense.
Recently, numerous efforts have been devoted to detecting face forgery and achieve promising detection performance. Most existing methods aim to discriminate fake images by exploiting low-level textures and searching for the
underlying generation artifacts [7,10,33,35,38,42,44,45,49,
52, 67, 68]. While deploying these techniques in real-world
products, we observe two common problems: (1) deepfake detection is usually performed on suspected videos and
the video frames have image degradations, such as image
rescale, noise and video codec conversion; and (2) when the
generated deepfake is convincingly photo-realistic, the lowlevel traces of forgeries become very hard to detect. These
problems make the deepfake detection unstable with video
input. We wish to make deepfake detection signiﬁcantly
more robust by making heavy use of semantically meaningful identity information.
In this paper we propose a new face forgery detection
technique called Identity Consistency Transformer (ICT)
based on high-level semantics. The key idea is to detect identity consistency in the suspect image, i.e., whether
the inner face and the outer face belongs to the same person. This turns out to be a non-trivial task. A naı̈ve so-

9468

