Ray3D: ray-based 3D human pose estimation for monocular absolute 3D
localization
Yu Zhan
Aibee Inc.

Fenghai Li
Beijing Technology and Business University

Renliang Weng
Aibee Inc.

Wongun Choi
Aibee Inc.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel monocular ray-based
3D (Ray3D) absolute human pose estimation with calibrated camera. Accurate and generalizable absolute 3D
human pose estimation from monocular 2D pose input is
an ill-posed problem. To address this challenge, we convert the input from pixel space to 3D normalized rays.
This conversion makes our approach robust to camera intrinsic parameter changes. To deal with the in-the-wild
camera extrinsic parameter variations, Ray3D explicitly
takes the camera extrinsic parameters as an input and
jointly models the distribution between the 3D pose rays
and camera extrinsic parameters. This novel network design is the key to the outstanding generalizability of Ray3D
approach. To have a comprehensive understanding of
how the camera intrinsic and extrinsic parameter variations affect the accuracy of absolute 3D key-point localization, we conduct in-depth systematic experiments on
three single person 3D benchmarks as well as one synthetic benchmark. These experiments demonstrate that our
method significantly outperforms existing state-of-the-art
models. Our code and the synthetic dataset are available
at https://github.com/YxZhxn/Ray3D.

1. Introduction
Accurate monocular 3D human pose estimation has
found its wide applications in augmented reality [24],
human-object interaction [6], and video action recognition [41]. While the problem has been extensively studied in
recent years, it’s a well-known ill-posed problem [23] with
limited generalization capability. The problem becomes
even more difficult when absolute 3D human pose estimation in a metric space is required, as knowing exactly where
a human joint is in the World Coordinate System (WCS) is
much more challenging than estimating the relative 3D offset of that joint from a reference point. While being more
challenging, knowing absolute 3D poses is more desirable

S!

S" = 2S!

𝐻!
Ground plane

𝐻" = 2𝐻!

Ground plane

Z!

f!

Z" = 2Z!

(a)
f" = 2 𝑓!

𝑆!

Z!

𝑆" = 𝑆1

Z" = 2 Z!

(b)

Figure 1. As shown in (a), if both the body size and the distance
to camera are scaled up by twice, the projected 2D keypoints locations remain the same. Same phenomenon is observed in (b),
where both the focal length and 3D distance are doubled. Z1 and
Z2 refer to the distance from the person to the camera, H1 and H2
represent the height of camera from the ground plane. S1 and S2
are the scale of the person. f1 and f2 represent focal length of the
camera. Such ambiguity is discussed in [4] as well.

than the root-relative 3D poses in the real-world applications. For instance, unmanned store requires to detect the
merchandise picked up by the customer, which relies on accurate hand localization in world coordinate system.
A key-point’s 2D pixel location is jointly determined by
the scale of person’s body figure, camera intrinsic parameters, camera extrinsic parameters and 3D position in the
world coordinate system. These factors introduce ambiguities for 3D pose estimation. For instance, as shown in Figure 1 (a), if both the body size and the distance to camera
are scaled up by twice, the projected 2D key-points locations remain the same. Similarly, if both the focal length
and 3D distance are doubled, the 2D key-points keep the
same, as illustrated in Figure 1 (b). Typically, there are more
than one configuration of 3D key-points that can generate
the same observation of 2D key-points in the image plane.
Thus, naively learning a model to map from 2D pixel locations to 3D world locations is arguably prone to failure.

13116

