Cross-patch Dense Contrastive Learning for Semi-supervised Segmentation
of Cellular Nuclei in Histopathologic Images
Huisi Wu1 , Zhaoze Wang1 , Youyi Song2 , Lin Yang2 , Jing Qin2
1
Shenzhen University, 2 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

Abstract
We study the semi-supervised learning problem, using a
few labeled data and a large amount of unlabeled data to
train the network, by developing a cross-patch dense contrastive learning framework, to segment cellular nuclei in
histopathologic images. This task is motivated by the expensive burden on collecting labeled data for histopathologic image segmentation tasks. The key idea of our method
is to align features of teacher and student networks, sampled from cross-image in both patch- and pixel-levels, for
enforcing the intra-class compactness and inter-class separability of features that as we shown is helpful for extracting valuable knowledge from unlabeled data. We also design a novel optimization framework that combines consistency regularization and entropy minimization techniques,
showing good property in eviction of gradient vanishing.
We assess the proposed method on two publicly available
datasets, and obtain positive results on extensive experiments, outperforming the state-of-the-art methods. Codes
are available at https://github.com/zzw-szu/CDCL.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models have achieved remarkable success
in cellular nuclei segmentation from histopathologic images [9, 42, 43]. However, for a good learning performance,
we often have to collect a large amount of annotated data
that tell how the deep model should output. The crux is
such annotated data are rather time-consuming to collect or
can be even prohibitively expensive, because they need tedious efforts from domain experts and the annotating process have to be conducted multiple rounds for reaching a
consensus among experts. Therefore, it has been receiving an increasing interest for researchers to study on how to
train deep models given only a few annotated data.
Seminal works in this direction include mainly semisupervised learning [17, 21, 36] and weakly-supervised
learning [1, 18, 37]. In this work, we study semi-supervised
learning problem that just needs a few pixel-wise annotated
data while being able to learn from quite massive unlabeled

data. This setting is more suitable for segmenting cellular nuclei in histopathologic images where a lot of objects
presented in one image, thus weak supervision signals, say
object’s center, often being far more expensive to acquire.
Advanced semi-supervised learning techniques in medical image segmentation often are based on adversarial training, pseudo-labeling, and consistency regularization [10,23,
26]. These existing methods, though have shown being
able to leverage knowledge from unlabeled data for learning, suffer from lack of exploiting feature structures across
the whole dataset, such as the similarity or disparity exists
between different features. Our idea for solving this problem is to tie semi-supervised learning and contrastive learning together. Contrastive learning selects positive and negative pairs of features from unlabeled data, and then exploit
knowledge from them by contrasting the similar features
against dissimilar features, being able to learn high-level semantic structures across different images.
The key to implement our idea is the sampling quality
of positive and negative pairs. Existing methods are based
on pixel-wise sampling, positive pairs consisting of multiple views of perturbations from the same pixel-wise feature while negative pairs are randomly sampled by features
with different pixel-wise predictions, under the guidance of
pseudo labels [20, 44]. Since nuclei have blur boundaries
while obvious distributions, pseudo labels are not accurate
as expected in pixel-wise, though they still reflect the class
distribution in a fixed region (e.g., patch), suggesting that
it is easier to correctly judge inter-patch feature disparity
rather than inter-pixel. Therefore, by leveraging the interpatch feature disparity, deep models are more likely to learn
better representations of target distributions.
With the above insight, we develop a cross-patch dense
contrastive learning framework to extract structural information from unlabeled data. Specifically, we sample patchwise negative pairs between patches with large disparity
and densely sample pixel-wise negative pairs between them.
Following with the standard positive sampling strategy, our
contrastive learning module enforces the intra-class compactness and inter-class separability [38] in both patchlevel and pixel-level. With the contrastive learning mod-

11666

