InsetGAN for Full-Body Image Generation
Anna Frühstück1, 2
Niloy J. Mitra2, 3
1

KAUST

2

Krishna Kumar Singh2
Peter Wonka1

Adobe Research

3

Eli Shechtman2
Jingwan Lu2

University College London

anna.fruehstueck@kaust.edu.sa, {krishsin,
pwonka}@gmail.com, jlu@adobe.com
(b) elishe}@adobe.com, {niloym,
(c)

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. InsetGAN applications. Our full-body human generator is able to generate reasonable bodies at state-of-the-art resolution
(1024×1024px) (a). However, some artifacts appear in the synthesized results, most visibly in extremities and faces. We make use of
a second, specialized generator to seamlessly improve the face region (b). We can also use a given face as an input for unconditional
generation of bodies (c). Furthermore, we can select both specific faces and bodies and compose them in a seamlessly merged output (d).

Abstract
While GANs can produce photo-realistic images in ideal
conditions for certain domains, the generation of full-body
human images remains difficult due to the diversity of identities, hairstyles, clothing, and the variance in pose. Instead of modeling this complex domain with a single GAN,
we propose a novel method to combine multiple pretrained
GANs, where one GAN generates a global canvas (e.g., human body) and a set of specialized GANs, or insets, focus
on different parts (e.g., faces, shoes) that can be seamlessly
inserted onto the global canvas. We model the problem
as jointly exploring the respective latent spaces such that
the generated images can be combined, by inserting the
parts from the specialized generators onto the global canvas, without introducing seams. We demonstrate the setup
by combining a full body GAN with a dedicated high-quality
face GAN to produce plausible-looking humans. We evaluate our results with quantitative metrics and user studies.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) have emerged
as a very successful image generation paradigm. For example, StyleGAN [14] is now the method of choice for creating

near photorealistic images for multiple classes (e.g., human
faces, cars, landscapes). However, for classes that exhibit
complex variations, creating very high quality results becomes harder. For example, full-body human generation
still remains an open challenge, given the high variability
of human pose, shape, and appearance.
How can we generate results at both high resolution and
high quality? One approach is to break the target image
into tiles and train a GAN to sequentially produce them [7].
Such methods, however, are unsuited for cases where the
coupling between the (object) parts are nonlocal and/or cannot easily be statistically modeled. An alternate approach is
to aim for collecting very high resolution images and train
a single GAN, at full resolution. However, this makes the
data collection and training tasks very expensive, and variations in object configuration/poses cause further challenges.
To the best of our knowledge, neither such a high resolution
dataset, nor a corresponding high resolution GAN architecture has been published.
We propose InsetGAN towards solving the above problems. Specifically, we propose to combine a generator to
provide the global context in the form of a canvas, and a set
of specialized part generators that provide details for different regions of interest. The specialized results are then

7723

