Finding Fallen Objects Via
Asynchronous Audio-Visual Integration
Chuang Gan*, Yi Gu∗ , Siyuan Zhou, Jeremy Schwartz, Seth Alter, James Traer,
Dan Gutfreund, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Josh H. McDermott∗ , Antonio Torralba∗
MIT and MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Abstract
The way an object looks and sounds provide complementary reflections of its physical properties. In many settings
cues from vision and audition arrive asynchronously but
must be integrated, as when we hear an object dropped on
the floor and then must find it. In this paper, we introduce a
setting in which to study multi-modal object localization in
3D virtual environments. An object is dropped somewhere
in a room. An embodied robot agent, equipped with camera and microphone, must determine what object has been
dropped – and where – by combining audio and visual signals with knowledge of the underlying physics. To study
this problem, we have generated a large-scale dataset – the
Fallen Objects dataset – that includes 8000 instances of 30
physical object categories in 64 rooms. The dataset uses
the ThreeDWorld Platform that can simulate physics-based
impact sounds and complex physical interactions between
objects in a photorealistic setting. As a first step toward addressing this challenge, we develop a set of embodied agent
baselines, based on imitation learning, reinforcement learning, and modular planning, and perform an in-depth analysis of the challenge of this new task. This dataset is publicly
available 1 .

1. Introduction
Humans integrate multi-sensory data to understand the
physical world around us. Consider the situation in which
we hear the sound of an object falling somewhere in our
house. What was it that fell, and where? Just by listening to the sound that is produced, we can usually determine not only the approximate location of the object that
fell but also aspects of its physical make-up. The loudness
of the sound, along with the reverberation that accompanies
it, tells us much about the object’s size, force of impact, and
distance [53]. And we can usually tell whether the object
* Equal Contribution
1 Project page: http://fallen-object.csail.mit.edu

Agent

Fallen object

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed embodied physical sound
source localization: an agent hears a physical object fall somewhere in the same room, and is required to find it via asynchronous
audio-visual integration.

was metal, wood or plastic [27,52], and whether it rolled on
the floor after impact [2]. However, the sound alone is often
not enough to precisely reveal the identity and location of
the object, and instead must be used to guide visual search.
Once we are in the vicinity of the fallen object, we use vision to find the object on the floor that is consistent with
what we heard. We term this ‘asynchronous audio-visual
integration’.
Replicating similar capabilities in assistive robots will
be useful for many real-world applications. For example,
robots may need to fetch a screw dropped in the middle of
an automated production line which might shut down operations until the item is located and safely removed. The
field of audio-visual navigation has made exciting progress
by using both visual and audio modalities to drive embodied agents to navigate towards the target location of sound
sources. Some of this earlier work [12, 20] defines the
acoustic target as a repeating sound, such as a phone ringing
or an alarm, providing a constant acoustic cue to the agent.
However, in real-world situations, many sounds are intermittent, or are the result of a single non-repeating impact

10523

