Raw High-Definition Radar for Multi-Task Learning
Julien Rebut1
1: Valeo.ai, Paris, France

Arthur Ouaknine1,2

Waqas Malik3

2: Télécom Paris, Paris, France

Patrick Pérez1

3: Valeo North America Inc., San Mateo, CA

Figure 1. Overview of our RADIal dataset. RADIal includes a set of 3 sensors (camera, laser scanner, high-definition radar) and
comes with GPS and vehicle’s CAN traces; 25k synchronized samples are recorded is raw format. (a) Camera image with projected laser
point cloud in red and radar point cloud in indigo, vehicle annotation in orange and free-driving-space annotation in green; (b) Radar
power spectrum with bounding box annotations; (c) Free-driving-space annotation in bird-eye view, with vehicles annotated with orange
bounding boxes, radar point cloud in indigo and laser point cloud in red; (d) Range-azimuth map in Cartesian coordinates overlayed with
radar point cloud and laser point cloud; (e) GPS trace in red and odometry trajectory reconstruction in green.

Abstract
With their robustness to adverse weather conditions and
ability to measure speeds, radar sensors have been part of
the automotive landscape for more than two decades. Recent progress toward High Definition (HD) Imaging radar
has driven the angular resolution below the degree, thus
approaching laser scanning performance. However, the
amount of data a HD radar delivers and the computational
cost to estimate the angular positions remain a challenge.
In this paper, we propose a novel HD radar sensing model,
FFT-RadNet, that eliminates the overhead of computing
the range-azimuth-Doppler 3D tensor, learning instead to
recover angles from a range-Doppler spectrum. FFTRadNet is trained both to detect vehicles and to segment free
driving space. On both tasks, it competes with the most recent radar-based models while requiring less compute and
memory. Also, we collected and annotated 2-hour worth
of raw data from synchronized automotive-grade sensors
(camera, laser, HD radar) in various environments (city
street, highway, countryside road). This unique dataset,
nick-named RADIal for “Radar, LiDAR et al.”, is available
at https://github.com/valeoai/RADIal.

1. Introduction
Automotive radars have been in production since the
late 90s. They are the preferred, most affordable sensors
for adaptive cruise control, blind spot detection and automatic emergency braking functions. However, they have
a poor angular resolution, which hinders their use in automated driving systems. Indeed, such systems need a high
level of safety and robustness, usually reached through redundancy mechanisms. While sensing is improved by fusing several modalities, the overall combination works only
if each sensor achieves sufficient and comparable performances. High-definition (HD) imaging radar has emerged
to meet these requirements. By using dense virtual antenna
arrays, these new sensors achieve high angular resolution
both in azimuth and elevation (horizontal and vertical angular positions, resp.) and produce denser point clouds.
With the rapid progress of deep learning and the availability of public driving datasets, e.g., [4, 6, 12], the perception ability of vision-based driving systems (detection of
objects, structures, markings and signs, estimation of depth,
forecasting of other road users’ movements) has considerably improved. These advances quickly extended to depth
sensors such as laser scanners (LiDAR), with the help of
specific architectures to deal with 3D point clouds [19, 42].

17021

