Hierarchical Self-supervised Representation Learning for Movie Understanding
Fanyi Xiao,* Kaustav Kundu, Joseph Tighe, Davide Modolo
AWS AI Labs

1. Introduction
Most of the latest research on self-supervised video representation learning (SSL) focuses on the task of action
recognition [4, 9, 13, 17, 32, 34, 55]. This priority has largely
influenced the design of these methods, as well as the type
of datasets used to learn their representations. For example,
they propose models that encourage the learning of shortterm appearance and motion cues, as these are the most informative for action recognition. At the same time, they
mostly focus on pretraining on the Kinetics [20] dataset,
which consists of hundreds of thousands of short YouTube
clips with diverse motion and semantic patterns. Unlike
these works, we are interested in learning self-supervised
video representations to understand movies.
Movies are however very complex and they require reasoning at many levels: from the simple understanding of
low-level actions to the interpretation of high-level semantic
narratives, which require knowledge of the characters, their
* Work done while at Amazon, now at Meta AI

action clips from YouTube

Contrastive Learning

Most self-supervised video representation learning approaches focus on action recognition. In contrast, in
this paper we focus on self-supervised video learning for
movie understanding and propose a novel hierarchical selfsupervised pretraining strategy that separately pretrains
each level of our hierarchical movie understanding model
(based on [37]). Specifically, we propose to pretrain the
low-level video backbone using a contrastive learning objective, while pretrain the higher-level video contextualizer
using an event mask prediction task, which enables the usage of different data sources for pretraining different levels
of the hierarchy. We first show that our self-supervised pretraining strategies are effective and lead to improved performance on all tasks and metrics on VidSitu benchmark [37]
(e.g., improving on semantic role prediction from 47% to
61% CIDEr scores). We further demonstrate the effectiveness of our contextualized event features on LVU tasks [54],
both when used alone and when combined with instance
features, showing their complementarity.

Mask Prediction

Abstract
movies

Video Feature Contextualizer
tasks

Video Backbone

Video Backbone

Video Backbone

Video Backbone

semantic level

{kaustavk,tighej,dmodolo}@amazon.com

movie retrieval
movie Q&A
actor graph generation
event relation prediction
semantic role prediction
......
action recognition
action detection

tasks scene detection
......

clip t-3

clip t-2

clip t-1

clip t
time

Figure 1. Hierarchical self-supervised pretraining. We pretrain
the low-level video feature backbone using contrastive learning
objectives on large collections of YouTube-style action clips; while
pretrain the higher-level feature contextualizer using mask prediction on movies with rich temporal plots.

histories, relationships, behaviours, etc. Towards building
rich models for movie understanding, [37] recently proposed a hierarchical movie understanding model that learns
in a fully supervised fashion. However, it is extremely difficult to annotate large-scale video datasets, even for a relatively simple task like action classification, not to mention for complex movie tasks (e.g. labeling actor relation
graphs [45]). To overcome this bottleneck, we propose a
novel hierarchical self-supervised pretraining strategy that
separately pretrains each level of this hierarchical model.
In details, the hierarchical movie model of [37] consists
of two levels: a low-level video backbone encoder and a
higher-level transformer contextualizer (Fig. 1). We design
our hierarchical learning strategy to sequentially pretrain
the backbone and the transformer encoder as they specialize
in different aspects of movie understanding. The backbone
is responsible for the heavy-lifting work to extract low-level
appearance and motion cues for people, objects and scenes
from raw pixels. Therefore, it needs to be high in capacity
and can be trained on a large amount of YouTube videos
(e.g., Kinetics [21]). Once we obtain an appropriate feature
abstraction from the video backbone, we can treat such rep-

9727

