PanopticDepth: A Unified Framework for Depth-aware Panoptic Segmentation
Naiyu Gao1,2 , Fei He1,2 , Jian Jia1,2 , Yanhu Shan4 , Haoyang Zhang4 , Xin Zhao1,2 ,* Kaiqi Huang1,2,3
1
CRISE, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, 4 Horizon Robotics, Inc.
{gaonaiyu2017,hefei2018,jiajian2018}@ia.ac.cn,{xzhao,kaiqi.huang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
{yanhu.shan,haoyang.zhang}@horizon.ai

Abstract
This paper presents a unified framework for depth-aware
panoptic segmentation (DPS), which aims to reconstruct 3D
scene with instance-level semantics from one single image.
Prior works address this problem by simply adding a dense
depth regression head to panoptic segmentation (PS) networks, resulting in two independent task branches. This neglects the mutually-beneficial relations between these two
tasks, thus failing to exploit handy instance-level semantic cues to boost depth accuracy while also producing suboptimal depth maps. To overcome these limitations, we propose a unified framework for the DPS task by applying a
dynamic convolution technique to both the PS and depth
prediction tasks. Specifically, instead of predicting depth
for all pixels at a time, we generate instance-specific kernels to predict depth and segmentation masks for each instance. Moreover, leveraging the instance-wise depth estimation scheme, we add additional instance-level depth
cues to assist with supervising the depth learning via a
new depth loss. Extensive experiments on Cityscapes-DPS
and SemKITTI-DPS show the effectiveness and promise of
our method. We hope our unified solution to DPS can
lead a new paradigm in this area. Code is available at
https://github.com/NaiyuGao/PanopticDepth.

1. Introduction
Depth-aware panoptic segmentation (DPS) is a new challenging task in scene understanding, attempting to build 3D
scene with instance-level semantic understanding from a
single image. Its goal is to assign each pixel a depth value,
a semantic class label and an instance ID. Thus, solving
this problem involves monocular depth estimation [1] and
panoptic segmentation [2]. Naturally, a straightforward solution to DPS is to add a dense depth regression head to
* Corresponding author

…

…

Instance Depth Maps

Depth Estimation

Input Image

…

…

Instance Masks

Panoptic Segmentation

Figure 1. Illustration of our unified solution to depth-aware panoptic segmentation which requires assigning each pixel in a single
image a depth value, a semantic class label and an instance ID.
Instead of predicting pixel-wise depth, we predict instance-wise
depth by instance-specific convolution kernels, which shares the
same manner of instance mask generation.

panoptic segmentation (PS) networks [3–5], producing a
depth value for each labelled pixel.
This method is intuitive yet sub-optimal. Since it tackles the two tasks with two independent branches, it does
not explore the mutually-beneficial relations between them,
especially failing to exploit handy instance-level semantic
cues to boost depth accuracy. We observe that pixels of adjacent instances generally have discontinuous depth. For
examples, two vehicles in a line are likely to have different depth. Therefore, it is hard to predict accurate depth for
both vehicles using the same pixel-wise depth regressor. On
the other hand, as indicated by previous works [6–9], considering that these pixels are of different vehicles, it benefits
the depth estimation if separate regressors are used respectively.
Following the train of thought above, we propose PanopticDepth in this paper, a unified model that predicts the

1632

