NeRF in the Dark: High Dynamic Range View Synthesis from Noisy Raw Images
Ben Mildenhall Peter Hedman Ricardo Martin-Brualla Pratul P. Srinivasan Jonathan T. Barron
Google Research

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) is a technique for high
quality novel view synthesis from a collection of posed input images. Like most view synthesis methods, NeRF uses
tonemapped low dynamic range (LDR) as input; these images have been processed by a lossy camera pipeline that
smooths detail, clips highlights, and distorts the simple
noise distribution of raw sensor data. We modify NeRF to
instead train directly on linear raw images, preserving the
scene’s full dynamic range. By rendering raw output images from the resulting NeRF, we can perform novel high
dynamic range (HDR) view synthesis tasks. In addition to
changing the camera viewpoint, we can manipulate focus,
exposure, and tonemapping after the fact. Although a single
raw image appears significantly more noisy than a postprocessed one, we show that NeRF is highly robust to the zeromean distribution of raw noise. When optimized over many
noisy raw inputs (25-200), NeRF produces a scene representation so accurate that its rendered novel views outperform dedicated single and multi-image deep raw denoisers
run on the same wide baseline input images. As a result, our
method, which we call RawNeRF, can reconstruct scenes
from extremely noisy images captured in near-darkness.

1. Introduction
View synthesis methods, such as neural radiance fields
(NeRF) [39], typically use tonemapped low dynamic range
(LDR) images as input and directly reconstruct and render
new views of a scene in LDR space. This poses no issues for
scenes that are well-lit and do not contain large brightness
variations, since they can be captured with minimal noise
using a single fixed camera exposure setting. However, this
precludes many common capture scenarios: images taken
at nighttime or in any but the brightest indoor spaces will
have poor signal-to-noise ratios, and scenes with regions of
both daylight and shadow have extreme contrast ratios that
require high dynamic range (HDR) to represent accurately.
Our method, RawNeRF, modifies NeRF to reconstruct
the scene in linear HDR color space by supervising directly
on noisy raw input images. This bypasses the lossy postpro-

(b) Noisy raw input images

(a) Reconstructed candlelit scene

(c) RawNeRF renderings

(d) Changing viewpoint, focus, exposure, and tonemapping

Figure 1. By jointly optimizing a single scene representation over
many input images, NeRF is surprisingly robust to high levels of
image noise. We exploit this fact to train RawNeRF directly on
completely unprocessed HDR linear raw images. In this nighttime
scene lit only by a single candle (a), RawNeRF can extract details
from the noisy raw data that would have been destroyed by postprocessing (b, c). RawNeRF recovers full HDR color information,
enabling HDR view synthesis tasks such as changing focus and
exposure for rendered novel views. The resulting renderings can
be retouched like any raw photograph: here we show (d, left) a
dark all-in-focus exposure with a simple global tonemap and (d,
right) a brighter, synthetically refocused exposure postprocessed
by HDRNet [18]. See our supplementary video for more results.

cessing that cameras apply to compress dynamic range and
smooth out noise in order to produce visually palatable 8-bit
JPEGs. By preserving the full dynamic range of the raw inputs, RawNeRF enables various novel HDR view synthesis
tasks. We can modify the exposure level and tonemapping
algorithm applied to rendered outputs and even create synthetically refocused images with accurately rendered bokeh
effects around out-of-focus light sources.
Beyond these view synthesis applications, we show
that training directly on raw data effectively turns RawNeRF into a multi-image denoiser capable of reconstructing

16190

