BoostMIS: Boosting Medical Image Semi-supervised Learning
with Adaptive Pseudo Labeling and Informative Active Annotation
Wenqiao Zhang 1

Lei Zhu 1

James Hallinan 2, *

Shengyu Zhang 3

Andrew Makmur 2

Qingpeng Cai 1 Beng Chin Ooi 1
1

National University of Singapore, Singapore, 2 National University Hospital, Singapore, 3 Zhejiang University, China

wenqiao@nus.edu.sg, e0203764@u.nus.edu, {james hallinan,andrew makmur}@nuhs.edu.sg,
sy zhang@zju.edu.cn, {qingpeng,ooibc}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel semi-supervised learning (SSL) framework named BoostMIS that combines adaptive pseudo labeling and informative active annotation to
unleash the potential of medical image SSL models: (1)
BoostMIS can adaptively leverage the cluster assumption
and consistency regularization of the unlabeled data according to the current learning status. This strategy can
adaptively generate one-hot “hard” labels converted from
task model predictions for better task model training. (2)
For the unselected unlabeled images with low confidence,
we introduce an Active learning (AL) algorithm to find
the informative samples as the annotation candidates by
exploiting virtual adversarial perturbation and model’s
density-aware entropy. These informative candidates are
subsequently fed into the next training cycle for better SSL
label propagation. Notably, the adaptive pseudo-labeling
and informative active annotation form a learning closedloop that are mutually collaborative to boost medical image SSL. To verify the effectiveness of the proposed method,
we collected a metastatic epidural spinal cord compression
(MESCC) dataset that aims to optimize MESCC diagnosis and classification for improved specialist referral and
treatment. We conducted an extensive experimental study
of BoostMIS on MESCC dataset. The experimental results
verify our framework’s effectiveness with a significant improvement over various state-of-the-art methods. Our work
will be available at github 1 .

1. Introduction
In recent years, the development of deep learning brings
prosperity to the field of computer vision [26, 27, 29, 29, 30,
32, 54, 57–59] and applied in industrial application [22, 28,
1 https://github.com/wannature/BoostMIS
* Corresponding Author.

Task Model

Labeled Data

SSL

Pseudo
Labeling

Threshold 𝜖

Training
Training

AL

Samples near
decision boundary

Annotation

Data Pool

Representative
samples

SSL decision
boundary

Informative
Selection

Human Expert

Unselected Data

Figure 1. An example of how does AL facilitates medical image
SSL. Orange and green dots represent two different classes in the
data pool. Grey dots represent the unlabeled data. Red and blue
marks indicate the annotation candidates, which can smooth the
decision boundary and propagate representative label information
to unlabeled data, respectively.

31,46,52,56]. For instance, a significant trend in healthcare
is to leverage the sizable well-annotated dataset using deep
learning technology [7, 19, 40, 49, 55, 62] to achieve automated medical image analysis. However, annotating such a
medical dataset is an expert-oriented, expensive, and timeconsuming task. The situation is further exacerbated by
large numbers of new raw medical images without labels.
These are generated on a daily basis in clinical practice and
there is an increasing demand for the exploitation of such
data. Therefore, semi-supervised learning (SSL) that goes
beyond traditional supervised learning by exploiting a limited amount of labeled data together with a huge amount
of raw unlabeled data is gaining traction. Among the existing SSL methods, pseudo-labeling [25] is a specific variant where model predictions are converted to pseudo-labels,
which is often used along with confidence-based thresholding that retains unlabeled examples only when the classifier
is sufficiently confident. Some of them [4, 24, 42, 50], have
210666

