Perturbed and Strict Mean Teachers for Semi-supervised Semantic Segmentation
Yuyuan Liu1
Yu Tian1
Yuanhong Chen1
Fengbei Liu1
Vasileios Belagiannis2
Gustavo Carneiro1
1
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, University of Adelaide
2
Universität Ulm, Germany
(mIoU)

Abstract
Consistency learning using input image, feature, or network perturbations has shown remarkable results in semisupervised semantic segmentation, but this approach can be
seriously affected by inaccurate predictions of unlabelled
training images. There are two consequences of these inaccurate predictions: 1) the training based on the “strict”
cross-entropy (CE) loss can easily overfit prediction mistakes, leading to confirmation bias; and 2) the perturbations applied to these inaccurate predictions will use potentially erroneous predictions as training signals, degrading
consistency learning. In this paper, we address the prediction accuracy problem of consistency learning methods with
novel extensions of the mean-teacher (MT) model, which
include a new auxiliary teacher, and the replacement of
MT’s mean square error (MSE) by a stricter confidenceweighted cross-entropy (Conf-CE) loss. The accurate prediction by this model allows us to use a challenging combination of network, input data and feature perturbations
to improve the consistency learning generalisation, where
the feature perturbations consist of a new adversarial perturbation. Results on public benchmarks show that our approach achieves remarkable improvements over the previous SOTA methods in the field.1 Our code is available at
https://github.com/yyliu01/PS-MT.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is an essential pixel-wise classification task that has reached remarkable success in recent
years. However, the training of such a task is known to
be data-hungry, where the labelling process is particularly
costly and time-consuming [34]. To tackle this limitation,
semi-supervised semantic segmentation has become an important research direction that has drawn a growing attention recently [9,21,34]. This problem relies on a small set of
pixel-level labelled images and a large set of unlabelled images, where both types of images are drawn from the same
1 Supported by Australian Research
DP180103232 and FT190100525.

Council

through

grants

78
76
74
72
70
68
66
64 1/16

Conf-CE
Loss
Network
Perturb.
Feature
Perturb.

CPS[9]
GCT[21]
CAC[22]
CCT[33]
Ours

1/8

1/4

1/2

Input
Perturb.

(ratio)

Figure 1. In (a), we compare our method (red star) to the current SOTA on Pascal VOC 2012 under different partition protocols
based on the augmented set [16], and (b) shows a simple diagram
of our consistency-based model, which includes two mean teach(1)
(2)
(1)
ers (denoted by the encoders tenc. and tenc. and decoders tdec.
(2)
and tdec. ) that produce accurate segmentation maps for unlabelled
images xu and the student (encoder senc. and decoder sdec. ), with
three types of perturbations (network, feature and input image) that
are used in the minimisation of our strict Conf-CE loss.

data distribution. The challenge is how to extract additional
and useful training signal from the unlabelled images to allow the training of the model to generalise beyond the small
labelled set.
Current state-of-the-art (SOTA) semi-supervised semantic segmentation models are based on consistency learning,
which enforces the agreement between the outputs from different views of unlabelled images [9, 14, 34, 44]. These different views can be obtained via perturbations applied to the
input image with data augmentation [44] or to the feature
space with noise injection [34]. Another way of obtaining
different views is with network perturbation, which encourages similar predictions between multiple models trained
from different initialization, and has been shown to enable
better consistency regularization than input image and feature perturbations [9, 21]. One potential weakness of consistency learning is that it assumes accurate predictions for
unlabelled images, such that the perturbation does not push
the image feature to the wrong side of the true (hidden)
classification decision boundary. Unfortunately, in prac-

4258

