CellTypeGraph: A New Geometric Computer Vision Benchmark
Lorenzo Cerrone1

Athul Vijayan3

Tejasvinee Mody2

Kay Schneitz2

Fred A. Hamprecht1
1

HCI, Heidelberg University, Germany
School of Life, Technical University of Munich, Germany
3
Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research, Germany
2

lorenzo.cerrone@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract
Classifying all cells in an organ is a relevant and difficult problem from plant developmental biology. We here
abstract the problem into a new benchmark for node classification in a geo-referenced graph. Solving it requires
learning the spatial layout of the organ including symmetries. To allow the convenient testing of new geometrical
learning methods, the benchmark of Arabidopsis thaliana
ovules is made available as a PyTorch data loader, along
with a large number of precomputed features. Finally, we
benchmark eight recent graph neural network architectures,
finding that DeeperGCN currently works best on this problem.

1. Introduction
Understanding morphogenesis, the generation of form,
remains a major challenge in biology. It requires a detailed quantitative description of the molecular and cellular
processes of the underlying mechanism. 3D digital organs
with cellular spatial resolution promise to help decipher the
morphogenesis of complex organs in plants [19, 32, 36, 54].
They can be generated by 3D microscopic imaging followed
by cell instance segmentation and tissue annotation. Plant
organs lend themselves to this approach as they exhibit a
relatively well-structured, layered organization and the tissues can be identified based on their positions and morphology. Thus, plant developmental biology is profiting from a
growing body of 3D digital organs. However, automatic annotation [31,32,40] of different tissue types within an organ
remains a major problem in the field, particularly for plant
organs of complex cellular architecture and shape such as
ovules of Arabidopsis thaliana [51].
In medical image analysis, the analogous problem of

segmenting whole-body scans has been addressed successfully using 3D encoder-decoder CNN architectures [25,52].
In the images of interest to plant morphogenesis, this
straightforward approach does not work as well: here, the
semantic classes lack distinctive local and texture features
helpful for convolution based architectures [13]. Instead,
the task requires very long-range spatial awareness and
good geometrical reasoning. In response, here we cast the
problem as a node classification task. To succeed, any approach requires informative input features, and indeed we
show that a cell-adjacency graph with cell-level features is
a powerful representation.
That said, our primary intent is twofold: first, to create
a testing ground for machine learning on highly structured
input. Indeed, it uniquely combines node classification typical of popular datasets [14, 30, 42] with the requirement
to generalize across geo-referenced graphs like in Quantum Chemistry [3, 16, 37, 56]. Our second intent is, by
allowing computer vision and machine learning scientists
to work on this problem without having to deal with dataprocessing issues that actually take the most time in many
applied projects, to channel the creativity and resourcefulness of our community to help solve a fascinating biological
problem.
As a starting point, we present extensive experiments
evaluating the performance of state-of-the-art and popular
models.
In summary, we make the following contributions:
1. We propose a new benchmark for node classification
in a geo-referenced graph. We release the benchmark dataset together with a ready-to-use PyTorch [33]
data loader. The source-code and usage instructions
are available at https://github.com/hciunihd/celltype-graph-benchmark.

20897

