Source-Free Object Detection by Learning to Overlook Domain Style
Shuaifeng Li1
1

Mao Ye1

Xiatian Zhu2

Lihua Zhou1

Lin Xiong1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2

Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing, University of Surrey

hotwindlsf@gmail.com,maoye@uestc.edu.cn,xiatian.zhu@surrey.ac.uk

Pseudo label strategy

Abstract
Source-free object detection (SFOD) needs to adapt a
detector pre-trained on a labeled source domain to a target domain, with only unlabeled training data from the target domain. Existing SFOD methods typically adopt the
pseudo labeling paradigm with model adaption alternating
between predicting pseudo labels and fine-tuning the model.
This approach suffers from both unsatisfactory accuracy of
pseudo labels due to the presence of domain shift and limited use of target domain training data. In this work, we
present a novel Learning to Overlook Domain Style (LODS)
method with such limitations solved in a principled manner. Our idea is to reduce the domain shift effect by enforcing the model to overlook the target domain style, such
that model adaptation is simplified and becomes easier to
carry on. To that end, we enhance the style of each target domain image and leverage the style degree difference
between the original image and the enhanced image as a
self-supervised signal for model adaptation. By treating the
enhanced image as an auxiliary view, we exploit a studentteacher architecture for learning to overlook the style degree difference against the original image, also characterized with a novel style enhancement algorithm and graph
alignment constraint. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our LODS yields new state-of-the-art performance on
four benchmarks.

1. Introduction
The resurgence of deep convolutional neural networks
has greatly promoted the development of object detection,
for example, the one-stage YOLO [1] and two-stage Faster
R-CNN [27] have made a big splash. However, when applied to a new scenario, a pre-trained detector often suffers
a performance drop, due to the domain shift [5]. Moreover,
considering to data privacy, distributed data storage, and inconvenient data transmission, Source-Free Object Detection
(SFOD) [23] which assumes only the pre-trained model on
the source domain is available and source data itself is un-

Target domain image

Detector

Pseudo labels

Supervised learning

Overlook domain style strategy
Style enhanced image

Enhancement

Target domain image

Detector(Student)

Mutual
self-supervised
learning

Detector(Teacher)

Detection results

Overlooking
style

Detection results

Figure 1. The comparison of pseudo label strategy (above) and our
proposed strategy (below).

available, emerged recently as a promising topic.
At present, there do not exist much researches on SFOD
problem. The community pays more attention to SourceFree Domain Adaptation (SFDA). The methods for SFDA
can be roughly divided into two categories. The first category is based on the idea of sample generation [11, 19, 21,
30]. Since the source data is not accessible, traditional domain adaptation techniques are not applicable. The labeled
images with source domain style or target domain style, or
the labeled features obeying the source distribution, are generated. The key to success is the satisfied samples generation which itself is sufficiently challenging and not well
solved. Another category utilizes the self-training based
pseudo labeling [18, 24, 25]. But obtaining reliable labels
is not easy especially in the situation with large domain gap
and always only high-confidence labeled samples are taken
in the self-training process.
The domain adaptation methods for SFDA can not be
applied to SFOD directly, owing to the complexity of background, diversity of objects and numerous negative samples
(background). Recently, several SFOD methods [13,23,36]
based on pseudo-labeling or sample generation strategies

8014

