Symmetry and Uncertainty-Aware Object SLAM
for 6DoF Object Pose Estimation
Nathaniel Merrill1 Yuliang Guo2 Xingxing Zuo3 Xinyu Huang2
Stefan Leutenegger3 Xi Peng1 Liu Ren2 Guoquan Huang1
1
University of Delaware 2 Bosch Research North America 3 Technical University of Munich
{nmerrill,xipeng,ghuang}@udel.edu

{yuliang.guo2,xinyu.huang,liu.ren}@us.bosch.com

{xingxing.zuo,stefan.leutenegger}@tum.de

Abstract
We propose a keypoint-based object-level SLAM framework that can provide globally consistent 6DoF pose estimates for symmetric and asymmetric objects alike. To
the best of our knowledge, our system is among the first
to utilize the camera pose information from SLAM to provide prior knowledge for tracking keypoints on symmetric
objects – ensuring that new measurements are consistent
with the current 3D scene. Moreover, our semantic keypoint network is trained to predict the Gaussian covariance
for the keypoints that captures the true error of the prediction, and thus is not only useful as a weight for the residuals in the system’s optimization problems, but also as a
means to detect harmful statistical outliers without choosing a manual threshold. Experiments show that our method
provides competitive performance to the state of the art in
6DoF object pose estimation, and at a real-time speed. Our
code, pre-trained models, and keypoint labels are available
https://github.com/rpng/suo_slam.

1. Introduction
Object pose estimation in 6 degrees of freedom (DoF)
plays a key role in a variety of down-stream applications (e.g., autonomous driving, robotic navigation, manipulation, and augmented reality), and has been extensively studied in computer vision and robotics communities [5, 14, 17, 22, 26, 28, 33]. Some methods rely on RGB
input [15,22,31,32,37], while others utilize additional depth
input to improve the performance [15,29,32,35]. Some deal
with a single view [22, 28, 35], while others utilize multiple
views to enhance the results [2, 3, 5, 14, 15, 29]. In particular, multi-view methods can be further categorized into offline structure from motion (SfM) – where all the frames
are given at once [3, 14] – and the online SLAM styles,
where frames are provided sequentially and real-time per-

Figure 1. Our proposed method leverages the detected keypoints
of asymmetric objects and the 3D scene created from the SLAM
system to consistently track the keypoints of symmetric objects.
Given the current camera pose estimated from asymmetric objects’
keypoints, the projections of the existing 3D keypoints into the
current image act as informative prior input to guide the network
in predicting keypoints with consistent symmetry over time.

formance is expected [5, 29]. This paper focuses on imagebased 6DoF pose estimation for multiple objects in the context of an online monocular SLAM system.
A typical multi-view 6DoF pose estimation method can
be decomposed into the single-view estimation stage and
the multi-view enhancement stage. While pose estimates
from multiple views can be fused for better performance [3,
5, 14], handling extreme inconsistency – e.g., those caused
by rotational symmetry of objects – is still challenging. It
is also unreliable to manually tune the thresholds for outlier rejection and assign residual weights for nonlinear optimization. To tackle these challenges, in this paper, we propose a symmetry and uncertainty-aware 6DoF object pose
estimation method which fuses semantic keypoint measurements from all views within a SLAM framework. The main
contributions of this work are:
• We design a keypoint-based object SLAM system that
jointly estimates the globally-consistent object and
camera poses in real time – even in the presence of
incorrect detections and symmetric objects.

14901

