LiDARCap: Long-range Marker-less 3D Human Motion Capture with LiDAR
Point Clouds
Jialian Li1, * Jingyi Zhang1, * Zhiyong Wang1 Siqi Shen1 Chenglu Wen1 Yuexin Ma2
Lan Xu2 Jingyi Yu2 Cheng Wang1,†
1
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities, Xiamen University
2
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging, ShanghaiTech University
{szljl36,zhangjingyi1,wangzy}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {siqishen,clwen,cwang}@xmu.edu.cn,
{mayuexin,xulan1,yujingyi}@shangtaitech.edu.cn

Figure 1. Overview: The proposed LiDARHuman26M benchmark dataset consists of synchronous LiDAR point clouds,
RGB images, and ground-truth 3D human motions obtained from professional IMU devices, covering diverse motions and
a large capture distance ranging. Based on LiDARHuman26M, we propose LiDARCap, a strong baseline motion capture
approach on LiDAR point clouds, which achieves promising results as shown on the right end.

Abstract
Existing motion capture datasets are largely short-range
and cannot yet fit the need of long-range applications. We
propose LiDARHuman26M, a new human motion capture
dataset captured by LiDAR at a much longer range to overcome this limitation. Our dataset also includes the ground
truth human motions acquired by the IMU system and the
synchronous RGB images. We further present a strong baseline method, LiDARCap, for LiDAR point cloud human
motion capture. Specifically, we first utilize PointNet++
to encode features of points and then employ the inverse
kinematics solver and SMPL optimizer to regress the pose
through aggregating the temporally encoded features hierarchically. Quantitative and qualitative experiments show
that our method outperforms the techniques based only on
RGB images. Ablation experiments demonstrate that our
dataset is challenging and worthy of further research. Finally, the experiments on the KITTI Dataset and the Waymo
Open Dataset show that our method can be generalized to
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

different LiDAR sensor settings.

1. Introduction
The past ten years have witnessed a rapid development
of marker-less human motion capture [9, 18, 48, 60], with
various applications like VR/AR and interactive entertainment. However, conveniently capturing long-range 3D human motions in a large space remains challenging, which is
critical for sports and human behavior analysis.
So far, vision-based mocap solutions take the majority
in this topic. The high-end solutions require dense optical markers [55, 72] or dense camera rigs [8, 25, 26, 48]
for faithfully motion capture, which are infeasible for
consumer-level usage. In contrast, monocular capture methods are more practical and attractive. The recent learningbased techniques have enable robust human motion capture from a single RGB stream, using pre-scanned human
templates [16, 17, 19, 62, 64] or parametric human models [5, 27, 31, 32, 36, 37, 39]. However, in the long-range
capture scenarios where the performers are far away from
the cameras, the captured images suffer from degraded and
blurred artifacts, leading to fragile motion capture. Vari-

20502

