MotionAug: Augmentation with Physical Correction
for Human Motion Prediction
Takahiro Maeda
Norimichi Ukita
Toyota Technological Institute, Japan
{sd21601, ukita}@toyota-ti.ac.jp

Abstract
This paper presents a motion data augmentation
scheme incorporating motion synthesis encouraging diversity and motion correction imposing physical plausibility. This motion synthesis consists of our modified
Variational AutoEncoder (VAE) and Inverse Kinematics (IK). In this VAE, our proposed sampling-nearsamples method generates various valid motions even
with insufficient training motion data. Our IK-based
motion synthesis method allows us to generate a variety of motions semi-automatically. Since these two
schemes generate unrealistic artifacts in the synthesized motions, our motion correction rectifies them.
This motion correction scheme consists of imitation
learning with physics simulation and subsequent motion debiasing. For this imitation learning, we propose the PD-residual force that significantly accelerates the training process. Furthermore, our motion
debiasing successfully offsets the motion bias induced
by imitation learning to maximize the effect of augmentation. As a result, our method outperforms previous noise-based motion augmentation methods by a
large margin on both Recurrent Neural Network-based
and Graph Convolutional Network-based human motion prediction models. The code is available at https:
//github.com/meaten/MotionAug.

Augmentation (DA), for example, image recognition [25,39]. Compared with image data augmentation,
however, DA for motion data is hard to address because
simple numerical transformations (e.g., additive noise)
may generate physically-implausible motions such as
too high velocities or floating motions.
This paper presents a novel motion data augmentation approach, including motion synthesis and motion
correction. Our motion synthesis uses Variational AutoEncoder (VAE) [24] to exploit a training data distribution and Inverse Kinematics (IK) to exploit human
knowledge, shown in “Motion Synthesis” in Fig. 1. Although most of our synthesized motions are physicallyplausible, we observed some of them have unrealistic
artifacts, which lead to the low accuracy of human motion prediction. These artifacts are corrected with our
proposed motion correction method. This correction
method uses (i) imitation learning with physics simulation to rectify these artifacts and (ii) subsequent
motion debiasing to offset biases imposed by the mismatch between the bodies of a human and the character during imitation learning (“Motion Correction”
in Fig. 1). Our contributions for motion diversity and
physical plausibility are as follows:
1. VAE-based human-motion synthesis: Our
generative model with adversarial training in sequencewise and framewise, and sampling-nearsamples can generate plausible motions even with
insufficient motion data.

1. Introduction
Human motion prediction, which forecasts future
body poses based on past poses, is a crucial technique for human-robot interaction [22,23,28,29,41], autonomous driving [30], VR/AR applications [18], performance capture [8, 32, 33, 43, 44], etc. However, these
applications are limited because of the lack of training motion data, which results in low prediction accuracy. This data insufficiency is caused by the enormous
cost of motion data acquisition, such as motion capture
equipment, recordings, post-processing, and denoising.
Such data insufficiency can be alleviated by Data

2. IK-based human-motion synthesis: Compared with annotating IK target points in all
frames as the standard IK does, our method requires less effort because only a target sampling
space for a keyframe is manually given.
3. PD-residual force: We propose the PD-residual
force that accelerates the training of imitation
learning in a physics simulator to rectify the physical implausibility of synthesized motions.

6427

