HP-Capsule: Unsupervised Face Part Discovery by Hierarchical Parsing
Capsule Network
Chang Yu1,2 , Xiangyu Zhu1,2 , Xiaomei Zhang1,2 , Zidu Wang1,2 , Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2,3 , Zhen Lei1,2,3 *
1
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Hong Kong Institute of Science & Innovation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
{chang.yu, xiangyu.zhu, zlei}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
{zhangxiaomei2016, wangzidu2022, zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn

Figure 1. A brief review of the Hierarchical Parsing Capsule Network (HP-Capsule). Given a large scale of unlabeled images (left),
HP-Capsule can automatically discover the hierarchical face parts (middle) and give unsupervised face segmentation results as by-products
(right).

Abstract
Capsule networks are designed to present the objects
by a set of parts and their relationships, which provide an
insight into the procedure of visual perception. Although
recent works have shown the success of capsule networks on
simple objects like digits, the human faces with homologous
structures, which are suitable for capsules to describe,
have not been explored. In this paper, we propose a
Hierarchical Parsing Capsule Network (HP-Capsule) for
unsupervised face subpart-part discovery. When browsing
large-scale face images without labels, the network first
encodes the frequently observed patterns with a set of
explainable subpart capsules. Then, the subpart capsules are assembled into part-level capsules through a
Transformer-based Parsing Module (TPM) to learn the
compositional relations between them. During training,
* Corresponding author.

as the face hierarchy is progressively built and refined,
the part capsules adaptively encode the face parts with
semantic consistency. HP-Capsule extends the application
of capsule networks from digits to human faces and takes a
step forward to show how the neural networks understand
homologous objects without human intervention. Besides,
HP-Capsule gives unsupervised face segmentation results
by the covered regions of part capsules, enabling qualitative
and quantitative evaluation. Experiments on BP4D and
Multi-PIE datasets show the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
Psychological studies [12, 22, 27] reveal that: The recognition procedure is often assigned with hierarchical structural descriptions by parsing the shapes into components
and organizing them with their spatial relationships. This
statement is consistent with the improvements of various

4032

