Talking Face Generation with Multilingual TTS
Hyoung-Kyu Song* 12 , Sang Hoon Woo* 1 , Junhyeok Lee1 , Seungmin Yang12 ,
Hyunjae Cho13 , Youseong Lee13 , Dongho Choi3 , Kang-wook Kim3
1
MINDsLab Inc., South Korea
2
KAIST, South Korea 3 Seoul National University, South Korea
{hksong35, shwoo, jun3518, myaowng2, chohyunjae, staru}@mindslab.ai
{dongho.choi, full324}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Recent studies in talking face generation have focused
on building a model that can generalize from any source
speech to any target identity. A number of works have already claimed this functionality and have added that their
models will also generalize to any language. However, we
show, using languages from different language families, that
these models do not translate well when the training language and the testing language are sufficiently different.
We reduce the scope of the problem to building a languagerobust talking face generation system on seen identities, i.e.,
the target identity is the same as the training identity. In
this work, we introduce a talking face generation system
that generalizes to different languages. We evaluate the efficacy of our system using a multilingual text-to-speech system. We present the joint text-to-speech system and the talking face generation system as a neural dubber system. Our
demo is available at https://bit.ly/ml- facegeneration-cvpr22-demo. Also, our screencast is
uploaded at https://youtu.be/F6h0s0M4vBI.

Videos with
Korean Speech

Input Text
!"# $%&'
()*"+,-

Target
Language

Preprocessor

Multilingual TTS

Training
Data

Talking Face
Generation

•
•
•
•

Korean
English
Japanese
Chinese

Source
Video
Talking
Face Video

Figure 1. An overview of the demonstration. With the text, the language, and the source video, users can make face videos which include the voice corresponding to text. For training data, we record
two hours of footage of the Korean speaker.

1. Introduction
Talking face generation, a task of synthesizing a face
video where the lip is synchronized with the input speech, is
one of the most popular research topics in neural video generation. When combined with a text-to-speech (TTS) system, the joint system allows users to create a talking video
with only a text input and has potential applications in news
broadcasting, virtual lectures, and digital concierge. Expanding the task to support multiple languages would significantly reduce the amount of effort required to widen the
target audience to the global population.
Recent works in talking face generation claim that their
models support input speeches in any language [8, 11].
* indicates equal contribution.

However, we observe that such models fail to generalize to
certain input speech languages, e.g., Korean. We hypothesize that the robustness of these models depends on the degree of similarity between the training speech language and
the input speech language. Thus, we will validate the generalization capabilities of multilingual face generation models
using speeches of languages from different language families.
For practical applications of multilingual talking face
generation, the speaker’s vocal identity should be preserved
across different languages. Since multilingual speech
datasets for desired speakers are often unavailable, the multilingual talking face generation system requires a multilin-

