Deblur-NeRF: Neural Radiance Fields from Blurry Images
Xiaoyu Li2
Jing Liao3
Qi Zhang2
Jue Wang2
Pedro V. Sander1

Li Ma1 *

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
3
Tencent AI Lab
City University of Hong Kong

Defocus Blur

Camera Motion Blur

1

Xuan Wang2

(a) Samples of Blurry Source Views

(b) Novel Views from NeRF

(c) Novel Views from Deblur-NeRF

Figure 1. Given a set of blurry multi-view input images (a), the original NeRF implementation reconstructs blurry novel views (b). Our
method is able to recover a sharp radiance field and synthesize clear novel views (c). Our proposed approach can handle both camera
motion blur (first row) and defocus blur (second row). Please refer to the supplementary material for video results.

Abstract
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) has gained considerable
attention recently for 3D scene reconstruction and novel
view synthesis due to its remarkable synthesis quality. However, image blurriness caused by defocus or motion, which
often occurs when capturing scenes in the wild, significantly degrades its reconstruction quality. To address this
problem, We propose Deblur-NeRF, the first method that
can recover a sharp NeRF from blurry input. We adopt
an analysis-by-synthesis approach that reconstructs blurry
views by simulating the blurring process, thus making NeRF
robust to blurry inputs. The core of this simulation is a
novel Deformable Sparse Kernel (DSK) module that models spatially-varying blur kernels by deforming a canonical sparse kernel at each spatial location. The ray origin of each kernel point is jointly optimized, inspired by
the physical blurring process. This module is parameterized as an MLP that has the ability to be generalized to
various blur types. Jointly optimizing the NeRF and the
DSK module allows us to restore a sharp NeRF. We demon* Author did this work during the internship at Tencent AI Lab.

strate that our method can be used on both camera motion blur and defocus blur: the two most common types
of blur in real scenes. Evaluation results on both synthetic and real-world data show that our method outperforms several baselines. The synthetic and real datasets
along with the source code is publicly available at https:
//limacv.github.io/deblurnerf/.

1. Introduction
Tremendous progress has been witnessed in the past few
years in novel view synthesis, where an intermediate 3D
representation is reconstructed from sparse input views to
interpolate or extrapolate arbitrary novel views. Recently,
NeRF [22] emerged as an effective scene representation that
achieves photorealistic rendering results. It models a static
scene as a continuous volumetric function that maps 3D location and 2D view direction to color and density. This
function is parameterized as a multilayer perceptron (MLP),
and its output can be rendered by volume rendering techniques in a differentiable manner.
To reconstruct a NeRF, several images from different
views are needed. While the original approach for train-

12861

