Compressing Models with Few Samples: Mimicking then Replacing
Huanyu Wang1 ,* Junjie Liu2 , Xin Ma2 , Yang Yong2 , Zhenhua Chai2 , Jianxin Wu1
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
Meituan

{cjnjuwhy,wujx2001}@gmail.com, {liujunjie10,maxin10,chaizhenhua}@meituan.com

Abstract
Few-sample compression aims to compress a big redundant model into a small compact one with only few samples. If we fine-tune models with these limited few samples
directly, models will be vulnerable to overfit and learn almost nothing. Hence, previous methods optimize the compressed model layer-by-layer and try to make every layer
have the same outputs as the corresponding layer in the
teacher model, which is cumbersome. In this paper, we propose a new framework named Mimicking then Replacing
(MiR) for few-sample compression, which firstly urges the
pruned model to output the same features as the teacher’s in
the penultimate layer, and then replaces teacher’s layers before penultimate with a well-tuned compact one. Unlike previous layer-wise reconstruction methods, our MiR optimizes
the entire network holistically, which is not only simple and
effective, but also unsupervised and general. MiR outperforms previous methods with large margins. Codes is available at https://github.com/cjnjuwhy/MiR.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) with millions of
parameters can only be utilized by high-performance devices, even when we only care about the inference stage. In
order to put deep models into small devices and decrease the
latency and memory consumption, network compression [5]
is widely used in model deployment. To compress a model,
network pruning methods [14,16,20,22,23,30] try to prune
less useful weights or channels, while quantization methods [7] aim at quantizing the weights and activations with
fewer bits, and knowledge distillation methods [15, 24] try
to distill the dark knowledge from a potentially redundant
big model into a more compact small one.
These compression methods have been very successful
in reducing computations and accelerating inference speed.
* Corresponding author. This research was partly supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61772256 and
Grant 61921006.

But, they all assume full access to the training data, and
unfortunately this assumption does not hold in many cases,
especially in non-academic scenarios. When handling sensitive data (e.g., medical or commercial data), data security
issues are of special importance. As a response to this issue, the few-sample or few-shot compression problem aims
to compress models with limited samples, which is a practical way to protect data privacy by using only non-sensitive
data.
To tackle this few-sample compression problem, recent
methods try to obtain a compact model in a layer-wise manner. Li et al. proposed FSKD [18], which adds a 1 × 1 conv.
after each layer and optimizes the weights by minimizing
the reconstruction error for each layer. Bai et al. introduced a cross distillation operation to better alleviate the error accumulation in each layer [1]. Furthermore, Shen et al.
tried to distill a compact model by grafting layers from the
teacher model to the student model progressively [27]. All
these methods tried to reconstruct the representation ability
layer-wisely, which is not only cumbersome but may also
cause error accumulation. Moreover, this layer-wise framework needs a one-to-one relationship between the pruned
and the original model, therefore imposing heavy restrictions to the pruned model’s structure.
Instead, we advocate pruning and optimizing the entire
network holistically instead of following this cumbersome
layer-wise reconstruction framework, and recover the representation abilities of the pruned model globally instead
of training the layers locally. In this regard, we propose a
new framework, Mimicking then Replacing (MiR), which
first urges the pruned model to output the same features
as the teacher’s (i.e., mimicking features), and following
LSHKD [29] we can mimic the features in the penultimate
layer. Then, while keeping the (classification, detection,
etc.) head intact, we replace all the other layers with the
trained compact model after mimicking. The features in the
penultimate layer in LSHKD [29] are obtained after a pooling layer. We reveal that mimicking the features before the
pooling layer can boost the accuracy without extra computation.

701

