Transformer Tracking with Cyclic Shifting Window Attention
Yi-Ping Phoebe Chen2
Wei Yang1
Zikai Song1
Junqing Yu1 *
1
2
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
La Trobe University, Australia
{skyesong, yjqing, weiyangcs}@hust.edu.cn, phoebe.chen@latrobe.edu.au

Transformer architecture has been showing its great
strength in visual object tracking, for its effective attention mechanism. Existing transformer-based approaches
adopt the pixel-to-pixel attention strategy on flattened image features and unavoidably ignore the integrity of objects. In this paper, we propose a new transformer architecture with multi-scale cyclic shifting window attention for visual object tracking, elevating the attention from
pixel to window level. The cross-window multi-scale attention has the advantage of aggregating attention at different scales and generates the best fine-scale match for
the target object. Furthermore, the cyclic shifting strategy brings greater accuracy by expanding the window samples with positional information, and at the same time saves
huge amounts of computational power by removing redundant calculations. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
superior performance of our method, which also sets the
new state-of-the-art records on five challenging datasets,
along with the VOT2020, UAV123, LaSOT, TrackingNet,
and GOT-10k benchmarks. Our project is available at
https://github.com/SkyeSong38/CSWinTT.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking (VOT) is one of the fundamental problems in computer vision research with a wide range
of applications in video surveillance, autonomous vehicles,
human-machine interaction, and others. It aims to estimate
the position of a target object in each video frame, commonly represented as a bounding box encapsulating the target. The target object is given as a template in the initial
frame, and the tracker is required to extract proper features about the target and localize the target in the following frames. Most of the popular trackers [1, 22, 23, 37, 41]
adopt the Siamese network structure, which conducts tracking by calculating the similarity between the template and
search region in the current frame. The similarity metric
* Corresponding author

Qu
ery

Qu
ery

Abstract
cyclic
shifts
window
partition

…
…

Ke

attention
…

y

(a) Cyclic shifting window-level Attn

…
…

…

Ke y
(b) Pixel-level Attn

Figure 1. (a) The proposed approach firstly achieves the windowlevel attention between query and key through window partitioning, and then applies cyclic shifts for each window (from the base
sample in the red box to generated samples surrounded by orange
boxes) to greatly extend the number of window samples, while
maintaining the integrity of objects. (b) Previous transformers produce pixel-level attention, which weakens the positional information between pixels and ignores the integrity of objects.

of cross-correlation used in Siamese trackers is prone to
lose much semantic information for it is a single-level linear
computational process. This deficiency can be well tackled
by using the attention mechanism to learn the global context. Recently, transformer-based approaches [6, 12, 25, 39]
have reported new state-of-the-art performance on image
recognition, object detection, and semantic segmentation
benchmarks. This is no wonder as transformer [36] has a
powerful cross-attention mechanism to reasoning between
patches [18]. Particularly, transformer trackers [7,40,45,50]
have shown their great strength by introducing the attention mechanism to enhance and fuse the features of the target and the tracked object. However, we observe that these
transformer trackers simply put the flattened features of the
template and search region into pixel-level attention, each
pixel of a flattened feature (Query) matches all pixels of another flattened feature (Key) in a complete and disordered
manner, as shown in Figure 1b. This pixel-level attention
destroys the integrity of the target object and leads to information loss of relative positions between pixels.
In this paper, we propose a novel multi-scale cyclic shifting window transformer for visual object tracking to further

8791

