IntraQ: Learning Synthetic Images with Intra-Class Heterogeneity for
Zero-Shot Network Quantization
Yunshan Zhong1,2 , Mingbao Lin2 , Gongrui Nan2 , Jianzhuang Liu3 ,
Baochang Zhang4 , Yonghong Tian5,6 , Rongrong Ji1,2,6 *
1
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University
2
MAC Lab, School of Informatics, Xiamen University 3 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei
4
Beihang University 5 Peking University 6 Peng Cheng Laboratory

Abstract

out among these methods for its significant memory reduction and more efficient integer operations.

Learning to synthesize data has emerged as a promising
direction in zero-shot quantization (ZSQ), which represents
neural networks by low-bit integer without accessing any
of the real data. In this paper, we observe an interesting
phenomenon of intra-class heterogeneity in real data and
show that existing methods fail to retain this property in
their synthetic images, which causes a limited performance
increase. To address this issue, we propose a novel zeroshot quantization method referred to as IntraQ. First, we
propose a local object reinforcement that locates the target
objects at different scales and positions of the synthetic images. Second, we introduce a marginal distance constraint
to form class-related features distributed in a coarse area.
Lastly, we devise a soft inception loss which injects a soft
prior label to prevent the synthetic images from being overfitting to a fixed object. Our IntraQ is demonstrated to well
retain the intra-class heterogeneity in the synthetic images
and also observed to perform state-of-the-art. For example, compared to the advanced ZSQ, our IntraQ obtains
9.17% increase of the top-1 accuracy on ImageNet when
all layers of MobileNetV1 are quantized to 4-bit. Code is at
https://github.com/zysxmu/IntraQ.

Most existing methods explore quantization-aware training (QAT) that builds a quantizer on the premise of accessing the original complete training dataset [2, 8, 43]. In
[18, 23, 47], QAT is demonstrated to be comparable or even
better than its floating-point counterpart since the weights
could be adjusted to fit the quantization operations given the
access to sufficient training data [40]. However, the drawbacks also stem from its reliance on training data. Specifically, in real-world cases, the original training data is sometimes prohibitive due to deteriorating privacy and security
problems. For example, people may not wish their medical records to be revealed to others, and business material
is not expected to be transmitted via the internet. As such,
QAT is no longer applicable. Though recent studies on posttraining quantization (PTQ) [24, 30, 40] directly quantizes
DNNs using a small portion of original data, for cases such
as MLaas (e.g., Amazon AWS and Google Cloud), it may be
impossible to reach any of the training data from users [3].

1. Introduction
The increasing demands in computing power and memory footprint of deep neural networks (DNNs) raise a challenging application problem on edge computing devices
such as smart phones or wearable gadgets, in which the limited hardware resource fails to support the highly complex
DNNs. A variety of methods [12, 13, 20, 25] have been investigated to reduce the model complexity. Network quantization, which represents the floating-point parameters and
activations within the networks by low-bit integers, stands
* Corresponding Author: rrji@xmu.edu.cn

Fortunately, the research community recently has proposed zero-shot quantization (ZSQ) to quantize models
without accessing real data. Existing studies on ZSQ can
be categorized into two groups. The first group calibrates
parameters without the involvement of any data. For example, DFQ [31] utilizes the shift and scale parameters β
and γ stored in the batch normalization layers of the fullprecision model to compute the expected biased error on
the output. Nevertheless, a simple calibration of parameters
results in severe performance degradation in ultra-low precision. For instance, only 0.10% top-1 accuracy of DFQ on
ImageNet [36] is reported in the appendix of [41] if quantizing ResNet-18 to 4-bit.
The second group performs quantization by exploiting
synthetic fake images. The involvement of fake images
facilitates the training of quantized networks which are
demonstrated to be superior in performance [11, 41, 46].

12339

