Scaling Vision Transformers
Xiaohua Zhai? , Alexander Kolesnikov? , Neil Houlsby, Lucas Beyer?
Google Research, Brain Team, Zürich
{xzhai, akolesnikov, neilhoulsby, lbeyer}@google.com

85

Attention-based neural networks such as the Vision Transformer (ViT) have recently attained state-of-the-art results
on many computer vision benchmarks. Scale is a primary
ingredient in attaining excellent results, therefore, understanding a model’s scaling properties is a key to designing
future generations effectively. While the laws for scaling
Transformer language models have been studied, it is unknown how Vision Transformers scale. To address this, we
scale ViT models and data, both up and down, and characterize the relationships between error rate, data, and compute.
Along the way, we refine the architecture and training of ViT,
reducing memory consumption and increasing accuracy of
the resulting models. As a result, we successfully train a
ViT model with two billion parameters, which attains a new
state-of-the-art on ImageNet of 90.45% top-1 accuracy. The
model also performs well for few-shot transfer, for example,
reaching 84.86% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet with only 10
examples per class.

1. Introduction
Attention-based Transformer architectures [44] have
taken computer vision domain by storm [7, 15] and are becoming an increasingly popular choice in research and practice. Previously, Transformers have been widely adopted in
the natural language processing (NLP) domain [6, 14]. Optimal scaling of Transformers in NLP was carefully studied
in [21], with the main conclusion that large models not only
perform better, but do use large computational budgets more
efficiently. However, it remains unclear to what extent these
findings transfer to the vision domain, which has several
important differences. For example, the most successful
pre-training schemes in vision are supervised, as opposed to
unsupervised pre-training in the NLP domain.
In this paper we concentrate on scaling laws for transfer
performance of ViT models pre-trained on image classifica? equal contribution

ImageNet top-1 accuracy

Abstract

80
75
70
65
60

1

5

Our ViT-G
ViT-H
SimCLR v2

BYOL
DINO

10

25

Examples per class

Figure 1. Few-shot transfer results. Our ViT-G model reaches
84.86% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet with 10-shot linear evaluation.

tion tasks. In particular, we experiment with models ranging
from five million to two billion parameters, datasets ranging
from one million to three billion training images and compute budgets ranging from below one TPUv3 core-day to
beyond 10 000 core-days. Our main contribution is a characterization of the performance-compute frontier for ViT
models, on two datasets.
Along the way, we create an improved large-scale training recipe. We investigate training hyper-parameters and
discover subtle choices that make drastic improvements in
few-shot transfer performance. The few-shot transfer evaluation protocol has also been adopted by previous large-scale
pre-training efforts in NLP domain [5]. Specifically, we
discover that very strong L2 regularization, applied to the
final linear prediction layer only, results in a learned visual
representation that has very strong few-shot transfer capabilities. For example, with just a single example per class on the
ImageNet dataset (which has 1 000 classes), our best model
achieves 69.52% accuracy; and with 10 examples per class
it attains 84.86%. In addition, we substantially reduce the
memory footprint of the original ViT model proposed in [15].
We achieve this by hardware-specific architecture changes
and a different optimizer. As a result, we train a model
with two billion parameters and attain a new state-of-the-art
90.45% accuracy on ImageNet.

12104

