PCL: Proxy-based Contrastive Learning for Domain Generalization
Xufeng Yao† , Yang Bai† , Xinyun Zhang† , Yuechen Zhang† , Qi Sun† , Ran Chen† , Ruiyu Li] , Bei Yu†
†
]
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
SmartMore
{xfyao,byu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
Abstract
Domain generalization refers to the problem of training
a model from a collection of different source domains that
can directly generalize to the unseen target domains. A
promising solution is contrastive learning, which attempts
to learn domain-invariant representations by exploiting rich
semantic relations among sample-to-sample pairs from different domains. A simple approach is to pull positive sample pairs from different domains closer while pushing other
negative pairs further apart. In this paper, we find that
directly applying contrastive-based methods (e.g., supervised contrastive learning) are not effective in domain generalization. We argue that aligning positive sample-tosample pairs tends to hinder the model generalization due
to the significant distribution gaps between different domains. To address this issue, we propose a novel proxybased contrastive learning method, which replaces the original sample-to-sample relations with proxy-to-sample relations, significantly alleviating the positive alignment issue.
Experiments on the four standard benchmarks demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed method. Furthermore, we
also consider a more complex scenario where no ImageNet
pre-trained models are provided. Our method consistently
shows better performance.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved significant success in various applications, assuming the training and test data are independent and identically distributed
(i.i.d.) [2, 12, 19, 20, 25, 40, 41, 47, 52]. However, in many
real-world problems, training and testing datasets are collected under different scenarios, which leads to the DNNs
trained on the source data performing poorly on the out-ofdistribution target data. Such performance degeneration due
to domain shift impairs the generalization ability of DNNs.
The literature in domain generalization (DG) aims to address this issue by exploiting the diversity of source domains to improve model generalization.
Different from domain adaptation task, it is assumed

Art

Cartoon

Photo

Sketch
(a) pacs benchmark
Similarity

Similarity

q

z

k

z

q

w+

encoder
q

encoder
k

encoder
q

Target
proxy

xq

xk

xq

z

(b) contrastive-based loss

(c) proxy-based contrastive loss

Figure 1. (a) PACS dataset is a typical domain generalization
benchmark that contains four domains: Art, Cartoon, Photo and
Sketch with seven categories in each domain. Domain Generalization task aims to train the model from multi-source domains (e.g.,
art, photo, sketch) and test on target domain (e.g., cartoon). In the
training stage, the target dataset can not be accessed. (b) Typical
contrastive-based loss (e.g., supervised contrastive loss) exploits
sample-to-sample relations, where different domain samples from
the same class can be regarded as positive pairs. We argue that
optimizing some hard positive pairs may worsen the model generalization. We term it as the positive alignment problem. (c) Based
on our observation, we propose a proxy-based contrastive loss. By
replacing the sample-to-sample relations with proxy-to-sample relations, we largely alleviate the positive alignment problem.

that only source domains can be accessed during training.
Therefore, most prior works in DG task focus on learning domain-invariant representations by aligning different
source domains [31, 33, 35]. Contrastive learning provides
a potential solution to address this problem. The key idea
is to construct multiple positive and negative pairs, which
are then used to learn to optimize a distance metric that

7097

