MPC: Multi-view Probabilistic Clustering
Junjie Liu1,2,∗ , Junlong Liu2 , Shaotian Yan1,2 , Rongxin Jiang1,4,† ,
Xiang Tian1,4 , Boxuan Gu1,3 , Yaowu Chen1,3 , Chen Shen2 , Jianqiang Huang2
1

Zhejiang University 2 Alibaba Cloud Computing Ltd.
3
Zhejiang University Embedded System Engineering Research Center, Ministry of Education of China
4
Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory for Network Multimedia Technologies
{jumptoliujj, yanshaotian}@gmail.com, {pingwu.ljl, jason.sc, jianqiang.hjq}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Despite the promising progress having been made, the
two challenges of multi-view clustering (MVC) are still
waiting for better solutions: i) Most existing methods are
either not qualified or require additional steps for incomplete multi-view clustering and ii) noise or outliers might
significantly degrade the overall clustering performance. In
this paper, we propose a novel unified framework for incomplete and complete MVC named multi-view probabilistic clustering (MPC). MPC equivalently transforms multiview pairwise posterior matching probability into composition of each view’s individual distribution, which tolerates data missing and might extend to any number of views.
Then graph-context-aware refinement with path propagation and co-neighbor propagation is used to refine pairwise probability, which alleviates the impact of noise and
outliers. Finally, MPC also equivalently transforms probabilistic clustering’s objective to avoid complete pairwise
computation and adjusts clustering assignments by maximizing joint probability iteratively. Extensive experiments
on multiple benchmarks for incomplete and complete MVC
show that MPC significantly outperforms previous state-ofthe-art methods in both effectiveness and efficiency.

1. Introduction
Multi-view clustering (MVC) [36], a task aiming at exploiting both correlated and complementary information
implied in multi-view data and dividing samples into various clusters in an unsupervised manner, has become a hot
spot in the area of computer vision, due to its superiority
over single-view clustering in performance. With the explosion of multi-source and multi-modal data, a great deal
∗ This work was done during research intern at Alibaba.
† Corresponding authors.

of effort has been put into MVC. Co-EM [23] intends to
maximize the mutual agreement across all views by learning knowledge from each other. SwMC [22] constructs a
unified similarity graph from multiple views and then partition this graph to obtain the clustering result. GMC [29]
weights each data graph matrix to derive the unified graph
matrix. SMSC [27] integrates anchor learning and graph
construction into a unified framework. MKKM [16] seeks
to optimally combine the predefined kernels with matrixinduced regularization in order to improve clustering performance.
Despite the progress having been made, MVC methods
still face various challenges: 1) Absence of partial views
among data points [17, 35] might frequently take place in
practice, while existing methods are either not qualified
[27,29] or require specific additional steps [30,33] for these
cases. 2) K-means [18] and spectral [25] clustering algorithm are commonly employed as the last step of MVC.
Both of them are sensitive to the quality of the common representations or similarity matrices, which might be significantly degraded by the noise or outliers contained in multiview data [11, 28, 42, 43] due to the complexity in data collection. Moreover, the performance of K-means and spectral clustering relies on the selection of total cluster number
which is usually unavailable in real world cases.
To address these issues, we propose a novel unified
framework for incomplete and complete MVC named
multi-view probabilistic clustering (MPC). Instead of learning or calculating a common similarity matrix, we utilize
posterior probability to directly reflect the pairwise matching possibility between samples. To obtain the posterior
probability matrix, we mathematically decompose it into
the formulas of each views’ distribution, which exhibits enhanced tolerance to the partial missing of views and has
the benefit of easily extending to any number of views.
Then, MPC performs graph-context-aware probability refinement with path propagation and co-neighbor propagation, which can effectively alleviate the impact of noise and

9509

