Quarantine: Sparsity Can Uncover the Trojan Attack Trigger for Free
Tianlong Chen1* , Zhenyu Zhang1* , Yihua Zhang2* , Shiyu Chang3 , Sijia Liu2,4 , Zhangyang Wang1
1
University of Texas at Austin, 2 Michigan State University,
3
University of California, Santa Barbara, 4 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
{tianlong.chen, zhenyu.zhang, atlaswang}@utexas.edu,
{zhan1908, liusiji5}@msu.edu, chang87@ucsb.edu

Abstract

Trojan Tickets

......

1. Introduction
Data-driven techniques for artificial intelligence (AI),
such as deep neural networks (DNNs), have powered a
technological revolution in a number of key application areas in computer vision [6, 28, 47, 66]. However, a critical shortcoming of these pure data-driven learning systems
is the lack of test-time and/or train-time robustness: They
often learn ‘too well’ during training – so much that (1)
* Equal Contribution.

Pruning

...

Pruning

Remaining Elements
Pruned Elements
Clean Accuracy
Attack
Successful Rate
Winning
Trojan Ticket

Accuracy (%)

Trojan attacks threaten deep neural networks (DNNs) by
poisoning them to behave normally on most samples, yet to
produce manipulated results for inputs attached with a particular trigger. Several works attempt to detect whether a
given DNN has been injected with a specific trigger during the training. In a parallel line of research, the lottery ticket hypothesis reveals the existence of sparse subnetworks which are capable of reaching competitive performance as the dense network after independent training.
Connecting these two dots, we investigate the problem of
Trojan DNN detection from the brand new lens of sparsity, even when no clean training data is available. Our
crucial observation is that the Trojan features are significantly more stable to network pruning than benign features. Leveraging that, we propose a novel Trojan network
detection regime: first locating a “winning Trojan lottery
ticket” which preserves nearly full Trojan information yet
only chance-level performance on clean inputs; then recovering the trigger embedded in this already isolated subnetwork. Extensive experiments on various datasets, i.e.,
CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and ImageNet, with different network architectures, i.e., VGG-16, ResNet-18, ResNet-20s,
and DenseNet-100 demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposal. Codes are available at https://github.com/
VITA-Group/Backdoor-LTH .

Network Sparsity

Figure 1. Overview of our proposal: Weight pruning identifies the
‘winning Trojan ticket’, which can be leveraged for Trojan detection and recovery.

the learned model is oversensitive to small input perturbations at testing time (known as evasion attacks) [1, 48];
(2) toxic artifacts injected in the training dataset can be
memorized during model training and then passed on to
the decision-making process (known as poisoning attacks)
[26, 43]. Methods to secure DNNs against different kinds
of ‘adversaries’ are now a major focus in research, e.g., adversarial detection [4, 24, 75, 79, 80, 86] and robust training [58, 83, 91]. In this paper, we focus on the study of
Trojan attacks (also known as backdoor attacks), the most
common threat model on data security [27, 69]. In particular, we aim to address the following question:
(Q) How does the model sparsity relate to its train-time
robustness against Trojan attacks?
Extensive research work on model pruning [2,35–37,39,
44, 49, 49, 56, 59–61, 63, 65, 95] has shown that the weights
of an overparameterized model (e.g., DNN) can be pruned
(i.e., sparsified) without hampering its generalization ability. In particular, Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (LTH), first
developed in [18], unveiled that there exists a subnetwork,
when properly pruned and trained, that can even perform
better than the original dense neural network. Such a subnetwork is called a winning lottery ticket. In the past, the
model sparsity (achieved by pruning) was mainly studied in
the non-adversarial learning context, and thereby, the gen-

598

