Towards Language-Free Training for Text-to-Image Generation
Yufan Zhou 1 , Ruiyi Zhang 2 , Changyou Chen 1 , Chunyuan Li 3 ,
Chris Tensmeyer 2 , Tong Yu 2 , Jiuxiang Gu 2 , Jinhui Xu 1 *, Tong Sun 2
1
State University of New York at Buffalo 2 Adobe Research 3 Microsoft Research, Redmond
{yufanzho, changyou, jinhui}@buffalo.edu
{ruizhang, tensmeye, tyu, jigu, tsun}@adobe.com

Abstract
One of the major challenges in training text-to-image
generation models is the need of a large number of highquality image-text pairs. While image samples are often
easily accessible, the associated text descriptions typically
require careful human captioning, which is particularly
time- and cost-consuming. In this paper, we propose the
first work to train text-to-image generation models without
any text data. Our method leverages the well-aligned multimodal semantic space of the powerful pre-trained CLIP
model: the requirement of text-conditioning is seamlessly
alleviated via generating text features from image features.
Extensive experiments are conducted to illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed method. We obtain state-of-theart results in the standard text-to-image generation tasks.
Importantly, the proposed language-free model outperforms
most existing models trained with full image-text pairs. Furthermore, our method can be applied in fine-tuning pretrained models, which saves both training time and cost in
training text-to-image generation models. Our pre-trained
model obtains competitive results in zero-shot text-to-image
generation on the MS-COCO dataset, yet with around only
1% of the model size and training data size relative to the
recently proposed large DALL-E model.

1. Introduction
Automatic synthesis of realistic images from arbitrary
text description is one of the core aspirations in artificial intelligence. Most existing works achieve the goal
by consuming a large number of high quality image-text
pairs [7,38,53,56,59], which, however, often requires heavy
workload of precise human captioning and filtering. For instance, MS-COCO [27], the most commonly used dataset in
text-to-image generation tasks, requires over 70,000 worker
* The research of the first and eighth authors was supported in part by
NSF through grants IIS-1910492.

chunyl@microsoft.com

hours in gathering and annotating the captions. Even for
less curated datasets such as Google Conceptual Captions
[41], it consists of 3.3 million image-text pairs that are heavily filtered from 5 billion images from around 1 billion English webpages. In practice, for a customized domain, it is
infeasible to collect such a large number of image-text pairs
for model training, due to the high cost of human captioning and filtering. This challenge renders the unprecedented
importance of the zero-shot text-to-image generation tasks,
where no domain-specific image-text pairs are used to train
a model to generate images in a given domain.
Recently, several attempts have been made to tackle
zero-shot text-to-image generation problem, by pre-training
giant generative models on web-scale image-text pairs, such
as DALL-E [38] and CogView [7]. Both are auto-regressive
Transformer models built for zero-shot text-to-image generation, as they can generate corresponding images given arbitrary text description without training on domain-specific
datasets. However, to ensure good performance, these models require a gigantic scale of data collections, model size
and model training. Specifically, DALL-E contains over 12
billion parameters and is trained on a dataset consisting of
250 million image-text pairs; CogView is a model with 4
billion parameters trained on 30 million image-text pairs.
For this reason, hundreds of GPUs are required in training
these models, which significantly increases carbon footprint
and decrease the inclusivity: making it extremely difficult
for more researchers to participate the study of this topic.
It is therefore desired to provide affordable solutions to
build text-to-image generation models for the settings of
limited image-text pair data, by reducing the requirements
on model size, data collections and model training. In terms
of data collections, in the ideal scenarios, the languagefree setting is probably the minimal and cheapest requirement, where only image data is provided. This is important because collecting only image data is much easier than
constructing high-quality image-text pairs, given the ample
domain-specific image datasets available online.

17907

