Dual Temperature Helps Contrastive Learning Without Many Negative Samples:
Towards Understanding and Simplifying MoCo
Chaoning Zhang1 *, Kang Zhang1,∗ , Trung X. Pham1,∗ , Axi Niu2 , Zhinan Qiao3
Chang D. Yoo1 , In So Kweon1
1
KAIST, 2 Northwestern Polytechnical University, 3 University of North Texas
chaoningzhang1990@gmail.com

Abstract
Contrastive learning (CL) is widely known to require
many negative samples, 65536 in MoCo for instance, for
which the performance of a dictionary-free framework is
often inferior because the negative sample size (NSS) is
limited by its mini-batch size (MBS). To decouple the NSS
from the MBS, a dynamic dictionary has been adopted in
a large volume of CL frameworks, among which arguably
the most popular one is MoCo family. In essence, MoCo
adopts a momentum-based queue dictionary, for which we
perform a fine-grained analysis of its size and consistency.
We point out that InfoNCE loss used in MoCo implicitly attract anchors to their corresponding positive sample with
various strength of penalties and identify such inter-anchor
hardness-awareness property as a major reason for the necessity of a large dictionary. Our findings motivate us
to simplify MoCo v2 via the removal of its dictionary as
well as momentum. Based on an InfoNCE with the proposed dual temperature, our simplified frameworks, SimMoCo and SimCo, outperform MoCo v2 by a visible margin. Moreover, our work bridges the gap between CL and
non-CL frameworks, contributing to a more unified understanding of these two mainstream frameworks in SSL. Code
is available at: https://bit.ly/3LkQbaT.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has become increasingly
popular in various domains, ranging from NLP [12, 30,
34, 38, 42] to visual representation [6, 22, 36], in the past
few years. Especially, contrastive learning (CL) frameworks [2,6,22,23,25,36,44,47,50,53,65] have attracted significant attention due to its intuitive motivation. In essence,
CL is designed to attract the anchor sample [46] close to
the positive sample, i.e. another augmented view of the
same image, and simultaneously repulse it from negative
* equal contribution.

Figure 1. Intra-anchor and Inter-anchor hardness-aware properties. The former is indicated by different repulsing weights (see
Eq 5) for different negative samples based on their hardness, i.e.
p11 ̸= p12 ... ̸= p1K (K denotes NSS), and the latter is indicated by
different weights being put on differentP
anchor samples
PKto attract
1
2
the corresponding positive sample, i.e. K
j=1 pj ̸=
j=1 pj ̸=
PK
3
j=1 pj with three anchor images as a motivation example.

samples, i.e. views from different images. With the popular InfoNCE loss [36], CL is widely reported to require a
large amount of negative samples [22]. For example, [6]
shows that increasing the mini-batch size (MBS) to a large
value, 4096 for instance, is essential for achieving competitive performance, for which there are multiple challenges,
such as GPU memory concern or difficulty to train with a
large MBS [6, 57]. Thus, a major line of CL frameworks,
such as MoCo [22], have emerged to decouple the required
large negative sample size (NSS) from the MBS with a dynamic dictionary. Despite much effort in the dictionary design [22,53], why contrastive InfoNCE requires a large dictionary (or many negative samples) is not well understood.
Our investigation of the above problem centers around
an interesting hardness-aware property [46] of InfoNCE. A
large volume of works [3, 26, 28, 35, 45, 60] have studied
strategies of mining hard negative samples, i.e. those samples that are similar to the anchor sample. We point out that

14441

