FashionVLP: Vision Language Transformer for Fashion Retrieval with Feedback
Sonam Goenka*† , Zhaoheng Zheng*‡ , Ayush Jaiswal† ,
Rakesh Chada† , Yue Wu† , Varsha Hedau† , Pradeep Natarajan†
†
Amazon Alexa Natural Understanding, ‡ USC Viterbi School of Engineering
†

{goenkasg, ayujaisw, rakchada, wuayue, hedau, natarap}@amazon.com, ‡ zhaoheng.zheng@usc.edu

Abstract
Fashion image retrieval based on a query pair of reference image and natural language feedback is a challenging
task that requires models to assess fashion related information from visual and textual modalities simultaneously. We
propose a new vision-language transformer based model,
FashionVLP, that brings the prior knowledge contained in
large image-text corpora to the domain of fashion image retrieval, and combines visual information from multiple levels of context to effectively capture fashion-related information.While queries are encoded through the transformer layers, our asymmetric design adopts a novel attention-based
approach for fusing target image features without involving
text or transformer layers in the process. Extensive results
show that FashionVLP achieves the state-of-the-art performance on benchmark datasets, with a large 23% relative
improvement on the challenging FashionIQ dataset, which
contains complex natural language feedback.

1. Introduction
The task of feedback-based fashion image retrieval involves fetching images of clothing items that match a customer’s needs and preferences. A customer starts with an
initial request to search for a fashion item and participates
in multiple turns of interaction with the conversational assistant until they get the result that they are satisfied with. A
key challenge in this use-case is to retrieve a new candidate
image based on both the previously retrieved image and the
new feedback provided by the customer. Figure 1 shows
examples of feedback-based fashion image retrieval.
Substantial progress [6, 19, 25, 49] has been made on
this topic by designing strong image-text composers using image and text features from separate neural networks.
Recently, Vision-Language Pre-trained (VLP) transformers
[8, 26, 28, 33, 44, 45, 54, 57, 59] have been shown to be capable of learning joint representations for images and text di* Equal contribution. Completed during Zhaoheng’s internship at Amazon.

FashionVLP
FashionVLP

⋯

I want a lighter
graphic design

⋯

I want a lighter
FashionVLP
graphic
design

(a) Example of simple modification
FashionVLP

⋯

I want orange and
less revealing

⋯

I want orange and
less revealing

(b) Example of compound modification

Figure 1. Fashion image retrieval with textual feedback. The input
query to the system includes a reference image and a comment
specifying changes to be made to the image. The system retrieves
fashion items with the desired changes accordingly.

rectly by training on large-scale image-text corpora. In this
work, we propose a VLP transformer-based model, FashionVLP, for fashion image retrieval with textual feedback,
which leverages prior knowledge from large corpora and
image features from multiple fashion-related context levels.
Our model is composed of two parallel blocks – one for
processing the reference image and the feedback, and another for processing target images. The reference block
starts with extracting image features at multiple-levels of
context: (1) whole image, (2) cropped image of clothing,
(3) regions around fashion landmarks [32], and (4) regions
of interest determined by a pretrained object detector. These
features along with object tags from the detector and word
tokens from the textual feedback are then fed into a multilayer transformer model to compute a final joint representation for reference. On the target side, features at contexts
(1)–(3) are computed using only image feature extractors
for efficient low-cost inference, and fused using a contextual attention mechanism instead of transformer layers to
generate a target encoding for each candidate image. The
model is trained using cosine similarity and a batch-based
classification loss where the target for each reference image is used as a negative sample for other reference images.
Finally, retrieval is performed by ranking candidates using
cosine similarities between reference and target encodings.

14105

