Learning Distinctive Margin toward Active Domain Adaptation
Ming Xie1 * Yuxi Li2 * Yabiao Wang2 Zekun Luo2 Zhenye Gan2
Zhongyi Sun2 Mingmin Chi1† Chengjie Wang2† Pei Wang3
1
Fudan University 2 Tencent Youtu Lab 3 NAOC CAS
{mxie20,mmchi}@fudan.edu.cn
{yukiyxli,caseywang,zekunluo,wingzygan,zhongyisun,jasoncjwang}@tencent.com
wangpei@nao.cas.cn

Abstract
Despite plenty of efforts focusing on improving the domain adaptation ability (DA) under unsupervised or fewshot semi-supervised settings, recently the solution of active learning started to attract more attention due to its
suitability in transferring model in a more practical way
with limited annotation resource on target data. Nevertheless, most active learning methods are not inherently designed to handle domain gap between data distribution,
on the other hand, some active domain adaptation methods (ADA) usually requires complicated query functions,
which is vulnerable to overfitting. In this work, we propose a concise but effective ADA method called Select-byDistinctive-Margin (SDM), which consists of a maximum
margin loss and a margin sampling algorithm for data selection. We provide theoretical analysis to show that SDM
works like a Support Vector Machine, storing hard examples around decision boundaries and exploiting them to
find informative and transferable data. In addition, we
propose two variants of our method, one is designed to
adaptively adjust the gradient from margin loss, the other
boosts the selectivity of margin sampling by taking the gradient direction into account. We benchmark SDM with
standard active learning setting, demonstrating our algorithm achieves competitive results with good data scalability. Code is available at https://github.com/
TencentYoutuResearch/ActiveLearning-SDM

1. Introduction
The domain adaptation problem has been widely studied
in transfer learning society, where adaptation algorithms are
* Both author contributed equally to this work. Work is completed during Ming Xie’s internship at Tencent Youtu Lab.
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. A simple conceptual illustration of our Select-byDistinctive-Margin pipeline. Before each sampling step, a model
is trained with a maximum margin objective, and unlabeled data
lying in the margin with similar distance to different categorical
centers are sampled to augment training data.

designed to generalize a model trained on source domain
to a target domain with different data distribution [4]. In
most of studies, the semantic labels from target domain are
assumed to be unavailable [4, 8, 12, 13, 24] (UDA) or only
few-shot of target samples are labeled [21, 23, 29](SSDA).
However, in a more practical sense, although it is difficult
to annotate all data in target domain, a moderate amount of
labeled data should be acceptable given certain budget on
annotations cost.
With this consideration, domain adaptation turns into an
active learning problem (AL), which focusing on additionally labeling limited data to bring maximum improvement
of machine learning algorithms [2,6,17,30,32,37,38]. However, currently most active learning algorithms are derived
from a pure semi-supervised scenario, where the unlabeled
data are assumed to conform to the same distribution as labeled data. These methods usually focus on designing a
distinctive query function to depict how informative or representative an unlabeled data sample is, which highly relies
on the uncertainty [6, 32] or structural distribution of data
features [2, 30]. On the contrary, in a domain adaptation
problem, the task model is initially trained with only source
data and the query function is usually correlated to the prediction of task models, in this case, most of target data will
be discriminated as uncertain regardless its location in fea-

7993

