Nested Collaborative Learning for Long-Tailed Visual Recognition
Jun Li1,2∗ , Zichang Tan3,4 ,* Jun Wan1,2†, Zhen Lei1,2,5 , Guodong Guo3,4
1
CBSR&NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Institute of Deep Learning, Baidu Research, Beijing, China
4
National Engineering Laboratory for Deep Learning Technology and Application, Beijing, China
5
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Hong Kong Institute of Science&Innovation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hong Kong, China
{lijun2021,jun.wan}@ia.ac.cn, zlei@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, {tanzichang, guoguodong01}@baidu.com

10.0

Abstract

7.5

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep neural networks have achieved resounding success in various visual tasks, i.e., face analy* The first two authors contributed equally to this work
† Corresponding author

5.0

Logits

The networks trained on the long-tailed dataset vary remarkably, despite the same training settings, which shows
the great uncertainty in long-tailed learning. To alleviate
the uncertainty, we propose a Nested Collaborative Learning (NCL), which tackles the problem by collaboratively
learning multiple experts together. NCL consists of two core
components, namely Nested Individual Learning (NIL) and
Nested Balanced Online Distillation (NBOD), which focus
on the individual supervised learning for each single expert
and the knowledge transferring among multiple experts, respectively. To learn representations more thoroughly, both
NIL and NBOD are formulated in a nested way, in which
the learning is conducted on not just all categories from a
full perspective but some hard categories from a partial perspective. Regarding the learning in the partial perspective,
we specifically select the negative categories with high predicted scores as the hard categories by using a proposed
Hard Category Mining (HCM). In the NCL, the learning
from two perspectives is nested, highly related and complementary, and helps the network to capture not only global
and robust features but also meticulous distinguishing ability. Moreover, self-supervision is further utilized for feature
enhancement. Extensive experiments manifest the superiority of our method with outperforming the state-of-the-art
whether by using a single model or an ensemble. Code is
available at https://github.com/Bazinga699/NCL

2.5
0.0
−2.5
−5.0
−7.5

−10.0
0

Data distribution

20

KL distance

40

Logits1

Class index

60

Logits2

1&2 Overlap

80

100

Figure 1. The comparisons of model outputs (logits) and Kullback–Leibler (KL) distance between two networks that are trained
from scratch. Analysis is conducted on CIFAR100-LT dataset with
Imbalanced Factor (IF) of 100. The logits are visualized on the
basis of a random selected example, and the KL distance is computed based on the whole test set and then the average results of
each category are counted and reported. Although the employed
two networks have the same network structure and training settings, their predictions differ largely from each other especially in
tail classes. Bested viewed in color.

sis [47, 61], action and gesture recognition [39, 65]. Despite the advances in deep technologies and computing capability, the huge success also highly depends on large welldesigned datasets of having a roughly balanced distribution,
such as ImageNet [12], MS COCO [35] and Places [64].
This differs notably from real-world datasets, which usually exhibit long-tailed data distributions [37, 51] where
few head classes occupy most of the data while many tail
classes have only few samples. In such scenarios, the model
is easily dominated by those few head classes, whereas
low accuracy rates are usually achieved for many other tail
classes. Undoubtedly, the long-tailed characteristics challenges deep visual recognition, and also immensely hinders
the practical use of deep models.

6949

