TransforMatcher: Match-to-Match Attention for Semantic Correspondence
Seungwook Kim

Juhong Min

Minsu Cho

Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), South Korea
http://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/TransforMatcher

Abstract
Establishing correspondences between images remains
a challenging task, especially under large appearance
changes due to different viewpoints or intra-class variations. In this work, we introduce a strong semantic image
matching learner, dubbed TransforMatcher, which builds on
the success of transformer networks in vision domains. Unlike existing convolution- or attention-based schemes for
correspondence, TransforMatcher performs global matchto-match attention for precise match localization and dynamic refinement. To handle a large number of matches in a
dense correlation map, we develop a light-weight attention
architecture to consider the global match-to-match interactions. We also propose to utilize a multi-channel correlation map for refinement, treating the multi-level scores as
features instead of a single score to fully exploit the richer
layer-wise semantics. In experiments, TransforMatcher sets
a new state of the art on SPair-71k while performing on par
with existing SOTA methods on the PF-PASCAL dataset.

1. Introduction
Establishing correspondences between images is a fundamental task in computer vision, and is used for a wide
range of problems including 3D reconstruction, visual localization and object recognition [11]. With the recent
advances of deep neural networks, many learning-based
keypoint extractors and feature descriptors were introduced [7,10,41,51,53], showing significantly improved performances over their traditional counterparts [1, 6, 32, 33].
More recently, dense feature matching methods - which use
all extracted features for matching - have shown impressive performances despite higher computation complexities [29, 34, 45]. However, establishing reliable correspondences between images under the presence of intra-class
variations i.e., different instances of the same category, remains a critical challenge for semantic visual correspondence [3, 12–14, 16–18, 20, 30, 30, 34, 36, 38, 42, 43, 45, 53].
The idea of applying high-dimensional convolutional

Input images
: a match between two features
: an element to transform
: a set of elements attended

(1) Patch-to-patch self-attention

(3) Match-to-match attention

(2) Patch-to-patch cross-attention

Figure 1. Patch-to-patch vs. Match-to-match attention. Patchto-patch attention considers each position in a 2D feature map as
an individual element, while match-to-match attention considers
every match in pair-wise correlations as an individual element.

layers on the 4D feature correlation map was first proposed
in NCNet [45], which proposes that unique matches will
support the nearby ambiguous matches. Among the various methods proposed for establishing semantic correspondences, NCNet and its follow-up methods have shown impressive results [16, 27, 34, 44, 45]. These methods evidence
that considering the match-to-match consensus by utilizing
the full set of dense correspondences represented by the 4D
correlation map is effective in establishing robust and accurate semantic correspondences. However, the convolutionbased methods suffer from inherent limitations of local and
static transformations; performing the same local transformation over all spatial positions of the input.
While convolutional neural networks have been the defacto standard for visual correspondence, transformer networks have recently shown promising results in the computer vision domain. The success of transformer networks
can be largely attributed to their dynamic feature transform
unlike stationary convolutional layers, and the non-local interactions between input elements which enable easy scal-

8697

