Towards Robust and Reproducible Active Learning using Neural Networks
Prateek Munjal *

Nasir Hayat †

Munawar Hayat ‡

Abstract
Active learning (AL) is a promising ML paradigm that has
the potential to parse through large unlabeled data and
help reduce annotation cost in domains where labeling
data can be prohibitive. Recently proposed neural network
based AL methods use different heuristics to accomplish
this goal. In this study, we demonstrate that under identical
experimental settings, different types of AL algorithms
(uncertainty based, diversity based, and committee based)
produce an inconsistent gain over random sampling
baseline. Through a variety of experiments, controlling
for sources of stochasticity, we show that variance in
performance metrics achieved by AL algorithms can
lead to results that are not consistent with the previously
reported results. We also found that under strong regularization, AL methods show marginal or no advantage
over the random sampling baseline under a variety of
experimental conditions. Finally, we conclude with a set of
recommendations on how to assess the results using a new
AL algorithm to ensure results are reproducible and robust
under changes in experimental conditions. We share our
codes to facilitate AL evaluations. We believe our findings
and recommendations will help advance reproducible
research in AL using neural networks.
Abbreviations: Active Learning (AL), Random Sampling
Baseline (RSB), Query-by-Committee (QBC), Variational
Adversarial Active Learning (VAAL), Uncertainty-based
sampling (UC), Deep Bayesian Active Learning (DBAL),
Bayesian Active Learning by Disagreement (BALD), Random Augmentation (RA), Stochastic Weighted Averaging
(SWA), Shake-Shake regularization (SS).
Conventions: Models that are regularized using either one or
combination of RA, SWA, and SS have been identified with
a suffix -SR added to the abbreviation, SR signifies ‘strong
regularization’. Models without such a suffix are also regularized, but with standard methods such as weight decay and
data augmentation using random flip and horizontal crop.
* G42 Healthcare, Abu Dhabi, UAE
† NYUAD, UAE
‡ Monash University, Australia
§ University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA

Jamshid Sourati §

Shadab Khan *

1. Introduction
Active learning (AL) is a machine learning paradigm
that promises to help reduce the burden of data annotation
by intelligently selecting a subset of informative samples
from a large pool of unlabeled data that. In AL, a model
trained with a small amount of labeled seed data is used to
parse through the unlabeled data to select the subset that
should be sent to an oracle (annotator). To select such a
subset, AL methods rely on exploiting the learned latentspace, model uncertainty, or other heuristics. The promise
of reducing annotation cost has brought a surge of interest in AL research [2, 3, 7, 14, 16, 25, 27, 28, 32] and with
it, a few outstanding issues. First, The results reported for
Random sampling baseline, RSB vary significantly between
studies. For example, using 20% labeled data of CIFAR10,
the difference between RSB performance reported by [32]
and [28] is ≈ 13% under identical settings. Second, The
results reported for the same AL method can vary across
studies: using VGG16 [26] on CIFAR100 [17] with 40%
labeled data, Coreset [25] reported ≈ 55% classification
accuracy whereas VAAL [27] reported 47.01% using the
method reported in [25]. Third, Recent AL studies have
been inconsistent with each other. For example, [25] and [6]
state that diversity-based AL methods consistently outperform uncertainty-based methods, which were found to be
worse than the RSB. In contrast, recent developments in uncertainty based studies [32] suggest otherwise.
In addition to these issues, results using a new AL method
are often reported on simplistic experimental conditions - (i)
regularization is not sufficiently explored beyond the usual
methods (e.g. weight decay), (ii) with increasing AL iterations, the training data distribution changes, however, the
training hyper-parameters are fixed in advance. Such issues in the AL results has spurred a recent interest in benchmarking of AL methods and recent NLP and computer vision studies have raised a number of interesting questions
[20, 22, 24]. With the goal of improving the reproducibility
and robustness of AL methods, in this study we evaluate the
performance of these methods for image classification task.
Contributions: Through a comprehensive set of experiments performed using consistent settings under a
common code base (PyTorch-based1 ) we compare differ1 https://github.com/PrateekMunjal/TorchAL

Correspondence to: Shadab Khan <skhan.shadab@gmail.com>

223

