Multi-Modal Dynamic Graph Transformer for Visual Grounding
Sijia Chen, Baochun Li
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Toronto
sjia.chen@mail.utoronto.ca, bli@ece.toronto.edu

Abstract
Visual grounding (VG) aims to align the correct regions
of an image with a natural language query about that image. We found that existing VG methods are trapped by
the single-stage grounding process that performs a sole
evaluate-and-rank for meticulously prepared regions. Their
performance depends on the density and quality of the candidate regions, and is capped by the inability to optimize
the located regions continuously. To address these issues,
we propose to remodel VG into a progressively optimized
visual semantic alignment process. Our proposed multimodal dynamic graph transformer (M-DGT) achieves this
by building upon the dynamic graph structure with regions
as nodes and their semantic relations as edges. Starting
from a few randomly initialized regions, M-DGT is able to
make sustainable adjustments (i.e., 2D spatial transformation and deletion) to the nodes and edges of the graph based
on multi-modal information and the graph feature, thereby
efficiently shrinking the graph to approach the ground truth
regions. Experiments show that with an average of 48
boxes as initialization, the performance of M-DGT on the
Flickr30k Entities and RefCOCO datasets outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods by a substantial margin, in
terms of both accuracy and Intersect over Union (IOU)
scores. Furthermore, introducing M-DGT to optimize the
predicted regions of existing methods can further significantly improve their performance. The source codes are
available at https://github.com/iQua/M-DGT.

1. Introduction
Visual grounding (VG) is a crucial task in the interdisciplinary subject of computer vision and natural language
processing. With a focus on aligning semantically consistent phrase-region pairs from the given image and sentence,
the general visual grounding problem can be extended to
phrase localization [5, 9, 36] and referring expression comprehension [17, 28]. Then, tasks including translation [24],
cross-modal retrieval [14], image caption [5, 39], and visual

query answering [1, 38] can benefit from aligned phraseregion pairs.
Although there have been significant breakthroughs in
recent years, we noticed that the main bodies of proposed
state-of-the-art VG methods [3, 6, 7, 16, 18, 20, 27, 28,
42, 46] follow the one-step evaluate-and-rank matching architecture. Methods with this architecture evaluate regions
in the image to select the correct ones, a single-execute
process without continuous optimization. Existing works
[16, 19, 20, 27, 42] relying on the region proposal build
models based on candidate regions and make once predictions from these regions. In some works [6, 18, 43] with
neural attention mechanism, the attention scores are assigned to rough regions that are refined once to generate the
grounding boxes. The inherent issues in this architecture are
that solving a complex nonlinear matching problem with a
one-step manner leads to poor region-phrase matching results caused by local optimum, and as a result the matched
regions for phrases cannot be further adjusted. For example, if there is a significant deviation between the predicted
regions and ground truth regions, existing works cannot adjust the regions to approach the target. This is proven by our
experiments, in that the accuracy of these works decreases
substantially with the increase of the Intersect over Union
(IOU) threshold.
Some more recent works [9, 33, 41] tried to alleviate
problems in such matching architecture by introducing the
idea of progressive learning. Dogan et al. [9] achieved this
by performing phrase grounding sequentially while Sun et
al. [33] proposed the idea of iterative shrinking the detection area through reinforcement learning to locate the target.
However, they are still trapped in the one-step matching architecture because the failure of any matching step in the
learning process will ultimately produce poor results.
In this work, we break the limits in such design by
proposing a search-based visual grounding mechanism.
More specifically, we remodel VG into a progressively optimized visual semantic alignment process. By doing this,
the simple initialization regions can be continuously optimized to approach the target regions. To achieve this goal,

15534

