Clean Implicit 3D Structure from Noisy 2D STEM Images
Hannah Kniesel
Ulm University
Clarissa Read
Ulm University

Timo Ropinski
Ulm University
Paul Walther
Ulm University

Tim Bergner
Ulm University

Kavitha Shaga Devan
Ulm University

Tobias Ritschel
University College London

Pedro Hermosilla
Ulm University

Abstract
Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopes (STEMs)
acquire 2D images of a 3D sample on the scale of individual cell components. Unfortunately, these 2D images can
be too noisy to be fused into a useful 3D structure and facilitating good denoisers is challenging due to the lack of
clean-noisy pairs. Additionally, representing detailed 3D
structure can be difficult even for clean data when using regular 3D grids. Addressing these two limitations, we suggest
a differentiable image formation model for STEM, allowing
to learn a joint model of 2D sensor noise in STEM together
with an implicit 3D model. We show, that the combination of
these models are able to successfully disentangle 3D signal
and noise without supervision and outperform at the same
time several baselines on synthetic and real data.

1. Introduction
STEMs enable the acquisition of 3D samples from 2D
images on the scale of cellular components [16, 20]. This
allows for addressing many important tasks in biology, that
rely on the spatial organization inside cells [31, 47].
In STEMs, the amount of electrons used to probe a sample needs to be low, in order to prevent sample damage as
well as to keep acquisition times at bay [28]. This, unfortunately, leads to 2D images that can be noisy. While
many sophisticated image denoisers exist, fusing noisy 2D
into consistent 3D structure poses its own challenge. Many
forms of fusing 2D information into 3D [54] assume that
the same world point has the same properties in all its 2D
projections. In the presence of noise, this assumption does
not hold. While this might be negligible in many instances
of fusing photographic-domain imagery taken under normal
lighting conditions, the noise in the electron domain is much
more intricate, i.e., it is, first, strong, and, second, does not
follow a simple Gaussian model. Thus, our first contribution is to model this 2D noise for STEMs using Normalizing

Figure 1. Our approach enables learning of clean 3D structure
from very noisy 2D sensor readings as produces by STEM.

Flows [32, 50] in an unsupervised setup.
To establish a link between 2D observations and a 3D
model, a range of recent methods employ differentiable volume rendering [29, 57], which allow for changing 3D information so that when rendered, it matches some input. For
these techniques, besides the difficulty of handling noise,
representing detailed 3D structures can be challenging even
for clean data, when using regular 3D grids. Fortunately,
implicit models like occupancy fields [15, 42, 52] or Neural
Radiance Fields (NeRF) [44] have recently shown great potential to represent 3D structures from photographs. These
methods do not rely on a regular 3D grid, as they learn a 3D
function to represents the shape itself. The loss of this learning requires to project the 3D representation to 2D images
to be compared to the 2D observations. Our second contribution is to unleash these methods for STEM reconstruction, by deriving the projection for STEM and a Maximumlikelihood Estimation (MLE) loss to compare the outcome
to noisy observations. This does not introduce the blur arising from the L1 or L2 loss commonly used in NeRF.
We will apply both our contributions jointly and show
that this combination can successfully disentangle 3D signal and noise without supervision, and outperform at the
same time both standard reconstruction algorithms and all
variants of our setup where the noise is not modeled. We
make all our data, code and trained networks available 1 .
1 https://github.com/HannahKniesel/Implicit-Electron-Tomography.git

Corresponding author email address: hannah.kniesel@uni-ulm.de

20762

