CAT-Det: Contrastively Augmented Transformer for
Multi-modal 3D Object Detection

1

Yanan Zhang1,2 , Jiaxin Chen2 , Di Huang1,2 *
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{zhangyanan, jiaxinchen, dhuang}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
In autonomous driving, LiDAR point-clouds and RGB
images are two major data modalities with complementary
cues for 3D object detection. However, it is quite difficult
to sufficiently use them, due to large inter-modal discrepancies. To address this issue, we propose a novel framework,
namely Contrastively Augmented Transformer for multimodal 3D object Detection (CAT-Det). Specifically, CATDet adopts a two-stream structure consisting of a Pointformer (PT) branch, an Imageformer (IT) branch along
with a Cross-Modal Transformer (CMT) module. PT, IT
and CMT jointly encode intra-modal and inter-modal longrange contexts for representing an object, thus fully exploring multi-modal information for detection. Furthermore, we
propose an effective One-way Multi-modal Data Augmentation (OMDA) approach via hierarchical contrastive learning at both the point and object levels, significantly improving the accuracy only by augmenting point-clouds, which is
free from complex generation of paired samples of the two
modalities. Extensive experiments on the KITTI benchmark
show that CAT-Det achieves a new state-of-the-art, highlighting its effectiveness.

Figure 1. Illustration of the fusion process in CAT-Det. (A): A
failure case due to few points at a long distance in the point-cloud
modality. (A’): Its corresponding case in the image modality. Although the feature of (A) is enhanced by those of (B) and (C) in
the PT branch, this is often insufficient. With the CMT module,
the feature of (A) is further enhanced by that of (A’) which also
integrates the contributions from (D’) and (F’) in the IT branch,
and accurate detection is finally achieved.

1. Introduction
3D object detection is a fundamental step in autonomous
driving perception systems. It mainly operates 3D pointclouds acquired by LiDAR sensors and provides important
spatial clues including location, direction, and object size.
Despite true and accurate geometry information recorded,
the distribution of point-clouds is disordered, irregular, and
sparse, making 3D object detection a challenging task.
The past few years have witnessed the fast development
in 3D object detection. A large number of methods are introduced in the literature, and according to the input form in
detection feature learning, the methods are roughly catego* indicates the corresponding author.

rized into grid-based and point-based. The former initially
converts point-clouds into regular grids by projecting them
to images of specific views [11, 22] or subdividing them to
voxels in the space [19, 43, 50, 60] and further conducts
2D or 3D Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) to encode geometric cues. The latter directly takes raw points
and applies point-cloud deep learning networks e.g. PointNet [34]/PointNet++ [35] or graph neural networks e.g.
DGCNN [45] to capture shape structures [38, 40, 51, 56].
More recently, several attempts [15, 37, 52] deliver stronger
models by integrating point-based and grid-based networks
as hybrid representations, reporting better results.
To boost the performance of 3D object detection, another

908

