Knowledge-Driven Self-Supervised Representation Learning for Facial Action
Unit Recognition
Yanan Chang, Shangfei Wang*
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, China
cyn123@mail.ustc.edu.cn, sfwang@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Facial action unit (AU) recognition is formulated as a
supervised learning problem by recent works. However,
the complex labeling process makes it challenging to provide AU annotations for large amounts of facial images.
To remedy this, we utilize AU labeling rules defined by
the Facial Action Coding System (FACS) to design a novel
knowledge-driven self-supervised representation learning
framework for AU recognition. The representation encoder
is trained using large amounts of facial images without AU
annotations. AU labeling rules are summarized from FACS
to design facial partition manners and determine correlations between facial regions. The method utilizes a backbone network to extract local facial area representations
and a project head to map the representations into a lowdimensional latent space. In the latent space, a contrastive
learning component leverages the inter-area difference to
learn AU-related local representations while maintaining
intra-area instance discrimination. Correlations between
facial regions summarized from AU labeling rules are also
explored to further learn representations using a predicting learning component. Evaluation on two benchmark
databases demonstrates that the learned representation is
powerful and data-efficient for AU recognition.

1. Introduction
Facial AUs defined by the Facial Action Coding System [4] describe the activities of sets of specific facial muscles. Nearly all facial behaviors can be represented through
one or more AUs. Automatic facial AU recognition has attracted attention due to its potential in a wide variety of applications.
The majority of current works on facial AU recognition are supervised, requiring fully AU-labeled images for
training. In general, there are two different approaches
to supervise AU recognition. The first treats AU recog* This is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. (a)The judgment areas of AU12 are shown. (b)Left:
Facial areas are divided into eight parts according to AU-related
appearance changes. Right: The relationships between facial areas. Corresponding AUs are labeled on the edges.

nition as a multi-label classification problem to be solved
by directly constructing an end-to-end deep network [2, 5].
However, AUs are typically correlated to partial facial areas. These works only utilize global facial information
for AU recognition, limiting their performance. Recent
works [14, 15, 17, 30] have opted for the second approach,
which tries to learn more AU-specific patterns to enhance
AU recognition. For example, these works locate AUs
based on facial landmarks and muscles. The nearby areas
of specific AUs are used to predict their labels. Leveraging more AU-specific patterns can effectively improve AU
recognition. However, AU labels must be annotated by experienced experts, which is time and labor intensive. Existing AU-labeled databases are too limited to take advantage
of these supervised methods.
Recently, several works have tackled the issue of AU
annotations. Some works [25, 27] try to perform semisupervised AU recognition. These works summarize label distribution from ground-truth AU labels, and use the
learned distribution to improve AU recognition. However,
the summarized patterns may not be consistent with the true
distribution due to limited ground-truth AU labels. Li et al.
[16] have created self-supervised learning methods in which
large amounts of unlabeled images are used to learn representations. They utilize the transformation between two adjacent frames as the supervisory signal to learn AU-related

20417

