Virtual Elastic Objects
Hsiao-yu Chen1,3† , Edith Tretschk2,3† , Tuur Stuyck3 , Petr Kadlecek3 , Ladislav Kavan3 , Etienne Vouga1 , Christoph Lassner3
1
University of Texas at Austin, 2 Max Planck Institute for Informatics, 3 Meta Reality Labs Research

Figure 1. Method overview. We use a multi-view capture system to record objects deforming under the influence of external forces. Our
method reconstructs a meshless geometry and deformation field from these sequences. Using a differentiable simulator, we optimize the
material parameters of the objects to match the observations. These parameters allow us to find novel, plausible object configurations in
response to new forces fields or collision constraints due to user interactions. Finally, we re-render the deformed state.

Abstract
We present Virtual Elastic Objects (VEOs): virtual objects that not only look like their real-world counterparts
but also behave like them, even when subject to novel interactions. Achieving this presents multiple challenges: not
only do objects have to be captured including the physical forces acting on them, then faithfully reconstructed and
rendered, but also plausible material parameters found and
simulated. To create VEOs, we built a multi-view capture
system that captures objects under the influence of a compressed air stream. Building on recent advances in modelfree, dynamic Neural Radiance Fields, we reconstruct the
objects and corresponding deformation fields. We propose
to use a differentiable, particle-based simulator to use these
deformation fields to find representative material parameters, which enable us to run new simulations. To render
simulated objects, we devise a method for integrating the
simulation results with Neural Radiance Fields. The resulting method is applicable to a wide range of scenarios: it
can handle objects composed of inhomogeneous material,
with very different shapes, and it can simulate interactions
with other virtual objects. We present our results using
a newly collected dataset of 12 objects under a variety of
force fields, which will be made available upon publication.
†

Work was done while Hsiao-yu (partially) and Edith were
interning at Reality Labs Research.

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction is one of the fundamental problems of
computer vision and a cornerstone of augmented and virtual reality. A recent achievement in this direction is the
discovery of a fairly general formulation for representing radiance fields [5, 29, 33, 35, 39, 49, 50, 53, 57, 66, 68]. Neural
radiance fields are remarkably versatile for reconstructing
real-world objects with high-fidelity geometry and appearance. But static appearance is only the first step: it ignores
how an object moves and interacts with its environment. 4D
reconstruction tackles this problem in part by incorporating the time dimension: with more intricate capture setups
and more data, we can reconstruct objects over time—but
can only re-play the captured sequences. Today, in the age
of mixed reality, a photo-realistically reconstructed object
might still destroy immersion if it is not “physically realistic” because the object cannot be interacted with. (For
example, if a soft object appears as rigid as the rocks next
to it when stepped on.)
By building on advances in computer vision and physics
simulation, we begin to tackle the problem of physicallyrealistic reconstruction and create Virtual Elastic Objects:
virtual objects that not only look like their real-world counterparts but also behave like them, even when subject to
novel interactions. For the first time, this allows for fullloop reconstruction of deforming elastic objects: from capture, to reconstruction, to simulation, to interaction, to rerendering.

15827

