QueryDet: Cascaded Sparse Query for Accelerating High-Resolution Small
Object Detection
Chenhongyi Yang*
University of Edinburgh

Zehao Huang
TuSimple

Naiyan Wang
TuSimple

chenhongyi.yang@ed.ac.uk

zehaohuang18@gmail.com

winsty@gmail.com

Abstract
While general object detection with deep learning has
achieved great success in the past few years, the performance and efficiency of detecting small objects are far
from satisfactory. The most common and effective way to
promote small object detection is to use high-resolution
images or feature maps. However, both approaches induce costly computation since the computational cost grows
squarely as the size of images and features increases. To
get the best of two worlds, we propose QueryDet that uses a
novel query mechanism to accelerate the inference speed
of feature-pyramid based object detectors. The pipeline
composes two steps: it first predicts the coarse locations
of small objects on low-resolution features and then computes the accurate detection results using high-resolution
features sparsely guided by those coarse positions. In this
way, we can not only harvest the benefit of high-resolution
feature maps but also avoid useless computation for the
background area. On the popular COCO dataset, the proposed method improves the detection mAP by 1.0 and mAPsmall by 2.0, and the high-resolution inference speed is improved to 3.0× on average. On VisDrone dataset, which
contains more small objects, we create a new state-of-theart while gaining a 2.3× high-resolution acceleration on
average. Code is available at https://github.com/
ChenhongyiYang/QueryDet-PyTorch.

1. Introduction
With the recent advances of deep learning [15, 53], visual object detection has achieved massive improvements
in both performance and speed [3, 12, 26, 27, 29, 37, 39, 49].
It has become the foundation for widespread applications,
such as autonomous driving and remote sensing. However,
detecting small objects is still a challenging problem. There
is a large performance gap between small and normal scale
objects. Taking RetinaNet [27], one of the state-of-the-art
* Work done when working as a full-time research intern at TuSimple.

Detection

Detection

Detection

Query

Query

Large

Sparse
Computation

Medium

Sparse
Computation

Small

Figure 1. QueryDet achieves highly effective small object detection in high-resolution features. The locations (query keys) where
small objects might exist are first predicted in the low-resolution
features, and a sparse feature map (query values) is constructed
using high-resolution features in those locations. Finally, a sparse
detection head is used to output the detected boxes. This paradigm
is applied in a cascaded manner, enabling fast and accurate small
object detection.

object detectors, as an example, it achieves 44.1 and 51.2
mAP on objects with medium and large sizes but only obtains 24.1 mAP on small objects on COCO [28] test-dev
set. Such degradation is mainly caused by three factors: 1)
the features that highlight the small objects are extinguished
because of the down-sampling operations in the backbone
of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN); hence the features of small objects are often contaminated by noise in
the background; 2) the receptive field on low-resolution features may not match the size of small objects as pointed in
[25]; 3) localizing small objects is more difficult than large
objects because a small perturbation of the bounding box
may cause a significant disturbance in the Intersection over
Union (IoU) metric.
Small object detection can be improved by scaling the
size of input images or reducing the down-sampling rate
of CNN to maintain high-resolution features, as they in-

13668

