Expanding Large Pre-trained Unimodal Models with Multimodal Information
Injection for Image-Text Multimodal Classification
Tao Liang1,2

Guosheng Lin3

Mingyang Wan2 Tianrui Li1 Guojun Ma2 Fengmao Lv1∗
Southwest Jiaotong University
2
Engineering Productivity & Quality Assurance of IES, Bytedance
3
Nanyang Technological University
1

{fengmaolv,taoliangdpg}@126.com
gslin@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Fine-tuning pre-trained models for downstream tasks is
mainstream in deep learning. However, the pre-trained
models are limited to be fine-tuned by data from a specific
modality. For example, as a visual model, DenseNet cannot
directly take the textual data as its input. Hence, although
the large pre-trained models such as DenseNet or BERT
have a great potential for the downstream recognition tasks,
they have weaknesses in leveraging multimodal information, which is a new trend of deep learning. This work focuses on fine-tuning pre-trained unimodal models with multimodal inputs of image-text pairs and expanding them for
image-text multimodal recognition. To this end, we propose
the Multimodal Information Injection Plug-in (MI2P) which
is attached to different layers of the unimodal models (e.g.,
DenseNet and BERT). The proposed MI2P unit provides the
path to integrate the information of other modalities into the
unimodal models. Specifically, MI2P performs cross-modal
feature transformation by learning the fine-grained correlations between the visual and textual features. Through
the proposed MI2P unit, we can inject the language information into the vision backbone by attending the word-wise
textual features to different visual channels, as well as inject
the visual information into the language backbone by attending the channel-wise visual features to different textual
words. Armed with the MI2P attachments, the pre-trained
unimodal models can be expanded to process multimodal
data without the need to change the network structures.

1. Introduction
In social media such as Twitter, a tweet usually contains
both the text and image contents which share the same con∗ Corresponding author: F. Lv (email: fengmaolv@126.com).

{wanmingyang,maguojun}@bytedance.com
trli@swjtu.edu.cn

cept. With the increased use of social media, a massive
number of multimodal user-generated contents can be available for training deep models. It is clear that multimodal
classification can gain a nontrivial advantage over the unimodal counterpart by using information from both the visual and language modalities [22]. Over the past years,
image-text multimodal classification has been widely applied to different social media projects such as emergency
response [1, 2], emotional recognition [31], fake news detection [25], etc.
The core idea in image-text multimodal classification is
to integrate the image and texts together. In general, the
current works for image-text multimodal recognition can
be categorized into two strategies. The first strategy maintains two separate backbones (e.g., DenseNet or BERT) to
process each modality and performs multimodal fusion on
the classification scores or the high-level features produced
by each backbone [1, 7, 15]. On the other hand, the second strategy goes in-depth into the intermediate layers of
the backbones and performs multimodal fusion on the finegrained mid-level features of each modality [13, 16, 17, 29].
However, the current works along this line mainly focus on
the homogeneous setting in which the modalities are just
different views of the same input (e.g., RGB and depth images) [13, 29, 34]. Due to the strong heterogeneity between
the mid-level features of images and texts, the second strategy is less studied for the image-text multimodal fusion
task. The recently proposed multimodal BERT can model
the inter-modal interactions between the fine-grained midlevel features of the visual and language modalities based
on the recent advances of Transformer [12, 16–19, 23]. As
large pre-trained models, multimodal BERT can be finetuned for image-text multimodal recognition.
The previous works have shown that an efficient multimodal classification algorithm needs to consider both the
intra-modal processing and inter-modal interaction [13,29].

15492

