Single-Stage 3D Geometry-Preserving Depth Estimation Model Training on
Dataset Mixtures with Uncalibrated Stereo Data

1

Nikolay Patakin1,2 , Anna Vorontsova1 , Mikhail Artemyev1 , Anton Konushin1
Samsung AI Center, Moscow 2 Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology (Skoltech)
{n.patakin, a.vorontsova, m.artemyev, a.konushin}@samsung.com

Abstract
Nowadays, robotics, AR, and 3D modeling applications
attract considerable attention to single-view depth estimation (SVDE) as it allows estimating scene geometry from
a single RGB image. Recent works have demonstrated
that the accuracy of an SVDE method hugely depends on
the diversity and volume of the training data. However,
RGB-D datasets obtained via depth capturing or 3D reconstruction are typically small, synthetic datasets are not
photorealistic enough, and all these datasets lack diversity. The large-scale and diverse data can be sourced from
stereo images or stereo videos from the web. Typically
being uncalibrated, stereo data provides disparities up to
unknown shift (geometrically incomplete data), so stereotrained SVDE methods cannot recover 3D geometry. It
was recently shown that the distorted point clouds obtained
with a stereo-trained SVDE method can be corrected with
additional point cloud modules (PCM) separately trained
on the geometrically complete data. On the contrary, we
propose GP2 , General-Purpose and Geometry-Preserving
training scheme, and show that conventional SVDE models can learn correct shifts themselves without any postprocessing, benefiting from using stereo data even in the
geometry-preserving setting. Through experiments on different dataset mixtures, we prove that GP2 -trained models outperform methods relying on PCM in both accuracy
and speed, and report the state-of-the-art results in the
general-purpose geometry-preserving SVDE. Moreover, we
show that SVDE models can learn to predict geometrically
correct depth even when geometrically complete data comprises the minor part of the training set.

1. Introduction
Single-view monocular depth estimation (SVDE) aims
at estimating a dense depth map corresponding to an input
RGB image. Being a fundamental problem in computer vision and visual understanding, it has numerous applications

in autonomous driving, robotics navigation and manipulation, and augmented reality. Most applications request for
approaches able to process an arbitrary RGB image and estimate a depth map that allows recovering the 3D geometry
of a scene (e.g. a point cloud can be reconstructed given
camera calibration).
Early SVDE methods were designed to work either in
indoor scenes [19] or in autonomous driving scenarios [8],
thus being domain-specific. Accordingly, these methods
demonstrate poor generalization ability in cross-domain experiments [25]. Overall, it is empirically proved that the
generalization ability of SVDE models heavily depends on
the diversity of the training data [4, 15, 25, 31, 35].
Recently, efforts have been made to obtain depth data
from new sources: from computer simulation [2, 26, 28],
via 3D reconstruction [15], or from stereo data. Among
them, stereo videos [25, 31] and stereo images [10, 32, 33]
collected from the web are the most diverse and accessible
data sources. However, the depth data obtained from stereo
videos is geometrically incomplete since stereo cameras’
intrinsic and extrinsic parameters are typically unknown.
Respectively, disparity from a stereo pair can be computed
up to unknown shift and scale coefficients (UTSS). Such
depth data can be used as a proxy for a ground truth depth
map, but is insufficient to restore 3D geometry.
As a result, modern general-purpose SVDE methods
trained on stereo data output predictions that cannot be used
to recover 3D geometry [16, 25, 33]. Hence, we describe
these methods as not geometry-preserving and their predictions as geometrically incorrect. The only SVDE method
that is both general-purpose and geometry-preserving is
LeReS [35]. It addresses geometry-preserving depth estimation with a multi-stage pipeline that recovers shift
and focal length through predicted depth post-processing.
This post-processing is performed using trainable pointcloud modules (PCM), thus resulting in significant overhead. Moreover, training PCM requires geometrically complete data with known camera parameters which limits the
possible sources of training data.
In this work, we introduce GP2 , an end-to-end training

1705

