Mip-NeRF 360: Unbounded Anti-Aliased Neural Radiance Fields
Jonathan T. Barron1 Ben Mildenhall1 Dor Verbin1,2
Pratul P. Srinivasan1 Peter Hedman1
1
Google 2 Harvard University

Abstract
Though neural radiance fields (NeRF) have demonstrated impressive view synthesis results on objects and
small bounded regions of space, they struggle on “unbounded” scenes, where the camera may point in any direction and content may exist at any distance. In this setting, existing NeRF-like models often produce blurry or
low-resolution renderings (due to the unbalanced detail and
scale of nearby and distant objects), are slow to train, and
may exhibit artifacts due to the inherent ambiguity of the
task of reconstructing a large scene from a small set of
images. We present an extension of mip-NeRF (a NeRF
variant that addresses sampling and aliasing) that uses a
non-linear scene parameterization, online distillation, and
a novel distortion-based regularizer to overcome the challenges presented by unbounded scenes. Our model, which
we dub “mip-NeRF 360” as we target scenes in which the
camera rotates 360 degrees around a point, reduces meansquared error by 57% compared to mip-NeRF, and is able to
produce realistic synthesized views and detailed depth maps
for highly intricate, unbounded real-world scenes.
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) synthesize highly realistic renderings of scenes by encoding the volumetric density
and color of a scene within the weights of a coordinatebased multi-layer perceptron (MLP). This approach has
enabled significant progress towards photorealistic view
synthesis [30]. However, NeRF models the input to the
MLP using infinitesimally small 3D points along a ray,
which causes aliasing when rendering views of varying resolutions. Mip-NeRF rectified this problem by extending
NeRF to instead reason about volumetric frustums along a
cone [3]. Though this improves quality, both NeRF and
mip-NeRF struggle when dealing with unbounded scenes,
where the camera may face any direction and scene content may exist at any distance. In this work, we present an
extension to mip-NeRF we call “mip-NeRF 360” that is capable of producing realistic renderings of these unbounded
scenes, as shown in Figure 1.
Applying NeRF-like models to large unbounded scenes

(a) mip-NeRF [3], SSIM=0.526

(b) Our Model, SSIM=0.804

Figure 1. (a) Though mip-NeRF is able to produce accurate renderings of objects, for unbounded scenes it often generates blurry
backgrounds and low-detail foregrounds. (b) Our model produces
detailed realistic renderings of these unbounded scenes, as evidenced by the renderings (top) and depth maps (bottom) from both
models. See the supplemental video for additional results.

raises three critical issues:
1. Parameterization. Unbounded 360 degree scenes can
occupy an arbitrarily large region of Euclidean space,
but mip-NeRF requires that 3D scene coordinates lie
in a bounded domain.
2. Efficiency. Large and detailed scenes require more network capacity, but densely querying a large MLP along
each ray during training is expensive.
3. Ambiguity. The content of unbounded scenes may lie
at any distance and will be observed by only a small
number of rays, exacerbating the inherent ambiguity
of reconstructing 3D content from 2D images.
Parameterization. Due to perspective projection, an object placed far from the camera will occupy a small portion
of the image plane, but will occupy more of the image and
be visible in detail if placed nearby. Therefore, an ideal parameterization of a 3D scene should allocate more capacity
to nearby content and less capacity to distant content. Outside of NeRF, traditional view-synthesis methods address
this by parameterizing the scene in projective panoramic

5470

