Coarse-to-Fine Feature Mining for Video Semantic Segmentation
Henghui Ding1
Thomas Probst1
Yun Liu1 *
Luc Van Gool1,2
1
Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zurich, 2 VISICS, KU Leuven

Guolei Sun1

Abstract
The contextual information plays a core role in semantic segmentation. As for video semantic segmentation,
the contexts include static contexts and motional contexts,
corresponding to static content and moving content in a
video clip, respectively. The static contexts are well exploited in image semantic segmentation by learning multiscale and global/long-range features. The motional contexts are studied in previous video semantic segmentation.
However, there is no research about how to simultaneously learn static and motional contexts which are highly
correlated and complementary to each other. To address
this problem, we propose a Coarse-to-Fine Feature Mining (CFFM) technique to learn a unified presentation of
static contexts and motional contexts. This technique consists of two parts: coarse-to-fine feature assembling and
cross-frame feature mining. The former operation prepares
data for further processing, enabling the subsequent joint
learning of static and motional contexts. The latter operation mines useful information/contexts from the sequential
frames to enhance the video contexts of the features of the
target frame. The enhanced features can be directly applied for the final prediction. Experimental results on popular benchmarks demonstrate that the proposed CFFM performs favorably against state-of-the-art methods for video
semantic segmentation. Our implementation is available at
https://github.com/GuoleiSun/VSS-CFFM.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation aims at assigning a semantic label to each pixel in a natural image, which is a fundamental and hot topic in the computer vision community. It has
wide range of applications in both academic and industrial
fields. Thanks to the powerful representation capability of
deep neural networks [28, 39, 71, 73] and large-scale image datasets [3, 14, 20, 59, 102], tremendous achievements
have been seen for image semantic segmentation. How* The corresponding author: yun.liu@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Figure 1. Illustration of static contexts (in blue) and motional contexts (in red) across neighbouring video frames. The human and
horse are moving objects, while the grassland and sky are static
background. Note that the static stuff is helpful for the recognition
of moving objects, i.e., a human is riding a horse on the grassland.

ever, video semantic segmentation has not been witnessed
such tremendous progress [23, 35, 53, 60] due to the lack
of large-scale datasets. For example, Cityscapes [14] and
NYUDv2 [70] datasets only annotate one or several nonadjacent frames in a video clip. CamVid [2] only has a small
scale and a low frame rate. The real world is actually dynamic rather than static, so the research on video semantic
segmentation (VSS) is necessary. Fortunately, the recent establishment of the large-scale video segmentation dataset,
VSPW [58], solves the problem of video data scarcity. This
inspires us to denoting our efforts to VSS.
As widely accepted, the contextual information plays a
central role in image semantic segmentation [5–7, 9, 16, 27,
33, 36, 37, 45, 50, 88, 90, 93, 96, 98, 99, 103, 107]. When
considering videos, the contextual information is twofold:
static contexts and motional contexts, as shown in Fig. 1.
The former refers to the contexts within the same video
frame or the contexts of unchanged content across different frames. Image semantic segmentation has exploited
such contexts (for images) a lot, mainly accounting for
multi-scale [6, 7, 9, 88] and global/long-range information
[33, 96, 98, 107]. Such information is essential not only
for understanding the static scene but also for perceiving
the holistic environment of videos. The latter, also known
as temporal information, is responsible for better parsing
moving object/stuff and capturing more effective scene representations with the help of motions. The motional context

3126

