Burst Image Restoration and Enhancement
Akshay Dudhane1 Syed Waqas Zamir2 Salman Khan1,3
Fahad Shahbaz Khan1,4 Ming-Hsuan Yang5,6,7
1
Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI 2 Inception Institute of AI 3 Australian National University
4
Linköping University 5 University of California, Merced 6 Yonsei University 7 Google Research
f

RAW LR Burst
B×4×H×W

Abstract

U1

×2
U2

Modern handheld devices can acquire burst image sequence in a quick succession. However, the individual acquired frames suffer from multiple degradations and are
misaligned due to camera shake and object motions. The
goal of Burst Image Restoration is to effectively combine
complimentary cues across multiple burst frames to generate high-quality outputs. Towards this goal, we develop
a novel approach by solely focusing on the effective information exchange between burst frames, such that the
degradations get filtered out while the actual scene details are preserved and enhanced. Our central idea is to
create a set of pseudo-burst features that combine complimentary information from all the input burst frames to
seamlessly exchange information. However, the pseudoburst cannot be successfully created unless the individual burst frames are properly aligned to discount interframe movements. Therefore, our approach initially extracts pre-processed features from each burst frame and
matches them using an edge-boosting burst alignment module. The pseudo-burst features are then created and enriched using multi-scale contextual information. Our final step is to adaptively aggregate information from the
pseudo-burst features to progressively increase resolution
in multiple stages while merging the pseudo-burst features.
In comparison to existing works that usually follow a late
fusion scheme with single-stage upsampling, our approach
performs favorably, delivering state-of-the-art performance
on burst super-resolution, burst low-light image enhancement and burst denoising tasks. The source code and
pre-trained models are available at https://github.
com/akshaydudhane16/BIPNet.

1. Introduction
High-end DSLR cameras can capture images of excellent quality with vivid details. With the growing popularity
of smartphones, the main goal of computational photography is to generate DSLR-like images with smartphone cameras [24]. However, the physical constraints of smartphone

U1

B

Edge Boosting
Feature Alignment
B×f×H×W

×2

f

Pseudo Burst
Feature Fusion
f×f×H×W

U3

U2

U1

×4

×4

×2

Adaptive Group
Up-sampling Module
1×f×8H×8W

Output Image
1×3×8H×8W

Figure 1. Holistic diagram of our burst image processing approach. Our network BIPNet takes as input a RAW image burst
and generates a high-quality RGB image. BIPNet has three key
stages. (1) Edge boosting feature alignment to remove noise, and
inter-frame spatial and color misalignment. (2) Pseudo-burst feature fusion mechanism to enable inter-frame communication and
feature consolidation. (3) Adaptive group upsampling to progressively increase spatial resolution while merging multi-frame information. While BIPNet is generalizable to other restoration tasks,
here we show super-resolution application.

cameras hinder the image reconstruction quality. For instance, small sensor size limits spatial resolution and small
lens and aperture provides noisy and color distorted images
in low-light conditions [12]. Similarly, small pixel cavities
accumulate less light therefore yielding low-dynamic range.
To alleviate these issues, burst (multi-frame) photography is
a natural solution instead of single-frame processing [21].
The goal of burst imaging is to composite a high-quality
image by merging desired information from a collection of
(degraded) frames of the same scene captured in a rapid
succession. However, burst image acquisition presents its
own challenges. For example, during image burst capturing,
any movement in camera and/or scene objects will cause
misalignment issues, thereby leading to ghosting and blurring artifacts in the output image [53]. Therefore, there
is a pressing need to develop a multi-frame processing algorithm that is robust to alignment problems and requires
no special burst acquisition conditions. We note that existing burst processing techniques [4, 5] extract and align
features of burst images separately and usually employ late
feature fusion mechanisms, which can hinder flexible infor-

5759

