Delving Deep into the Generalization of Vision Transformers
under Distribution Shifts
Chongzhi Zhang1,* , Mingyuan Zhang2,* , Shanghang Zhang3,* , Daisheng Jin1 , Qiang Zhou4 ,
Zhongang Cai2,5 , Haiyu Zhao2,5 , Xianglong Liu1 , Ziwei Liu2,
1
Beihang University 2 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
3
Peking University 4 AIR, Tsinghua University 5 Shanghai AI Laboratory

Abstract
Vision Transformers (ViTs) have achieved impressive
performance on various vision tasks, yet their generalization under distribution shifts (DS) is rarely understood. In
this work, we comprehensively study the out-of-distribution
(OOD) generalization of ViTs. For systematic investigation, we first present a taxonomy of DS. We then perform
extensive evaluations of ViT variants under different DS
and compare their generalization with Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) models. Important observations are
obtained: 1) ViTs learn weaker biases on backgrounds and
textures, while they are equipped with stronger inductive
biases towards shapes and structures, which is more consistent with human cognitive traits. Therefore, ViTs generalize better than CNNs under DS. With the same or less
amount of parameters, ViTs are ahead of corresponding
CNNs by more than 5% in top-1 accuracy under most types
of DS. 2) As the model scale increases, ViTs strengthen
these biases and thus gradually narrow the in-distribution
and OOD performance gap. To further improve the generalization of ViTs, we design the Generalization-Enhanced
ViTs (GE-ViTs) from the perspectives of adversarial learning, information theory, and self-supervised learning. By
comprehensively investigating these GE-ViTs and comparing
with their corresponding CNN models, we observe: 1) For
the enhanced model, larger ViTs still benefit more for the
OOD generalization. 2) GE-ViTs are more sensitive to the
hyper-parameters than their corresponding CNN models. We
design a smoother learning strategy to achieve a stable training process and obtain performance improvements on OOD
data by 4% from vanilla ViTs. We hope our comprehensive
study could shed light on the design of more generalizable
learning architectures. Codes and datasets are released in
https://github.com/Phoenix1153/ViT OOD generalization.
* These authors contributed equally to this work.

Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
Recently, transformer has made remarkable achievements
in vision tasks, such as e.g. image classification [7, 8, 27], object detection [4, 36], and image processing [6]. Despite the
encouraging performance achieved on standard benchmarks
and several properties revealed in recent works [1, 5, 20, 21],
the generalization ability of Vision Transformers (ViTs) is
still less understood. While the traditional train-test scenario
assumes the test data for model evaluation are independent
identically distributed (IID) with sampled training data, this
assumption does not always hold in real-world scenarios.
Thus, out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization is a highly
desirable capability of machine learning models. Recent
works indicate current CNN architectures generalize poorly
on various distribution shifts (DS) [11, 13, 14], whereas the
investigation on ViTs remains scarce. Therefore, in this
paper, we mainly focus on delving deep into the OOD generalization of ViTs under DS.
To comprehensively study the OOD generalization ability
of ViTs, we first define a categorization of commonly appearing DS based on the modified semantic concepts in images.
Generally, an image for classification contains a foreground
object and background information. The foreground object
consists of hierarchical semantic concepts including pixellevel elements, object textures, and shapes, object parts, and
object itself [35]. A distribution shift usually causes variance
on one or more semantics and we thus present a taxonomy
of DS into four conceptual groups: background shifts, corruption shifts, texture shifts, and style shifts.
With the taxonomy of DS, we investigate the OOD generalization of ViTs by comparison with CNNs in each case.
While models are desired to generalize to arbitrary OOD
scenarios, the no-free-lunch theorem for machine learning [3, 12, 32] demonstrates that there is no entirely generalpurpose learning algorithm, and that any learning algorithm
implicitly or explicitly will generalize better on some distributions and worse on others. Thus some set of inductive biases are demanded to acquire generalization. Hence,

7277

