RNNPose: Recurrent 6-DoF Object Pose Refinement with Robust
Correspondence Field Estimation and Pose Optimization

1

Yan Xu1 Kwan-Yee Lin1 Guofeng Zhang2 Xiaogang Wang1 Hongsheng Li1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
Object

Abstract

1. Introduction
6-DoF object pose estimation is of crucial importance in
various applications, including augmented reality, robotic
manipulation, and autonomous driving. Influenced by varying illuminations and occlusions, appearances of the differently posed objects may vary significantly from different
views, which poses great challenges for 6-DOF object pose
estimation from a single color image.
The recent top-performing methods [23,27,41,52,58] additionally include a pose refinement procedure which substantially improves the performance. Some of these frameworks [41, 52] rely on depth sensors and refine the poses
with the ICP algorithm [2]. To avoid the expensive depth
sensor, Li et al. [23] and Manhardt et al. [27] pioneered
the RGB-based pose refinement. During refinement, these
methods first render a reference color image according to
the coarse pose estimate. This rendered image along with
K. Lin and H. Li are the co-corresponding authors.

Correspondence Field Estimation
2

𝐚𝐫𝐠 𝐦𝐢𝐧
𝛿𝐏
2

LM Optim.
(c) Pose Result
(shown as a
green mask)

Target Image (Observed)

Similarity
Score Map

Estimated
Correspondence
Field 𝐂෠𝑡

Pose-derived
Correspondence Field
𝐂(⋅; 𝛿𝐏)

෡𝒕
Optimized Pose 𝜹𝐏

Recurrent
Iterations

Correspondence Field
Rectification

(a) Observed
Image & Rendered
Object

Re-rendering

Reference Image (Rendered )

6-DoF object pose estimation from a monocular image
is challenging, and a post-refinement procedure is generally needed for high-precision estimation. In this paper, we
propose a framework based on a recurrent neural network
(RNN) for object pose refinement, which is robust to erroneous initial poses and occlusions. During the recurrent
iterations, object pose refinement is formulated as a nonlinear least squares problem based on the estimated correspondence field (between a rendered image and the observed image). The problem is then solved by a differentiable Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) algorithm enabling endto-end training. The correspondence field estimation and
pose refinement are conducted alternatively in each iteration to recover the object poses. Furthermore, to improve
the robustness to occlusion, we introduce a consistencycheck mechanism based on the learned descriptors of the
3D model and observed 2D images, which downweights the
unreliable correspondences during pose optimization. Extensive experiments on LINEMOD, Occlusion-LINEMOD,
and YCB-Video datasets validate the effectiveness of our
method and demonstrate state-of-the-art performance.

(b) Recurrent Pose Refinement

Figure 1. The basic idea. (a) Before refinement, a reference image
is rendered according to the object initial pose (shown in a fused
view). (b) Our RNN-based framework recurrently refines the object pose based on the estimated correspondence field between the
reference and target images. The pose is optimized to be consistent with the reliable correspondence estimations highlighted by
the similarity score map (built from learned 3D-2D descriptors)
via differentiable LM optimization. (c) The output refined pose.

the observed image is then fed to a CNN to directly predict
the residual pose for refining the coarse pose [23, 27, 58].
While these methods perform well in ideal scenarios based
on massive training data, the pose regression becomes less
stable in practice. More recently, Iwase et al. [20] formulated the object pose refinement as an optimization problem
based on feature alignment, and reported significant performance improvements. In their work, the encoded features
of a 3D model by a neural network are projected to the
2D image plane according to the pose parameters. Thereafter, the pose optimization is conducted by aligning the
projected features with the observed target image features.
As the pose optimization depends on the gradients from the
pixel-level feature differences, the feature alignment based
methods are only applicable to small inter-frame pose variations [57] and are not quite robust with erroneous initial
poses. Moreover, Iwase et al. [20] still have a limited design for occlusion handling, which might limit the deployment scope.
In this work, we propose a recurrent object pose refinement framework, dubbed RNNPose, which is robust to erroneous initial poses and occlusions. The overall pipeline

14880

