RBGNet: Ray-based Grouping for 3D Object Detection
Haiyang Wang1 Shaoshuai Shi2 * Ze Yang3
Qi Qian5 Hongsheng Li4 Bernt Schiele2

Rongyao Fang4
Liwei Wang6,7

1

Center for Data Science, Peking University 2 Max Planck Institute for Informatics
University of Toronto 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong 5 Alibaba Group
6
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, MOE, School of Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
7
International Center for Machine Learning Research, Peking University
3

{wanghaiyang@stu, wanglw@cis}.pku.edu.cn
zeyang@cs.toronto.edu

{sshi, schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

{rongyaofang@link, hsli@ee}.cuhk.edu.hk

qi.qian@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
As a fundamental problem in computer vision, 3D object detection is experiencing rapid growth. To extract the
point-wise features from the irregularly and sparsely distributed points, previous methods usually take a feature
grouping module to aggregate the point features to an object candidate. However, these methods have not yet leveraged the surface geometry of foreground objects to enhance
grouping and 3D box generation. In this paper, we propose the RBGNet framework, a voting-based 3D detector
for accurate 3D object detection from point clouds. In order to learn better representations of object shape to enhance cluster features for predicting 3D boxes, we propose
a ray-based feature grouping module, which aggregates the
point-wise features on object surfaces using a group of determined rays uniformly emitted from cluster centers. Considering the fact that foreground points are more meaningful for box estimation, we design a novel foreground biased
sampling strategy in downsample process to sample more
points on object surfaces and further boost the detection
performance. Our model achieves state-of-the-art 3D detection performance on ScanNet V2 and SUN RGB-D with
remarkable performance gains. Code will be available at
https://github.com/Haiyang-W/RBGNet.

1. Introduction
3D object detection is becoming an active research topic
in computer vision, which aims to estimate oriented 3D
bounding boxes and semantic labels of objects in 3D scenes.
As a fundamental technique for 3D scene understanding,
it plays a critical role in many applications, such as autonomous driving [3, 38], augmented reality [2, 4] and domestic robots [54, 39]. Unlike the scenarios in the well* Corresponding author: Shaoshuai Shi.

seed point

order ray

chair box

cluster center

ball query

table box

Figure 1: 3D object detection in point clouds with a raybased feature grouping module. Given the point clouds
of a 3D scene, our model aggregates the point-wise features
on object surface by a group of ordered rays to boost the
performance of 3D object detection.
studied 2D image problems, 3D scenes are generally represented by point clouds, a set of unordered, sparse and irregular points captured by depth sensors (e.g., RGB-D cameras, LiDAR sensors), which makes it significantly different
from traditional regular input data like images and videos.
Previous 3D detection approaches can be coarsely classified into two lines in terms of point representations, i.e.,
the grid-based methods and the point-based methods. The
grid-based methods generally convert the irregular points to
regular data structure such as 3D voxels [37, 35, 44, 53,
32, 48, 9] or 2D bird’s eye view maps [6, 16, 19, 45, 46].
Thanks to the great success of PointNet series [30, 31],
the point-based methods [29, 34, 28, 49, 20, 7] directly extract the point-wise features from the irregular and points.
These point-wise features are generally enhanced by various feature grouping modules for predicting the 3D bounding boxes. However, these feature grouping strategies have
not well explored the fine-grained surface geometry to help
improve the performance of 3D box generation.
We argue that feature grouping module plays an important role in point-based 3D detectors, and how to better
incorporate the foreground object geometry features to en-

1110

