Sequential Voting with Relational Box Fields for Active Object Detection
Qichen Fu

Xingyu Liu

Kris M. Kitani

Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
A key component of understanding hand-object interactions is the ability to identify the active object – the object
that is being manipulated by the human hand. In order to
accurately localize the active object, any method must reason using information encoded by each image pixel, such
as whether it belongs to the hand, the object, or the background. To leverage each pixel as evidence to determine
the bounding box of the active object, we propose a pixelwise voting function. Our pixel-wise voting function takes
an initial bounding box as input and produces an improved
bounding box of the active object as output. The voting
function is designed so that each pixel inside of the input
bounding box votes for an improved bounding box, and the
box with the majority vote is selected as the output. We
call the collection of bounding boxes generated inside of
the voting function, the Relational Box Field, as it characterizes a field of bounding boxes defined in relationship
to the current bounding box. While our voting function is
able to improve the bounding box of the active object, one
round of voting is typically not enough to accurately localize the active object. Therefore, we repeatedly apply the
voting function to sequentially improve the location of the
bounding box. However, since it is known that repeatedly
applying a one-step predictor (i.e., auto-regressive processing with our voting function) can cause a data distribution
shift, we mitigate this issue using reinforcement learning
(RL). We adopt standard RL to learn the voting function parameters and show that it provides a meaningful improvement over a standard supervised learning approach. We
perform experiments on two large-scale datasets: 100DOH
and MECCANO, improving AP50 performance by 8%
and 30%, respectively, over the state of the art. The
project page with code and visualizations can be found at
https://fuqichen1998.github.io/SequentialVotingDet/.

1. Introduction
Finding the active object – the object that is being manipulated by the human hand – is a crucial task towards under-

Figure 1. Relational Box Field and Pixel-wise Voting visualization. Each green bounding box is an estimated active object
bounding box for a pixel inside the blue input bounding box (initialized with a detected hand box). The voting function selects the
majority vote prediction (red) as the improved active object bounding box estimate. To ensure visibility, we only show 200 sampled
predictions.

standing human-object interactions, especially in egocentric
videos where hands are the only visible human parts. It is
also an essential step to a variety of downstream tasks including joint hand-object pose estimation [6, 7, 19, 25, 33],
reconstruction [5, 14], activity recognition [10, 20, 22], and
imitation learning [34]. However, an accurate localization
of the active object can be challenging due to natural occlusions caused by the hands during interactions. During
a hand-object interaction, it is common for the hand to occlude most of the object in order to grasp the object. On
one hand, this makes it hard to detect active objects. On
the other hand, the appearance of the hand actually contains
important information about the location, shape, size, and
pose of the active object. It is important to develop computer vision algorithms that can leverage each pixel of the
image, especially the hands and objects, to accurately esti-

2374

