Temporally Efficient Vision Transformer for Video Instance Segmentation
Shusheng Yang1,3 ,* Xinggang Wang1†, Yu Li4∗ , Yuxin Fang1 ,
Jiemin Fang2,1 , Wenyu Liu1 , Xun Zhao3 , Ying Shan3
1

School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science & Technology
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Huazhong University of Science & Technology
3
Applied Research Center (ARC), Tencent PCG 4 International Digital Economy Academy (IDEA)
2

Abstract
Recently vision transformer has achieved tremendous
success on image-level visual recognition tasks. To effectively and efficiently model the crucial temporal information within a video clip, we propose a Temporally Efficient
Vision Transformer (TeViT) for video instance segmentation (VIS). Different from previous transformer-based VIS
methods, TeViT is nearly convolution-free, which contains
a transformer backbone and a query-based video instance
segmentation head. In the backbone stage, we propose a
nearly parameter-free messenger shift mechanism for early
temporal context fusion. In the head stages, we propose a
parameter-shared spatiotemporal query interaction mechanism to build the one-to-one correspondence between video
instances and queries. Thus, TeViT fully utilizes both framelevel and instance-level temporal context information and
obtains strong temporal modeling capacity with negligible
extra computational cost. On three widely adopted VIS
benchmarks, i.e., YouTube-VIS-2019, YouTube-VIS-2021,
and OVIS, TeViT obtains state-of-the-art results and maintains high inference speed, e.g., 46.6 AP with 68.9 FPS
on YouTube-VIS-2019. Code is available at https://
github.com/hustvl/TeViT.

1. Introduction
Video Instance Segmentation (VIS) [62] is a representative and challenging video understanding task that requires
detecting, segmenting and tracking video instances across
frames simultaneously. Similar to other instance-level
video recognition tasks, making full use of temporal context information is critical for building high-performance
VIS systems. Vision transformer (ViT) [13], which is based
on self-attention [51], has shown strong long-range context modeling ability and obtained great successes on im* This work was done while Shusheng Yang and Yu Li were at Applied
Research Center (ARC), Tencent PCG.
† Corresponding author, E-mail: xgwang@hust.edu.cn.

age classification [13, 15, 21, 31, 47, 50, 55], object detection [7, 33, 44, 68], semantic segmentation [11, 43, 59], instance segmentation [12, 17, 66], and video recognition [1,
4, 14, 32, 36, 65, 67].
Recently, how to design ViTs for instance-level video
understanding, especially VIS, becomes an emerging problem. Different from the detection transformers [7,16,33,44,
68], semantic segmentation transformers [11,43,59], and instance segmentation transformers [12, 17, 66], which focus
on 2D contextual information modeling, VIS transformers
additionally require to perform temporal context modeling.
To this end, VisTR [57] firstly proposes a transformer encoder to fuse patch features from a sequence of frames using
a CNN backbone and leverages a query-based decoder to
predict video instances, IFC [22] introduces memory tokens
to store frame-level features and performs cross-frame feature interaction by computing self-attention among memory
tokens, and then decodes instance-level results using a conditional mask head.
In this paper, we focus on the efficiency of modeling temporal information for ViT-based VIS. This is a
very important problem since (1) computing self-attention
among all video patches has extremely high time and space
complexity [57], (2) additional multi-head self attention
(MHSA) layers for temporal modeling have extra parameters and are sensitive to pre-training [22], (3) the CNN or
transformer backbones in these methods [22,37,57,64] only
support single frame feature extraction and fail to capture
temporal information in the backbone stage. To remedy the
above issues, we present Temporally Efficient ViT (TeViT)
to fully utilize temporal contextual information for efficient
and effective video instance segmentation.
TeViT contains a transformer backbone and a series of
query-based VIS heads. In the backbone stage, we use
messenger tokens [15] to extract intra-frame information
via self-attention and propose a messenger shift mechanism
for frame-level context modeling, in which messenger tokens are divided into several groups to perform temporal
shift with various of time steps. Different from previous

2885

