Label Relation Graphs Enhanced Hierarchical Residual Network for
Hierarchical Multi-Granularity Classification

1

Jingzhou Chen1 , Peng Wang1 , Jian Liu2 , Yuntao Qian1 *
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, China
2
Ant Financial Services Group

{11621038, pengwang18, ytqian}@zju.edu.cn, rex.lj@antgroup.com

Abstract
Hierarchical multi-granularity classification (HMC) assigns hierarchical multi-granularity labels to each object
and focuses on encoding the label hierarchy, e.g., [“Albatross”, “Laysan Albatross”] from coarse-to-fine levels.
However, the definition of what is fine-grained is subjective, and the image quality may affect the identification.
Thus, samples could be observed at any level of the hierarchy, e.g., [“Albatross”] or [“Albatross”, “Laysan Albatross”], and examples discerned at coarse categories are
often neglected in the conventional setting of HMC. In this
paper, we study the HMC problem in which objects are labeled at any level of the hierarchy. The essential designs of
the proposed method are derived from two motivations: (1)
learning with objects labeled at various levels should transfer hierarchical knowledge between levels; (2) lower-level
classes should inherit attributes related to upper-level superclasses. The proposed combinatorial loss maximizes the
marginal probability of the observed ground truth label by
aggregating information from related labels defined in the
tree hierarchy. If the observed label is at the leaf level, the
combinatorial loss further imposes the multi-class crossentropy loss to increase the weight of fine-grained classification loss. Considering the hierarchical feature interaction, we propose a hierarchical residual network (HRN), in
which granularity-specific features from parent levels acting as residual connections are added to features of children levels. Experiments on three commonly used datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach compared
to the state-of-the-art HMC approaches. The code will be
available at https://github.com/MonsterZhZh/HRN.

1. Introduction
Traditional single-granularity classification usually assigns a single label to a given object from a set of mu* Yuntao Qian is the corresponding author.

(a) Differences in domain knowledge and interference from the image
occlusion.

(b) Large variations of image resolutions.

Figure 1. Different objects can be discerned at various levels in the
label hierarchy due to differences in domain knowledge or image
quality such as occlusion or resolution.

tually exclusive class labels. For instance, FGVC aims at
distinguishing objects from different subordinate-level categories within a given object category, e.g., subcategories of
birds [31], cars [16], aircraft [20]. However, the definition
of what is fine-grained is subjective, and the image quality
may affect the identification, as illustrated in Fig. 1. A bird
can be discerned as Albatross or Laysan Albatross due to
differences in domain knowledge. Moreover, a bird expert
recognizes a bird as Albatross rather than Black-footed Albatross because of the occlusion of key parts. Airborne or
satellite image resolutions often have large variations, causing objects to be recognized at different levels. These challenges increase the difficulty of constructing a dataset for
single-granularity classification, while images annotated as
coarse categories are also overlooked.
Compared to single-granularity classification, a more
preferable solution is to employ hierarchical multigranularity labels to describe an object, which provides
more flexible options for annotators with different knowledge backgrounds [4]. HMC [28] aims to exploit hierarchical multi-granularity labels and embeds the label hierarchy

4858

