Not Just Selection, but Exploration: Online Class-Incremental Continual
Learning via Dual View Consistency
Yanan Gu, Xu Yang, Kun Wei∗, Cheng Deng∗
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
{yanangu.xd,xuyang.xd,weikunsk,chdeng.xd}@gmail.com

Abstract
Online class-incremental continual learning aims to
learn new classes continually from a never-ending and
single-pass data stream, while not forgetting the learned
knowledge of old classes. Existing replay-based methods have shown promising performance by storing a subset
of old class data. Unfortunately, these methods only focus on selecting samples from the memory bank for replay and ignore the adequate exploration of semantic information in the single-pass data stream, leading to poor
classification accuracy. In this paper, we propose a novel
yet effective framework for online class-incremental continual learning, which considers not only the selection of
stored samples, but also the full exploration of the data
stream. Specifically, we propose a gradient-based sample
selection strategy, which selects the stored samples whose
gradients generated in the network are most interfered by
the new incoming samples. We believe such samples are
beneficial for updating the neural network based on back
gradient propagation. More importantly, we seek to explore the semantic information between two different views
of training images by maximizing their mutual information, which is conducive to the improvement of classification accuracy. Extensive experimental results demonstrate
that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on
a variety of benchmark datasets. Our code is available on
https://github.com/YananGu/DVC.

1. Introduction
Intelligent systems [24, 30, 33, 49, 53, 56] based on convolutional neural networks have achieved excellent performance on various tasks, some of which even exceed humanlevel performance. However, these intelligent systems,
which need to restart the training process when new data
is available, lack the ability to accumulate knowledge over
time as humans do. Actually, such a restart practice is of∗ Corresponding author

ten not applicable in real scenarios because of training costs
and privacy concerns. In order to achieve a higher level intelligent system, Continual Learning [17, 35, 38] studies the
problem of learning from a never-ending data stream. A significant problem such a never-ending learning process faces
is catastrophic forgetting—the inability to retain previously
learned knowledge when learning new tasks.
Existing methods [1, 32, 42, 55] often relax the problem
of continual learning to a more accessible task-incremental
setting. In a task-incremental setting, the data stream is divided into several tasks with clear boundaries, and each task
is learned offline. However, this setting lacks flexibility, because data in real world scenarios is often streamed online
without task identity. In this paper, we focus on a more
general online class-incremental continual setting, where a
stream of samples is seen only once and task identity is unavailable during the training and testing phases.
There are already many types of methods proposed for
task-incremental setting [1, 32, 34, 37], which can be primarily divided into three categories: regularization-based,
parameter-isolation, and replay-based methods. In these
methods, replay-based methods [2,13,45] have been proved
to be simple yet efficient compared to other methods in the
online class-incremental continual setting. Such methods
usually keep previous performance by recording some samples of old classes for replay. Specifically, the recorded and
incoming samples are put together to train the model, which
makes the model preserve the previous knowledge to the
greatest extent and learn new knowledge simultaneously.
However, these methods only focus on finding the optimal
recorded samples for replay and lack a full exploration of
semantic information in the single-pass data stream, leading to poor classification accuracy.
In this paper, we propose a novel yet effective framework
for online class-incremental continual learning to address
the deficiencies observed above. Specifically, we propose
a Maximally Gradient Interfered (MGI) retrieval strategy,
which selects the stored samples whose gradients generated in the network are most interfered by the new incoming
samples. We believe such samples are beneficial for updat-

7442

