Joint Distribution Matters: Deep Brownian Distance Covariance for
Few-Shot Classification
Jiangtao Xie1,∗ , Fei Long1,∗ , Jiaming Lv1 , Qilong Wang2 , Peihua Li1,†
1
Dalian University of Technology, China 2 Tianjin University, China

Abstract
Few-shot classification is a challenging problem as only
very few training examples are given for each new task. One
of the effective research lines to address this challenge focuses on learning deep representations driven by a similarity measure between a query image and few support images
of some class. Statistically, this amounts to measure the
dependency of image features, viewed as random vectors
in a high-dimensional embedding space. Previous methods either only use marginal distributions without considering joint distributions, suffering from limited representation capability, or are computationally expensive though
harnessing joint distributions. In this paper, we propose
a deep Brownian Distance Covariance (DeepBDC) method
for few-shot classification. The central idea of DeepBDC is
to learn image representations by measuring the discrepancy between joint characteristic functions of embedded
features and product of the marginals. As the BDC metric is
decoupled, we formulate it as a highly modular and efficient
layer. Furthermore, we instantiate DeepBDC in two different few-shot classification frameworks. We make experiments on six standard few-shot image benchmarks, covering
general object recognition, fine-grained categorization and
cross-domain classification. Extensive evaluations show
our DeepBDC significantly outperforms the counterparts,
while establishing new state-of-the-art results. The source
code is available at http://www.peihuali.org/DeepBDC.

1. Introduction
Few-shot classification [15, 17] is concerned with a task
where a classifier can be adapted to distinguish classes unseen previously, given only a very limited number of examples of these classes. This is a challenging problem as
scarcely labeled examples are far from sufficient for learning abundant knowledge and also likely lead to overfitting. One practical solution is based on the technique of
∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author, peihuali@dlut.edu.cn. The
work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China
(61971086, 61806140), and CCF-Baidu Open Fund (2021PP15002000).

meta-learning or learning to learn [12, 39], in which the
episodic training is formulated to transfer the knowledge
obtained on a massive meta-training set spanning a large
number of known classes to the few-shot regime of novel
classes. Among great advances that have been made, the
line of metric-based methods attracts considerable research
interest [15, 26, 33, 39], achieving state-of-the-art performance [45, 47] in recent years.
The primary idea of the metric-based few-shot classification is to learn representations through deep networks,
driven by the similarity measures between a query image
and few support images of some class [33,47]. Statistically,
the features of a query image (resp., support images) can be
viewed as observations of a random vector X (resp., Y ) in a
high-dimensional embedding space. Therefore, the similarity between images can be measured by means of probability distributions. However, modeling distributions of highdimensional (and often few) features is hard and a common
method is to model statistical moments. ProtoNet [33] and
its variants (e.g., [26]) represent images by first moment
(mean vector) and use Euclidean distance or cosine similarity for metric learning. To capture richer statistics, several works study second moment (covariance matrix) [44]
or combination of first and second moments in the form of
Gaussians [20] for image representations, while adopting
Frobenius norm or Kullback-Leiberler (KL) divergence as
similarity measures. However, these methods only exploit
marginal distributions while neglecting joint distributions,
limiting the performance of learned models. In addition,
the covariances can only model linear relations.
In general, the dependency between X and Y should be
measured in light of their joint distribution fXY (x, y) [6].
Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD) is an effective method for
measuring such dependency. As described in [29, Sec. 2.3],
EMD seeks an optimal joint distribution fXY (x, y), whose
marginals are constrained to be given fX (x) and fY (y), so
that the expectation of transportation cost is minimal. In
few-shot classification, DeepEMD [47] proposes differential EMD for optimal matching of image regions. Though
achieving state-of-the-art performance, DeepEMD is computationally expensive [45], due to inherent linear program-

7972

