Balanced and Hierarchical Relation Learning for One-shot Object Detection
Hanqing Yang1,2 Sijia Cai2 Hualian Sheng2,3 Bing Deng2
Jianqiang Huang2 Xian-Sheng Hua2 Yong Tang4 Yu Zhang1 *
1
State Key Laboratory of Industrial Control Technology,
College of Control Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University
2
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
3
College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University
4
Shudao Investment Group Co., Ltd
{hanqing.yang, hlsheng, zhangyu80}@zju.edu.cn, jianqiang.jqh@gmail.com, ty640106@163.com
{stephen.csj, dengbing.db, xiansheng.hxs}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Instance-level feature matching is significantly important to the success of modern one-shot object detectors. Recently, the methods based on the metric-learning paradigm
have achieved an impressive process. Most of these works
only measure the relations between query and target objects on a single level, resulting in suboptimal performance
overall. In this paper, we introduce the balanced and hierarchical learning for our detector. The contributions are
two-fold: firstly, a novel Instance-level Hierarchical Relation (IHR) module is proposed to encode the contrastivelevel, salient-level, and attention-level relations simultaneously to enhance the query-relevant similarity representation. Secondly, we notice that the batch training of the IHR
module is substantially hindered by the positive-negative
sample imbalance in the one-shot scenario. We then introduce a simple but effective Ratio-Preserving Loss (RPL)
to protect the learning of rare positive samples and suppress the effects of negative samples. Our loss can adjust the weight for each sample adaptively, ensuring the
desired positive-negative ratio consistency and boosting
query-related IHR learning. Extensive experiments show
that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art method by
1.6% and 1.3% on PASCAL VOC and MS COCO datasets
for unseen classes, respectively. The code will be available
at https://github.com/hero-y/BHRL.

1. Introduction
Development of modern deep learning architectures
gives rise to great advances in general object detection
* Corresponding author.

[10, 19, 24, 33]. However, deep detectors necessitate massive, high-quality yet expensive annotated data to reach performance saturation, which is extremely difficult for practical applications. Inspired by the human ability of learning new concepts with very little supervision, some recent
works [23, 25, 29, 30, 34] attempt to apply few-shot learning techniques to detect novel-class objects from extremely
few novel-class data. Yet, the majority focus on finetunebased strategies by adapting pre-trained detectors to limited
unseen-class samples. Such deep detectors usually suffer
from generalization limitations, such as the catastrophic forgetting of base classes, the underutilization of novel data,
and the severe shift in data distribution.
The One-Shot Object Detection (OSOD) [2,12,22] without finetuning aims to detect all interesting objects in the
target image with the same novel class of single query image patch. A noteworthy effort has been made to exploit the
instance matching techniques and build semantic relations
for the query-target region proposals. Some early developments [12, 22] integrate effective metric-learning solutions
with the general object detectors (e.g., Faster R-CNN [24])
to learn a similarity metric. For example, SiamMask [22]
uses the matching module to correlate the query image
and target image. CoAE [12] proposes to apply non-local
scheme [28] for exploring the relation feature. Although
such methods are capable of achieving fast and effective
adaption to novel classes through a single query image
patch, they lack accurate modeling of multi-level semantic relations for the query-target pairs. Intuitively, the single
relation measure may lead to a certain similarity deviation,
thus reducing the generalization ability of the learned detector. Some modern approaches [2, 8, 30] propose to capture seen-unseen semantic structure via more fine-grained
relation learning. For example, [8] introduces three relation

7591

