Stochastic Variance Reduced Ensemble Adversarial Attack
for Boosting the Adversarial Transferability

1

Yifeng Xiong1 *, Jiadong Lin1 , Min Zhang1 , John E. Hopcroft2 , Kun He1†
Department of Computer Science, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
2
Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA
{xiongyf,jdlin,m zhang}@hust.edu.cn, jeh@cs.cornell.edu, brooklet60@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
The black-box adversarial attack has attracted impressive attention for its practical use in the field of deep learning security. Meanwhile, it is very challenging as there is
no access to the network architecture or internal weights
of the target model. Based on the hypothesis that if an example remains adversarial for multiple models, then it is
more likely to transfer the attack capability to other models, the ensemble-based adversarial attack methods are efficient and widely used for black-box attacks. However, ways
of ensemble attack are rather less investigated, and existing ensemble attacks simply fuse the outputs of all the models evenly. In this work, we treat the iterative ensemble attack as a stochastic gradient descent optimization process,
in which the variance of the gradients on different models
may lead to poor local optima. To this end, we propose a
novel attack method called the stochastic variance reduced
ensemble (SVRE) attack, which could reduce the gradient
variance of the ensemble models and take full advantage of
the ensemble attack. Empirical results on the standard ImageNet dataset demonstrate that the proposed method could
boost the adversarial transferability and outperforms existing ensemble attacks significantly. Code is available at
https://github.com/JHL-HUST/SVRE.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown impressive
performance on various computer vision tasks. However,
recent researches have shown that DNNs are strikingly vulnerable to adversarial examples crafted by adding humanimperceptible perturbations [7, 23, 28]. Moreover, adversarial examples are known to be transferable that the examples crafted for one model can also mislead other black-box
models [17, 20, 22]. Generating adversarial examples, i.e.,
* The first two authors contribute equally.
† Corresponding author.

adversarial attack, has drawn enormous attention since it
can help evaluate the robustness of different models [2, 29]
and improve their robustness by adversarial training [7, 19].
Various adversarial attack methods have been proposed, including the optimization-based methods such as
box-constrained L-BFGS [28] and Carlini & Wagner’s
method [2], the gradient-based methods such as Fast Gradient Sign Method [7] and its iterative variants [13,19], etc. In
general, these adversarial attack methods can achieve high
attack success rates in the white-box setting [2], where the
attacker can access the complete information of the target
model, including the model architecture and gradient information. However, these methods often exhibit low attack
success rates in the black-box setting [3], where the attacker
can not access the information of the target model. In this
case, the attacker either utilizes the transferability of adversarial examples to fool the black-box model, or attacks directly based on a small amount of queries on the output of
the black-box model.
In recent years, a number of methods have been proposed
to enhance the transferability of adversarial examples so as
to improve the attack success rates in the black-box setting,
including the gradient optimization attacks [3, 16, 31], input transformation attacks [4, 16, 35], and model ensemble
attacks [3, 17]. Among these methods, the model ensemble
attacks are efficient and have been broadly adopted in boosting the black-box attack performance [5, 16, 35]. However,
as compared to the other two categories that have been explored in depth, the category of model ensemble attack is
rather less investigated.
In this work, we observe that the existing model ensemble attack methods simply fuse the outputs of all models
directly but ignore the variance of the gradients on different models, which may limit the potential capability of the
model ensemble attacks. Due to the inherent difference of
the model architectures, the optimization paths of the models may differ widely, indicating that there exists considerable difference on the variance of the gradient directions
among the possible models. Such variance may cause the

14983

