Scene Consistency Representation Learning for Video Scene Segmentation
Haoqian Wu1,2,3,4∗ , Keyu Chen2∗ , Yanan Luo2 , Ruizhi Qiao2 , Bo Ren2 ,
Haozhe Liu1,3,4,5 , Weicheng Xie1,3,4† , Linlin Shen1,3,4
1
Computer Vision Institute, Shenzhen University 2 Tencent YouTu Lab
3
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
4
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing 5 KAUST
wuhaoqian2019@email.szu.edu.cn {yolochen, ruizhiqiao, timren}@tencent.com
luoyanan93@gmail.com haozhe.liu@kaust.edu.sa {wcxie, llshen}@szu.edu.cn
NN Selection

NN Selection

t

Shot
Consistency

Ground Truth Scene Boundary

(c) Scene
Consistency

(a) Shot Perspective Clip

Scene B

Scene A

Scene C

Scene D

Scene E

…
Scene Consistency Selection
(b) Scene Perspective Clip

Figure 1. An illustration of representation learning methods from the shot-to-scene perspective. Several continuous shots are shown
in Fig. (a), where existing SSL approaches obtain positive pairs from the adjacent shots (e.g., by performing Nearest Neighbor (NN)
Selection [1]). While we propose to look further for scenes that are often crossed over, as Scene A/C and Scene B/E shown in Fig. (b),
where positive samples are explored in a broader region and the shots are clustered to the same scene in the feature representation space,
i.e., Fig. (c). Best viewed in color.

Abstract
A long-term video, such as a movie or TV show, is composed of various scenes, each of which represents a series
of shots sharing the same semantic story. Spotting the correct scene boundary from the long-term video is a challenging task, since a model must understand the storyline of
the video to figure out where a scene starts and ends. To
this end, we propose an effective Self-Supervised Learning
(SSL) framework to learn better shot representations from
unlabeled long-term videos. More specifically, we present
an SSL scheme to achieve scene consistency, while exploring considerable data augmentation and shuffling methods to boost the model generalizability. Instead of explicitly learning the scene boundary features as in the previous methods, we introduce a vanilla temporal model with
∗ Equal Contribution

† Corresponding Author

less inductive bias to verify the quality of the shot features.
Our method achieves the state-of-the-art performance on
the task of Video Scene Segmentation. Additionally, we suggest a more fair and reasonable benchmark to evaluate the
performance of Video Scene Segmentation methods. The
code is made available.1

1. Introduction
In the process of video creation, to make the story more
compelling, the editor will use various editing techniques,
such as montage, one shot to the end, etc. Quickly switching between stories and scenes makes the movie plot tighter,
e.g. inserting outdoor battle scenes into indoor dialogue
scenes, as shown in Fig. 1 (b), making the scene tran1 https://github.com/TencentYoutuResearch/Scen
eSegmentation-SCRL

14021

