Delving into the Estimation Shift of Batch Normalization in a Network
Lei Huang1 * Yi Zhou2 Tian Wang1 Jie Luo1 Xianglong Liu1
SKLSDE, Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
MOE Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration, Southeast University, China
1

Dataset

Abstract

濕濡

Batch normalization (BN) is a milestone technique in
deep learning. It normalizes the activation using mini-batch
statistics during training but the estimated population statistics during inference. This paper focuses on investigating the
estimation of population statistics. We deﬁne the estimation
shift magnitude of BN to quantitatively measure the difference between its estimated population statistics and expected
ones. Our primary observation is that the estimation shift
can be accumulated due to the stack of BN in a network,
which has detriment effects for the test performance. We further ﬁnd a batch-free normalization (BFN) can block such
an accumulation of estimation shift. These observations motivate our design of XBNBlock that replace one BN with BFN
in the bottleneck block of residual-style networks. Experiments on the ImageNet and COCO benchmarks show that
XBNBlock consistently improves the performance of different
architectures, including ResNet and ResNeXt, by a signiﬁcant margin and seems to be more robust to distribution shift.

濕濡

濕濡

濕濡

ESM
Input

Layer 1

Layer 3

Layer 2

Layer 4

(a) Network with BN in each layer
Dataset
濕濙濡

濕濡

濕濡

濕濙濡

ESM
Input

Layer 1

Layer 2

Layer 3

Layer 4

(b) Network with BN and BFN mixed in different layers

Figure 1. Illustration of the main observations. The red rectangle
and green round represent a linear and non-linear transformation,
respectively. Given the training and test data with distribution shift,
we show the distributions of normalized output after each BN layer
during training and test, and calculate the magnitude of difference
between the estimated population statistics and expected ones (refer
to as ESM, and see Section 4.2 for details).

1. Introduction
Input normalization is extensively used in training neural networks for decades [19] and shows good theoretical
properties in optimization for linear models [20, 47]. It uses
population statistics for normalization that can be calculated
directly from the available training data. A natural idea is to
extend normalization for the activation in a network. However, normalizing activation is more challenging since the
distribution of internal activation varies, which leads to the
estimation of population statistics for normalization inaccurate [7, 28]. A network with activation normalized by the
population statistics shows the training instability [12].
Batch normalization (BN) [16] addresses itself to normalize the activation using mini-batch statistics during training, but the estimated population statistics during inference/test. BN ensures the normalized mini-batch output
standardized over each iteration, enabling stable training,

efﬁcient optimization [1, 13, 16, 36] and potential generalization [3, 13, 48]. It has been extensively used in varieties
of architectures [9, 11, 44, 45, 50, 54], and successfully proliferated throughout various areas [12, 24, 35].
Despite the common success of BN, it still suffers from
problems when applied in certain scenarios [4, 12]. One
notorious limitation of BN is its small-batch-size problem
— BN’s error increases rapidly as the batch size becomes
smaller [41,48]. Besides, a network with a naive BN gets signiﬁcantly degenerated performance, if there exists covariate
shift between the training and test data [2, 22, 29, 37]. While
these problems raise across different scenarios and contexts,
the estimated population statistics of BN used for inference
seems to be the link between them: 1) the small-batch-size
problem of BN can be relieved if its estimated populations
statistics are corrected during test [41, 43]; 2) and a model

* Corresponding author. E-mail: huangleiAI@buaa.edu.cn

763

