Stability-driven Contact Reconstruction From Monocular Color Images
Zimeng Zhao

Binghui Zuo

Wei Xie

Yangang Wang∗

Southeast University, China

Abstract
Physical contact provides additional constraints for
hand-object state reconstruction as well as a basis for further understanding of interaction affordances. Estimating these severely occluded regions from monocular images
presents a considerable challenge. Existing methods optimize the hand-object contact driven by distance threshold or prior from contact-labeled datasets. However, due
to the number of subjects and objects involved in these indoor datasets being limited, the learned contact patterns
could not be generalized easily. Our key idea is to reconstruct the contact pattern directly from monocular images,
and then utilize the physical stability criterion in the simulation to optimize it. This criterion is defined by the resultant
forces and contact distribution computed by the physics engine. Compared to existing solutions, our framework can
be adapted to more personalized hands and diverse object shapes. Furthermore, an interaction dataset with extra physical attributes is created to verify the sim-to-real
consistency of our methods. Through comprehensive evaluations, hand-object contact can be reconstructed with both
accuracy and stability by the proposed framework.

1. Introduction
Monocular hand-object contact recovery has wide applications, which can enable accurate interactions in metaverse
and telepresence robot control. Traditional methods often
judge contact regions by the closest distances between surfaces of the hand and object in an optimization strategy [58],
where the recovered contact highly depends on the accuracy
of hand-object pose estimation. However, this accuracy is
hard to be guaranteed by monocular reconstruction. Recent
approaches [5, 17, 62] learn the hand-object contact prior
from well-labeled datasets [3, 52], yet their performance
∗ Corresponding author. E-mail: yangangwang@seu.edu.cn. This work
was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(No. 62076061), the “Young Elite Scientists Sponsorship Program by
CAST” (No. YES20200025), and the “Zhishan Young Scholar” Program
of Southeast University (No. 2242021R41083).

Figure 1. Stability-driven contact reconstruction. Each row illustrates the hand-object state represented by multiple ellipsoids.
The resultant forces and torques on the objects are calculated by
the physics engine [8].

rely on the diversity of the contact data.
Generally speaking, a credible contact is to ensure the interacting stability between a hand and object in the physical
world, either to keep the object stationary or with a required
acceleration. To reconstruct this stable contact, our key idea
is to reconstruct the contact pattern driven by the physical criteria (i.e., the balancing of forces and torques) cal-

1643

