RU-Net: Regularized Unrolling Network for Scene Graph Generation

1

Xin Lin1 * Changxing Ding1,2† Jing Zhang3 Yibing Zhan4 Dacheng Tao4,3
South China University of Technology 2 Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou 3 The University of Sydney
4
JD Explore Academy
eelinxin@mail.scut.edu.cn,

chxding@scut.edu.cn,

zhanyibing@jd.com,

jing.zhang1@sydney.edu.au,

dacheng.tao@gmail.com
Message Passing
man

Abstract
Scene graph generation (SGG) aims to detect objects
and predict the relationships between each pair of objects.
Existing SGG methods usually suffer from several issues,
including 1) ambiguous object representations, as graph
neural network-based message passing (GMP) modules are
typically sensitive to spurious inter-node correlations, and
2) low diversity in relationship predictions due to severe
class imbalance and a large number of missing annotations.
To address both problems, in this paper, we propose a regularized unrolling network (RU-Net). We ﬁrst study the relation between GMP and graph Laplacian denoising (GLD)
from the perspective of the unrolling technique, determining
that GMP can be formulated as a solver for GLD. Based
on this observation, we propose an unrolled message passing module and introduce an p -based graph regularization
to suppress spurious connections between nodes. Second,
we propose a group diversity enhancement module that promotes the prediction diversity of relationships via rank maximization. Systematic experiments demonstrate that RU-Net
is effective under a variety of settings and metrics. Furthermore, RU-Net achieves new state-of-the-arts on three
popular databases: VG, VRD, and OI. Code is available at
https://github.com/siml3/RU-Net.

1. Introduction
Scene Graph Generation (SGG) aims to provide a graphical representation of objects and their relationships in an
image. Recently, SGG has emerged as a promising approach that bridges the gap between vision and natural language domains. It has been found to be useful for many vision tasks, including 3D scene understanding [2, 40], visual
question answering [8, 32], and image captioning [12, 58].
A scene graph comprises a collection of triplets in the
* Work done during ﬁrst author’s internship at JD Explore Academy.
† Corresponding author.

19457

surfboard

man
beach

0

0.6 0.4

0.9

0 0.1

0.5 0.5 0

surfboard

beach

Attention Map
(a) Ambiguous node representations.
5
2

1

1
3

4

2
6

on non-rel. others
0.6
0.3 0.1
man1-on-street1
0.4
0.2
0.4
man2-standing on-street1
0.7
0.1
man3-sitting on-street1 0.2
0.6
0.3 0.1
man4-on-street2
0.1
0.5
0.4
man5-walking on-street2
0.2
0.3
0.5
man6-lying on-street2

(b) Lack of diversity in relationship prediction.

Figure 1. (a) Spurious correlation between nodes causes ambiguous representations through graph neural network-based message
passing. (b) Relationship prediction for the same category of node
pairs lacks diversity. Missing relationship annotations are underlined and highlighted in gray. Best viewed in color.

form subject-relationship-object. The objects and their pairwise relationships are denoted as nodes and edges, respectively. Existing SGG models [6, 19, 22, 39, 46, 47, 60] typically utilize context modeling strategies to learn discriminative representations for node and edge prediction; speciﬁcally, most of them adopt graph neural network-based message passing (GMP) mechanisms. In GMP, node representations are iteratively updated through the aggregation
of neighboring information according to learnable attention
weights, which are typically supervised by node labels.
However, current GMPs are negatively impacted by spurious correlations between nodes. Here, a spurious correlation refers to a relatively large attention weight between a
pair of semantically disparate nodes. These spurious correlations frequently occur, as attention weights between spatially proximate nodes tend to be large regardless of whether
their object categories are related. In Figure 1(a), it is evident that the attention weights for the surfboard are dominated by those for the man (i.e., equal to 0.9). As a result,
the quality of representations for some nodes may degrade
after erroneous message passing. Moreover, relationship
prediction diversity among existing SGG models tends to
be low. This is mainly due to the long-tailed distribution
of relationships and a large number of missing relationship

