End-to-end Generative Pretraining for Multimodal Video Captioning
Paul Hongsuck Seo

Arsha Nagrani

Anurag Arnab

Cordelia Schmid

-dtrm5hxiII-00039
-dtrm5hxiII-00039
Google Research

{phseo,anagrani,aarnab,cordelias}@google.com
Video withVideo
annotated
with caption
annotated caption

…

Unlabelled video
Unlabelled video

…

…

Caption Caption
man talkingman
about
the about the
talking
difficulty indifficulty
mentally in mentally
processing
processing hard math hard math
is an
of level
conscious
level This
processing. This problems problems
“This is an “This
example
ofexample
conscious
processing.

hurts,
more
hurts, right?
This right?
takes This
more.takes
This more.
takes This
moretakes
energy.
“ energy. “

…
Future Utterance
Future Utterance

“You're
going
to oil
putinsome
inbe
here
and be generous“We're simply
“We're
simply gonna
“You're going
to put
some
hereoil
and
generous
gonna
the oilwe
because
want
it to
it it
helps
cook it while
thisand
together and
with the oilwith
because
want itwe
to it
helps
cook
while
wrap this wrap
together
wrap
it's in the it's
ovenin“ the oven “
wrap it up in
theit up
foil.”in the foil.”

!

(a) Multimodal video captioning

!

!+1

!+1

(b) Pretraining using a future utterance

Figure 1. Generative pretraining for Multimodal Video Captioning. Multimodal Video Captioning takes visual frames and speech transcribed by
ASR as inputs and predicts a caption. The example on the left (a) demonstrates that using both modalities jointly is beneficial to generate an accurate
caption, i.e., red words are present in the visual input whereas blue words correspond to the concepts in the ASR. Our new multimodal video generative
pretraining (MV-GPT) uses a future utterance in time from the video stream as a captioning target (b). This objective can be applied to unlabeled
data (e.g., HowTo100M), which comes with ASR but no captions, and results in effective joint-pretraining for both a multimodal encoder and decoder.

Abstract
Recent video and language pretraining frameworks lack
the ability to generate sentences. We present Multimodal
Video Generative Pretraining (MV-GPT), a new pretraining
framework for learning from unlabelled videos which can
be effectively used for generative tasks such as multimodal
video captioning. Unlike recent video-language pretraining
frameworks, our framework trains both a multimodal video
encoder and a sentence decoder jointly. To overcome the lack of
captions in unlabelled videos, we leverage the future utterance
as an additional text source and propose a bidirectional generation objective – we generate future utterances given the present
mulitmodal context, and also the present utterance given future
observations. With this objective, we train an encoder-decoder
model end-to-end to generate a caption from raw pixels and
transcribed speech directly. Our model achieves state-of-the-art
performance for multimodal video captioning on four standard
benchmarks, as well as for other video understanding tasks
such as VideoQA, video retrieval and action classification.

1. Introduction
A long-standing goal of the AI community is the development of conversational multimodal systems that can both
reliably perceive the world and effortlessly communicate with
humans. An emerging benchmark of progress in this field is
the task of multimodal video captioning [17, 32] - which tests

both abilities; a successful model must not only accurately
understand ‘multimodal’ streams of input video (including the
speech and the video frames), but also generate coherent natural
language descriptions of the content.
Unsurprisingly, a major challenge in the field of vision and
language learning is the lack of large-scale, manually annotated
data. Annotating captions for videos is time intensive, expensive
and subjective (with low inter-annotator agreement [17]) – this
is in contrast to fields such as image classification where fully
annotated datasets are orders of magnitude larger [15, 41, 56].
To overcome this limitation, there has been a flurry of recent
works that pretrain their video-language models on instructional
videos [32, 33, 42, 44, 45], a domain where the speech is
particularly well aligned to visual content. Recently introduced
datasets such as Cooking312K [45] and HowTo100M [34]
leverage such instructional videos with associated captions
from ASR (automatic speech recognition) to learn joint
video-and-text embeddings [33, 44] or to train multimodal
video encoders [27, 42]. However, the models in these works
often do not contain a decoder, lacking the ability to generate
sentences, and thus only the video encoder is transferred to the
downstream tasks – indeed for the case of video captioning, the
decoder is often learned from scratch [45, 47, 63]. While one
can still initialize the decoder using independently pretrained
weights such as those from a GPT-2 [37] model, we observe
that this strategy is suboptimal and performance is significantly
improved by optimizing the encoder and the decoder jointly.
For the task of multimodal video captioning, we require a

17959

