Bridging the Gap between Classification and Localization
for Weakly Supervised Object Localization

1

Eunji Kim1
Siwon Kim1
Jungbeom Lee1
Hyunwoo Kim2
Sungroh Yoon1,3 *
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University 2 LG AI Research
3
Interdisciplinary Program in AI, AIIS, ASRI, INMC, and ISRC, Seoul National University
{kce407, tuslkkk, jbeom.lee93}@snu.ac.kr, hwkim@lgresearch.ai, sryoon@snu.ac.kr

Vanilla

Abstract
CAM

1

0

* Correspondence to: Sungroh Yoon (sryoon@snu.ac.kr).

1

Activation
in Feature Map

(a)

0

Similarity

1

(b)

Activation
in Feature Map

-1

1. Introduction
Object localization aims to find the area of a target object
in a given image [5, 13, 18, 19, 23]. However, fully supervised approaches require accurate bounding box annotations,
which require a tremendous cost. Weakly supervised object
localization (WSOL) has been a great alternative because
it requires only image-level labels to train a localization
model [3, 4, 17, 21, 27].
The most commonly used approach for WSOL is a class
activation map (CAM) [33]. CAM-based methods employ
a global average pooling (GAP) layer [12] followed by a
fully connected (FC) layer, and generate a CAM with the
feature maps prior to the GAP layer. A highly activated area
in a CAM is predicted to be an object location. However,
it is widely observed that CAM identifies only the most
discriminative parts of an object rather than the entire object
area, resulting in low localization performance [11, 15, 30].
We ask the question, “Why does CAM generated from an

Input Image

Ours

Similarity

Weakly supervised object localization aims to find a target
object region in a given image with only weak supervision,
such as image-level labels. Most existing methods use a
class activation map (CAM) to generate a localization map;
however, a CAM identifies only the most discriminative parts
of a target object rather than the entire object region. In this
work, we find the gap between classification and localization
in terms of the misalignment of the directions between an
input feature and a class-specific weight. We demonstrate
that the misalignment suppresses the activation of CAM in
areas that are less discriminative but belong to the target
object. To bridge the gap, we propose a method to align
feature directions with a class-specific weight. The proposed
method achieves a state-of-the-art localization performance
on the CUB-200-2011 and ImageNet-1K benchmarks.

EIL

Feature vector
Class-specific weight

Training Progress

Figure 1. (a) Examples of CAM and decomposed terms from the
classifier trained with the vanilla method [33] and with EIL [15].
(b) Visualization of the changes of CAM and decomposed terms as
training with our method progresses.

accurate classifier fail to highlight the entire object area?”
To answer this, we provide a new perspective of decomposing CAM into two terms: (1) activation in a feature map
and (2) cosine similarity between the feature vector at each
spatial location and the class-specific weight in the FC layer.
Fig. 1(a) shows that only the bird’s body is highly activated
in the CAM of the vanilla model, leaving the wing less activated. However, looking at the activation in the feature map,
the wing as well as the body is highly activated. The low
similarity of the wing region offsets the activation in the

14258

