Deep vanishing point detection: Geometric priors make dataset variations vanish
Yancong Lin, Ruben Wiersma, Silvia L. Pintea, Klaus Hildebrandt, Elmar Eisemann, and Jan C. van Gemert
Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands

Abstract
Deep learning has improved vanishing point detection
in images. Yet, deep networks require expensive annotated
datasets trained on costly hardware and do not generalize
to even slightly different domains, and minor problem variants. Here, we address these issues by injecting deep vanishing point detection networks with prior knowledge. This
prior knowledge no longer needs to be learned from data,
saving valuable annotation efforts and compute, unlocking
realistic few-sample scenarios, and reducing the impact of
domain changes. Moreover, the interpretability of the priors
allows to adapt deep networks to minor problem variations
such as switching between Manhattan and non-Manhattan
worlds. We seamlessly incorporate two geometric priors:
(i) Hough Transform – mapping image pixels to straight
lines, and (ii) Gaussian sphere – mapping lines to great
circles whose intersections denote vanishing points. Experimentally, we ablate our choices and show comparable
accuracy to existing models in the large-data setting. We
validate our model’s improved data efficiency, robustness to
domain changes, adaptability to non-Manhattan settings.

1. Introduction
Vanishing point detection in images has non-vanishing
real-world returns: camera calibration [1, 9, 21], scene
understanding [18], visual SLAM [13, 33], or even autonomous driving [28]. Deep learning is an excellent approach to vanishing point detection [7, 8, 67, 69], where all
geometric knowledge is learned from large annotated data
sets. Yet, in the real-world, there are several factors that
complicate deep learning solutions: (1) Manually annotating large training sets is expensive and error prone; (2)
Training models on large data sets require costly computational resources; (3) Practical changes to data collection
cause domain shifts, hampering deep network generalization; (4) Slight changes in the problem setting require a
complete change in deep network architectures. Thus, there
is a need to make deep learning less reliant on data, and its
architectures more robust to variants of the same problem.
In this paper, we add geometric priors to deep vanishing

Figure 1. We add two geometric priors: (i) Hough Transform
and (ii) Gaussian sphere mapping, for vanishing points detection.
We transform learned image features to the Hough domain, where
lines are mapped to individual bins. We further project the Hough
bins to the Gaussian sphere, where lines become great circles and
vanishing points are at the intersection of great circles. Each color
represents a set of image lines related to a vanishing point. Adding
geometric prior knowledge makes our model data-efficient, less
dependent on domain-specifics, and easily adaptable to problem
variations such as detecting a variable number of vanishing points.

point detection. Using geometric priors is data-efficient as
this knowledge no longer needs to be learned from data.
Thus, fewer annotations and compute resources are needed.
Moreover, by relying on priors, the model is less sensitive to
particular idiosyncrasies in the training data and generalizes
better to domains with slightly different data distributions.
Another advantage of a knowledge-based approach is that it
is interpretable, and thus the architecture is easy to adapt to
a slightly different problem formulation.
We add two geometric priors, see Fig. 1: (i) the Hough
Transform and (ii) a Gaussian sphere mapping. Our trainable Hough Transform module represents each line as an
(offset, angle) pair in line polar coordinates, allowing us
to identify individual lines in Hough space [15]. We subsequently map these lines from Hough space to the Gaussian sphere, where lines become great circles, and vanishing
points are located at the intersection of great circles [4]. The
benefit of using great circles is that lines are mapped from
the unbounded image plane to a bounded unit sphere, facilitating vanishing point detection outside the image view.
Both the Hough Transform and the Gaussian sphere mapping are end-to-end trainable, taking advantage of learned
representations, while adding knowledge priors.

6103

