Interpretable part-whole hierarchies and conceptual-semantic relationships in
neural networks
Nicola Garau, Niccoló Bisagno, Zeno Sambugaro, and Nicola Conci
University of Trento - Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science - DISI
Via Sommarive, 9, 38123 Povo, Trento TN
nicola.garau,niccolo.bisagno,zeno.sambugaro,nicola.conci@unitn.it

Figure 1. [Better seen in color]. Overview of the proposed solution. Our Agglomerator is a novel architecture for vision applications,
in which column structure (c) mimics hyper-columns typical of the human visual cortex [14]. The input data (a) is fed to the columns
using a patch-based embedding (b). The Agglomerator architecture iteratively routes the information across its structure, creating a neural
representation of each image, similar to neural fields [37]. In the neural representation, part-whole hierarchies (d) emerge at different levels
of the columns. The same column can represent the same patch of the image with different levels of abstraction (e.g., the ears, the head,
and the dog) corresponding to each level in the column. Neighbor columns agree on a part representation (e.g ears, head) at lower levels,
ideally representing the same whole (e.g. dog) at the top level. The resulting feature space represents the conceptual-semantic relationships
between data (e) resembling the human hierarchical organization [38]. Samples belonging to the same super-class (e.g., animals, vehicles)
are clustered together, with conceptually close categories (e.g., birds and airplanes) represented on the edge of the super-classes.

Abstract
Deep neural networks achieve outstanding results in a
large variety of tasks, often outperforming human experts.
However, a known limitation of current neural architectures is the poor accessibility to understand and interpret
the network response to a given input. This is directly related to the huge number of variables and the associated
non-linearities of neural models, which are often used as
black boxes. When it comes to critical applications as autonomous driving, security and safety, medicine and health,
the lack of interpretability of the network behavior tends to
induce skepticism and limited trustworthiness, despite the
accurate performance of such systems in the given task.
Furthermore, a single metric, such as the classification accuracy, provides a non-exhaustive evaluation of most realworld scenarios. In this paper, we want to make a step forward towards interpretability in neural networks, providing
new tools to interpret their behavior. We present Agglomer-

ator, a framework capable of providing a representation of
part-whole hierarchies from visual cues and organizing the
input distribution matching the conceptual-semantic hierarchical structure between classes. We evaluate our method
on common datasets, such as SmallNORB, MNIST, FashionMNIST, CIFAR-10, and CIFAR-100, providing a more
interpretable model than other state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
The extensive adoption of neural networks and, in general, learning models has been raising concerns regarding
our chances, as humans, to explain their behavior. Interpretability would be a highly desirable feature for neural
networks, especially in those applications like autonomous
driving [13], healthcare [40], and finance [45], where safety,
life, and security are at stake.
Deep neural networks have achieved superhuman perfor-

13689

