PhoCaL: A Multi-Modal Dataset for Category-Level Object Pose Estimation
with Photometrically Challenging Objects
Pengyuan Wang∗1 , HyunJun Jung∗1 , Yitong Li1 , Siyuan Shen1 , Rahul Parthasarathy Srikanth1 ,
Lorenzo Garattoni2 , Sven Meier2 , Nassir Navab1 , Benjamin Busam1
∗
1
2
Equal Contribution
Technical University of Munich
Toyota Motor Europe
pengyuan.wang@tum.de

hyunjun.jung@tum.de

b.busam@tum.de

Figure 1. PhoCaL comprises 60 high quality 3D models of household object in 8 categories with different photometric complexity.
The selected objects include challenging texture-less, occluded, symmetric, reflective and transparent objects. Our robotic-induced pose
annotation pipeline provides highly accurate 6D pose labels even for objects that are hard to capture by modern RGBD sensors. The figure
shows RGB, 3D bounding boxes and rendered Normalized Object Coordinate Space (NOCS) map for 4 example scenes.

Abstract
Object pose estimation is crucial for robotic applications and augmented reality. Beyond instance level 6D
object pose estimation methods, estimating category-level
pose and shape has become a promising trend. As such, a
new research field needs to be supported by well-designed
datasets. To provide a benchmark with high-quality ground
truth annotations to the community, we introduce a multimodal dataset for category-level object pose estimation
with photometrically challenging objects termed PhoCaL.
PhoCaL comprises 60 high quality 3D models of household
objects over 8 categories including highly reflective, transparent and symmetric objects. We developed a novel robotsupported multi-modal (RGB, depth, polarisation) data acquisition and annotation process. It ensures sub-millimeter
accuracy of the pose for opaque textured, shiny and transparent objects, no motion blur and perfect camera synchronisation.
To set a benchmark for our dataset, state-of-the-art
RGB-D and monocular RGB methods are evaluated on the
challenging scenes of PhoCaL.

1. Introduction
Vision systems interacting with their environment need
to estimate the position and orientation of objects in space,
which highlights why 6D object pose estimation is an important task for robotic applications. Even though there
have been great advances in the field [6, 42], instance-level
6D pose methods require pre-scanned object models and
support limited number of objects. Category-level object
pose estimation [40] scales better to the needs of real operating environments. However, photometrically challenging
objects such as shiny, e.g. metallic, and transparent, e.g.
glass, objects are very common in our daily life and little
work has been done to estimate their 6D poses within practical accuracy on a category-level. The difficulty arises from
two aspects: first, it is difficult to annotate 6D pose ground
truth for photometrically challenging objects since no texture can be used to determine key points; second, commonly
used depth sensors fail to return the correct depth information, as structured light and stereo method often fail to
correctly interpret reflection and refraction artefacts. As a
consequence, RGB-D methods [25, 40] do not work reliably with photometrically challenging objects. We intro-

21222

