Continuous Scene Representations for Embodied AI
Samir Yitzhak Gadre1 *
Kiana Ehsani2
Shuran Song1
Roozbeh Mottaghi2,3
1
Columbia University 2 Allen Institute for AI 3 University of Washington
prior.allenai.org/projects/csr
Abstract
We propose Continuous Scene Representations (CSR),
a scene representation constructed by an embodied agent
navigating within a space, where objects and their relationships are modeled by continuous valued embeddings.
Our method captures feature relationships between objects,
composes them into a graph structure on-the-fly, and situates an embodied agent within the representation. Our key
insight is to embed pair-wise relationships between objects
in a latent space. This allows for a richer representation
compared to discrete relations (e.g., [ SUPPORT ], [ NEXTTO ]) commonly used for building scene representations.
CSR can track objects as the agent moves in a scene, update the representation accordingly, and detect changes in
room configurations. Using CSR, we outperform state-ofthe-art approaches for the challenging downstream task of
visual room rearrangement, without any task specific training. Moreover, we show the learned embeddings capture
salient spatial details of the scene and show applicability to
real world data. A summery video and code is available at
prior.allenai.org/projects/csr.

1. Introduction
To operate within a scene, embodied agents require a
comprehensive representation of their surroundings. Such
perceptual understanding should not be limited to determining object identities, but should rather capture relationships
between objects and between the agent and its surroundings. An expressive scene representation should also allow
for downstream task completion of interactive tasks without
additional training (i.e., zero-shot inference).
Towards building such representations, scene graphs
[2, 29, 65] are a candidate as they provide a compact and
explicit description of a scene. In a typical scene graph
pipeline, it is common to define a set of relationship labels,
use them to manually annotate connections between objects
in frames, and train a model to infer target graphs. However,
* Work done while SYG was a research intern at AI2. Correspondence
to sy@cs.columbia.edu

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Representing relationships. Our work, Continuous
Scene Representations, encodes object relationships into a graph
with nodes and edges represented as feature vectors. (a) If an object is shuffled between two trajectories, different embeddings allow for change detection. (b) As the agent moves within a trajectory, new nodes and edges are populated.

once labels are defined, there are inherent limitations. Once
trained, models are restricted to a fixed set of relationships.
Even if all relationships are modeled, how well can predefined discrete symbols represent the complex relationships between objects? Consider [ SUPPORT ], a common
semantic relation used in the literature [32, 62, 64]. The relationship “table supports mug” indicates the mug is on the
table, but it does not capture where. In practice, the agent
behavior may depend on this information.
Beyond the inherent limitations of modeling relationships as discrete symbols, scene graphs used in the literature
are typically static [28, 34, 61] (i.e., they represent a snapshot of a scene or a bundle of frames). In embodied settings,
new objects are observed as an agent explores, and the scene
representation should update on-the-fly. If an agent returns
to a position, it should determine if objects have moved.

14849

