Deformation and Correspondence Aware Unsupervised Synthetic-to-Real Scene
Flow Estimation for Point Clouds

1

Zhao Jin1 Yinjie Lei1, * Naveed Akhtar2 Haifeng Li3 Munawar Hayat4
Sichuan University 2 The University of Western Australia 3 Central South University 4 Monash University
jinzhao@stu.scu.edu.cn

yinjie@scu.edu.cn

lihaifeng@csu.edu.cn

First Frame

Abstract
Point cloud scene flow estimation is of practical importance for dynamic scene navigation in autonomous driving.
Since scene flow labels are hard to obtain, current methods train their models on synthetic data and transfer them
to real scenes. However, large disparities between existing
synthetic datasets and real scenes lead to poor model transfer. We make two major contributions to address that. First,
we develop a point cloud collector and scene flow annotator
for GTA-V engine to automatically obtain diverse realistic
training samples without human intervention. With that, we
develop a large-scale synthetic scene flow dataset GTA-SF.
Second, we propose a mean-teacher-based domain adaptation framework that leverages self-generated pseudo-labels
of the target domain. It also explicitly incorporates shape
deformation regularization and surface correspondence refinement to address distortions and misalignments in domain transfer. Through extensive experiments, we show that
our GTA-SF dataset leads to a consistent boost in model
generalization to three real datasets (i.e., Waymo, Lyft and
KITTI) as compared to the most widely used FT3D dataset.
Moreover, our framework achieves superior adaptation performance on six source-target dataset pairs, remarkably
closing the average domain gap by 60%. Data and codes
are available at https://github.com/leolyj/DCA-SRSFE

1. Introduction
Scene flow estimation aims to predict the 3D motion
field from two consecutive input frames. As a generalization of 2D optical flow, scene flow represents 3D motion of
objects and can be used to predict their movement in the
future, which is meaningful in robotic navigation and autonomous driving. In the early years, scene flow was estimated from stereo or RGB-D images [13, 44, 45, 49]. With
the recent advances in 3D sensing and data driven technologies, learning scene flow directly from point clouds has
* Corresponding Author: Yinjie Lei (yinjie@scu.edu.cn)

naveed.akhtar@uwa.edu.au

munawar.hayat@monash.edu

Second Frame

Prediction

Ground Truth

(a) Differences between FT3D [27] (left) and Waymo [17, 40] (right)
shape deformation
(i)

correspondence deviation
(ii)

(i)
(ii)

(b) Inaccurate predictions (i.e., results of adding estimated scene flow to
1st frame) caused by training on FT3D [27] and testing on Waymo [17,40]

Figure 1. Challenges for Synthetic-to-Real Scene Flow Estimation
(SRSFE). (a) Existing synthetic dataset FT3D [27] (left) stacks
and moves ShapeNet [38] objects for data generation, resulting
in unnatural scenes distinct from real data (right), e.g., Waymo
[17, 40]. (b) Due to domain shift, SRSFE fails to maintain local
structure and accurate movement, leading to shape deformation
and correspondence deviation. The lack of appropriate synthetic
datasets and performance drop in SRSFE motivate our work.

gained significant research attention [2, 7, 8, 17, 24, 32].
Obtaining training data for scene flow estimation requires 3D motion vector annotation of each point in the
scene, which is extremely challenging. One pragmatic solution is to employ synthetic data for training, whose annotations can be directly generated. However, training
on synthetic data and testing on real data for scene flow
estimation, i.e., Synthetic-to-Real Scene Flow Estimation
(SRSFE), faces two major challenges. First, SRSFE research on point clouds is still in its infancy, and currently
there is a lack of synthetic data that adequately captures the
real-world dynamics for this task. The only public synthetic
data for SRSFE on point clouds, i.e., FlyingThings3D [27]
(FT3D), is generated by randomly moving 3D objects sampled from ShapeNet [38]. This simplistic process leads to
unnatural scene flows in the data, see Fig. 1(a). Second,

7233

