Distribution-Aware Single-Stage Models for Multi-Person 3D Pose Estimation
Zitian Wang1,3

Xuecheng Nie3
1

Xiaochao Qu3

Yunpeng Chen3

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, China
2

Hangzhou Innovation Institute, Beihang University, China
3

MT Lab, Meitu Inc., China

wangzt.kghl@gmail.com {nxc, qxc, cyp5}@meitu.com

In this paper, we present a novel Distribution-Aware
Single-stage (DAS) model for tackling the challenging
multi-person 3D pose estimation problem. Different from
existing top-down and bottom-up methods, the proposed
DAS model simultaneously localizes person positions and
their corresponding body joints in the 3D camera space
in a one-pass manner. This leads to a simplified pipeline
with enhanced efficiency. In addition, DAS learns the true
distribution of body joints for the regression of their positions, rather than making a simple Laplacian or Gaussian
assumption as previous works. This provides valuable priors for model prediction and thus boosts the regressionbased scheme to achieve competitive performance with
volumetric-base ones. Moreover, DAS exploits a recursive update strategy for progressively approaching to regression target, alleviating the optimization difficulty and
further lifting the regression performance. DAS is implemented with a fully Convolutional Neural Network and endto-end learnable. Comprehensive experiments on benchmarks CMU Panoptic and MuPoTS-3D demonstrate the superior efficiency of the proposed DAS model, specifically
1.5x speedup over previous best model, and its stat-of-theart accuracy for multi-person 3D pose estimation.

1. Introduction
Estimating 3D poses of multiple persons from a single
RGB image is a fundamental yet challenging task in computer vision, which targets at localizing 3D positions of persons and their body joints in the camera space. Recently, it
has drawn much attention thanks to the broad applications
in AR/VR [2, 14], Gaming [30, 31, 33], Human-Computer
Interaction [7, 32], etc.
Prior works address this task via two-stage strategies.
They either adopt the top-down scheme [22, 28, 35, 41] that

liusi@buaa.edu.cn

i)
DAS
(a)

(a) Center Confidence Map

(b)

(c)

(b) Center Coordinate Map

(c) Joint Offset Map

ii)
PCK !"#

Abstract

† Corresponding author.

Si Liu1,2,†

Lin et al. (SOTA Top-down Method)
Zhen et al. (SOTA Bottom-up Method)
Ours

Runtime (per image)

Figure 1. Overview of our Distribution-Aware Single-stage (DAS)
model for multi-person 3D pose estimation. i) The brief pipeline
of DAS. ii) Comparison with state-of-the-arts on MuPoTs-3D.
DAS outperforms two-stage models in efficiency. It achieves superior performance with SOTA bottom-up method while competitive
with SOTA top-down one. For PCKrel , the higher, the better.

first localizes the absolute 3D person positions and then separately estimates the root-relative body joints for each person; or the bottom-up scheme [8,21,47] that in the first stage
detects all 3D body joints and groups them into the corresponding persons in the second stage. Although achieving
good accuracy, these methods suffer redundant computation
and complex postprocessing, caused by the sequential management for person position and body joint localization in
a two-stage manner. This leads to unsatisfied efficiency for
deployment in real scenarios.
Given the above motivation, we propose to simplify the
pipeline for multi-person 3D pose estimation, further pushing forward the frontier of its applications. Inspired by
schemes in the 2D counterpart [23, 40, 48], we aim to design a single-stage model to simultaneously localize 3D person positions and body joints. However, the extension from
2D to 3D scenes is non-trival, due to the ill-posed setup for
deriving depth information from a monocular RGB image
without prior knowledge on the data distribution.
To achieve the goal, we present a novel DistributionAware Single-stage (DAS) model in this paper. The pro-

13096

