Generalized Binary Search Network for Highly-Efficient Multi-View Stereo
Zhenxing Mi
Chang Di
Dan Xu
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{zmiaa, dchangac}@connect.ust.hk, danxu@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Multi-view Stereo (MVS) with known camera parameters is essentially a 1D search problem within a valid depth
range. Recent deep learning-based MVS methods typically
densely sample depth hypotheses in the depth range, and
then construct prohibitively memory-consuming 3D cost
volumes for depth prediction. Although coarse-to-fine sampling strategies alleviate this overhead issue to a certain
extent, the efficiency of MVS is still an open challenge.
In this work, we propose a novel method for highly efficient MVS that remarkably decreases the memory footprint, meanwhile clearly advancing state-of-the-art depth
prediction performance. We investigate what a search strategy can be reasonably optimal for MVS taking into account of both efficiency and effectiveness. We first formulate MVS as a binary search problem, and accordingly propose a generalized binary search network for MVS. Specifically, in each step, the depth range is split into 2 bins
with extra 1 error tolerance bin on both sides. A classification is performed to identify which bin contains the true
depth. We also design three mechanisms to respectively
handle classification errors, deal with out-of-range samples and decrease the training memory. The new formulation makes our method only sample a very small number
of depth hypotheses in each step, which is highly memory
efficient, and also greatly facilitates quick training convergence. Experiments on competitive benchmarks show that
our method achieves state-of-the-art accuracy with much
less memory. Particularly, our method obtains an overall
score of 0.289 on DTU dataset and tops the first place on
challenging Tanks and Temples advanced dataset among all
the learning-based methods. Our code will be released at
https://github.com/MiZhenxing/GBi-Net.

1. Introduction
Multi-view Stereo (MVS) is a long-standing and fundamental topic in computer vision, which aims to reconstruct 3D geometry of a scene from a set of overlapping images [9, 10, 26, 32, 35]. With known camera pa-

Dense linear search by regression

Dense coarse-to-fine search by regression

Binary search by classification

Hypothesis
Bin edge

(a)

Different searches
(b)

Figure 1. (a) Comparison with previous state-of-the-art learningbased MVS methods [5,11,33,34,41,44,45] on DTU [2]. The relationship between the overall error and the GPU memory overhead
with image size 1152 × 1600 and image number 5. (b) Comparison of the previous dense search and the proposed binary search.

rameters, MVS matches pixels across images to compute
dense correspondences and recover 3D points, which is
essentially a 1D search problem [8]. A depth map is
widely used as 3D representation due to its regular format. To overcome the issue of coarse matching in previous purely geometry-based methods, recent learning-based
MVS methods [14, 21, 41, 42] designed deep networks for
dense depth prediction to significantly advance traditional
pipelines. For instance, MVSNet [41] and RMVSNet [42]
propose to construct 3D cost volumes from 2D image features with dense depth hypotheses. A 3D cost volume is
a 5D tensor and is typically regularized by a 3D Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) or a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) for depth prediction.
The importance of 3D cost volume regularization for accurate depth prediction has been confirmed by other works
[4, 5, 11]. However, a severe problem is that 3D cost
volumes are highly memory-consuming. Existing works
made significant efforts to address this issue via decreasing
the resolution of feature maps [41], using a coarse-to-fine
strategy that gradually increases resolution of feature maps
while decreasing the depth hypothesis number [4, 5, 11],
and removing expensive 3D CNN or RNN [33, 40]. Although the memory can be alleviated to some extent, relatively lower accuracy is commonly observed. The size of
3D cost volume, specifically the depth hypothesis number,

12991

