PlanarRecon: Real-time 3D Plane Detection and Reconstruction
from Posed Monocular Videos

1

Yiming Xie1,2 Matheus Gadelha3 Fengting Yang4 Xiaowei Zhou2† Huaizu Jiang1†
Northeastern University 2 Zhejiang University 3 Adobe Research 4 The Pennsylvania State University

…
Planar
Recon

…

Input: Posed images
(1015 frames)

Output: 3D Planes
(4.06 s)

NeuralRecon+Seq-RANSAC
(59.14 s)

Textured Planes

Ground Truth

Figure 1. Comparison of the proposed approach, PlanarRecon, and our baseline. Colored planes mean different instances. We also show the textured
mesh for our approach. For the multi-view method NeuralRecon [37] + Seq-RANSAC [14], the Sequential RANSAC is used to extract planes after the
geometry reconstruction. Our model produces a much more accurate and coherent 3D plane detection in real-time. Best viewed in color.

Abstract
We present PlanarRecon – a novel framework for globally coherent detection and reconstruction of 3D planes
from a posed monocular video. Unlike previous works that
detect planes in 2D from a single image, PlanarRecon incrementally detects planes in 3D for each video fragment,
which consists of a set of key frames, from a volumetric representation of the scene using neural networks. A
learning-based tracking and fusion module is designed to
merge planes from previous fragments to form a coherent
global plane reconstruction. Such design allows PlanarRecon to integrate observations from multiple views within
each fragment and temporal information across different
ones, resulting in an accurate and coherent reconstruction of the scene abstraction with low-polygonal geometry. Experiments show that the proposed approach achieves
state-of-the-art performances on the ScanNet dataset while
being real-time. Code is available at the project page:
https://neu-vi.github.io/planarrecon/.

This work was partially done when Yiming Xie was a research assistant at Zhejiang University. † Corresponding authors: Xiaowei Zhou and
Huaizu Jiang.

1. Introduction
Recovering 3D planar surfaces from a posed monocular
video is a critical task for many downstream applications
in 3D vision, such as Augmented and Virtual Reality (AR
and VR), interior modeling, and human-robot interaction.
Planar surfaces provide a compact representation and important geometric cues of the 3D scene. AR, for example,
to enable realistic and immersive interactions between AR
effects and the surrounding physical scene, 3D plane detection needs to be accurate, consistent, and performed in
real-time. While camera poses can be tracked accurately
with state-of-the-art visual-inertial SLAM systems [1,5,30],
real-time image-based 3D plane detection remains to be a
challenging problem due to the low detection quality and
high computation demands.
Most recent deep learning-based plane recovery works
[22, 23, 38, 42, 48] focus on the single-view case. Their
pipeline typically aims to jointly segment the plane instances and regress the plane parameters (i.e., surface normals and offsets). Despite the significant progress made in
this direction using deep neural networks, because of the
single-view scale ambiguity, these methods cannot deliver
absolute depth estimation in the unknown scenes. Moreover, fusing the plane detections from multiple views is not
trivial. Jin et al. [19] extend the single-view approach [22]
to sparse views (mostly 2 views), where time-consuming

6219

