PCA-Based Knowledge Distillation Towards Lightweight
and Content-Style Balanced Photorealistic Style Transfer Models
Tai-Yin Chiu
University of Texas at Austin

Danna Gurari
University of Colorado Boulder

chiu.taiyin@utexas.edu

danna.gurari@colorado.edu

Figure 1. Exemplification of our PCA-based knowledge distillation resulting in models that are more lightweight, faster, and achieve a
better content-style balance for photorealistic style transfer than existing models. We demonstrate its versatility by reporting results for
when our approach is applied to two backbone architectures: VGG (Ours-VGG) and MobileNet (Ours-Mob). Compared to WCT2 , our
smallest model uses only 0.7% of the parameters (73K vs. 10.12M) while producing results over 6x faster (0.04s vs. 0.27s). Additionally,
our distilled models consistently transfer stronger style effects than WCT2 [48] and preserve content better than PhotoWCT-HFR (an
improved variant of PhotoWCT [24]), PhotoWCT2 [11], and a CKD [43] distilled model.

Abstract
Photorealistic style transfer entails transferring the style
of a reference image to another image so the result seems
like a plausible photo. Our work is inspired by the observation that existing models are slow due to their large
sizes. We introduce PCA-based knowledge distillation to
distill lightweight models and show it is motivated by theory. To our knowledge, this is the first knowledge distillation method for photorealistic style transfer. Our experiments demonstrate its versatility for use with different backbone architectures, VGG and MobileNet, across
six image resolutions. Compared to existing models, our
top-performing model runs at speeds 5-20x faster using
at most 1% of the parameters. Additionally, our distilled models achieve a better balance between stylization
strength and content preservation than existing models. To
support reproducing our method and models, we share
the code at https://github.com/chiutaiyin/PCA-KnowledgeDistillation.

1. Introduction
Photorealistic style transfer is the task of rendering an
image (content image) in the style of a reference image
(style image) to create a photorealistic result. Examples are
shown in Fig. 1. A key challenge the community has focused on tackling since the seminal neural network-based

algorithm for this task [30] has been how to simultaneously achieve a good balance between stylization strength
and content preservation while running fast to better support practical applications [11, 24, 46, 48].
The status quo for modern photorealistic style transfer
models is to use autoencoders. As illustrated in Fig. 2(a),
the basic model uses a pre-trained VGG-19 [40]1 as the encoder to extract content and style features, then a feature
transformation to adapt the content feature with respect to
the style feature, and finally a decoder to invert the adapted
feature to a stylized image. A limitation of this framework
is that the speed of autoencoder-based approaches is limited
by the large size of the VGG-19 backbone.
This size limitation is further amplified in state-of-theart models, as they extend the basic autoencoder framework by using multiple feature transformations to better
capture style effects. For instance, PhotoWCT [24] and
PhotoWCT2 [11] perform coarse-to-fine feature transformations to sequentially adapt the coarse content feature
(i.e., relu4 1 content feature from VGG) to the fine content feature (i.e., relu1 1 content feature from VGG) with
respect to the corresponding style features. This means the
fine style feature is added on top of the coarse style feature and so can produce strong style effects. However, as
1 VGG-19 is favored in artistic [7, 15, 16, 19, 20, 22, 23, 39] and photore-

alistic [4, 11, 24, 30, 46, 48] style transfer research due to its simple architecture with no complex multiple branches and residual modules, making
VGG features easier to interpret for content and style.

7844

