Cloth-Changing Person Re-identification from A Single Image
with Gait Prediction and Regularization
Xin Jin1,2 *, Tianyu He2 , Kecheng Zheng1 , Zhiheng Yin3 , Xu Shen2 , Zhen Huang1 , Ruoyu Feng1 ,
Jianqiang Huang2 , Zhibo Chen1†, Xian-Sheng Hua2†
1
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Alibaba Cloud Computing Ltd.
3
University of Michigan
{jinxustc,zkcys001,hz13,ustcfry}@mail.ustc.edu.cn,yzhiheng@umich.edu,chenzhibo@ustc.edu.cn
{timhe.hty,shenxu.sx,jianqiang.hjq,xiansheng.hxs}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Cloth-Changing person re-identification (CC-ReID)
aims at matching the same person across different locations over a long-duration, e.g., over days, and therefore
inevitably has cases of changing clothing. In this paper, we
focus on handling well the CC-ReID problem under a more
challenging setting, i.e., just from a single image, which enables an efficient and latency-free person identity matching
for surveillance. Specifically, we introduce Gait recognition as an auxiliary task to drive the Image ReID model
to learn cloth-agnostic representations by leveraging personal unique and cloth-independent gait information, we
name this framework as GI-ReID. GI-ReID adopts a twostream architecture that consists of an image ReID-Stream
and an auxiliary gait recognition stream (Gait-Stream). The
Gait-Stream, that is discarded in the inference for high efficiency, acts as a regulator to encourage the ReID-Stream
to capture cloth-invariant biometric motion features during
the training. To get temporal continuous motion cues from a
single image, we design a Gait Sequence Prediction (GSP)
module for Gait-Stream to enrich gait information. Finally,
a semantics consistency constraint over two streams is enforced for effective knowledge regularization. Extensive experiments on multiple image-based Cloth-Changing ReID
benchmarks, e.g., LTCC, PRCC, Real28, and VC-Clothes,
demonstrate that GI-ReID performs favorably against the
state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) aims at identifying a specific person across cameras, times, and locations. Abundant
approaches have been proposed to address the challenging geometric misalignment among person images caused
* This work was done when he was visiting Alibaba as a research intern.
† Corresponding author.

Same person with different clothes

Gait tells us that they are the same person

Different persons with similar clothes

Gait tells us that they are different persons

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) shows a realistic wanted case that a suspect changed
her coat from black to white for hiding. (b) reveals that the gait
of person could help ReID, especially when the identity matching
meets the cloth-changing challenge (All faces in the images are
masked for anonymization).

by diversities of human poses [43, 48, 66], camera viewpoints [24, 50, 62], and style/scales [25, 26]. These methods
usually inadvertently assume that both query and gallery
images of the same person have the same clothing. In general, they perform well on the trained short-term datasets
but suffer from significant performance degradations when
testing on a long-term collected ReID dataset [45,52,57,59].
Because large clothing variations occur over long-duration
among these datasets, which seriously hinders the accuracy
of ReID. For example, Figure 1(a) shows a realistic wanted
case 1 where a suspect that captured by surveillance devices
at different times/locations changed her coat from black to
white, which makes ReID difficult, especially when she
wears a mask and the captured images are of low quality.
In recent years, to handle the cloth-changing ReID (CCReID) problem, some studies have contributed some new
datasets where clothing changes are commonplace (e.g.,
1 Information comes from https://www.wjr.com/2016/01/06/womanwanted-in-southwest-detroit-bank-robbery/

14278

