HLRTF: Hierarchical Low-Rank Tensor Factorization for Inverse Problems in
Multi-Dimensional Imaging
Deyu Meng2,3
Taixiang Jiang4
Yisi Luo1
Xile Zhao1 *
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
2
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
4
Southwestern University of Finance and Economics, Chengdu, China
yisiluo1221@foxmail.com, xlzhao122003@163.com, dymeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, taixiangjiang@gmail.com
1

Abstract
Inverse problems in multi-dimensional imaging, e.g.,
completion, denoising, and compressive sensing, are challenging owing to the big volume of the data and the inherent ill-posedness. To tackle these issues, this work unsupervisedly learns a hierarchical low-rank tensor factorization
(HLRTF) by solely using an observed multi-dimensional
image. Specifically, we embed a deep neural network
(DNN) into the tensor singular value decomposition framework and develop the HLRTF, which captures the underlying low-rank structures of multi-dimensional images with
compact representation abilities. This DNN herein serves
as a nonlinear transform from a vector to another to help
obtain a better low-rank representation. Our HLRTF infers the parameters of the DNN and the underlying lowrank structure of the original data from its observation via
the gradient descent using a non-reference loss function in
an unsupervised manner. To address the vanishing gradient
in extreme scenarios, e.g., structural missing pixels, we introduce a parametric total variation regularization to constrain the DNN parameters and the tensor factor parameters with theoretical analysis. We apply our HLRTF for
typical inverse problems in multi-dimensional imaging including completion, denoising, and snapshot spectral imaging, which demonstrates its generality and wide applicability. Extensive results illustrate the superiority of our method
as compared with state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Tensor factorization family methods extend familiar matrix cases to multi-dimensional modalities for effective
analysis and processing of real-world multi-dimensional
images, e.g., videos, hyperspectral images (HSIs), and
* Corresponding author

PSNR 14.65
Observed

PSNR 23.40
TNN [58]

PSNR 23.37
DCTNN [33]

PSNR 32.68
HLRTF

Figure 1. Top: The results of multi-dimensional image completion by TNN (based on the DFT) [58], DCTNN (based on the
DCT) [33], and HLRTF (based on the DNN transform) on MSI
Beans
rate 0.1. Bottom: The AccEgy (AccEgy
P
P with sampling
= ki=1 σi2 / j σj2 with σi denotes the i-th singular value [46])
versus the percentage of singular values of the transformed frontal
slices by different transforms (i.e., the DNN transform, the DNN
transform with only one layer, the DCT, and the DFT). The DNN
transform obtains lower-rank transformed frontal slices and thus
the corresponding HLRTF achieves better recovery performance.

multispectral images (MSIs) [1, 11]. Real-world multidimensional images are usually self-correlated and thus enjoy intrinsic low-rank structures [15, 28]. Therefore, lowrank tensor factorization methods utilize this property to
design specific forms and operations to exploit the lowrankness or/and enhance the low-rankness by minimizing
the nuclear norm [17, 52, 60, 61], successfully applying to
various applications such as hyperspectral imaging [41,48],
image/video inpainting [26], network compression [42],
and recommender system [6, 7].
Most tensor factorization methods rely on multilinear
operations. The classic Tucker decomposition and CP decomposition [13, 24, 28, 44] were proposed for tensor analysis. Recently, tensor network decompositions including

19303

