Learning Program Representations for Food Images and Cooking Recipes
Dim P. Papadopoulos1,3
1

MIT CSAIL

2

Nestle

Enrique Mora2 Nadiia Chepurko1
Ferda Ofli4 Antonio Torralba1
3

DTU Compute

4

Kuan Wei Huang1

Qatar Computing Research Institute, HBKU

dimp@dtu.dk, enrique.mora@es.nestle.com, {nadiia,kwhuang,torralba}@mit.edu, fofli@hbku.edu.qa

Food image

Abstract
In this paper, we are interested in modeling a how-to
instructional procedure, such as a cooking recipe, with a
meaningful and rich high-level representation. Specifically,
we propose to represent cooking recipes and food images
as cooking programs. Programs provide a structured representation of the task, capturing cooking semantics and sequential relationships of actions in the form of a graph. This
allows them to be easily manipulated by users and executed
by agents. To this end, we build a model that is trained to
learn a joint embedding between recipes and food images
via self-supervision and jointly generate a program from
this embedding as a sequence. To validate our idea, we
crowdsource programs for cooking recipes and show that:
(a) projecting the image-recipe embeddings into programs
leads to better cross-modal retrieval results; (b) generating programs from images leads to better recognition results compared to predicting raw cooking instructions; and
(c) we can generate food images by manipulating programs
via optimizing the latent code of a GAN. Code, data, and
models are available online1 .

1. Introduction
Food is an important part of our lives. Imagine an AI
agent that can look at a dish and recognize ingredients
and reliably reconstruct the exact recipe of the dish, or
another agent that can read, interpret and execute a cooking recipe to produce our favorite meal. Computer vision
community has long studied image-level food classification [4, 10, 21, 26, 27, 34], and only recently focused on understanding the mapping between recipes and images using
multi-modal representations [14, 30, 48, 49, 67]. However,
retrieval systems are limited to the existing database and
usually fail for queries outside of this database while generating the full recipe from an image remains a challenge [47].
1 http://cookingprograms.csail.mit.edu

Cooking recipe
Linguine with Peppers and Sausage
Ingredients

Instructions

• (8 ounce) package linguini pasta

• Cook pasta in a large pot of boiling salted water until al dente.
• While the pasta is cooking, prepare the sauce.
• Sauté sausages in a heavy skillet over medium high heat until light
brown, breaking up clumps with back of spoon.
• Add peppers, onion, and garlic; saute until tender.
• Add wine and simmer until liquid is slightly reduced, about 6
minutes.
• Drain pasta, and add to the skillet.
• Toss to combine.
• Serve.

• ½ pound sweet Italian sausage
• 2 red bell peppers, chopped
• 1 onion, chopped
• 1 clove garlic, minced
• 1 cup white wine
• ¼ cup grated Parmesan cheese

Cooking program and graph
h1 = Cook(pasta, tool=pot, time=until al dente)

Sausage

Saute

Onion

Add

h2 = Saute(sausage, tool=skillet, temp=medium

h2 Peppers

heat, time=until light brown, how=breaking
clumps)

h3

h3 = Add(h2, peppers, onions, garlic)
h4 = Saute(h3, time=until tender)

Pasta

Saute

Cook

Add

h4

h5 = Add(h4, wine)
h6 = Simmer(h5, time=6 minutes)
h7 = Drain(h1)
h8 = Add(h6, h7)
h9 = Toss(h8, why=to combine)
out = Serve(h9)

Garlic

h1

h5

Drain

Simmer

h7
Add

h6
h8

out

h9
Toss

Serve

return out

Figure 1. Cooking programs. We learn cooking programs from
food images and recipes. Programs provide a structured representation of the cooking procedures which can also be represented as
graphs (for brevity, we only show action and ingredient nodes).

Cooking recipes are step-by-step instructional procedures which we propose to represent as programs, capturing all the cooking semantics and relationships. A program
contains a sequence of actions that can be written as functions (e.g., Cook(), Add()). Each action operates on
specific ingredients under certain conditions, such as time
or tool (e.g., Cook(pasta, time=‘10 minutes’,
tool=‘pot’)). A program also captures the sequential
dependency of the actions by maintaining their input-output
connections. Note that even though cooking actions are often performed sequentially in time, their connections are not
necessarily sequential. The program can also be represented
as a graph where each function and parameter is a node,
while the edges are the function connections or the connections between the parameters and the actions (Fig. 1).
Our goal is to generate cooking programs conditioned
on food images or cooking recipes. We build a model that
leverages the natural pairing of food images and recipes by

16559

