Equivariance Allows Handling Multiple Nuisance Variables
When Analyzing Pooled Neuroimaging Datasets
Vishnu Suresh Lokhande

Rudrasis Chakraborty

Sathya N. Ravi

Vikas Singh

lokhande@cs.wisc.edu

rudrasischa@gmail.com

sathya@uic.edu

vsingh@biostat.wisc.edu

Abstract
Pooling multiple neuroimaging datasets across institutions often enables improvements in statistical power when
evaluating associations (e.g., between risk factors and disease outcomes) that may otherwise be too weak to detect.
When there is only a single source of variability (e.g., different scanners), domain adaptation and matching the distributions of representations may suffice in many scenarios. But in the presence of more than one nuisance variable which concurrently influence the measurements, pooling datasets poses unique challenges, e.g., variations in the
data can come from both the acquisition method as well
as the demographics of participants (gender, age). Invariant representation learning, by itself, is ill-suited to fully
model the data generation process. In this paper, we show
how bringing recent results on equivariant representation
learning (for studying symmetries in neural networks) instantiated on structured spaces together with simple use
of classical results on causal inference provides an effective practical solution. In particular, we demonstrate how
our model allows dealing with more than one nuisance
variable under some assumptions and can enable analysis of pooled scientific datasets in scenarios that would
otherwise entail removing a large portion of the samples.
Our code is available on https://github.com/vsinghgroup/DatasetPooling

1. Introduction
Observational studies in many disciplines acquire crosssectional/longitudinal clinical and imaging data to understand diseases such as neurodegeneration and dementia
[41]. Typically, these studies are sufficiently powered for
the primary scientific hypotheses of interest. However,
secondary analyses to investigate weaker but potentially
interesting associations between risk factors (such as genetics) and disease outcomes are often difficult when using common statistical significance thresholds, due to the
small/medium sample sizes.
Over the last decade, there are coordinated large scale

Figure 1.

Learning Invariant Representations. In our framework,
input images X are pooled together from multiple sites. An encoder Φ
maps X to the latent representations Φ(X) that corresponds to high-level
causal features XC that influences the label prediction. Unlike the input
images X, Φ(X) is robust to nuisance attributes like site (scanner) and
covariates (age). Φ is trained alongside predictor h and decoder Ψ.

multi-institutional imaging studies (e.g., ADNI [24], NIH
All of Us and HCP [17]) but the types of data collected
or the project’s scope (e.g., demographic pool of participants) may not be suited for studying specific secondary
scientific questions. A “pooled” imaging dataset obtained
from combining roughly similar studies across different institutions/sites, when possible, is an attractive alternative.
The pooled datasets provide much larger sample sizes and
improved statistical power to identify early disease biomarkers – analyses which would not otherwise be possible [14,27]. But even when study participants are consistent
across sites, pooling poses challenges. This is true even for
linear regression [53] – improvement in statistical power is
not always guaranteed. Partly due to these as well as other
reasons, high visibility projects such as ENIGMA [44] have
reported findings using meta-analysis methods.
Data pooling and fairness. Even under ideal conditions,
pooling imaging datasets across sites requires care. Assume that the participants across two sites, say site1 and
site2 , are perfectly gender matched with the same proportion of male/female and the age distribution (as well as the
proportion of diseased/health controls) is also identical. In
this idealized setting, the only difference between sites may
come from variations in scanners or acquisition (e.g., pulse
sequences). When training modern neural networks for a
regression/classification task with imaging data obtained in
this scenario, we may ask that the representations learned by

10432

