The Auto Arborist Dataset: A Large-Scale Benchmark for Multiview Urban
Forest Monitoring Under Domain Shift
Sara Beery*† , Guanhang Wu† , Trevor Edwards† , Filip Pavetic† , Bo Majewski† ,
Shreyasee Mukherjee† , Stanley Chan† , John Morgan† , Vivek Rathod† , Jonathan Huang†
California Institute of Technology* Google†

Abstract
Generalization to novel domains is a fundamental challenge for computer vision. Near-perfect accuracy on benchmarks is common, but these models do not work as expected
when deployed outside of the training distribution . To build
computer vision systems that truly solve real-world problems at global scale, we need benchmarks that fully capture
real-world complexity, including geographic domain shift,
long-tailed distributions, and data noise.
We propose urban forest monitoring as an ideal testbed
for studying and improving upon these computer vision
challenges, while working towards filling a crucial environmental and societal need. Urban forests provide significant
benefits to urban societies. However, planning and maintaining these forests is expensive. One particularly costly
aspect of urban forest management is monitoring the existing trees in a city: e.g., tracking tree locations, species,
and health. Monitoring efforts are currently based on tree
censuses built by human experts, costing cities millions of
dollars per census and thus collected infrequently.
Previous investigations into automating urban forest
monitoring focused on small datasets from single cities,
covering only common categories . To address these shortcomings, we introduce a new large-scale dataset that joins
public tree censuses from 23 cities with a large collection of
street level and aerial imagery. Our Auto Arborist dataset
contains over 2.5M trees and 344 genera and is >2 orders of magnitude larger than the closest dataset in the
literature. We introduce baseline results on our dataset
across modalities as well as metrics for the detailed analysis of generalization with respect to geographic distribution
shifts, vital for such a system to be deployed at-scale.

1. Introduction
Urban forests provide critical benefits to the over 4B
people living in urban areas worldwide [107]. They filter air and water, capture stormwater runoff, sequester
atmospheric carbon dioxide, limit erosion and drought,
and save energy in a variety of ways (e.g., by providing

Figure 1. The Auto Arborist dataset covers 23 cities across North America, and contains paired aerial and multiview ground-level imagery for
2.6M trees across 344 unique genera.

shade and thus reducing cooling costs and urban heat islands [100, 120, 138, 141]). In the US alone, urban forests
cover 127M acres and produce ecosystem services valued
at >$18B [106]. These forests make up the foundations of
our urban ecosystems, and provide habitat for diverse urban
wildlife and insect populations [44]. Urban forest monitoring, measuring the size, health and species distribution over
time, allows us to (1) quantify ecosystem services including
air quality improvement [20, 47], carbon sequestration [92,
106,121], and benefits to public health [28,47,125,125], (2)
track damage from extreme weather events [8, 67, 99], and
(3) target planting to improve robustness to climate change,
disease and infestation [24, 64, 114, 115]. Further, lack of
access to urban greenery is a key aspect of urban social
inequality [56, 93, 104], including socioeconomic inequality [52, 73, 86] and racial inequality [21, 129]. Urban forest
monitoring enables the quantification of this inequality and

21294

