Revisiting Document Image Dewarping by Grid Regularization
Xiangwei Jiang1,2 ,* Rujiao Long3 ,* Nan Xue1 , Zhibo Yang3 , Cong Yao3 , Gui-Song Xia1,2†
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
2
3
LIESMARS, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
Alibaba-Group, Hangzhou, China

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of document image dewarping, which aims at eliminating the geometric distortion
in document images for document digitization. Instead of
designing a better neural network to approximate the optical flow fields between the inputs and outputs, we pursue the
best readability by taking the text lines and the document
boundaries into account from a constrained optimization
perspective. Specifically, our proposed method first learns
the boundary points and the pixels in the text lines and
then follows the most simple observation that the boundaries and text lines in both horizontal and vertical directions
should be kept after dewarping to introduce a novel grid
regularization scheme. To obtain the final forward mapping
for dewarping, we solve an optimization problem with our
proposed grid regularization. The experiments comprehensively demonstrate that our proposed approach outperforms
the prior arts by large margins in terms of readability (with
the metrics of Character Errors Rate and the Edit Distance)
while maintaining the best image quality on the publiclyavailable DocUNet benchmark.

1. Introduction
The technologies of document digitization (DocDig)
have largely facilitated our daily lives by transferring the
information written in paper sheets from the physical world
to electronic devices. Since the paper sheets are thin, fragile and easily-deformed, it is usually required to carefully
capture document images of paper sheets with the scanners to avoid unexpected deformation of papers for digitization. Such a pipeline works well to some extent, however,
it quickly loses efficiency when we are using handheld mobile devices, e.g., smartphones, for fast, painless but accurate document digitization. Therefore, the communities of
computer vision and document analysis have been making
efforts on getting rid of the restriction of DocDig by studying the problem of document image dewarping.
There is a rich history for the problem of document im* Equal Contribution
† Correspondence Author

(a) Input Image

(b) DocUNet [27]

(c) DewarpNet [10]

(d) Geometric Element

(e) Deformation Grid

(f) Our Result

Figure 1. Our method leverages the geometric information of
text lines and document boundaries to generate a deformation grid
which effectively reduces the error rate of character recognition.

age dewarping. In the early pioneering works [2,31,35], this
problem was formulated as surface reconstruction from different imaging configurations including multi-view images,
binocular cameras as well as structured-lightning depth sensors, achieving accurate results in the lab environment while
remaining issues for practical usage. Subsequently, the
prior knowledge of paper-sheets in single-view images was
extensively studied by detecting the boundaries [5], text
lines [17, 18], structured lights [31], and so on [37] in the
pre-deep-learning era. As those approaches depend on the
detected prior knowledge, they are limited by the detection
quality of those low-level visual cues, thus posing an issue
of accuracy for the dewarping.
With the resurgence of deep learning in recent years,
convolutional neural networks (ConvNets) have also been
used for dewarping document image by learning the deformation field between the distorted input images and the expected flattened ones [10,11,21,27,28,39] under various supervision signals such as the synthetic data annotations [27],

4543

