GuideFormer: Transformers for Image Guided Depth Completion
Kyeongha Rho1∗
1

Jinsung Ha2∗

Youngjung Kim1†

Agency for Defense Development (ADD), Daejeon, Korea, 2 LUXROBO, Seoul, Korea
{khrho325, read12300}@add.re.kr, jinsung@luxrobo.com

Abstract
Depth completion has been widely studied to predict a
dense depth image from its sparse measurement and a single color image. However, most state-of-the-art methods
rely on static convolutional neural networks (CNNs) which
are not flexible enough for capturing the dynamic nature of
input contexts. In this paper, we propose GuideFormer, a
fully transformer-based architecture for dense depth completion. We first process sparse depth and color guidance
images with separate transformer branches to extract hierarchical and complementary token representations. Each
branch consists of a stack of self-attention blocks and has
key design features to make our model suitable for the task.
We also devise an effective token fusion method based on
guided-attention mechanism. It explicitly models information flow between the two branches and captures intermodal dependencies that cannot be obtained from depth or
color image alone. These properties allow GuideFormer
to enjoy various visual dependencies and recover precise
depth values while preserving fine details. We evaluate
GuideFormer on the KITTI dataset containing real-world
driving scenes and provide extensive ablation studies. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Guided depth completion is the task of converting sparse
depth observations to dense depth maps with the corresponding color image. This task has been drawing more
and more research attention, thanks to its wide range of applications in the computer vision field, e.g., 3D scene mapping [26] and 3D object detection [22] for robotic perception and autonomous driving. However, commercial depthsensing cameras (e.g. LiDAR sensors) suffer from their
inherent drawbacks, including specular surfaces, quantization, occlusion, and noise. These properties make depth
completion a challenging problem. To tackle depth completion, a variety of methods, mostly based on deep convoluThis research was supported by the Next Generation R&D Program
(912706601), funded by the Agency for Defense Development (ADD).
∗ Equal contribution, † Corresponding author

tional neural networks (CNNs), have been proposed. Early
works deal only with sparse depth input to estimate dense
depth via sparsity invariant CNN [30] or auxiliary vision
tasks [13, 18]. Recent works have shown a great success
in using multi-modal information, including color images
[10, 15, 20, 31, 40] and surface normal [23, 36]. These methods have achieved state-of-the-art performances over the
conventional methods using only depth input. Nevertheless,
CNN-based methods show fundamental limitations by their
basic building block, i.e., the static convolutional layers.
The interaction between convolution kernels and inputs is
content-independent. Applying the same kernels to any region might not be flexible for adapting diverse and disparate
spatial contexts. Furthermore, the convolution is not effective for modeling long-range dependencies. Recently, there
are several attempts to develop content-adaptive CNNs for
depth completion. ACMNet [40] constructs a graph propagation based network, and learns graph affinities by considering color and depth information. GuideNet [29] proposes a guided-convolution module, dynamically predicting content-adaptive convolution kernels from color images. However, these methods still use CNNs as the backbone, which leaves room for further improvement.
In this paper, we propose GuideFormer, a dual-branch
architecture that takes full advantage of attention mechanisms for depth completion. Each branch, consisting of a
stack of modified self-attention blocks, embeds hierarchical
and complementary tokens from sparse depth and color images. This allows our model to better capture adaptive intramodal dependencies through the whole completion process.
An effective token fusion method, called guided-attention
module (GAM), is also introduced by extending the standard self-attention mechanism. It models explicit information exchange among the two complementary branches and
captures inter-modal dependencies from the learned crossmodal similarity. To the best of our knowledge, we are the
first to apply fully transformer-based architecture for depth
completion task. Experimental results on the KITTI benchmark [30] demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
method, which outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:

6250

