Attribute Surrogates Learning and Spectral Tokens Pooling
in Transformers for Few-shot Learning
Yangji He1,2
Weihan Liang1,2
Dongyang Zhao1,2
Hong-Yu Zhou3
Weifeng Ge1,2 *
Yizhou Yu 3
Wenqiang Zhang2
1
Nebula AI Group, School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing
3
The University of Hong Kong

Abstract
This paper presents new hierarchically cascaded transformers that can improve data efficiency through attribute
surrogates learning and spectral tokens pooling. Vision
transformers have recently been thought of as a promising alternative to convolutional neural networks for visual recognition. But when there is no sufficient data, it
gets stuck in overfitting and shows inferior performance.
To improve data efficiency, we propose hierarchically cascaded transformers that exploit intrinsic image structures
through spectral tokens pooling and optimize the learnable
parameters through latent attribute surrogates. The intrinsic image structure is utilized to reduce the ambiguity between foreground content and background noise by spectral tokens pooling. And the attribute surrogate learning
scheme is designed to benefit from the rich visual information in image-label pairs instead of simple visual concepts assigned by their labels. Our Hierarchically Cascaded Transformers, called HCTransformers, is built upon
a self-supervised learning framework DINO and is tested
on several popular few-shot learning benchmarks.
In the inductive setting, HCTransformers surpass the
DINO baseline by a large margin of 9.7% 5-way 1shot accuracy and 9.17% 5-way 5-shot accuracy on
miniImageNet, which demonstrates HCTransformers are
efficient to extract discriminative features. Also, HCTransformers show clear advantages over SOTA few-shot classification methods in both 5-way 1-shot and 5-way 5-shot
settings on four popular benchmark datasets, including
miniImageNet, tieredImageNet, FC100, and CIFAR-FS.
The trained weights and codes are available at https:
//github.com/StomachCold/HCTransformers.

* Corresponding author:wfge@fudan.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Few-shot learning [16, 33, 53] refers to the problem of
learning from a very small amount of labeled data, which
is expected to reduce the labeling cost, achieve a low-cost
and quick model deployment, and shrink the gap between
human intelligence and machine models. The key problem of few-shot learning is how to efficiently learn from
the rich information hidden in annotated data. Inspired by
the part-whole hierarchical concepts used in GraphFPN [71]
and GLOM [21], part layout information of objects/scenes
contains various visual information. If it can be embedded
in vision transformers to guide the feature learning, we will
get discriminative feature representations. Meanwhile, to
avoid the concentration of visual information on single concepts, we need to expand the hidden information of image
labels into a much more general semantic representation.
Then how to mine such latent information and generate a
complete description of visual concepts becomes important.
In this paper, we aim to improve the data efficiency in
ViT [13] for few-shot image classification. To be specific,
we design a meta feature extractor composed of three consecutively cascaded transformers, each of which models the
dependency of image regions at different semantic levels.
The output tokens of a previous transformer are passed to
a spectral tokens pooling layer to produce the input tokens
for the subsequent. The spectral tokens pooling is partly
based on spectral clustering [38, 64], where features of tokens within the same clusters are averaged to generate new
token descriptors for the subsequent transformer. The motivation behind the spectral tokens pooling is to bring the image segmentation hierarchy into transformers. That means
when the transformer performs self-attention, it needs to
consider the image layout not simply through the positional
embedding, but from the semantic relationship of different
image regions. In our implementation, each token can be
thought to represent some specific region within an image.

9119

