Task Decoupled Framework for Reference-based Super-Resolution
†

†

Yixuan Huang1*, Xiaoyun Zhang1*, Yu Fu1 , Siheng Chen1,2 , Ya Zhang1,2 , Yanfeng Wang1,2 , Dazhi He1
1
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{huangyixuan,xiaoyun.zhang,fyuu11,sihengc,ya zhang,wangyanfeng,hedazhi}@sjtu.edu.cn
input & reference

reference

C2-Matching

input & reference

Ours

RRDB

C2-Matching

Ours

(b) Reference-misuse issue

(a) Reference-underuse issue

Figure 1. Current state-of-the-art RefSR methods suffer from (a) reference-underuse issue and (b) reference-misuse issue due to
the improper coupled framework. Speciﬁcally, for the reference-underuse issue, RefSR methods transfer the detail textures from reference
insufﬁciently, even when the reference has highly similar content to input. As for the reference-misuse issue, current methods introduce blur
and artifacts, which is even worse than SISR methods, when the reference has no relevant content. Our novel task decoupled framework
for RefSR mitigates these issues.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Reference-based super-resolution(RefSR) has achieved
impressive progress on the recovery of high-frequency details thanks to an additional reference high-resolution(HR)
image input. Although the superiority compared with
Single-Image Super-Resolution(SISR), existing RefSR methods easily result in the reference-underuse issue and the
reference-misuse as shown in Fig.1. In this work, we deeply
investigate the cause of the two issues and further propose
a novel framework to mitigate them. Our studies ﬁnd that
the issues are mostly due to the improper coupled framework design of current methods. Those methods conduct the
super-resolution task of the input low-resolution(LR) image and the texture transfer task from the reference image
together in one module, easily introducing the interference
between LR and reference features. Inspired by this ﬁnding,
we propose a novel framework, which decouples the two
tasks of RefSR, eliminating the interference between the LR
image and the reference image. The super-resolution task
upsamples the LR image leveraging only the LR image itself.
The texture transfer task extracts and transfers abundant
textures from the reference image to the coarsely upsampled result of the super-resolution task. Extensive experiments demonstrate clear improvements in both quantitative
and qualitative evaluations over state-of-the-art methods.

The goal of Single Image Super-Resolution(SISR) [10,
16, 26, 38] is to recover the high-resolution(HR) details of
the image from its low-resolution(LR) counterpart. It has
been widely used in image enhancement, video surveillance
and remote sensing imaging. The ill-pose essence of SISR
makes it easily resulting in visual artifacts as the scale factor is large(×4). To tackle the problem, Reference-based
Super-Resolution(RefSR) has attracted much attention recently. Compared with SISR that only uses one single LR
input, RefSR [13, 22, 27, 36, 40, 41] super-resolves the LR
image with an additional HR reference image, which can
provide abundant real textures for the super-resolved image. RefSR can be applied to plenty of scenarios, such as
dual-cameras [31] and video streaming [25].
Current RefSR methods mostly transfer the textures
based on the alignment between reference and LR images, such as spatial alignment [27, 41] and patch matching [13, 22, 36, 40]. After alignment, RefSR methods concatenate the LR and aligned reference features as the input and transfer the detailed textures to the output through
some well-designed architectures, such as attention mechanism [36] and spatial adaptation module [22].
Although superior of the performance compared with
SISR, current methods are easily plagued by the referenceunderuse issue(i.e., reference textures are transferred insuf-

* Equal contribution(co-ﬁrst authors).
† Corresponding author.

5931

