Node Representation Learning in Graph via Node-to-Neighbourhood Mutual
Information Maximization

1

Wei Dong1 , Junsheng Wu2 *, Yi Luo2 , Zongyuan Ge3 , Peng Wang4 *
School of Computer Science and Engineering, 2 School of Software, Northwestern Polytechnical University
3
Monash University
4
University of Wollongong

Abstract
The key towards learning informative node representations in graphs lies in how to gain contextual information
from the neighbourhood. In this work, we present a simpleyet-effective self-supervised node representation learning
strategy via directly maximizing the mutual information between the hidden representations of nodes and their neighbourhood, which can be theoretically justified by its link to
graph smoothing. Following InfoNCE, our framework is
optimized via a surrogate contrastive loss, where the positive selection underpins the quality and efficiency of representation learning. To this end, we propose a topologyaware positive sampling strategy, which samples positives
from the neighbourhood by considering the structural dependencies between nodes and thus enables positive selection upfront. In the extreme case when only one positive is
sampled, we fully avoid expensive neighbourhood aggregation. Our methods achieve promising performance on various node classification datasets. It is also worth mentioning
by applying our loss function to MLP based node encoders,
our methods can be orders of faster than existing solutions.
Our codes and supplementary materials are available at
https://github.com/dongwei156/n2n.

1. Introduction
Graph-structured data is ubiquitous because almost nothing in the world exists in isolation. As an effective
graph modeling tool, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have
gained increasing popularity in a wide range of domains
such as computer vision [6, 26, 29], natural language processing [35], knowledge representation [9], social networks [15], and molecular property prediction [33], just
name a few.
* Wei Dong’s email is dw156@mail.nwpu.edu.cn.
Corresponding
authors: Peng Wang (pengw@uow.edu.au) and Junsheng Wu (wujunsheng@nwpu.edu.cn)

In this work, we focus on the node classification
task in graphs where the key is to learn informative
structure-aware node representations by gaining contextual information from the neighbourhood. This motivates
a massive proliferation of message passing techniques in
GNNs. Among these methods, a dominant idea follows
an AGGREGATION-COMBINE-PREDICTION pipeline,
where AGGREGATION step aggregates the neighbouring information into vectorized representations via various
neighbourhood aggregators such as mean [15], max [15], attention [31], and ensemble [8], which are COMBINED with
the node representations via sum or concatenation to realize neighbourhood information fusion. To model multi-hop
message passing, the AGGREGATION and COMBINE operations tend to be repeated before the ultimate node representations are obtained for label prediction. In other words,
the information exchange in this pipeline is driven by a node
classification loss in the PREDICTION phase. Under the
umbrella of supervised learning, this line of methods unifies node representation learning and classification. A potential problem is that they may suffer from the scalability
issue due to the expensive labeling cost for large-scale graph
data.
As a remedy to expensive human annotation, SelfSupervised Learning (SSL) has shown proven success in
computer vision [4, 5] and natural language processing [2,
12], which, however, is less sufficiently explored in graph
modeling. The key challenge thereof lies in how to design
suitable pretext task from non-Euclidean graph-structured
data to learn informative node representations. Inheriting
the idea from computer vision, many recent attempts approach graph-based SSL by designing topological graph
augmentations to generate multi-view graphs for contrastive
loss. Off-the-shelf GNNs [20, 37] tend to be used as default
options for node/graph encoding.
In this work, we propose a simple-yet-effective SSL
alternative to learn node representations by adopting
aggregation-free Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP) as node encoder and directly maximizing the mutual information be-

16620

