Dual-Shutter Optical Vibration Sensing
Mark Sheinin, Dorian Chan, Matthew O’Toole, and Srinivasa G. Narasimhan
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
marksheinin@gmail.com, dychan@andrew.cmu.edu, mpotoole@cmu.edu, srinivas@andrew.cmu.edu

remote audio recording

Abstract
Visual vibrometry is a highly useful tool for remote capture of audio, as well as the physical properties of materials, human heart rate, and more. While visually-observable
vibrations can be captured directly with a high-speed camera, minute imperceptible object vibrations can be optically
amplified by imaging the displacement of a speckle pattern,
created by shining a laser beam on the vibrating surface.
In this paper, we propose a novel method for sensing vibrations at high speeds (up to 63kHz), for multiple scene
sources at once, using sensors rated for only 130Hz operation. Our method relies on simultaneously capturing the
scene with two cameras equipped with rolling and global
shutter sensors, respectively. The rolling shutter camera
captures distorted speckle images that encode the highspeed object vibrations. The global shutter camera captures undistorted reference images of the speckle pattern,
helping to decode the source vibrations. We demonstrate
our method by capturing vibration caused by audio sources
(e.g. speakers, human voice, and musical instruments) and
analyzing the vibration modes of a tuning fork.

1. Introduction
Vibrations are all around us, caused by sources ranging
from heartbeats to engines, to music, speech, and ultrasonics. These vibrations exhibit various amplitudes (microns
to meters) and frequencies (a few Hz to MHz). As such,
measuring vibrations is an essential tool in many engineering and scientific fields. However, optically sensing vibrations, especially the low-amplitude high-frequency kind, is
challenging. To make matters worse, indirect damped vibrations caused by remote sources (e.g. a speaker vibrating
an object [13]) can be even more subtle. Additionally, these
challenges are harder to overcome when the vibrating surface is far from the imaging system or is itself moving (e.g.
the natural movements of a musician playing guitar).
That said, much progress has been made recently on visual vibrometry. Passive capture and estimation of small
motions [15, 18, 21, 35–37, 39, 45] of a vibrating surface

multi-point 2D vibration analysis
recording multiple instruments

dual-shutter
vibration
camera

rolling shutter

global shutter

Figure 1. Optically measuring vibrations allows remote capture
of speech, music, and the mechanical vibrations of various objects, including engines, bridges, and more. We propose a new
method for sensing 2D object vibrations at high speeds, using a
dual-shutter sensor system consisting of two low-speed cameras.
Our system samples vibration with speeds up to 63KHz, for multiple objects at once and can handle non-static objects. We test our
system by capturing and replaying audio source vibrations (e.g.
speakers, human voice), analyzing the vibrational modes of a tuning fork, and capturing the vibrations of musical instruments.

have been used to extract (a) heart rate and sound from
video [13, 39] and (b) the physical properties of materials
[6,9,12,16] and structures (e.g. buildings and bridges) [10].
However, low-amplitude high-frequency vibrations require
a high-speed video camera with a zoom-lens and bright
lighting to compensate for the short camera exposures.
In contrast to passive approaches, active speckle-based
approaches illuminate a vibrating surface with coherent
light (e.g. laser) and image the resulting speckle [5, 40–42].
The speckle is imaged by focusing in between the surface
and the sensor. A small tilt of the vibrating surface results in a shift of the speckle, a phenomenon called the
memory effect [3, 42].1 This approach optically magnifies
small-amplitude vibrations and has been used to demonstrate long-distance audio capture [5, 40, 42]. But, as in
1 The memory effect was used for motion tracking [22, 47], ego-motion
[17], object tracking [30, 31], environment sensing [43, 44] and more.

16324

