OakInk: A Large-scale Knowledge Repository for Understanding
Hand-Object Interaction
1,2

Lixin Yang⋆ , 1 Kailin Li⋆ , 1 Xinyu Zhan⋆ , 1 Fei Wu, 1 Anran Xu, 1 Liu Liu, 1,2 Cewu Lu†
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China 2 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute, China

{siriusyang, kailinli, kelvin34501, legendary, xuanran, liuliu1993, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning how humans manipulate objects requires machines to acquire knowledge from two perspectives: one for
understanding object affordances and the other for learning human’s interactions based on the affordances. Even
though these two knowledge bases are crucial, we find that
current databases lack a comprehensive awareness of them.
In this work, we propose a multi-modal and rich-annotated
knowledge repository, OakInk, for visual and cognitive understanding of hand-object interactions. We start to collect
1,800 common household objects and annotate their affordances to construct the first knowledge base: Oak. Given
the affordance, we record rich human interactions with 100
selected objects in Oak. Finally, we transfer the interactions on the 100 recorded objects to their virtual counterparts through a novel method: Tink. The recorded and
transferred hand-object interactions constitute the second
knowledge base: Ink. As a result, OakInk contains 50,000
distinct affordance-aware and intent-oriented hand-object
interactions. We benchmark OakInk on pose estimation and
grasp generation tasks. Moreover, we propose two practical
applications of OakInk: intent-based interaction generation
and handover generation. Our dataset and source code are
publicly available at www.oakink.net.

1. Introduction
Enabling a machine to understand and imitate the behavior of humans has been a long-term vision in the history of
science. Among the tasks derived from it, learning how humans manipulate objects is a fundamental challenging one.
As most tools are designed for achieving function, human
can easily learn to manipulate them through instruction or
experiences. However, these experiences are hard for a machine to acquire. It was not until recently that data-driven
approaches have begun to promote research on learning hu⋆ Equal contribution.
† Cewu Lu is the corresponding author. He is the member of Qing Yuan
Research Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, and Shanghai Qi Zhi institute, China.

Figure 1. Illustration of different data modalities in OakInk repository. The left column shows human manipulating 3 source objects
(mug, camera, and headphones). The right 5 columns show the
transferred interactions on 15 virtual counterpart objects.

man manipulation [2, 15, 20, 35, 43, 59]. Prior work has
tried to empower a machine complex skills such as handobject localization [45], pose estimation [29], grasp generation [11], and action imitation [41].
Two fundamental components for learning human manipulation are 1) the affordance of the objects and 2) how
human hand would interact with the objects based on those
affordances. While the word “affordance” has different formulations in different tasks, in this paper, we denote “affordance” as the functionality of object. Since 2019, there
have been at least 9 datasets of hand-object interaction released: ObMan [23], YCBAfford [11], HO3D [19], ContactPose [5], GRAB [51], DexYCB [10], two H2O [28, 57]
and DexMV [41]. However, these datasets lack comprehensive awareness of the object’s affordance and the hand’s
interactions with it. First, existing real-world datasets only
contain a small number of objects and hand interactions.
As two illustrative examples, only 20 objects were captured
in DexYCB, and only 2.3K distinct interactions were captured among 2.9M images in ContactPose (0.08%). Second, even if synthetic dataset [23] can extend to large numbers of interactions in grasp simulator: GraspIt [33], the
generated grasps neither reflect the distribution of human
interactions nor consider the object’s affordance itself. To

20953

