En-Compactness: Self-Distillation Embedding & Contrastive Generation for
Generalized Zero-Shot Learning
Xia Kong1 Zuodong Gao1 Xiaofan Li1 Ming Hong1
Jun Liu2 Chengjie Wang2 Yuan Xie3† Yanyun Qu1†
1
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Fujian, China 2 Tencent Youtu Lab
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
kongxia@stu.xmu.edu.cn, {junsenselee, jasoncjwang}@tencent.com
yxie@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, yyqu@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Generalized zero-shot learning (GZSL) requires a classifier trained on seen classes that can recognize objects
from both seen and unseen classes. Due to the absence
of unseen training samples, the classifier tends to bias
towards seen classes. To mitigate this problem, feature
generation based models are proposed to synthesize visual features for unseen classes. However, these features
are generated in the visual feature space which lacks of
discriminative ability. Therefore, some methods turn to
find a better embedding space for the classifier training.
They emphasize the inter-class relationships of seen classes,
leading the embedding space overfitted to seen classes and
unfriendly to unseen classes. Instead, in this paper, we
propose an Intra-Class Compactness Enhancement method
(ICCE) for GZSL. Our ICCE promotes intra-class compactness with inter-class separability on both seen and
unseen classes in the embedding space and visual feature
space. By promoting the intra-class relationships but the
inter-class structures, we can distinguish different classes
with better generalization. Specifically, we propose a SelfDistillation Embedding (SDE) module and a SemanticVisual Contrastive Generation (SVCG) module. The former
promotes intra-class compactness in the embedding space,
while the latter accomplishes it in the visual feature space.
The experiments demonstrate that our ICCE outperforms
the state-of-the-art methods on four datasets and achieves
competitive results on the remaining dataset.

1. Introduction
Image classification tasks relying on large amounts of
labeled data [6, 16, 23] have made tremendous progress
due to the advancement of deep learning [13, 21, 55].
However, the data hunger nature of deep models leads
them to perform unsatisfyingly when some categories have
† Corresponding authors.

Figure 1. Motivation of this paper. (a) Existing methods
such as CE-GZSL [14], produce discriminative embeddings for
seen classes, but dispersed embeddings for unseen classes. (b)
Our ICCE promotes intra-class compactness with inter-class
separability for both seen and unseen classes in the embedding
space.

scarce or even no labeled data [47]. Zero-Shot Learning
(ZSL) [24, 35] is proposed to tackle this data absence
issue by recognizing objects from unseen classes. They
first learn a classification model on the seen classes, of
which the training samples are provided, then transfer the
model to unseen classes using the class-level semantic
descriptors [10, 24, 31, 32], such as visual attributes [10, 24]
or word vectors [31, 32].
Unlike ZSL, Generalized Zero-Shot Learning (GZSL) [7, 50] has been proposed to identify test samples from
both seen and unseen classes, which is more challenging.
Since the training set only contains seen classes samples,
during testing, GZSL methods tend to misclassify unseen
classes samples into seen classes, which is the widespread
strong bias problem.
Recently, feature generation based GZSL methods [11,
14, 15, 26, 28, 38] have been proposed to mitigate the strong
bias problem by synthesizing training samples for unseen
classes conditioned on the semantic descriptors. Merging
the real seen training features and the synthetic unseen

9306

