Texture-based Error Analysis for Image Super-Resolution
Salma Abdel Magid1 Zudi Lin1 Donglai Wei2 Yulun Zhang3 Jinjin Gu4 Hanspeter Pfister1
1

Harvard University

2

Boston College

3

ETH Zürich

4

The University of Sydney

Abstract
Evaluation practices for image super-resolution (SR) use
a single-value metric, the PSNR or SSIM, to determine
model performance. This provides little insight into the
source of errors and model behavior. Therefore, it is beneficial to move beyond the conventional approach and reconceptualize evaluation with interpretability as our main priority. We focus on a thorough error analysis from a variety
of perspectives. Our key contribution is to leverage a texture
classifier, which enables us to assign patches with semantic labels, to identify the source of SR errors both globally
and locally. We then use this to determine (a) the semantic
alignment of SR datasets, (b) how SR models perform on
each label, (c) to what extent high-resolution (HR) and SR
patches semantically correspond, and more. Through these
different angles, we are able to highlight potential pitfalls
and blindspots. Our overall investigation highlights numerous unexpected insights. We hope this work serves as an
initial step for debugging blackbox SR networks.

1. Introduction
The standard practice of training and evaluating image
SR models has not changed drastically in recent years. Neural networks are optimized on the Diverse 2K (DIV2K) [40]
HR images. The models are then evaluated on five benchmark datasets: Set5 [3], Set14 [45], B100 [28], Urban100 [15], and Manga109 [29] with two metrics, the
peak-signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) and the structural similarity index (SSIM) [43]. This protocol ultimately shapes
the performance of the network and provides a means by
which models are compared against each other.
We note several limitations to this standard approach.
First, a single value is used to represent the model’s performance on an entire dataset. There is immense variability within a single image, let alone an entire dataset. Using only the PSNR does little to showcase the true performance or indicate to the user where and how the model fails.
Second, because we do not have a concrete description of
the datasets, these performance results might be misleading. For example, models might perform well on patches

Original

EDSR

SAN

RCAN

EDSR

SAN

RCAN

Figure 1. Visual examples of errors from state-of-the-art SR models. Some reconstructions completely change the semantic meaning of a patch. In the bottom left row, the digits “094” on the
airplane wing have been obscured or changed to a different digit.
Especially at inference time, it is critical to detect such mistakes.

that are not reflective of the dataset’s overall content. Additionally, the datasets have not been probed, and it is unclear
whether these are appropriate choices for the task, whether
that be training or evaluation.
Moreover, during inference time, we do not have access
to the original HR image. It has been demonstrated that neural networks make overly confident predictions [14]. Even
more troubling, SR networks frequently change the semantic meaning of images. Figure 1 shows the original HR image alongside several reconstructions by popular SR models. In the top left figure, the airplane wing contains the
digits “094”. However, in the reconstructions by all three
SR models, the numbers have been obscured or transformed
to a different number. Similarly, in the following image of
the bird, the orientation, width, and number of lines have
changed. These types of errors are significant as they can
alter the semantic meaning of the image. The importance of
catching and understanding such errors is compounded in
safety-critical domains such as biomedicine. For example,
Weigert et al. [44] introduced CARE networks to restore
fluorescence microscopy data. They showed that important
biological structures can appear and disappear randomly,
significantly influencing downstream analysis.
To begin to address these concerns, we take a closer look
at the error sources for each step of the SR framework. The

2118

