Reversible Vision Transformers
Karttikeya Mangalam*, 1, 2
Haoqi Fan1
Yanghao Li1
Chao-Yuan Wu1
Bo Xiong 1
Christoph Feichtenhofer *, 1
Jitendra Malik 1, 2
∗

1

equal technical contribution
2

Facebook AI Research

We present Reversible Vision Transformers, a memory
efficient architecture design for visual recognition. By decoupling the GPU memory footprint from the depth of the
model, Reversible Vision Transformers enable memory efficient scaling of transformer architectures. We adapt two
popular models, namely Vision Transformer and Multiscale
Vision Transformers, to reversible variants and benchmark
extensively across both model sizes and tasks of image classification, object detection and video classification. Reversible Vision Transformers achieve a reduced memory
footprint of up to 15.5× at identical model complexity, parameters and accuracy, demonstrating the promise of reversible vision transformers as an efficient backbone for resource limited training regimes. Finally, we find that the additional computational burden of recomputing activations
is more than overcome for deeper models, where throughput can increase up to 3.9× over their non-reversible counterparts. Code and models are available at https://
github.com/facebookresearch/mvit.

1. Introduction
The deep learning revolution in computer vision has
rested on the bedrock of high performance hardware accelerators. Fueled by special purpose AI accelerators, the
compute requirements for state-of-the-art models are growing exponentially. However, compute is only half the story.
The other, and often overlooked half, is memory bandwidth
bottleneck, which has been difficult to proportionally scale
as compared to peak accelerator FLOPs [51]. In particular,
the peak accelerator FLOPs have been increasing at a rate
of ∼3.1× every 2 years. However, peak bandwidth only
scales at a rate of ∼1.4× every 2 years. This disparity is
exacerbated in transformers, which have been doubling in
required compute roughly every three months for the past
three years, resulting in a so-called memory wall [21] where
both the overall model performance as well as the training
speed have become tightly memory-bound [33].
As such, for bandwidth bound models, trading compute
for memory through re-computation could actually be more
efficient than using work-optimal algorithms [67,68]. In the

GPU Memory (MB/img)

Abstract

UC Berkeley
MViT
Rev-MViT
ViT

102

Rev-ViT
RegNetY
ResNet

4.5x

Large (81.5)

Base (81.8)

15.5x

Base (81.8)

Large (81.4)

Small (79.9)

101

Small (79.9)

10

20
30
40
50
Model Complexity (GFLOPs)

60

Figure 1. Reversible Vision Transformers are more memoryefficient, yet powerful reversible counterparts of state-of-theart Vision Transformer (ViT) [15] and Multiscale Vision Transformer (MViT) [18] architectures with varying model complexity. Numbers in parentheses denote top-1 ImageNet performance.
ResNet [27] and RegNet [55] are only shown for reference. For
detailed discussion please refer to §4.1.

case of training neural network models, this can be achieved
by re-computing activations instead of storing and then
loading them from DRAM [30]. Besides training speed,
scaling vision transformers in depth naturally hits the GPU
memory capacity, especially in memory starved regimes
such as video recognition where state-of-the-art models are
often limited to batch size 1 due to high memory footprint
of intermediate activations.
In this work, we propose Reversible Vision Transformers, a family of expressive visual recognition architectures
with very favorable activation memory footprints (Figure 1)
compared to their non-reversible variants. By trading-off
GPU activation caching with efficient on-the-fly activation
re-computation, reversible vision transformers effectively
decouple the activation memory growth from the depth of
the model. While the natural language processing community has performed some early exploration of reversible
transformers for machine translation [37], these techniques
focus on longer sequence lengths rather than depth.
Our experiments show that a straightforward adaptation
of vision transformers to reversible architectures fails to
scale for deeper models because of training convergence in-

10830

