Towards real-world navigation with deep differentiable planners
Shu Ishida
João F. Henriques
Visual Geometry Group
University of Oxford
{ishida, joao}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We train embodied neural networks to plan and navigate
unseen complex 3D environments, emphasising real-world
deployment. Rather than requiring prior knowledge of the
agent or environment, the planner learns to model the state
transitions and rewards. To avoid the potentially hazardous
trial-and-error of reinforcement learning, we focus on differentiable planners such as Value Iteration Networks (VIN),
which are trained offline from safe expert demonstrations.
Although they work well in small simulations, we address
two major limitations that hinder their deployment. First,
we observed that current differentiable planners struggle
to plan long-term in environments with a high branching
complexity. While they should ideally learn to assign low
rewards to obstacles to avoid collisions, these penalties are
not strong enough to guarantee collision-free operation. We
thus impose a structural constraint on the value iteration,
which explicitly learns to model impossible actions and noisy
motion. Secondly, we extend the model to plan exploration
with a limited perspective camera under translation and fine
rotations, which is crucial for real robot deployment. Our
proposals significantly improve semantic navigation and exploration on several 2D and 3D environments, succeeding
in settings that are otherwise challenging for differentiable
planners. As far as we know, we are the first to successfully
apply them to the difficult Active Vision Dataset, consisting
of real images captured from a robot.1

1. Introduction
Continuous advances in robotics have enabled robots to
be deployed to a wide range of scenarios, from manufacturing in factories and cleaning in households, to the emerging
applications of autonomous vehicles and delivery drones [2].
Improving their autonomy is met with many challenges, due
to the difficulty of planning from uncertain sensory data. In
classical robotics, the study of planning has a long tradi1 Code available: https://github.com/shuishida/calvin

Figure 1. (1st column) Input images seen during a run of our
method on AVD (Sec. 5.2.2). This embodied neural network has
learned to efficiently explore and navigate unseen indoor environments, to seek objects of a given class (highlighted in the last
image). (2nd -3rd columns) Predicted rewards and values (resp.),
for each spatial location (higher for brighter values). The unknown
optimal trajectory is dashed, while the robot’s trajectory is solid.

tion [44], using detailed knowledge of a robot’s configuration and sensors, with little emphasis on learning from data.
An almost orthogonal approach is to use deep learning, an
intensely data-driven, non-parametric approach [11]. Modern deep neural networks excel at pattern recognition [40],
although they do not offer a direct path to planning applications. While one approach would be to parse a scene into
pre-defined elements (e.g. object classes and their poses)
to be passed to a more classical planner, an end-to-end approach where all modules are learnable has the chance to
improve with data, and be adaptable to novel settings with
no manual tuning. Because of the data-driven setup, a deep
network has the potential to learn behaviour that leverages
the biases of the environment, such as likely locations for
certain types of rooms. Value Iteration Networks (VINs) [43]
emerged as an elegant way to merge classical planning and
data-driven deep networks, by defining a differentiable plan-

17327

