Weakly-supervised Action Transition Learning for
Stochastic Human Motion Prediction

1

Wei Mao1 , Miaomiao Liu1 , Mathieu Salzmann2,3
Australian National University; 2 CVLab, EPFL; 3 ClearSpace, Switzerland
{wei.mao, miaomiao.liu}@anu.edu.au, mathieu.salzmann@epfl.ch
Drink

Pass

Figure 1. Action-driven stochastic human motion prediction. Given a past motion (pink) and a sequence of future action labels, our
model generates action-specific future poses (yellow). We show two different futures generated for the same history and actions. Our
model allows these predictions to have different lengths. The motions are down-sampled to the same frame rate for visualisation.

Abstract
We introduce the task of action-driven stochastic human
motion prediction, which aims to predict multiple plausible future motions given a sequence of action labels and a
short motion history. This differs from existing works, which
predict motions that either do not respect any specific action category, or follow a single action label. In particular,
addressing this task requires tackling two challenges: The
transitions between the different actions must be smooth;
the length of the predicted motion depends on the action
sequence and varies significantly across samples. As we
cannot realistically expect training data to cover sufficiently
diverse action transitions and motion lengths, we propose
an effective training strategy consisting of combining multiple motions from different actions and introducing a weak
form of supervision to encourage smooth transitions. We
then design a VAE-based model conditioned on both the
observed motion and the action label sequence, allowing
us to generate multiple plausible future motions of varying
length. We illustrate the generality of our approach by exploring its use with two different temporal encoding models, namely RNNs and Transformers. Our approach outperforms baseline models constructed by adapting state-ofthe-art single action-conditioned motion generation methods and stochastic human motion prediction approaches to

our new task of action-driven stochastic motion prediction.
Our code is available at https://github.com/weimao-2019/WAT.

1. Introduction
Modeling human motion has broad applications in
human-robot interaction [26], virtual/augmented reality (AR/VR) [46] and animation [49]. As such, it has been
an active research problem for many years [8]. In particular,
recently, great progress has been made in predicting future
motion given an observed past motion sequence [5,56]. Addressing this could have a significant impact on autonomous
systems, allowing them to forecast potential dangers and
plan their actions accordingly. Nevertheless, except for a
few early methods that predict motions of a single action
category [13, 21], recent methods [36, 56] mostly focus on
action-agnostic predictions. Thus, they cannot be used by
an autonomous system to generate specific potential future
scenarios encoded by a sequence of action labels, for example to evaluate the consequences of a person on a sidewalk either walking to the crossing, waiting for the green
light, and crossing the road, or instead running on the street
and stopping in front of the car. By contrast, recent works
on human motion synthesis can generate action-specific sequences [17, 42]. However, these methods neither lever-

8151

