Decoupling Makes Weakly Supervised Local Feature Better
Kunhong Li1,2 Longguang Wang3 Li Liu3,4 Qing Ran5 Kai Xu3 Yulan Guo1,2,3 *
1
Sun Yat-Sen University 2 The Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-Sen University
3
National University of Defense Technology 4 University of Oulu 5 Alibaba Group

Abstract
Weakly supervised learning can help local feature methods to overcome the obstacle of acquiring a large-scale
dataset with densely labeled correspondences. However,
since weak supervision cannot distinguish the losses caused
by the detection and description steps, directly conducting
weakly supervised learning within a joint training describethen-detect pipeline suffers limited performance. In this paper, we propose a decoupled training describe-then-detect
pipeline tailored for weakly supervised local feature learning. Within our pipeline, the detection step is decoupled
from the description step and postponed until discriminative
and robust descriptors are learned. In addition, we introduce a line-to-window search strategy to explicitly use the
camera pose information for better descriptor learning. Extensive experiments show that our method, namely PoSFeat
(Camera Pose Supervised Feature), outperforms previous
fully and weakly supervised methods and achieves state-ofthe-art performance on a wide range of downstream task.

(a) DISK-W, a DISK model [46] trained with weak supervision

(b) PoSFeat (ours)

Figure 1. An illustration of the influence of ambiguity for weakly
supervised local feature methods. Keypoints that succeed and fail
to create landmarks are shown. (a) With joint training describethen-detect pipeline, DISK-W [46] produces inaccurate keypoints
that are out of the objects. (b) With our decoupled training
describe-then-detect pipeline, PoSFeat can produce more reasonable keypoints. Best viewed in color.

1. Introduction
Finding pixel correspondences is a fundamental problem
in computer vision. Sparse local feature [5,12,22,36,48], as
one of the mainstream methods to find correspondences, has
been widely applied in many areas, such as simultaneous
localization and mapping (SLAM) [29, 52], structure from
motion (SfM) [1, 40], and visual localization [7, 16, 38, 51].
Traditional sparse local feature methods [5, 22, 36] follow a detect-then-describe pipeline. Specifically, keypoints
are first detected and then patches centered at these keypoints are used to generate descriptors. Early methods
[15, 17, 19, 22] focus on the detection step and are proposed to distinguish distinctive areas to detect good keypoints. Later works pay more attention to the description
step and make attempts to design powerful descriptors using advanced representations [5, 8, 36].
* Corresponding author: Yulan Guo (guoyulan@sysu.edu.cn).

Codes: https://github.com/The-Learning-And-Vision-Atelier-LAVA/PoSFeat.

Motivated by the success of deep learning, many efforts
[23, 27, 31, 44, 50] have been made to replace the detection
or description step in the detect-then-describe pipeline with
CNNs. Recent works [13,24,34,46] find that keypoints and
descriptors are interdependent and propose a joint training
describe-then-detect pipeline. Specifically, the description
network and detection network are combined into a single
CNN and optimized jointly. The joint training describethen-detect pipeline achieves better performance than the
detect-then-describe pipeline, especially under challenging
conditions [18,45]. However, these methods are fully supervised and rely on dense ground-truth correspondence labels
for training.
Because collecting a large dataset with pixel-level
ground-truth correspondences is expensive, self-supervised
and weakly supervised learning are investigated for training. Specifically, DeTone et al. [12] used a single im-

15838

