Towards Total Recall in Industrial Anomaly Detection
Karsten Roth1,∗ , Latha Pemula2 , Joaquin Zepeda2 , Bernhard Schölkopf2 , Thomas Brox2 , Peter Gehler2
1
University of Tübingen 2 Amazon AWS

Abstract
Being able to spot defective parts is a critical component
in large-scale industrial manufacturing. A particular challenge that we address in this work is the cold-start problem:
fit a model using nominal (non-defective) example images
only. While handcrafted solutions per class are possible,
the goal is to build systems that work well simultaneously
on many different tasks automatically. The best peforming approaches combine embeddings from ImageNet models with an outlier detection model. In this paper, we extend
on this line of work and propose PatchCore, which uses
a maximally representative memory bank of nominal patchfeatures. PatchCore offers competitive inference times while
achieving state-of-the-art performance for both detection
and localization. On the challenging, widely used MVTec
AD benchmark PatchCore achieves an image-level anomaly
detection AUROC score of up to 99.6%, more than halving
the error compared to the next best competitor. We further report competitive results on two additional datasets
and also find competitive results in the few samples regime.
Code: github.com/amazon-research/patchcore-inspection.

1. Introduction
The ability to detect unusual patterns in images is a feature deeply ingrained in human cognition. Humans can differentiate between expected variance in the data and outliers
after having only seen a small number of normal instances.
In this work we address the computational version of this
problem, cold-start1 anomaly detection for visual inspection of industrial image data. It arises in many industrial
scenarios where it is easy to acquire imagery of normal examples but costly and complicated to specify the expected
defect variations in full. This task is naturally cast as a outof-distribution detection problem where a model needs to
distinguish between samples being drawn from the training
data distribution and those outside its support. Industrial
visual defect classification is especially hard, as errors can
∗ Work done during a research internship at Amazon AWS.
1 Commonly also dubbed one-class classification (OCC).

Figure 1. Examples from the MVTec benchmark datasets. Superimposed on the images are the segmentation results from PatchCore. The orange boundary denotes anomaly contours of actual
segmentation maps for anomalies such as broken glass, scratches,
burns or structural changes in blue-orange color gradients.

vary from subtle changes such as thin scratches to larger
structural defects like missing components [5]. Some examples from the MVTec AD benchmark along with results
from our proposed method are shown in Figure 1. Existing
work on cold-start, industrial visual anomaly detection relies on learning a model of the nominal distribution via autoencoding methods [12, 36, 44], GANs [2, 39, 43], or other
unsupervised adaptation methods [42, 56]. Recently, [4, 10]
proposed to leverage common deep representations from
ImageNet classification without adaptation to the target distribution. Despite the missing adaptation, these models offer strong anomaly detection performance and even solid
spatial localization of the defects. The key principle behind these techniques is a feature matching between the test
sample and the nominal samples while exploiting the multiscale nature of deep feature representations. Subtle, finegrained defect segmentation is covered by high-resolution
features, whereas structural deviations and full image-level
anomaly detection are supposed to be covered by features
at much higher abstraction levels. The inherent downside of
this approach, since it is non-adaptive, is the limited matching confidence at the higher abstraction levels: high-level
abstract features from ImageNet training coincide little with

14318

