E2 (GO)MOTION: Motion Augmented Event Stream
for Egocentric Action Recognition
Chiara Plizzari* ,1
1

Mirco Planamente* ,1,2 Gabriele Goletto1 Marco Cannici3
Matteo Matteucci3 Barbara Caputo1,2

Politecnico di Torino

2

CINI Consortium

name.surname@polito.it

3

Emanuele Gusso1

Politecnico di Milano

name.surname@polimi.it

Abstract
Event cameras are novel bio-inspired sensors, which
asynchronously capture pixel-level intensity changes in the
form of “events”. Due to their sensing mechanism, event
cameras have little to no motion blur, a very high temporal
resolution and require significantly less power and memory than traditional frame-based cameras. These characteristics make them a perfect fit to several real-world applications such as egocentric action recognition on wearable
devices, where fast camera motion and limited power challenge traditional vision sensors. However, the ever-growing
field of event-based vision has, to date, overlooked the potential of event cameras in such applications. In this paper, we show that event data is a very valuable modality
for egocentric action recognition. To do so, we introduce
N-EPIC-Kitchens, the first event-based camera extension
of the large-scale EPIC-Kitchens dataset. In this context,
we propose two strategies: (i) directly processing eventcamera data with traditional video-processing architectures
(E2 (GO)) and (ii) using event-data to distill optical flow information (E2 (GO)MO). On our proposed benchmark, we
show that event data provides a comparable performance
to RGB and optical flow, yet without any additional flow
computation at deploy time, and an improved performance
of up to 4% with respect to RGB only information. The NEPIC-Kitchens dataset is available at https://github.
com/EgocentricVision/N-EPIC-Kitchens.

1. Introduction
Egocentric vision has introduced a variety of new challenges to the computer vision community, such as humanobject interaction [18,65], action anticipation [1,30,39,64],
action recognition [52], and video summarization [23, 57,
58]. With the advent of novel large-scale datasets [14, 15],
new tasks are being proposed, such as wearer’s pose estimation [105] and egocentric videos anonymization [95].
This trend will grow in the next years thanks to the very
recent release of Ego4D [41], a massive-scale egocentric
* The authors equally contributed to this work.

Figure 1. N-EPIC-Kitchens: the first event-based dataset for
egocentric action recognition. From RGB images, we generate
a stream of events (bottom). Positive polarity is represented by red
events, whereas blue events represent negative polarity. Events
focus on motion, similarly to optical flow (top). With their low
latency, high temporal resolution, and low-power consumption,
event data are a perfect fit for egocentric action recognition.

video dataset offering more than 3,000 hours of daily-life
activity videos accompanied by audio, 3D meshes of the
environment, eye gaze, stereo, and multi-view videos.
Among all, RGB sensors provide by far the richest
source of visual information. However, the performance
of RGB-based deep models drastically decrease when the
training and test data do not share the same distribution [20].
This issue, known as environmental bias [53, 72, 78, 85, 89],
originates from RGB-based networks’ tendency to rely on
the environment in which activities are recorded, affecting their ability to recognize actions when they are performed in unfamiliar (unseen) surroundings. This is mainly
caused by appearance-based networks’ tendency to primarily focus on background cues and objects texture, which are
typically uncorrelated with the action being performed and
thus largely varying in different environments. As a result,
appearance-free modalities, such as motion, have become
the favored choice in current egocentric vision systems, as

19935

