Open Challenges in Deep Stereo: the Booster Dataset
Pierluigi Zama Ramirez∗
Fabio Tosi∗
Matteo Poggi∗
Samuele Salti
Stefano Mattoccia
Luigi Di Stefano
CVLAB, Department of Computer Science and Engineering (DISI)
University of Bologna, Italy
{pierluigi.zama, fabio.tosi5, m.poggi}@unibo.it

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 1. A scene in the Booster dataset. We collect images in a variety of indoor environments featuring challenging objects such as the
mirror shown in (a). We provide dense ground-truth disparities (b) and segmentation masks that identify the most challenging materials (c).
As state-of-the-art deep stereo networks [25] struggle on these scenes (d), our benchmark highlights the open challenges in deep stereo.

Abstract
We present a novel high-resolution and challenging
stereo dataset framing indoor scenes annotated with dense
and accurate ground-truth disparities. Peculiar to our
dataset is the presence of several specular and transparent
surfaces, i.e. the main causes of failures for state-of-theart stereo networks. Our acquisition pipeline leverages a
novel deep space-time stereo framework which allows for
easy and accurate labeling with sub-pixel precision. We release a total of 419 samples collected in 64 different scenes
and annotated with dense ground-truth disparities. Each
sample include a high-resolution pair (12 Mpx) as well as
an unbalanced pair (Left: 12 Mpx, Right: 1.1 Mpx). Additionally, we provide manually annotated material segmentation masks and 15K unlabeled samples. We evaluate stateof-the-art deep networks based on our dataset, highlighting
their limitations in addressing the open challenges in stereo
and drawing hints for future research.

1. Introduction
Depth estimation from images has long been deemed a
favourable alternative compared to expensive and intrusive
active sensors. Among several image-based approaches,
stereo vision [32,36] is arguably the most popular and heavily researched technique. In the years, huge progresses have
∗ Joint first authorship.

been made in this field, also thanks to the availability of
challenging stereo benchmarks [15, 29, 34, 38] where the
community competes for the higher ranks. Moreover, the
abundance of stereo images paved the way for deep learning
to succeed also in this field [22,28,54]. Indeed, by browsing
the most popular benchmarks, one can notice how nowadays all the top-ranking proposals consist in end-to-end
deep networks that can reach sub-pixel precision in most
cases. Just to name a few, KITTI 2012 and 2015 [15, 29]
or ETH3D [38] seem solved, with top entries achieving average error rates near to 1%. Should this evidence suggest
that, thanks to deep learning, stereo vision is a solved problem? As shown in Fig. 1, we believe that this is definitely
not the case and, rather, it is time for the community to focus on the open-challenges left unsolved in the field. In
particular, we identify two of such challenges, namely i)
non-Lambertian surfaces and ii) high-resolution images.
As for non-Lambertian reflectivity, a variety of materials
and surfaces still represent a hard challenge to most computer vision methodologies and to deep stereo alike. Specifically, matching pixels dealing with transparent or specular
surfaces is extremely difficult and may consist in an inherently ill-posed problem in many cases. Yet, we reckon that
objects with such properties are almost absent or unlabeled
in most stereo benchmarks, except for KITTI 2015, where
cars have been replaced with CAD models providing supervision on some specular/transparent surfaces on cars. As reported in the KITTI 2015 online benchmark, deep learning
has the potential to tackle this challenge as well, if properly

21168

