Slimmable Domain Adaptation
Rang Meng2 , Weijie Chen1,2,†, Shicai Yang2 , Jie Song1 , Luojun Lin3 , Di Xie2
Shiliang Pu2 , Xinchao Wang4 , Mingli Song1 , Yueting Zhuang1,†
1

Zhejiang University, 2 Hikvision Research Institute, 3 Fuzhou University, 4 National University of Singapore
{mengrang, chenweijie5,yangshicai,xiedi,pushiliang.hri}@hikvision.com
{sjie,songml,yzhuang}@zju.edu.cn, linluojun2009@126.com, xinchao@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Vanilla unsupervised domain adaptation methods tend to
optimize the model with fixed neural architecture, which is
not very practical in real-world scenarios since the target
data is usually processed by different resource-limited devices. It is therefore of great necessity to facilitate architecture adaptation across various devices. In this paper, we
introduce a simple framework, Slimmable Domain Adaptation, to improve cross-domain generalization with a weightsharing model bank, from which models of different capacities can be sampled to accommodate different accuracyefficiency trade-offs. The main challenge in this framework lies in simultaneously boosting the adaptation performance of numerous models in the model bank. To tackle
this problem, we develop a Stochastic EnsEmble Distillation method to fully exploit the complementary knowledge
in the model bank for inter-model interaction. Nevertheless,
considering the optimization conflict between inter-model
interaction and intra-model adaptation, we augment the existing bi-classifier domain confusion architecture into an
Optimization-Separated Tri-Classifier counterpart. After
optimizing the model bank, architecture adaptation is leveraged via our proposed Unsupervised Performance Evaluation Metric. Under various resource constraints, our
framework surpasses other competing approaches by a very
large margin on multiple benchmarks. It is also worth
emphasizing that our framework can preserve the performance improvement against the source-only model even
when the computing complexity is reduced to 1/64. Code
will be available at https:// github.com/ HIKLAB/SlimDA.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are usually trained on the offlinecollected images (labeled source data) and then embedded
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. SlimDA: We only adapt once on cloud computing center
but can flexibly sample models with diverse capacities to distribute
to different resource-limited edge devices.

in edge devices to test the images sampled from new scenarios (unlabeled target data). This paradigm, in practice,
degrades the network performance due to the domain shift.
Recently, more and more researchers have delved into unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) to address this problem.
Vanilla UDA aims to align source data and target data
into a joint representation space so that the model trained
on source data can be well generalized to target data
[7,11,20,26,29,38,44]. Unfortunately, there is still a gap between academic studies and industrial needs: most existing
UDA methods only perform weight adaptation with fixed
neural architecture yet cannot fit the requirements of various devices in the real-world applications efficiently. Taking the example of a widely-used application scenario as
shown in Fig.1, a domain adaptive model trained on a powerful cloud computing center is urged to be distributed to
different resource-limited edge devices like laptops, smart
mobile phones, and smartwatches, for real-time processing.
In this scenario, vanilla UDA methods have to train a series of models with different capacities and architectures
time-and-again to fit the requirements of devices with dif-

7141

