Pin the Memory: Learning to Generalize Semantic Segmentation
Jiyoung Lee2
1
Yonsei University

Kwanghoon Sohn1∗
Jungin Park1
Dongbo Min3 *
2
3
NAVER AI Lab
Ewha Womans University

{kimjin928, newrun, khsohn}@yonsei.ac.kr

lee.j@navercorp.com

Semantic segmentation, assigning a semantic class label
to each pixel, is a classical research topic for visual understanding in computer vision. The recent tremendous progress
in semantic segmentation has been dominated by deep neural networks trained on large amounts of densly annotated
datasets. Despite its success, models trained with a given
dataset (source) do not generalize well in a new domain
(target) that the models have not seen during training. Overcoming the domain shift issue caused by the different data
distributions of two domains is crucial to deal with unex* Corresponding authors.

This research was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIP)
(NRF2021R1A2C2006703), the Yonsei University Research Fund of 2021
(2021-22-0001), and the Mid-Career Researcher Program through the NRF
of Korea (NRF-2021R1A2C2011624).
1 https://github.com/Genie-Kim/PintheMemory

Training
(Source Domain)

Virtual
Domain Shift
𝕊1

𝕊2

Categorical Memory
Update

Read

⋯

1. Introduction

Meta-test

Meta-train

Abstract

Test
(Target Domain)

The rise of deep neural networks has led to several breakthroughs for semantic segmentation. In spite of this, a model
trained on source domain often fails to work properly in new
challenging domains, that is directly concerned with the generalization capability of the model. In this paper, we present
a novel memory-guided domain generalization method for
semantic segmentation based on meta-learning framework.
Especially, our method abstracts the conceptual knowledge
of semantic classes into categorical memory which is constant beyond the domains. Upon the meta-learning concept,
we repeatedly train memory-guided networks and simulate
virtual test to 1) learn how to memorize a domain-agnostic
and distinct information of classes and 2) offer an externally
settled memory as a class-guidance to reduce the ambiguity
of representation in the test data of arbitrary unseen domain.
To this end, we also propose memory divergence and feature
cohesion losses, which encourage to learn memory reading
and update processes for category-aware domain generalization. Extensive experiments for semantic segmentation
demonstrate the superior generalization capability of our
method over state-of-the-art works on various benchmarks.1

dbmin@ewha.ac.kr

⋯

Jin Kim1

Read
Encoder
Decoder
Segmentation
Net.

Input

Prediction

Figure 1. The illustration of our memory-guided meta-learning
algorithm for domain generalization. Our method learns how to
memorize domain-agnostic categorical knowledge that can provide
an external guide to the test data in unseen target domain.

pected and unseen data, especially for replacing human tasks
such as medical diagnosing or autonomous driving.
In order to mitigate severe performance degradation from
the domain shift [4, 20], unsupervised domain adaptation
(UDA) approaches [16, 41, 56] have been proposed to bridge
the domain gap using unlabelled images of the target domain.
These methods have introduced inventive learning strategies
to learn domain invariant features [21, 28, 65, 66, 73, 76] or
align source and target domain to unified space [22, 24, 51,
69, 70]. Though they have shown impressive results against
domain shift, collecting data from the target domain is often impractical. Moreover, the scalability of the model is
restricted as UDA requires network re-training or fine-tuning
for the new target domain, thereby exposing limitations in
terms of being able to generalize to ‘any’ unseen domains.
To overcome those limitations, domain generalization
(DG) methods have been developed to learn robust models
against variants of data distribution across arbitrary unseen
domains [7, 29, 35, 37, 58, 77]. It is much harder than UDA in
that no target domain data is available during training. Some

4350

