DGECN: A Depth-Guided Edge Convolutional Network for
End-to-End 6D Pose Estimation
Tuo Cao1 , Fei Luo1 *, Yanping Fu2 , Wenxiao Zhang1 , Shengjie Zheng1 , and Chunxia Xiao1 *
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, Anhui, China
ypfu@ahu.edu.cn, wenxxiao.zhang@gmail.com, zsj mdk@163.com, {maplect,luofei,cxxiao}@whu.edu.cn
http://graphvision.whu.edu.cn/

Abstract
Monocular 6D pose estimation is a fundamental task
in computer vision. Existing works often adopt a twostage pipeline by establishing correspondences and utilizing a RANSAC algorithm to calculate 6 degrees-of-freedom
(6DoF) pose. Recent works try to integrate differentiable
RANSAC algorithms to achieve an end-to-end 6D pose estimation. However, most of them hardly consider the geometric features in 3D space, and ignore the topology cues
when performing differentiable RANSAC algorithms. To
this end, we proposed a Depth-Guided Edge Convolutional
Network (DGECN) for 6D pose estimation task. We have
made efforts from the following three aspects: 1) We take
advantages of estimated depth information to guide both the
correspondences-extraction process and the cascaded differentiable RANSAC algorithm with geometric information.
2) We leverage the uncertainty of the estimated depth map to
improve accuracy and robustness of the output 6D pose. 3)
We propose a differentiable Perspective-n-Point(PnP) algorithm via edge convolution to explore the topology relations
between 2D-3D correspondences. Experiments demonstrate that our proposed network outperforms current works
on both effectiveness and efficiency.

1. Introduction
Object pose estimation is a task of calculating the 6 degrees of freedom (DoF) pose of a rigid object, including its
location and orientation in an image. It is widely used in
the three-dimensional registration of AR [1, 28, 45], robotic
vision [27, 31] and 3D reconstruction [9, 10]. Due to the
presence of noises and other influential factors, such as the
occlusion, noisy background, and illumination variations,
accurately estimating the 6DoF poses of the objects in the
RGB image is still a challenging problem.
* Chunxia Xiao and Fei Luo are co-corresponding authors

Depth map

CNN
Input image

Semantic labels

3D model

DG-PnP

6D pose

2D-3D corr.

Figure 1. Pipeline of DGECN. With an input RGB image, we
propose a novel DGECN to simultaneously predict segmentation
and depth maps. After established 2D-3D correspondences, we
replace the RANSAC/PnP with a learnable DG-PnP to regress 6D
pose.

Current object pose estimation methods can be divided
into two types: 1) the object poses are estimated using a single RGB image [17, 27, 28, 31, 45] or 2) an RGB image accompanying a depth image [14,39,41]. For both RGB based
and RGB-D based methods, the keypoints-based works are
dominant in this field. On the other hand, methods based
on direct regression are usually inferior to keypoints-based
methods. The keypoints-based methods usually consist of
two stages: firstly it predicts the 2D location of the keypoints of the 3D model on RGB images via a modern neural network. And then calculate the 6D pose parameters
with the RANSAC-based Perspective-n-Point (PnP) method
from 2D-3D correspondences. Although many representative works [15, 22, 25, 33, 35, 36] have proven the validity of
the two-stage pipeline, there are still many limitations in it.
Firstly, few methods can directly output the 6D pose parameters. Most of the existing methods still use a variant of the
RANSAC-based PnP algorithm to estimate the pose parameters. Secondly, RANSAC-based PnP can be very time-cost
when the 2D-3D correspondences are dense. Thirdly, the

3783

