BNV-Fusion: Dense 3D Reconstruction using Bi-level Neural Volume Fusion
Kejie Li1 , Yansong Tang1,2 , Victor Adrian Prisacariu1 , Philip H.S. Torr1
1
University of Oxford, 2 Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University

Depth Maps
(input)

...

RGB Images
(for reference only)

...

Figure 1. Bi-level Neural Volume Fusion (BNV-Fusion) incrementally integrates noisy depth images to a global model of geometry.

Abstract
Dense 3D reconstruction from a stream of depth images
is the key to many mixed reality and robotic applications.
Although methods based on Truncated Signed Distance
Function (TSDF) Fusion have advanced the field over the
years, the TSDF volume representation is confronted with
striking a balance between the robustness to noisy measurements and maintaining the level of detail. We present
Bi-level Neural Volume Fusion (BNV-Fusion), which leverages recent advances in neural implicit representations and
neural rendering for dense 3D reconstruction. In order to
incrementally integrate new depth maps into a global neural implicit representation, we propose a novel bi-level fusion strategy that considers both efficiency and reconstruction quality by design. We evaluate the proposed method on
multiple datasets quantitatively and qualitatively, demonstrating a significant improvement over existing methods.

1. Introduction
Dense 3D reconstruction from images is one of the
most long-standing tasks in the computer vision community. While there is a large body of research focusing on

reconstruction using RGB-only images [13,15], the increasing popularity of depth sensors in commodity devices (e.g.
Microsoft Kinect [45], Apple LiDAR scanner [1]) has enabled researchers to develop reconstruction algorithms taking advantage of depth maps [9, 26, 33].
However, the representation used in these methods –
Truncated Signed Distance Function (TSDF) Volume – is
known to lose fine details at sub-voxel scale (e.g. thin surfaces) [3, 41] because it discretizes the scene geometry at a
pre-defined resolution. In addition to the limitation of the
representation, each depth measurement is integrated into
the volume independently using voxel-wise weighted averaging without any local context, which makes the fusion
process vulnerable to noisy depth measurements.
In contrast, emerging neural implicit representations,
which show promising results in novel view synthesis [25],
and shape modelling [24,29,31], have the potential of being
a better alternative to TSDF volume-based reconstruction in
an online setting. In essence, these representations are deep
neural networks that map continuous 3D coordinates to a
task-dependent scene property, such as the color or the distance to the nearest surface. As a result, a surface can be
extracted at any resolution given the implicit function represented by the network, without any increase in memory

6166

