Visual Abductive Reasoning
Chen Liang1,4 * , Wenguan Wang2 , Tianfei Zhou3 , Yi Yang1
1

CCAI, Zhejiang University

2

ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney

3

ETH Zurich

4

Baidu Research

https://github.com/leonnnop/VAR

Abstract
Abductive reasoning seeks the likeliest possible explanation for partial observations. Although abduction is frequently employed in human daily reasoning, it is rarely explored in computer vision literature. In this paper, we propose a new task and dataset, Visual Abductive Reasoning
(VAR), for examining abductive reasoning ability of machine intelligence in everyday visual situations. Given an incomplete set of visual events, AI systems are required to not
only describe what is observed, but also infer the hypothesis that can best explain the visual premise. Based on our
large-scale VAR dataset, we devise a strong baseline model,
R EASONER (causal-and-cascaded reasoning Transformer).
First, to capture the causal structure of the observations, a
contextualized directional position embedding strategy is
adopted in the encoder, that yields discriminative representations for the premise and hypothesis. Then, multiple decoders are cascaded to generate and progressively refine the
premise and hypothesis sentences. The prediction scores of
the sentences are used to guide cross-sentence information
flow in the cascaded reasoning procedure. Our VAR benchmarking results show that R EASONER surpasses many famous video-language models, while still being far behind
human performance. This work is expected to foster future
efforts in the reasoning-beyond-observation paradigm.

1. Introduction
Abduction · · · consists in studying facts and devising a
theory to explain them.
– Charles Sanders Peirce (1839 – 1914)

Abductive reasoning [50] was coined by Charles Sanders
Peirce, the founder of American pragmatism, around 1865.
It is inference to the most likely explanation or conclusion
for an incomplete set of observations. Abductive reasoning
is invariably employed in our everyday life; the generated
hypothesis (H) is expected to best explain what happens
before, after, or during the observation (O). Fig. 1 gives
some examples. If you see O: “the road is wet”, abduction
* Part of this work was done when Chen Liang was an intern at Baidu.

Explanation (H)

Observation (O1)

Observation (O)

Observation (O)

Explanation (H)

Explanation (H)

Observation (O2)

Figure 1. Abductive reasoning is inference to the most likely explanation for an incomplete set of observations.

will lead you to the best explanation H: “it rained earlier”
(i.e., H →O). One morning you find O: “sister leaves home
hurriedly”, then you conclude H: “she will be late for class”
(i.e., O → H). You see O1 : “a boy throws a frisbee out
and his dog is running after it”. One minute later you find
O2 : “frisbee is in the boy’s hand”. You can imagine H:
“the dog just caught the frisbee back” (i.e., O1 → H → O2 ).
Although abductive reasoning has long been considered as a
core ability of everyday human cognition [39,54,56], it still
remains an untouched domain in computer vision literature.
In this article, we propose Visual Abductive Reasoning
(VAR), a novel task and dataset for investigating the abductive reasoning ability of AI systems in daily visual situations. In particular, inspired by the recent advance of causal
reasoning in NLP community (i.e., abductive text generation [5] and counterfactual story revision [51]), we explore
the use of natural language as the expression form to fully
capture the complexity of real situations. This also better reflects the nature of human mind, which relies on linguistic
thinking [37, 38]. VAR requires the AI systems to describe
the incomplete observation (i.e., visual premise) and write
down the hypothesis that can best explain the premise. This
allows to thoroughly evaluate the entire abduction procedure, as accurate understanding of the premise is the basis
of abductive reasoning. Moreover, this can hasten the development of this new field, by comparing and embracing ideas
for a relevant, well-established, yet different task – dense
video captioning (DVC) [29]. In contrast to DVC that focuses only on describing the observation, VAR yields a new

15565

