Nested Hyperbolic Spaces for Dimensionality Reduction and Hyperbolic NN
Design
Xiran Fan
University of Florida
Department of Statistics

Chun-Hao Yang
National Taiwan University
Institute of Applied Mathematical Sciences

Baba C. Vemuri
University of Florida
Department of CISE

fanxiran@ufl.edu

chunhaoy@ntu.edu.tw

vemuri@ufl.edu

Abstract
Hyperbolic neural networks have been popular in the recent past due to their ability to represent hierarchical data
sets effectively and efficiently. The challenge in developing these networks lies in the nonlinearity of the embedding space namely, the Hyperbolic space. Hyperbolic space
is a homogeneous Riemannian manifold of the Lorentz
group which is a semi-Riemannian manifold, i.e. a manifold equipped with an indefinite metric. Most existing methods (with some exceptions) use local linearization to define a variety of operations paralleling those used in traditional deep neural networks in Euclidean spaces. In this
paper, we present a novel fully hyperbolic neural network
which uses the concept of projections (embeddings) followed by an intrinsic aggregation and a nonlinearity all
within the hyperbolic space. The novelty here lies in the
projection which is designed to project data on to a lowerdimensional embedded hyperbolic space and hence leads
to a nested hyperbolic space representation independently
useful for dimensionality reduction. The main theoretical
contribution is that the proposed embedding is proved to
be isometric and equivariant under the Lorentz transformations, which are the natural isometric transformations in
hyperbolic spaces. This projection is computationally efficient since it can be expressed by simple linear operations,
and, due to the aforementioned equivariance property, it allows for weight sharing. The nested hyperbolic space representation is the core component of our network and therefore, we first compare this representation – independent of
the network – with other dimensionality reduction methods
such as tangent PCA, principal geodesic analysis (PGA)
and HoroPCA. Based on this equivariant embedding, we
develop a novel fully hyperbolic graph convolutional neural
network architecture to learn the parameters of the projection. Finally, we present experiments demonstrating comparative performance of our network on several publicly
available data sets.

1. Introduction
Hyperbolic geometry is a centuries old field of nonEuclidean geometry and has recently found its way into the
field of machine learning, in particular into deep learning in
the form of hyperbolic neural networks (HNNs) or hyperbolic graph convolutional networks (HGCNs) and recently
for dimensionality reduction of data embedded in the hyperbolic space. In this paper, we will discuss both problems namely, dimensionality reduction in hyperbolic spaces
and HNN architectures. In particular, we will present novel
techniques for both these problems. In the following, we
present literature review of the two above stated problems
and establish the motivation for our work. A word on terminology, we will use the term hyperbolic neural network
and hyperbolic graph (convolutional) neural network synonymously in the rest of the paper.

1.1. Dimensionality Reduction of Manifold-valued
Data
Dimensionality reduction is a fundamental problem in
machine learning with applications in computer vision and
many other fields of engineering and sciences. The simplest and most popular method among these is the principal component analysis (PCA), which was proposed more
than a century ago (see [22] for a review and some recent
developments on PCA). PCA however is limited to data in
vector spaces. For data that are manifold-valued, principal geodesic analysis (PGA) was presented in [10], which
yields the projection of data onto principal geodesic submanifolds passing through an intrinsic (Fréchet) mean (FM)
[11] of the data (assuming it exists). They find the geodesic
submanifold of a lower dimension that maximizes the projected variance and computationally, this was achieved via
linear approximation, i.e., applying PCA on the tangent
space anchored at the FM. This is sometimes referred to
as the tangent PCA (tPCA). This approximation however
requires the data to be clustered around the FM, otherwise
the tangent space approximation to the manifold leads to

356

