Not All Points Are Equal: Learning Highly Efﬁcient Point-based Detectors
for 3D LiDAR Point Clouds
Yifan Zhang1 , Qingyong Hu2** , Guoquan Xu1 , Yanxin Ma1 , Jianwei Wan1 , Yulan Guo1
1
National University of Defense Technology, 2 University of Oxford
{zhangyifan16c, xuguoquan19, mayanxin, wanjianwei, yulan.guo}@nudt.edu.cn, qingyong.hu@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We study the problem of efﬁcient object detection of 3D
LiDAR point clouds. To reduce the memory and computational cost, existing point-based pipelines usually adopt
task-agnostic random sampling or farthest point sampling
to progressively downsample input point clouds, despite the
fact that not all points are equally important to the task of
object detection. In particular, the foreground points are inherently more important than background points for object
detectors. Motivated by this, we propose a highly-efﬁcient
single-stage point-based 3D detector in this paper, termed
IA-SSD. The key of our approach is to exploit two learnable, task-oriented, instance-aware downsampling strategies to hierarchically select the foreground points belonging to objects of interest. Additionally, we also introduce
a contextual centroid perception module to further estimate
precise instance centers. Finally, we build our IA-SSD following the encoder-only architecture for efﬁciency. Extensive experiments conducted on several large-scale detection benchmarks demonstrate the competitive performance
of our IA-SSD. Thanks to the low memory footprint and a
high degree of parallelism, it achieves a superior speed of
80+ frames-per-second on the KITTI dataset with a single RTX2080Ti GPU. The code is available at https:
//github.com/yifanzhang713/IA-SSD.

1. Introduction
Accurate recognition and localization of speciﬁc 3D objects is a fundamental research problem in 3D computer vision [10]. As a commonly-used 3D representation, point
cloud has attracted increasing attention for its ﬂexibility and
compactness. However, the task of 3D object detection in
LiDAR point clouds (i.e., predicting 3D bounding boxes
with 7 degrees-of-free including 3D-location, 3D-size, orientation, and class labels) remains highly challenging due to
the complex geometrical structure and non-uniform density.
* Corresponding author

18953

Figure 1. Comparison of the detection performance (accuracy)
and efﬁciency (computational and memory) of different methods
in KITTI benchmark. All experiments are conducted on a single
RTX2080Ti GPU. Note that, we evaluate the memory efﬁciency
by calculating the maximum number of parallel frames during inference when fully utilizing the GPU memory. Additionally, the
FPS is calculated with the full utilization of GPU memory, more
detailed analysis could be found in Table 6.

Due to the unstructured and orderless nature of 3D point
clouds, early works usually ﬁrst convert the raw point
clouds into intermediate regular representation, including
projecting the 3D point clouds into 2D images from birdseye-view or frontal view [1, 17, 18, 41, 42, 50, 60], or transformed into dense 3D voxels [49, 61]. Then, several welldeveloped 2D detection paradigms can be deployed into the
task of 3D object detection. Although remarkable progress
has been achieved recently [2, 3, 7, 11, 24, 39, 53, 54], these

