Motron: Multimodal Probabilistic Human Motion Forecasting
1

Tim Salzmann1 , Marco Pavone2,3 and Markus Ryll1
Technical University of Munich 2 Stanford University 3 NVIDIA Research
{tim.salzmann, markus.ryll}@tum.de

pavone@stanford.edu

Abstract
Autonomous systems and humans are increasingly sharing the same space. Robots work side by side or even
hand in hand with humans to balance each other’s limitations. Such cooperative interactions are ever more sophisticated. Thus, the ability to reason not just about a
human’s center of gravity position, but also its granular
motion is an important prerequisite for human-robot interaction. Though, many algorithms ignore the multimodal
nature of humans or neglect uncertainty in their motion
forecasts. We present Motron, a multimodal, probabilistic,
graph-structured model, that captures human’s multimodality using probabilistic methods while being able to output deterministic maximum-likelihood motions and corresponding confidence values for each mode. Our model aims
to be tightly integrated with the robotic planning-controlinteraction loop; outputting physically feasible human motions and being computationally efficient. We demonstrate
the performance of our model on several challenging realworld motion forecasting datasets, outperforming a wide
array of generative/variational methods while providing
state-of-the-art single-output motions if required. Both using significantly less computational power than state-of-the
art algorithms.

1. Introduction
The key desideratum of autonomous systems is to provide added-value to humans while ensuring safety. Traditionally, safety aspects limit such robots to low-risk tasks
with minimal human interaction. An understanding of humans and their distribution of feasible anticipated movement is key to develop safe, risk-aware human-interactive
autonomous systems. Such systems could operate in closer
proximity to humans, performing tasks involving higher
levels of interaction, providing enhanced added value.
However, capturing the complexity of human motion
in a computational model is challenging due to the multitude of continuous movement possibilities (multimodality),
even within fixed boundaries of physical limitations. Traditionally, over-conservative systems rely solely on those
constraints to ensure safety, while predictive single-motionoutput methods discard the potential of many high-level fu-

Figure 1. Two examples of multiple possible poses at a given prediction time weighted by their probability. Left: Start of high variance jumping motion. Right: Landing from jump. Lower body is
predicted with low uncertainty as feet will come to a stop during
landing. Our parametric output distribution captures the full multimodal uncertainty in human motion; enabling subsequent evaluation of samples, individual modes, or most-likely motion as well
as their respective confidence values.

tures in favor of a single possible motion.
In contrast to such deterministic regressors, Monte-Carlo
method models aim to produce samples of human future
motion. However, for different reasons (e.g., simulation
purposes), they prioritize generative diversity over representing actual plausible motions. For robotic use cases, we
aim for samples to represent the underlying distribution of
possible motions; or even better a parametric description
thereof (Fig. 1).
Both, single-output and sampled, human motion predictions have been developed independently to maximize their
strengths in accuracy and diversity. Still, many of them have
been developed without directly accounting for real-world
robotic use cases; they settle for diversity instead of accuracy, ignore physical boundaries, and are computationally
too expensive. We target robotic use cases, where predictions are used in a control loop. As such, a model has to
capture the underlying distribution of possible human motions without being over-confident or over-diverse within
an imminent time horizon; combining and balancing the
desiderata of both research strands. In consequence, we are
interested in developing a human motion prediction model
that (I) represents the inherent multimodal structure of human motion; (II) accurately captures humans’ probabilistic

6457

