CLIP-Event: Connecting Text and Images with Event Structures
Manling Li1 ,* Ruochen Xu2 , Shuohang Wang2 , Luowei Zhou2 , Xudong Lin3
Chenguang Zhu2 , Michael Zeng2 , Heng Ji1 , Shih-Fu Chang3
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 Microsoft Research 3 Columbia University
{manling2,hengji}@illinois.edu,
{ruox,shuowa,luozhou,chezhu,nzeng}@microsoft.com
{xudong.lin,sc250}@columbia.edu

Abstract

Protester

Protester

Protester
Protester

Vision-language (V+L) pretraining models have achieved
great success in supporting multimedia applications by understanding the alignments between images and text. While
existing vision-language pretraining models primarily focus
on understanding objects in images or entities in text, they
often ignore the alignment at the level of events and their
argument structures. In this work, we propose a contrastive
learning framework to enforce vision-language pretraining
models to comprehend events and associated argument (participant) roles. To achieve this, we take advantage of text information extraction technologies to obtain event structural
knowledge, and utilize multiple prompt functions to contrast
difficult negative descriptions by manipulating event structures. We also design an event graph alignment loss based
on optimal transport to capture event argument structures.
In addition, we collect a large event-rich dataset (106,875
images) for pretraining, which provides a more challenging
image retrieval benchmark to assess the understanding of
complicated lengthy sentences1 . Experiments show that our
zero-shot CLIP-Event outperforms the state-of-the-art supervised model in argument extraction on Multimedia Event
Extraction, achieving more than 5% absolute F-score gain
in event extraction, as well as significant improvements on a
variety of downstream tasks under zero-shot settings.

1. Introduction
Real-world multimedia applications require an understanding of not only entity knowledge (i.e., objects and object types), but also event knowledge (i.e., event types) with
event argument structures (i.e., entities involved and their
roles). For example, 89% images include events in contem* The work is done when the first author was an intern at Microsoft.
1 The data and code are publicly available for research purpose in

Protester Police Police

Police

Event Type

(a) Agent
Target

Attack
protester
police

(b)

Event Type

Attack

Agent

police

Target

protester

Figure 1. Examples of visual event ATTACK with different arguments. Groundings are bounding-boxes colored to match roles.

porary multimedia news data2 . Furthermore, recognizing the
arguments (participants) is critical for news comprehension,
since events might be contradictory if the arguments play
different roles. For example, both Fig. 1(a) and Fig. 1(b)
are about the same event type ATTACK and contain entities
protester and police, but their argument roles are different,
i.e., the protester plays the role of ATTACKER in the first
event and the role of TARGET in the second event, and vice
versa for the police. Different argument roles for the same
group entity result in the differentiation of two attack events.
However, existing vision-language pretraining models [4,
12, 18, 26, 31, 41] focus on the understanding of images or
entities, ignoring the event semantics and structures. As a
result, apparent failures happen in the circumstances requiring verb comprehension [10]. Thus, we focus on integrating
event structural knowledge into vision-language pretraining.
Previous work primarily represents visual events as verbs
with subjects and objects [13, 19, 30, 33, 36, 43]. However,
events contain structural knowledge, with each event being
assigned to an event type that represents a set of synonymous verbs. Each argument is grounded to text or images,
and associated with an argument role that the participant
is playing. As shown in Fig. 2, the carry event is typed
as T RANSPORT, with protesters as AGENT, injured man as
2 We randomly check 100 images at https://www.voanews.com/.

https://github.com/limanling/clip-event.

16420

