Localization Distillation for Dense Object Detection
Zhaohui Zheng1∗ , Rongguang Ye2 *, Ping Wang2 , Dongwei Ren3 , Wangmeng Zuo3 ,
Qibin Hou1†, Ming-Ming Cheng1
1
2
TMCC, CS, Nankai University
School of Mathematics, Tianjin University
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology

Abstract
Knowledge distillation (KD) has witnessed its powerful
capability in learning compact models in object detection.
Previous KD methods for object detection mostly focus on
imitating deep features within the imitation regions instead
of mimicking classification logit due to its inefficiency in
distilling localization information and trivial improvement.
In this paper, by reformulating the knowledge distillation
process on localization, we present a novel localization distillation (LD) method which can efficiently transfer the localization knowledge from the teacher to the student. Moreover, we also heuristically introduce the concept of valuable localization region that can aid to selectively distill the
semantic and localization knowledge for a certain region.
Combining these two new components, for the first time,
we show that logit mimicking can outperform feature imitation and localization knowledge distillation is more important and efficient than semantic knowledge for distilling
object detectors. Our distillation scheme is simple as well
as effective and can be easily applied to different dense object detectors. Experiments show that our LD can boost
the AP score of GFocal-ResNet-50 with a single-scale 1×
training schedule from 40.1 to 42.1 on the COCO benchmark without any sacrifice on the inference speed. Our
source code and pretrained models are publicly available
at https://github.com/HikariTJU/LD.

1. Introduction
Localization is a fundamental issue in object detection
[15, 24, 33, 49, 50, 55–57, 61, 68]. Bounding box regression
is the most popular manner so far for localization in object detection [10, 32, 39, 42], where Dirac delta distribution
representation is intuitive and popular for years. However,
localization ambiguity where objects cannot be confidently
located by their edges is still a common issue. For exam* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

A
Figure 1. Bottom edge for “elephant” and(a)
right edge for “surfboard” are ambiguous.

ple, as shown in Fig. 1, the bottom edge for “elephant”
and the right edge for “surfboard” are ambiguous
to locate.B
A
This issue is even worse for lightweight detectors. One way
(a)
(b)
to alleviate this problem is the knowledge distillation (KD),
which, as a model compression technology, has been widely
validated to be useful for boosting the performance of the
small-sized student network by transferring the generalized
knowledge captured by the large-sized teacher network.
Speaking of KD in object detection, previous works
[22, 52, 62] have pointed out that the original logit mimicking technique [19] for classification is inefficient as it only
transfers the semantic knowledge (i.e., classification), while
neglects the importance of localization knowledge distillation. Therefore, existent KD methods for object detection
mostly focus on enforcing the consistency of the deep features between the teacher-student pair, and exploit various
imitation regions for distillation [5, 8, 16, 25, 52]. Fig. 2
exhibits three popular KD pipelines for object detection.
However, as the semantic knowledge and the localization
one are mixed on the feature maps, it is hard to tell whether
it is beneficial to the performance to transfer the hybrid
knowledge for each location and which regions are conducive to the transfer of a certain type of knowledge.
Motivated by the aforementioned questions, in this paper, instead of simply distilling the hybrid knowledge on the
feature maps, we propose a novel divide-and-conquer distillation strategy that transfers the semantic and localization
knowledge separately. For semantic knowledge, we use the

9407

(b)

