On Adversarial Robustness of Trajectory Prediction for Autonomous Vehicles
Qingzhao Zhang1 , Shengtuo Hu1 , Jiachen Sun1 , Qi Alfred Chen2 , Z. Morley Mao1
1
University of Michigan, 2 University of California, Irvine
{qzzhang, shengtuo, jiachens, zmao}@umich.edu

Abstract
Trajectory prediction is a critical component for autonomous vehicles (AVs) to perform safe planning and navigation. However, few studies have analyzed the adversarial
robustness of trajectory prediction or investigated whether
the worst-case prediction can still lead to safe planning. To
bridge this gap, we study the adversarial robustness of trajectory prediction models by proposing a new adversarial
attack that perturbs normal vehicle trajectories to maximize the prediction error. Our experiments on three models
and three datasets show that the adversarial prediction increases the prediction error by more than 150%. Our case
studies show that if an adversary drives a vehicle close to
the target AV following the adversarial trajectory, the AV
may make an inaccurate prediction and even make unsafe
driving decisions. We also explore possible mitigation techniques via data augmentation and trajectory smoothing.

1. Introduction
Autonomous vehicles (AVs) are transforming the transportation systems. AV is a complex system integrating a
pipeline of modules such as perception of obstacles, planning of driving behaviors, and controlling of the physical
vehicle [1, 3]. Specifically, trajectory prediction in the perception module predicts the future trajectories of nearby
moving objects. The prediction is essential for the planning module and affects AV’s driving behavior. Therefore,
accurate trajectory prediction is critical for safe AV driving.
Many studies propose trajectory prediction models based
on deep neural networks [8, 10, 11, 13, 21, 23, 24, 27, 32, 33,
35, 38, 41, 42]. They evaluate the models on benchmarks
collected from real world using the average ℓ2 distance between ground truth and predicted trajectories as the key
metric. However, few studies evaluate trajectory prediction
models from the perspective of security or analyze the robustness against adversarial examples. For trajectory prediction, if the adversary can control the position of a vehicle close to the target AV, e.g., by driving the vehicle along
a crafted trajectory, the adversary can influence the AV’s
trajectory prediction and driving behaviors.

alfchen@uci.edu

To bridge this gap, we propose new white/black box adversarial attacks on trajectory prediction, which adds minor
perturbation on normal trajectories to maximize the prediction error. Compared with adversarial attacks on image/video classification, attacking trajectory prediction is
unique in two aspects. First, the attack requires naturalness [40] of the adversarial examples. Adversarial trajectories are natural if they obey physical rules and are possible to happen in the real world. With naturalness, the trajectories can be reproduced by the attacker-controlled vehicle in the real world and cannot be easily classified as
anomaly by AVs. To realize naturalness, we enforce constraints on physical properties (e.g., velocity and acceleration) of the perturbed trajectory during optimization solving. Second, we need to define optimization objectives that
are semantically-attractive for attackers targeting trajectory
prediction. To this end, we find multiple attractive attack
dimensions can co-exist even for the same scenario (e.g.,
causing the predicted trajectory to deviate laterally or longitudinally are both of interest to attackers in AV context).
Thus, in our attack design we consider different metrics of
prediction error as optimization objectives, e.g., average lateral/longitudinal deviation to four different directions.
We evaluate the proposed attacks on 10 different combinations of prediction models [18, 20, 30] and trajectory
datasets [2, 5, 16]. The results show that the adversarial perturbation can substantially increase the prediction error by
around 150%. 62.2% of attacks cause prediction to deviate by more than half of the lane width, which are likely
to significantly alter AV’s navigation decisions. In addition,
we thoroughly analyze how various factors impact the attack results and make recommendations for improvements
of implementing trajectory prediction such as leveraging
map information and driving rules. We also explore mitigation mechanisms against adversarial trajectories through
data augmentation and trajectory smoothing, which reduce
the prediction error under attacks by 28%. In general, our
work exposes the necessity of evaluating the worst-case performance of trajectory prediction. The hard cases involving
natural but adversarial trajectories generated by attacks have
critical safety concerns (e.g., causing hard brakes or even

15159

