Multi-label Iterated Learning for Image Classification with Label Ambiguity
Sai Rajeswar1,2,3 ,* Pau Rodríguez1 ,* Soumye Singhal2,3 , David Vazquez1 , Aaron Courville2,3,4
1
ServiceNow Research, 2 Montréal Institute of Learning Algorithms,
3
Université de Montréal, 4 CIFAR Fellow
rajsai24@gmail.com, pau.rodriguez@servicenow.com

Abstract
Transfer learning from large-scale pre-trained models has
become essential for many computer vision tasks. Recent
studies have shown that datasets like ImageNet are weakly
labeled since images with multiple object classes present
are assigned a single label. This ambiguity biases models
towards a single prediction, which could result in the suppression of classes that tend to co-occur in the data. Inspired
by language emergence literature, we propose multi-label iterated learning (MILe) to incorporate the inductive biases of
multi-label learning from single labels using the framework
of iterated learning. MILe is a simple yet effective procedure
that builds a multi-label description of the image by propagating binary predictions through successive generations
of teacher and student networks with a learning bottleneck.
Experiments show that our approach exhibits systematic benefits on ImageNet accuracy as well as ReaL F1 score, which
indicates that MILe deals better with label ambiguity than
the standard training procedure, even when fine-tuning from
self-supervised weights. We also show that MILe is effective
reducing label noise, achieving state-of-the-art performance
on real-world large-scale noisy data such as WebVision. Furthermore, MILe improves performance in class incremental
settings such as IIRC and it is robust to distribution shifts.
Code: https://github.com/rajeswar18/MILe

1. Introduction
Large-scale datasets with human-annotated labels have
been central to the development of modern state-of-the-art
neural network-based artificial perception systems [23, 24,
32]. Improved performance on ImageNet [17] has led to
remarkable progress in tasks and domains that leverage ImageNet pretraining [11, 42, 70]. However, these weaklyannotated datasets and models tend to project a rich, multilabel reality into a paradigm that envisions one and only one
label per image. This form of simplification often hinders
* Equal contribution.

Kt
Teacher

Human
Tree
Car
House

BCE loss
//
stop
gradient

Copy
weights

single-label
ground-truth

multi-label prediction
bottleneck

Student

BCE loss

Ks
Figure 1. Multi-label Iterated Learning (MILe) builds a multilabel representation of the images from singly-labeled ground-truth.
In this example, a model produces multi-label binary predictions
for the next generation, obtaining Car and House for an image
weakly labeled with House.

model performance by asking models to predict a single label, when trained on real-world images that contain multiple
objects.
Given the importance of the problem, there is growing
recognition of single-labeled datasets as a form of weak
supervision and an increasing interest in evaluating the limits of these singly-labeled benchmarks. A series of recent
studies [8, 54, 56, 59, 65] highlight the problem of label
ambiguity in ImageNet. In order to obtain a better estimate
of model performance, Beyer et al. [8] and Shankar et al.
[54] introduced multi-label evaluation sets. They identified
softmax cross-entropy training as one of the main reasons
for low multi-label performance since it promotes label exclusiveness. They also showed that replacing the softmax
with sigmoid activations and casting the output as a set of
binary classifiers results in better multi-label validation performance. Several other studies have explored ways to overcome the shortcomings in existing validation procedures by
improving the pipelines for gathering labels [6, 48, 58].
In order to obtain a more complete description of images
from weakly-supervised or semi-supervised data, a number

4783

