ICON: Implicit Clothed humans Obtained from Normals
Yuliang Xiu Jinlong Yang Dimitrios Tzionas Michael J. Black
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
{yuliang.xiu, jinlong.yang, dtzionas, black}@tuebingen.mpg.de

Figure 1. Images to avatars. ICON robustly reconstructs 3D clothed humans in unconstrained poses from individual video frames (Left).
These are used to learn a fully textured and animatable clothed avatar with realistic clothing deformations (Right).

Abstract
Current methods for learning realistic and animatable 3D
clothed avatars need either posed 3D scans or 2D images
with carefully controlled user poses. In contrast, our goal is
to learn an avatar from only 2D images of people in unconstrained poses. Given a set of images, our method estimates
a detailed 3D surface from each image and then combines
these into an animatable avatar. Implicit functions are well
suited to the first task, as they can capture details like hair
and clothes. Current methods, however, are not robust to
varied human poses and often produce 3D surfaces with
broken or disembodied limbs, missing details, or non-human
shapes. The problem is that these methods use global feature
encoders that are sensitive to global pose. To address this,
we propose ICON (“Implicit Clothed humans Obtained from
Normals”), which, instead, uses local features. ICON has
two main modules, both of which exploit the SMPL(-X) body
model. First, ICON infers detailed clothed-human normals
(front/back) conditioned on the SMPL(-X) normals. Second,
a visibility-aware implicit surface regressor produces an
iso-surface of a human occupancy field. Importantly, at inference time, a feedback loop alternates between refining
the SMPL(-X) mesh using the inferred clothed normals and
then refining the normals. Given multiple reconstructed
frames of a subject in varied poses, we use a modified version of SCANimate to produce an animatable avatar from
them. Evaluation on the AGORA and CAPE datasets shows

that ICON outperforms the state of the art in reconstruction, even with heavily limited training data. Additionally,
it is much more robust to out-of-distribution samples, e.g.,
in-the-wild poses/images and out-of-frame cropping. ICON
takes a step towards robust 3D clothed human reconstruction from in-the-wild images. This enables avatar creation
directly from video with personalized pose-dependent cloth
deformation. Models and code are available for research at
https://icon.is.tue.mpg.de.

1. Introduction
Realistic virtual humans will play a central role in mixed
and augmented reality, forming a key foundation for the
“metaverse” and supporting remote presence, collaboration,
education, and entertainment. To enable this, new tools
are needed to easily create 3D virtual humans that can be
readily animated. Traditionally, this requires significant artist
effort and expensive scanning equipment. Therefore, such
approaches do not scale easily. A more practical approach
would enable individuals to create an avatar from one or
more images. There are now several methods that take a
single image and regress a minimally clothed 3D human
model [4, 5, 13, 16, 28, 40]. Existing parametric body models,
however, lack important details like clothing and hair [24,
32, 40, 45, 56]. In contrast, we present a method that robustly
extracts 3D scan-like data from images of people in arbitrary
poses and uses this to construct an animatable avatar.

13296

