Synthetic Aperture Imaging with Events and Frames
Wei Liao1 ,* Xiang Zhang1 ,* Lei Yu1†, Shijie Lin2 , Wen Yang1†, Ning Qiao3
1
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
2
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
3
Chengdu SynSense Tech. Co. Ltd., Chengdu, China
{weiliao,xiangz,ly.wd,yangwen}@whu.edu.cn,lsj2048@connect.hku.hk,ning.qiao@synsense.ai

The Event-based Synthetic Aperture Imaging (E-SAI)
[34, 35] has been recently proposed for occlusion removal,
benefiting from the low latency and the high dynamic
range of events. It shows promising performance, especially when facing extremely dense occlusions, as shown
in Fig. 1. Unlike the frame-based SAI (F-SAI) collecting
the light information from conventional frame-based cameras [8, 15, 16, 22, 33], the E-SAI collects the light information with events asynchronously triggered by brightness
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

The research was partially supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grants 61871297, the Natural Science Foundation of Hubei Province, China under Grant 2021CFB467, the Fundamental
Research Funds for the Central University under Grant 2042020kf0019,
and the National Natural Science Foundation of China Enterprise Innovation Development Key Project under Grant U19B2004.

Sparser

1. Introduction

Denser

The Event-based Synthetic Aperture Imaging (E-SAI)
has recently been proposed to see through extremely dense
occlusions. However, the performance of E-SAI is not consistent under sparse occlusions due to the dramatic decrease of signal events. This paper addresses this problem
by leveraging the merits of both events and frames, leading
to a fusion-based SAI (EF-SAI) that performs consistently
under the different densities of occlusions. In particular, we
first extract the feature from events and frames via multimodal feature encoders and then apply a multi-stage fusion
network for cross-modal enhancement and density-aware
feature selection. Finally, a CNN decoder is employed to
generate occlusion-free visual images from selected features. Extensive experiments show that our method effectively tackles varying densities of occlusions and achieves
superior performance to the state-of-the-art SAI methods.
Codes and datasets are available at https://github.
com/smjsc/EF-SAI

Extremely Dense

Abstract

Occluded scenes

F-SAI+CNN

E-SAI+Hybrid

EF-SAI (Ours)

Figure 1. Qualitative comparisons of F-SAI+CNN [27], ESAI+Hybrid [35] and our proposed EF-SAI under different densities of occlusions. The EF-SAI can reconstruct high-quality
occlusion-free images under either sparse or dense occlusions by
exploiting the information from both events and frames.

contrast [34, 35] in almost continuous viewpoints. Existing
E-SAI approaches have shown the superiority of restoring
clear images from the occluded light field with extremely
dense occlusions. However, their performance degrades
dramatically when occlusions become sparse (see Fig. 1).
The principle of existing E-SAI is to predict the light
field of occluded targets via accumulating events triggered
by occlusion-to-target contrast, which is proportional to the
intensity of occluded targets [35]. Thus, E-SAI achieves
high performance in occluded scenes with dense occlusions, where the signal events caused by target-to-occlusion
contrast is dominant. However, when occlusions become
sparse, the performance of existing E-SAI will inevitably
deteriorate as signal events decrease.

17735

