Recurrent Glimpse-based Decoder for Detection with Transformer
Zhe Chen1
Jing Zhang1
Dacheng Tao2,1
1
2
The University of Sydney, Australia
JD Explore Academy, China
{zhe.chen1,jing.zhang1}@sydney.edu.au; dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract
Recurrent Glimpsebased Decoder

DETR

Although detection with Transformer (DETR) is increasingly popular, its global attention modeling requires an
extremely long training period to optimize and achieve
promising detection performance. Alternative to existing
studies that mainly develop advanced feature or embedding designs to tackle the training issue, we point out that
the Region-of-Interest (RoI) based detection refinement can
easily help mitigate the difficulty of training for DETR
methods. Based on this, we introduce a novel REcurrent
Glimpse-based decOder (REGO) in this paper. In particular, the REGO employs a multi-stage recurrent processing structure to help the attention of DETR gradually focus on foreground objects more accurately. In each processing stage, visual features are extracted as glimpse features from RoIs with enlarged bounding box areas of detection results from the previous stage. Then, a glimpse-based
decoder is introduced to provide refined detection results
based on both the glimpse features and the attention modeling outputs of the previous stage. In practice, REGO can
be easily embedded in representative DETR variants while
maintaining their fully end-to-end training and inference
pipelines. In particular, REGO helps Deformable DETR
achieve 44.8 AP on the MSCOCO dataset with only 36
training epochs, compared with the first DETR and the Deformable DETR that require 500 and 50 epochs to achieve
comparable performance, respectively. Experiments also
show that REGO consistently boosts the performance of
different DETR detectors by up to 7% relative gain at the
same setting of 50 training epochs. Code is available via
https://github.com/zhechen/DeformableDETR-REGO.

1. Introduction
Object detection aims to locate and recognize foreground
objects from images. In recent years, deep learning has
made rapid development in object detection. With deep
convolutional neural networks [18, 19, 27, 33, 46], various powerful detectors have been developed [4, 22, 32, 37].

Poor Detection with
Shorter Training
Glimpsebased
Decoder

Stage 1

Robust Detection with
Shorter Training
Glimpsebased
Decoder

Glimpsebased
Decoder

Stage 2

Stage 3

Figure 1. Concept of the proposed recurrent glimpse-based decoder (REGO) for augmenting the training of attention modeling
in Detection with Transformer (DETR). Using original DETR results, the REGO performs a multi-stage Region-of-Interest (RoI)
based attention modeling refinement procedure by gradually focusing on more accurate areas. In each stage, glimpse features are
extracted and a glimpse-based decoder is employed to provide refined detection outputs based on both the glimpse features and the
attention modeling output of the previous stage. The REGO maintains the fully end-to-end pipeline of different DETR methods and
can improve their training performance promisingly.

In general, modern detectors produce redundant results
and require Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS) to reduce
the redundancy in detection. Different from this popular
paradigm, Detection with Transformer (DETR) [3] applied
Transformer [39] for detection and is the first fully end-toend detector that avoids the need for NMS. In particular, a
Transformer is a powerful attention-based encoder-decoder
pipeline for translating an input sequence to the target sequence. By formulating the detection task as a direct set
prediction problem, the authors of DETR managed to translate visual features into a set of detection results based on
the global attention modeling of a Transformer. Despite
benefits, the DETR suffers from a difficult training problem.
Using MS COCO dataset [24], the original DETR requires
500 training epochs to obtain promising performance, while
the other popular detectors like FPN [22] only require less
than 36 epochs to get similar results. Even using a machine
with 8 powerful V100 GPUs, a DETR detector costs more
than 10 days to finish the training [3].
By addressing the training problem, researchers found

5260

