Using 3D Topological Connectivity for Ghost Particle Reduction
in Flow Reconstruction
Christina Tsalicoglou
Thomas Rösgen
Institute of Fluid Dynamics, ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
{ctsalico,roesgen}@ethz.ch

Abstract
Volumetric flow velocimetry for experimental fluid dynamics relies primarily on the 3D reconstruction of point
objects, which are the detected positions of tracer particles
identified in images obtained by a multi-camera setup. By
assuming that the particles accurately follow the observed
flow, their displacement over a known time interval is a
measure of the local flow velocity. The number of particles imaged in a 1 Megapixel image is typically in the order
of 103 -104 , resulting in a large number of consistent but incorrect reconstructions (no real particle in 3D), that must
be eliminated through tracking or intensity constraints. In
an alternative method, 3D Particle Streak Velocimetry (3DPSV), the exposure time is increased, and the particles’
pathlines are imaged as “streaks”. We treat these streaks
(a) as connected endpoints and (b) as conic section segments and develop a theoretical model that describes the
mechanisms of 3D ambiguity generation and shows that
streaks can drastically reduce reconstruction ambiguities.
Moreover, we propose a method for simultaneously estimating these short, low-curvature conic section segments and
their 3D position from multiple camera views. Our results
validate the theory, and the streak and conic section reconstruction method produces far fewer ambiguities than simple particle reconstruction, outperforming current state-ofthe-art particle tracking software on the evaluated cases.

1. Introduction
Volumetric velocimetry techniques for fluid flows enable the analysis of complex flow fields and their complete
spatio-temporal evolution, by providing all three velocity
components of the flow in discrete positions in a 3D measurement volume. Most volumetric methods require a minimum of two synchronized cameras and record the positions of tracers over time as they follow the flow. The most
common approaches are 3D Particle Tracking Velocimetry
(3D-PTV) [14] and Tomographic Particle Image Velocime-

Figure 1. Epipolar and epipolar tangency constraints for conic
section segments reduce the reconstruction ambiguities, “ghosts”,
in 3D flow reconstruction from streaks.

try (Tomo-PIV) [4]. In 3D-PTV, the tracer particles are reconstructed in 3D space by triangulation, while in TomoPIV a light intensity field is reconstructed tomographically.
Both methods result in “ghost particles”, which are consistently reconstructed particles for which it remains undecidable whether they are real or artifacts of the reconstruction
process. The tracer density in these applications is in the
order of 103 -104 particles in a 1 Mpx image, resulting in a
large number of ghost particles if left untreated.
There are several ways to reduce the number of ghost
particles and improve the reconstruction quality: increasing the number of cameras, reducing the seeding density
of tracer particles, or rejecting particles using criteria such
as their intensity, estimated velocity, or trajectory smoothness (e.g. [19]). Still, triangulating particles independently
in time, frame-by-frame, results in a loss of information
which needs to be recovered using assumptions about the
flow field. Handling regions with large velocity differences
remains a challenge, as the particle displacement assumptions often fail to eliminate ghost tracks [20].
A less common variant of 3D-PTV is 3D Particle Streak
Velocimetry (3D-PSV), where the cameras’ exposure time
is increased, so that the tracer particles’ pathlines over
the exposure time are recorded as “streaks” [2, 15, 16, 24].
Therefore, the tracking information is retained in a single
image and can be used in the triangulation step to eliminate
some of the reconstruction ambiguities. Furthermore, the
displacement of both fast and slow-moving particles is en-

1839

