Demystifying the Neural Tangent Kernel from a Practical Perspective:
Can it be trusted for Neural Architecture Search without training?
Byunggook Na1
Ji-Hoon Kim2,3†
Dongyoon Han2†
Sungroh Yoon1,4†
Jisoo Mok1 *
1
2
3
Department of ECE, Seoul National University
NAVER AI Lab
NAVER CLOVA
4
AIIS, ASRI, INMC, ISRC, and Interdisciplinary Program in AI, Seoul National University

Skip

Abstract
In Neural Architecture Search (NAS), reducing the cost
of architecture evaluation remains one of the most crucial
challenges. Among a plethora of efforts to bypass training
of each candidate architecture to convergence for evaluation, the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) is emerging as a
promising theoretical framework that can be utilized to estimate the performance of a neural architecture at initialization. In this work, we revisit several at-initialization metrics
that can be derived from the NTK and reveal their key shortcomings. Then, through the empirical analysis of the time
evolution of NTK, we deduce that modern neural architectures exhibit highly non-linear characteristics, making the
NTK-based metrics incapable of reliably estimating the performance of an architecture without some amount of training. To take such non-linear characteristics into account, we
introduce Label-Gradient Alignment (LGA), a novel NTKbased metric whose inherent formulation allows it to capture the large amount of non-linear advantage present in
modern neural architectures. With minimal amount of training, LGA obtains a meaningful level of rank correlation
with the final test accuracy of an architecture. Lastly, we
demonstrate that LGA, complemented with few epochs of
training, successfully guides existing search algorithms to
achieve competitive search performances with significantly
less search cost. The code is available at: https://
github.com/nutellamok/DemystifyingNTK.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) continue to produce impressive results in a wide variety of domains and applications. The remarkable success of DNNs is due in no small
part to the development of novel neural architectures, all
of which used to be designed manually by machine learning engineers by testing a number of architectural design
* Work done while interning at NAVER (magicshop1118@snu.ac.kr)
† Corresponding Authors

3x3 Conv

Avg Pool

Weak kernel twisting
(a) Low-accuracy Architectures

Strong kernel twisting
→ Non-linear behavior
(b) High-accuracy Architectures

Figure 1. A conceptualized view of how (a) the NTK of a lowaccuracy architecture and (b) that of a high-accuracy architecture
evolve during training (gray → green). Black planes denote the
function space realization of weight parameters. On the top left
corners of (a) and (b), an example of a low- and high-accuracy architecture is provided. Unlike a low-accuracy architecture, a highaccuracy architecture equipped with a large amount of non-linear
advantage experiences strong kernel twisting, such that the principal components of the NTK become more aligned with target
labels. In Figure 2, we illustrate that LGA captures this difference
in the architectures residing in two polar accuracy regimes.

choices. To remedy this issue, Neural Architecture Search
(NAS), a sub-field of automated machine learning, has
emerged as a feasible alternative to hand-designing neural
architectures [13].
Although the architectures derived by NAS are beginning to outperform hand-designed architectures, the
tremendous computational cost required to execute NAS
makes its immediate deployment rather challenging [39,51,
52]. The majority of the search cost in NAS is induced by
the need to train each candidate architecture to convergence
for evaluation [35]. In more recently proposed NAS algorithms, the individual training of candidate architectures is
circumvented by a weight-sharing strategy [5, 8, 12, 29, 34,
35, 46, 48, 50]. With weight sharing, the computational cost
of NAS is reduced by orders of magnitude: from tens of
thousands of GPU hours to < 1 GPU day. Unfortunately,
NAS algorithms that rely on weight-sharing are known to
experience an optimization gap between the performance
of an architecture approximated through weight-sharing and

11861

