RegionCLIP: Region-based Language-Image Pretraining
Yiwu Zhong1 ,* Jianwei Yang2 , Pengchuan Zhang2 , Chunyuan Li2 , Noel Codella3 ,
Liunian Harold Li4 , Luowei Zhou3 , Xiyang Dai3 , Lu Yuan3 , Yin Li1 , Jianfeng Gao2
1
University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2 Microsoft Research, 3 Microsoft Cloud + AI, 4 UCLA
{yzhong52, yin.li}@wisc.edu,{jianwei.yang, penzhan, chunyl, ncodella,
luozhou, xidai, luyuan, jfgao}@microsoft.com, {liunian.harold.li}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract

Image classification (ImageNet)
Region classification (LVIS)

Cropped image regions recognized by CLIP
boy, 65%

Contrastive language-image pretraining (CLIP) using
image-text pairs has achieved impressive results on image
classification in both zero-shot and transfer learning settings. However, we show that directly applying such models to recognize image regions for object detection leads to
unsatisfactory performance due to a major domain shift:
CLIP was trained to match an image as a whole to a text description, without capturing the fine-grained alignment between image regions and text spans. To mitigate this issue,
we propose a new method called RegionCLIP that significantly extends CLIP to learn region-level visual representations, thus enabling fine-grained alignment between image
regions and textual concepts. Our method leverages a CLIP
model to match image regions with template captions, and
then pretrains our model to align these region-text pairs in
the feature space. When transferring our pretrained model
to the open-vocabulary object detection task, our method
outperforms the state of the art by 3.8 AP50 and 2.2 AP
for novel categories on COCO and LVIS datasets, respectively. Further, the learned region representations support
zero-shot inference for object detection, showing promising results on both COCO and LVIS datasets. Our code is
available at https://github.com/microsoft/RegionCLIP.

1. Introduction
The recent advances in vision-language representation
learning has created remarkable models like CLIP [37],
ALIGN [26] and Florence [59]. Such models are trained
using hundreds of millions of image-text pairs by matching images to their captions, achieving impressive results
of recognizing a large set of concepts without manual labels, and capable of transferring to many visual recognition
tasks. Following their success on image classification, a natural question is whether these models can be used to reason
* Work done as an intern at Microsoft Research.

59.6

boy, 55%

Accuracy (%)

19.1

a

b

Image

c

Region

Image-text
matching
“A boy is flying a kite.”
“A photo of one cruise.”
“A bad photo of a bike.”
“A photo of a boy.”

(CLIP)

Region-text
matching
(Ours)

Figure 1. (a). A pretrained CLIP model [37] failed to capture localization quality. (b). A major drop on accuracy when using the
same pretrained CLIP to classify image regions. (c). Our key idea
is learning to match image regions and their text descriptions.

about image regions, e.g., for tasks like object detection.
To answer this question, we construct a simple R-CNN
style [16] object detector using a pretrained CLIP model,
similar to adapting a convolutional network pretrained on
ImageNet. This detector crops candidate object regions
from an input image, and applies the CLIP model for detection by matching visual features of cropped regions to
text embeddings of object categories. Fig. 1(a-b) shows the
results on LVIS dataset [19]. When using object proposals [42] as the input regions, scores from CLIP often fail to
capture the localization quality (Fig. 1a). Even with groundtruth object boxes, classification accuracy using CLIP drops
significantly from 60% on ImageNet to 19% on LVIS, with
a similar number of classes (Fig. 1b). There is thus a major
performance degradation when applying a pretrained CLIP
model for object detection. How can we empower a visionlanguage pretrained model to reason about image regions?
We believe the main gap lies in the training of these
vision-language models. Many existing vision-language

16793

