Omni-DETR: Omni-Supervised Object Detection with Transformers
Pei Wang2,⋆ Zhaowei Cai1,† Hao Yang1 Gurumurthy Swaminathan1
Nuno Vasconcelos2 Bernt Schiele1 Stefano Soatto1
AWS AI Labs1 UC San Diego2
{zhaoweic,haoyng,gurumurs,bschiel,soattos}@amazon.com

{pew062,nuno}@ucsd.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Most of the successes of recent object detection are attributed to the large-scale well-established object detection
datasets [11, 12, 25, 28, 38], which have accurate and complete detection annotation (category and bounding box or
segmentation mask) for every object of interest in an image.
In general, complete and accurate detection annotation is
very expensive. For example, complete annotation of a single image of MS-COCO [28] takes about 346 seconds, 76.5
seconds on each category elimination and 269.5 seconds
on accurate bounding box localization, on average [35]1 .
Given this expensive cost, it is very difficult to scale up the
data size. For example, OpenImages consisting of 9 million
images [25] used a combination of machine annotation and
human verification to reduce the annotation cost. The ques⋆ Work done during internship at Amazon. † Corresponding author.
1 Not accurate numbers from [28] but rough estimation from [35].

COCO

40

36

mAP

34
31
28
Supervised
Semi-supervised
Omni-supervised

25
220.5

CrowdHuman

39

37

mAP

We consider the problem of omni-supervised object detection, which can use unlabeled, fully labeled and weakly
labeled annotations, such as image tags, counts, points,
etc., for object detection. This is enabled by a unified
architecture, Omni-DETR, based on the recent progress
on student-teacher framework and end-to-end transformer
based object detection. Under this unified architecture, different types of weak labels can be leveraged to generate accurate pseudo labels, by a bipartite matching based filtering mechanism, for the model to learn. In the experiments,
Omni-DETR has achieved state-of-the-art results on multiple datasets and settings. And we have found that weak
annotations can help to improve detection performance
and a mixture of them can achieve a better trade-off between annotation cost and accuracy than the standard complete annotation. These findings could encourage larger
object detection datasets with mixture annotations. The
code is available at https://github.com/amazonresearch/omni-detr.

1

2

hours (103)

3

33
30
Supervised
Semi-supervised
Omni-supervised

27
4

24100

300

500

700

900

1100

hours

Figure 1. The top is the visualization of different forms of weak
annotations, and the bottom is the trade-off comparison (accuracy v.s. annotation cost) of supervised/semi-supervised/omnisupervised detection (see Section 5.5 for more details).

tion is, do we need accurate and complete annotation which
is expensive to achieve strong detection performances?
There are many weaker forms of object annotation as
shown in Figure 1 (top), e.g., points, tags, counts, etc., but
they are not well explored in the literature and the majority
of the object detection frameworks are designed to be used
with complete detection annotations. One of the main reasons for this is that using weaker forms of annotation has not
shown promising results yet. For example, the performance
of weakly supervised object detection (WSOD) [23, 32, 44]
lags in performance compared to standard supervised detection using complete annotations. In addition, UFO2 [35], as
the first work in omni-supervised object detection (OSOD),
has shown that using additional weak annotations only has
marginal gains. In this paper, however, we will show that,
weak annotation can help to improve detection performance
and achieve better cost-accuracy trade-off.
Towards this, we propose a unified architecture for
OSOD, Omni-DETR, which can work with different types

9367

