Adaptive Hierarchical Representation Learning for Long-Tailed Object
Detection
Banghuai Li
MEGVII Technology
libanghuai@gmail.com

30

Abstract
General object detectors are always evaluated on handdesigned datasets, e.g., MS COCO and Pascal VOC, which
tend to maintain balanced data distribution over different
classes. However, it goes against the practical applications in the real world which suffer from a heavy class imbalance problem, known as the long-tailed object detection. In this paper, we propose a novel method, named
Adaptive Hierarchical Representation Learning (AHRL),
from a metric learning perspective to address long-tailed
object detection. We visualize each learned class representation in the feature space, and observe that some classes,
especially under-represented scarce classes, are prone to
cluster with analogous ones due to the lack of discriminative representation. Inspired by this, we propose to split the
whole feature space into a hierarchical structure and eliminate the problem in a coarse-to-fine way. AHRL contains
a two-stage training paradigm. First, we train a normal
baseline model and construct the hierarchical structure under the unsupervised clustering method. Then, we design an
AHR loss that consists of two optimization objectives. On
the one hand, AHR loss retains the hierarchical structure
and keeps representation clusters away from each other. On
the other hand, AHR loss adopts adaptive margins according to specific class pairs in the same cluster to further optimize locally. We conduct extensive experiments on the challenging LVIS dataset and AHRL outperforms all the existing
state-of-the-art methods, with 29.1% segmentation AP and
29.3% box AP on LVIS v0.5 and 27.6% segmentation AP
and 28.7% box AP on LVIS v1.0 based on ResNet-101. We
hope our simple yet effective approach will serve as a solid
baseline to help stimulate future research in long-tailed object detection. Code will be released soon.

1. Introduction
The emerging of convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
leads to prosperity in object detection. With effort of re-

28

AP s(R50)
AP b(R50)
AP s(R101)
AP b(R101)

26

24

22

20

Class-balance Loss(19)
Focal Loss(17)
EQL(20)
LST(20)
SimCal(20)
RFS(19)
DropLoss(21)
Forest R-CNN(20)
BAGS(20)
ACSL(21)
BALMS(20)
Ours

Figure 1. Comparisons between the state-of-the-art methods and
our AHRL on LVIS v0.5 [8]. We report different task results (object detection and instance segmentation) on both ResNet-50(red)
and ResNet-101(blue) backbones. AP s stands for the segmentation AP, while AP b means the box AP. Our proposed AHRL
outperforms all the existing methods.

searchers, recent advances in object detection achieve encouraging results in manually balanced datasets, like Pascal VOC [5] and MS COCO [18]. However, in reality, we always need to face long-tailed distributed data
[25], where head classes(classes with plenty of instances)
and tailed/scarce classes(classes with few instances) significantly differ in the number of instances. Nevertheless, many
traditional detection models are hard to take care of head
classes and tailed classes in the same time, resulting in the
desire for an adaptive solution.
Different from long-tailed object recognition, an additional localization sub-task makes long-tailed object detection more challenging. Extreme imbalance of the instance
number for each class still restricts its performance. Almost
all the past works [3, 12, 15, 31, 35, 37] on long-tailed object detection reach a consensus that classifier is the major
bottleneck for further improvements. As shown in Figure

2313

