Leveraging Self-Supervision for Cross-Domain Crowd Counting
Weizhe Liu1 Nikita Durasov2 Pascal Fua2
1
Tencent AI Lab 2 CVLab, EPFL

Abstract
State-of-the-art methods for counting people in crowded
scenes rely on deep networks to estimate crowd density.
While effective, these data-driven approaches rely on large
amount of data annotation to achieve good performance,
which stops these models from being deployed in emergencies during which data annotation is either too costly or
cannot be obtained fast enough.
One popular solution is to use synthetic data for training. Unfortunately, due to domain shift, the resulting models generalize poorly on real imagery. We remedy this
shortcoming by training with both synthetic images, along
with their associated labels, and unlabeled real images. To
this end, we force our network to learn perspective-aware
features by training it to recognize upside-down real images from regular ones and incorporate into it the ability to predict its own uncertainty so that it can generate useful pseudo labels for fine-tuning purposes. This
yields an algorithm that consistently outperforms state-ofthe-art cross-domain crowd counting ones without any extra
computation at inference time. Code is publicly available
at https : / / github . com / weizheliu / Cross Domain-Crowd-Counting.

1. Introduction
Crowd counting is important for applications such as
video surveillance and traffic control. For example during
the current COVID-19 pandemic, it has a role to play in
monitoring social distancing and slowing down the spread
of the disease. Most state-of-the-art approaches rely on regressors to estimate the local crowd density in individual
images, which they then proceed to integrate over portions
of the images to produce people counts. The regressors typically use Random Forests [37], Gaussian Processes [4], or
more recently Deep Networks [3,28,39,44,50,51,59,63,69–
71, 74, 77, 79, 94, 105, 106, 111], with most state-of-the-art
approaches now relying on the latter.
Unfortunately, training such deep networks in a traditional supervised manner requires much ground-truth annotation. This is expensive and time-consuming and has

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Motivation. (a): Time, expense, and robustness. Annotating dense crowd is extremely time-consuming. It can take
hours for someone to annotate a single image and the process is
error prone. (b) Accuracy: For region far away from the camera
where people are very small and bunched up, it is almost impossible for human beings to annotate accurately. (c): Privacy issues.
Real images feature real people and information about them will
be exposed to the annotator, which can create ethical concerns.
(d): Solution. All of these problems can be solved by using synthetic data.

slowed down the deployment of data-driven approaches,
as illustrated by Fig. 1. One way around this difficulty
is to use synthetic data for training purposes. However
there is usually too much domain shift—change in statistical properties—between real and synthetic images for networks trained in this manner to perform well.
In this paper, we remedy this shortcoming by training
with both synthetic images, along with their associated labels, and unlabeled real images. We force our network
to learn perspective-aware features on the real images and
build into it the ability to use these features to predict
its own uncertainty using a fast variant of the ensemble
method [14] to effectively use pseudo labels for fine-tuning.
We train it as follows:
1. Initially we use synthetic images, unlabeled real images, and upside-down version of the latter. We train
the network not only to give good results on the synthetic images but also to recognize if the real images

5341

