Focal Length and Object Pose Estimation via Render and Compare
Georgy Ponimatkin1,2
Yann Labbé3
Bryan Russell4
Mathieu Aubry1
Josef Sivic2
1

LIGM, École des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS

2

CIIRC CTU

3

ENS/Inria

4

Adobe Research

georgy.ponimatkin@enpc.fr
https://ponimatkin.github.io/focalpose

Abstract
We introduce FocalPose, a neural render-and-compare
method for jointly estimating the camera-object 6D pose
and camera focal length given a single RGB input image
depicting a known object. The contributions of this work
are twofold. First, we derive a focal length update rule that
extends an existing state-of-the-art render-and-compare 6D
pose estimator to address the joint estimation task. Second,
we investigate several different loss functions for jointly estimating the object pose and focal length. We find that
a combination of direct focal length regression with a reprojection loss disentangling the contribution of translation, rotation, and focal length leads to improved results.
We show results on three challenging benchmark datasets
that depict known 3D models in uncontrolled settings. We
demonstrate that our focal length and 6D pose estimates
have lower error than the existing state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
The projection of a 3D object into an image depends not
only on the object’s relative pose to the camera, but also on
the camera’s intrinsic parameters. While it is possible to
capture objects in a controlled environment where the camera’s intrinsic parameters are known (e.g., a calibrated camera on a robot), for many “in-the-wild” images we do not
have control over the capture process and these parameters
are unknown, e.g., Internet pictures or archival photographs.
Given an input image, we seek to retrieve a 3D model of
a depicted object from a model library and estimate the relative camera-object 6D pose jointly with the camera’s focal
length (depicted in Figure 1). This problem has its origins
in the early days of computer vision [26,27,36] and has important modern-day applications in augmented reality and
computer graphics, such as applying in situ object overlays
or editing the position of an object via 3D compositing in
uncontrolled consumer-captured images.
The problem of 6D object pose estimation in an uncal-

Figure 1. Given a single input photograph (left) and a known 3D
model, our approach accurately estimates the 6D camera-object
pose together with the focal length of the camera (right), here
shown by overlaying the aligned 3D model over the input image.
Our approach handles a large range of focal lengths and the resulting perspective effects.

ibrated setting is, by its nature, challenging. First, it is
difficult to distinguish subtle changes of the camera’s focal length from changes in an object’s depth. Second, including the camera’s focal length increases the number of
parameters that must be estimated and hence increases the
optimization complexity. Finally, “in-the-wild” consumercaptured images may depict large appearance variation for
a particular object instance in the model library. Variation
may be due to differences in illumination and the depicted
object having slightly different, non-identical shapes or surface appearance in different real-world instance captures.
For example, consider different instances of the same car
model that have a similar overall shape but may have different color, wear and tear, or customizable features (e.g.,
additional headlights, alloy wheels, or a spoiler).
Previous approaches for this task primarily rely on establishing local 2D-3D correspondences between an image

3825

