Probabilistic Warp Consistency for Weakly-Supervised Semantic
Correspondences
Prune Truong
Martin Danelljan
Fisher Yu
Luc Van Gool
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
{prune.truong, martin.danelljan, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

i@yf.io

Estimated probabilistic mapping

Abstract
We propose Probabilistic Warp Consistency, a weaklysupervised learning objective for semantic matching. Our
approach directly supervises the dense matching scores predicted by the network, encoded as a conditional probability
distribution. We first construct an image triplet by applying a known warp to one of the images in a pair depicting different instances of the same object class. Our probabilistic learning objectives are then derived using the constraints arising from the resulting image triplet. We further account for occlusion and background clutter present
in real image pairs by extending our probabilistic output
space with a learnable unmatched state. To supervise it,
we design an objective between image pairs depicting different object classes. We validate our method by applying it to four recent semantic matching architectures. Our
weakly-supervised approach sets a new state-of-the-art on
four challenging semantic matching benchmarks. Lastly,
we demonstrate that our objective also brings substantial
improvements in the strongly-supervised regime, when combined with keypoint annotations.

1. Introduction
The semantic matching problem entails finding pixelwise correspondences between images depicting instances
of the same semantic category of object or scene, such as
‘cat’ or ‘bird’. It has received growing interest, due to its
applications in e.g., semantic segmentation [35, 38] and image editing [1, 6, 9, 22]. The task nevertheless remains extremely challenging due to the large intra-class appearance
and shape variations, view-point changes, and backgroundclutter. These issues are further complicated by the inherent
difficulty to obtain ground-truth annotations.
While a few current datasets [10, 11, 30] provide manually annotated keypoints matches, these are often illdefined, ambiguous and scarce. Strongly-supervised approaches relying on such annotations therefore struggle

Composition w.
marginalization

Known probabilistic mapping

Direct

Unmatched state
prediction

Known warping
distribution
Known non-matching
distribution
Matching images (same object class)

Non-matching images (different object classes)

Figure 1. From a real image pair (I, J) representing the same
object class, we generate a new image I ′ by warping I according to a randomly sampled transformation. We further extend the
image triplet with an additional image A, that depicts a different
object class. For each pixel in I ′ , we introduce two consistency
objectives by enforcing the conditional probability distributions
obtained either from the composition I ′ → J → I, or directly
through I ′ → I, to be equal to the known warping distribution.
We further model occlusion and unmatched regions by introducing a learnable unmatched state. It is trained by enforcing the predicted distribution between the non-matching images (I ′ , A) to be
mapped to the unmatched state for all pixels.

to generalize across datasets, as demonstrated in recent
works [4, 31]. As a prominent alternative, unsupervised
approaches [27, 31–33, 37, 39, 41] often train the network
with synthetically generated dense ground-truth and image
data. While benefiting from direct supervision, the lack of
real image pairs often leads to poor generalization to real
data. Weakly-supervised methods [13,16,31,33,34] thus appear as an attractive paradigm, leveraging supervision from
real image pairs by only exploiting image-level class labels,
which are inexpensive compared to keypoint annotations.
Previous weakly-supervised alternatives introduce objectives on the predicted dense correspondence volume,
which encapsulates the matching confidences for all pairwise matches between the image pair. The most common
strategy is to maximize the maximum scores [13, 34] or
negative entropy [31] of the correspondence volume computed between images of the same class, while minimizing

8708

