Knowledge distillation:
A good teacher is patient and consistent
Lucas Beyer? Xiaohua Zhai? Amélie Royer?† Larisa Markeeva?‡ Rohan Anil Alexander Kolesnikov?
Google Research, Brain Team
{lbeyer,xzhai,akolesnikov}@google.com

4x
80

75

Epochs

48
00
96
00

00
12

30

0

consistent teaching
fixed teacher
function matching
90

30

There is a growing discrepancy in computer vision between large-scale models that achieve state-of-the-art performance and models that are affordable in practical applications. In this paper we address this issue and significantly
bridge the gap between these two types of models. Throughout our empirical investigation we do not aim to necessarily
propose a new method, but strive to identify a robust and effective recipe for making state-of-the-art large scale models
affordable in practice. We demonstrate that, when performed
correctly, knowledge distillation can be a powerful tool for
reducing the size of large models without compromising their
performance. In particular, we uncover that there are certain implicit design choices, which may drastically affect
the effectiveness of distillation. Our key contribution is the
explicit identification of these design choices, which were
not previously articulated in the literature. We back up our
findings by a comprehensive empirical study, demonstrate
compelling results on a wide range of vision datasets and,
in particular, obtain a state-of-the-art ResNet-50 model for
ImageNet, which achieves 82.8% top-1 accuracy.

ImageNet top-1 accuracy

Abstract

Figure 1. We demonstrate that distillation works the best when we
train patiently for a large number of epochs and provide consistent image views to teacher and student models (green and blue
lines). This can be contrasted to a popular setting of distilling with
precomputed teacher targets (black line), which works much worse.

1. Introduction
Large-scale vision models currently dominate many areas
of computer vision. Recent state-of-the-art models for image
classification [6, 22, 39, 41, 48], object detection [7, 26] or
semantic segmentation [52] push model size to the limits
allowed by modern hardware. Despite their impressive performance, these models are rarely used in practice due to
high computational costs. Instead, practitioners typically
use much smaller models, such as ResNet-50 [22] or MobileNet [14], which are order(s) of magnitude cheaper to
run. According to the download counts of five BiT models
? equal contribution
† work done at Google, while being a PhD student in IST Austria.
‡ work done at Google, while being a PhD student in Skoltech.

from Tensorflow Hub, the smallest ResNet-50 [11] model
has been downloaded for significantly more times than the
larger ones. As a result, many recent improvements in vision
do not translate to real-world applications.
To address this problem, we concentrate on the following task: given a specific application and a large model that
performs very well on it, we aim to compress the model to a
smaller and more efficient architecture without compromising performance. There are two widely used paradigms that
target this task: model pruning [18] and knowledge distillation [12]. Model pruning reduces the large model’s size by
stripping away its parts. This procedure can be restrictive in
practice: first, it does not allow changing the model family,

10925

