HybridCR: Weakly-Supervised 3D Point Cloud Semantic Segmentation via
Hybrid Contrastive Regularization
Mengtian Li1 , Yuan Xie1 , Yunhang Shen2 , Bo Ke2 , Ruizhi Qiao2 , Bo Ren2 , Shaohui Lin1,† , Lizhuang Ma1,†
1
School of Computer Science and Technology
East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
2
Tencent Youtu Lab
mtli@stu.ecnu.edu.cn, {yxie,shlin,lzma}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn
{odysseyshen,boke,ruizhiqiao,timren}@tencent.com

Abstract
To address the huge labeling cost in large-scale point
cloud semantic segmentation, we propose a novel hybrid contrastive regularization (HybridCR) framework in
weakly-supervised setting, which obtains competitive performance compared to its fully-supervised counterpart.
Specifically, HybridCR is the first framework to leverage
both point consistency and employ contrastive regularization with pseudo labeling in an end-to-end manner. Fundamentally, HybridCR explicitly and effectively considers
the semantic similarity between local neighboring points
and global characteristics of 3D classes. We further design a dynamic point cloud augmentor to generate diversity and robust sample views, whose transformation parameter is jointly optimized with model training. Through extensive experiments, HybridCR achieves significant performance improvement against the SOTA methods on both indoor and outdoor datasets, e.g., S3DIS, ScanNet-V2, Semantic3D, and SemanticKITTI.

1. Introduction
Learning the precise semantic meanings of large-scale
point clouds is a fundamental perception task for intelligent machines to understand complex 3D scenes. Existing deep-learning-based methods heavily rely on the availability and quantity of labeled point cloud data for training [5, 21, 22, 29]. However, 3D point-wise labeling is timeconsuming and labor-intensive. Hence, we aim to explore
weakly-supervised learning to maximize the data efficiency
and reduce efforts to annotate 3D point clouds.
Recently, several 3D point cloud weakly-supervised semantic segmentation methods have been emerged, which
† Corresponding authors.

Figure 1. Hybrid contrastive regularization at local and global.
Left: The anchor point is encouraged to be similar to the matched
positive point and its neighbors (in green circle) while being
dissimilar to negative points and their neighbors (in red circle).
Right: The anchor point is encouraged to be similar to the
matched positive point and other points that belong to the same
class (in green box) while being dissimilar to negative points of
different classes (in red box).

can be generally divided into three groups: (1) Consistency regularization [33, 38] employs consistency constrain
from the distribution of prediction after randomly modifying the input or model function. (2) Pseudo labeling, a.k.a.
self-training [4, 18, 37], uses the model predictions as supervision. (3) Contrastive pre-training [9, 32] focuses on
model pre-trained, which is then followed by fine-tuning
with fewer labels for downstream tasks.
Although the existing methods have achieved encouraging results, some limitations remain to be addressed. Firstly,
they do not adequately consider the semantic properties of
neighbors and global characteristics of 3D classes for largescale scenarios, failing to fully exploit the limited yet valu-

14930

