The Implicit Values of A Good Hand Shake:
Handheld Multi-Frame Neural Depth Refinement
Ilya Chugunov1† Yuxuan Zhang1 Zhihao Xia2 Xuaner Zhang2 Jiawen Chen2 Felix Heide1
1

Princeton University

2

Adobe

1. Introduction
The cell-phone of the 90s was a phone, the modern cellphone is a handheld computational imaging platform [9]
that is capable of acquiring high-quality images, pose, and
depth. Recent years have witnessed explosive advances
in passive depth imaging, from single-image methods that
leverage large data priors to predict structure directly from
image features [40, 41] to efficient multi-view approaches
grounded in principles of 3D geometry and epipolar projection [50, 47]. At the same time, progress has been made
in the miniaturization and cost-reduction [3] of active depth
systems such as LiDAR and correlation time-of-flight sensors [29]. This has culminated in their leap from industrial
and automotive applications [45, 11] to the space of mobile
phones. Nestled in the intersection of high-resolution imaging and miniaturized LiDAR we find modern smartphones,
† Developed data acquisition pipeline during Adobe internship.

Our Reconstruction

0

Depth [m]

Abstract
Modern smartphones can continuously stream multimegapixel RGB images at 60 Hz, synchronized with highquality 3D pose information and low-resolution LiDARdriven depth estimates. During a snapshot photograph,
the natural unsteadiness of the photographer’s hands offers
millimeter-scale variation in camera pose, which we can
capture along with RGB and depth in a circular buffer. In
this work we explore how, from a bundle of these measurements acquired during viewfinding, we can combine dense
micro-baseline parallax cues with kilopixel LiDAR depth to
distill a high-fidelity depth map. We take a test-time optimization approach and train a coordinate MLP to output photometrically and geometrically consistent depth estimates at the continuous coordinates along the path traced
by the photographer’s natural hand shake. With no additional hardware, artificial hand motion, or user interaction
beyond the press of a button, our proposed method brings
high-resolution depth estimates to point-and-shoot “tabletop” photography – textured objects at close range.

LiDAR Depth

0.5

Data Acquisition

Figure 1. We reconstruct centimeter-scale depth features for this
tabletop object from nothing more than a handheld snapshot.

such as the iPhone 12 Pro, which offer access to high framerate, low-resolution depth and high-quality pose estimates.
As applications of mixed reality grow, particularly in industry [30] and healthcare [17] settings, so does the demand for convenient systems to extract 3D information
from the world around us. Smartphones fit this niche well,
as they boast a wide array of sensors – e.g. cameras, magnetometer, accelerometer, and the aforementioned LiDAR
system – while remaining portable and affordable, and consequently ubiquitous. Image, pose, and depth data from
mobile phones can drive novel problems in view synthesis [35, 39], portrait relighting [38, 49], and video interpolation [2] that either implicitly or explicitly rely on depth
cues, as well as more typical 3D understanding tasks concerning salient object detection [59, 13], segmentation [46],
localization [61], and mapping [44, 37].
Although 3D scene information is essential for a wide
array of 3D vision applications, today’s mobile phones
do not offer accurate high-resolution depth from a single
snapshot. While RGB image data is available at more
than 100 megapixels (e.g. Samsung ISOCELL HP1), the
most successful depth sensors capture at least three orders
of magnitude fewer measurements, with pulsed time-offlight sensors [36] and modulated correlation time-of-flight
imagers [28, 20, 27] offering kilopixel resolutions. Passive approaches can offer higher spatial resolution by exploiting RGB data; however, existing methods relying on
stereo [7, 4, 25] depth estimation require large baselines,
monocular depth methods [6, 40] suffer from scale ambiguity, and structure-from-motion methods [43] require diverse
12852

