A Brand New Dance Partner: Music-Conditioned Pluralistic Dancing Controlled
by Multiple Dance Genres
Jinwoo Kim1 , Heeseok Oh2 , Seongjean Kim1 , Hoseok Tong1 and Sanghoon Lee* 1
1

School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University
2
Department of Applied AI, Hansung University

Abstract
When coming up with phrases of movement, choreographers all have their habits as they are used to their skilled
dance genres. Therefore, they tend to return certain patterns of the dance genres that they are familiar with. What
if artificial intelligence could be used to help choreographers blend dance genres by suggesting various dances,
and one that matches their choreographic style? Numerous task-specific variants of autoregressive networks have
been developed for dance generation. Yet, a serious limitation remains that all existing algorithms can return repeated
patterns for a given initial pose sequence, which may be inferior. To mitigate this issue, we propose MNET, a novel
and scalable approach that can perform music-conditioned
pluralistic dance generation synthesized by multiple dance
genres using only a single model. Here, we learn a dancegenre aware latent representation by training a conditional
generative adversarial network leveraging Transformer architecture. We conduct extensive experiments on AIST++
along with user studies. Compared to the state-of-the-art
methods, our method synthesizes plausible and diverse outputs according to multiple dance genres as well as generates outperforming dance sequences qualitatively and
quantitatively.

1. Introduction
Dance has long been considered as a universal language
that can share emotions more effectively than words. Nowadays, many people share their life-log via short-form video
apps such as TikTok and Youtube Shorts [27,54]. However,
dancing is a highly creative and artistic process, hence professional training is often followed to express a feeling of
elegant and rhythmic own story in a short-form video. For
* Corresponding author.

this reason, the music-conditioned dance generation, despite significant progress, is a challenging task that should
capture high kinematic complexity rhythmically.
Recently, deep autoregressive networks have been used
to synthesize dance motions learning long-range dependencies with the input music. Most state-of-the-art (SOTA)
methods [21, 29, 37, 38] exploit RNN or Transformer architectures and generate dance for a given initial pose sequence
with music. While previous studies produce temporally coherence sequence according to music, we find that all existing algorithms remain severely limited diversity by extending a given initial pose sequence into a repeated patterns.
Although skilled dancers and choreographers often repeat
dance patterns, they try to subtly diversify their dance lines.
So, the lack of diversity issue is critical to the dance synthesizing.
In this paper, we tackle the problem of the musicconditioned pluralistic dance generation synthesized by
multiple dance genres. The key challenge of pluralistic dance generation is to produce perceptually realistic
and various motions aligning to musical beats. To overcome this challenge, we propose a generic new approach
that bridges the gap between music-conditional sequenceto-sequence learning and recent unconditional generative
architectures via Transformer Conditional GAN.
Specifically, we leverage the generative capability from
transformer decoder, embedding both conditional and
stochastic representations via self-attention module.
By injecting a latent code and querying a certain duration
of music and initial pose sequence, the proposed model enables the synthesis of diverse and consistent dance as shown
in Figure 1.
However, to synthesize dance controlled by multiple
dance genres, injecting latent code with conditions is an
ineffective process in such multi-domain translation task,
which can not be scalable to the increasing number of domains. As discussed in multi-domain image-to-image trans-

3490

