Learning Motion-Dependent Appearance for High-Fidelity Rendering of
Dynamic Humans from a Single Camera
Jae Shin Yoon†,♯
Duygu Ceylan♯
Tuanfeng Y. Wang♯
Jingwan Lu♯ Jimei Yang♯ Zhixin Shu♯ Hyun Soo Park†
†

♯

University of Minnesota

Adobe Research

Abstract
Appearance of dressed humans undergoes a complex geometric transformation induced not only by the static pose
but also by its dynamics, i.e., there exists a number of
cloth geometric configurations given a pose depending on
the way it has moved. Such appearance modeling conditioned on motion has been largely neglected in existing
human rendering methods, resulting in rendering of physically implausible motion. A key challenge of learning
the dynamics of the appearance lies in the requirement of
a prohibitively large amount of observations. In this paper, we present a compact motion representation by enforcing equivariance—a representation is expected to be transformed in the way that the pose is transformed. We model
an equivariant encoder that can generate the generalizable
representation from the spatial and temporal derivatives of
the 3D body surface. This learned representation is decoded by a compositional multi-task decoder that renders
high fidelity time-varying appearance. Our experiments
show that our method can generate a temporally coherent
video of dynamic humans for unseen body poses and novel
views given a single view video.

1. Introduction
We express ourselves by moving our body that drives a
sequence of natural secondary motion, e.g., dynamic movement of dress induced by dancing as shown in Figure 1.
This secondary motion is the resultant of complex physical interactions with the body, which is, in general, timevarying. This presents a major challenge for plausible rendering of dynamic dressed humans in applications such as
video based retargetting or social presence. Many existing approaches such as pose-guided person image generation [7] focus on static poses as a conditional variable. Despite its promising rendering quality, it fails to generate a
physically plausible secondary motion, e.g., generating the
same appearance for fast and slow motions.

Front

Back

Prediction
Surface normal 3D velocity

Surface normal

Appearance

Figure 1. Given surface normal and velocity of a 3D body model,
our method synthesizes subject-specific surface normal and appearance. We specifically focus on synthesis of plausible dynamic
appearance by learning an effective 3D motion descriptor.

One can learn the dynamics of the secondary motion
from videos. This, however, requires a tremendous amount
of data, i.e., videos depicting all possible poses and associated motions. In practice, only a short video clip is available, e.g., the maximum length of videos in social media
(e.g., TikTok) are limited to 15-60 seconds. The learned
representation is, therefore, prone to overfitting.
In this paper, we address the fundamental question of
“can we learn a representation for dynamics given a limited amount of observations?”. We argue that a meaningful
representation can be learned by enforcing an equivariant
property—a representation is expected to be transformed in
the way that the body pose is transformed. With the equivariance, we model the dynamics of the secondary motion as
a function of spatial and time derivative of the 3D body. We
construct this representation by re-arranging 3D features in
the canonical coordinate system of the body surface, i.e.,
the UV map, which is invariant to the choice of the 3D coordinate system. The UV map also captures the semantic
meaning of body parts since each body part is represented
by a UV patch. The resulting representation is compact and

3407

