Pyramid Architecture for Multi-Scale Processing in Point Cloud Segmentation
Dong Nie, Rui Lan, Ling Wang, Xiaofeng Ren
AMap, Alibaba
{dong.nie, lr264907, wangling.lingwang, x.ren}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Semantic segmentation of point cloud data is a critical
task for autonomous driving and other applications. Recent
advances of point cloud segmentation are mainly driven by
new designs of local aggregation operators and point sampling methods. Unlike image segmentation, few efforts have
been made to understand the fundamental issue of scale and
how scales should interact and be fused. In this work, we investigate how to efficiently and effectively integrate features
at varying scales and varying stages in a point cloud segmentation network. In particular, we open up the commonly
used encoder-decoder architecture, and design scale pyramid architectures that allow information to flow more freely
and systematically, both laterally and upward/downward in
scale. Moreover, a cross-scale attention feature learning
block has been designed to enhance the multi-scale feature fusion which occurs everywhere in the network. Such
a design of multi-scale processing and fusion gains large
improvements in accuracy without adding much additional
computation. When built on top of the popular KPConv network, we see consistent improvements on a wide range of
datasets, including achieving state-of-the-art performance
on NPM3D and S3DIS. Moreover, the pyramid architecture
is generic and can be applied to other network designs: we
show an example of similar improvements over RandLANet.

1. Introduction
With the rise of autonomous driving, semantic segmentation of point cloud data is increasingly drawing attention
in research. Building deep models for point clouds, sets of
orderless points at arbitrary 3D positions, is arguably different from that for images. Early works projected 3D points
to regular structures so that convolution operators could
be used [31, 36, 40]. Later, the pioneering work of PointNet [33,34] developed a promising method to directly apply
Code is available at https://github.com/ginobilinie/
kp_pyramid

deep learning on sparse 3D points, using shared multi-layer
perceptrons (MLPs) to learn per-point features.
Follow-up work along the line of PointNet typically consists of three key components, namely: point-wise transformation, local aggregation, and point sampling. Local aggregation operator plays a similar role for points as the convolution layer does for image pixels [27]; and point sampling
works as a pooling layer does for pixels [34, 52, 60]. To
take the similarities further, state-of-the-art point cloud segmentation methods mostly employ the encoder-decoder Ushape architecture [13, 34, 47], which is a classic design in
image segmentation (UNet [37]). In the encoder path, transformation layers learn increasingly sophisticated per-point
features, local aggregation operators combine information
in local neighborhoods, and point subsampling layers further increase the receptive field. The decoder path consists
of upsampling and per-point transformation layers.
Most recent works on point cloud segmentation focused
on either local aggregation [14, 19, 20, 27, 30, 34, 45, 47, 53,
58] or point sampling strategies [1, 8, 13, 24, 41, 54, 55]. For
example, PointNet++ [34] applied several MLPs on a concatenation of relative position and point feature to aggregate
information in local neighborhoods. KPConv [47] designed
to obtain pseudo grid feature and applied convolution on
these kernel points. RandLANet [13] compared point sampling methods and selected random sampling for efficiency.
Density-adaptive sampling [1] was proposed to handle heterogeneous density distributions and class imbalance.
Interestingly, for point cloud segmentation, little attention has been devoted to the study of the network architecture itself. This is in stark contrast with image segmentation, where most recent efforts went way beyond the basic
encoder-decoder U-structure to design better and more efficient architectures, especially on the topics of multi-scale
processing and fusion [18, 32, 35, 48, 57] and context aggregation [5, 28, 50, 59]. For example, HRNet [48] proposed
to aggregates multi-scale features throughout lateral stages,
with an emphasis on high-resolution representation. Hierarchical Attention [44] was also built upon better uses of
multi-scale information, from a perspective of inference.
Point cloud data, no different from images, are multi-

17284

