Node-aligned Graph Convolutional Network for Whole-slide Image
Representation and Classification
Yonghang Guan1 *, Jun Zhang2 *, Kuan Tian2 , Sen Yang2 , Pei Dong2 ,
Jinxi Xiang2 , Wei Yang2 , Junzhou Huang2 , Yuyao Zhang1†, Xiao Han2†
1
ShanghaiTech University, 2 Tencent AI Lab

Abstract
The large-scale whole-slide images (WSIs) facilitate the
learning-based computational pathology methods. However, the gigapixel size of WSIs makes it hard to train a
conventional model directly. Current approaches typically
adopt multiple-instance learning (MIL) to tackle this problem. Among them, MIL combined with graph convolutional
network (GCN) is a significant branch, where the sampled
patches are regarded as the graph nodes to further discover
their correlations. However, it is difficult to build correspondence across patches from different WSIs. Therefore,
most methods have to perform non-ordered node pooling to
generate the bag-level representation. Direct non-ordered
pooling will lose much structural and contextual information, such as patch distribution and heterogeneous patterns,
which is critical for WSI representation. In this paper, we
propose a hierarchical global-to-local clustering strategy to
build a Node-Aligned GCN (NAGCN) to represent WSI with
rich local structural information as well as global distribution. We first deploy a global clustering operation based
on the instance features in the dataset to build the correspondence across different WSIs. Then, we perform a local clustering-based sampling strategy to select typical instances belonging to each cluster within the WSI. Finally,
we employ the graph convolution to obtain the representation. Since our graph construction strategy ensures the
alignment among different WSIs, WSI-level representation
can be easily generated and used for the subsequent classification. The experiment results on two cancer subtype classification datasets demonstrate our method achieves better
performance compared with the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Histopathology plays an essential role in the clinical diagnosis and understanding of the underlying reasons for
* Equal contribution. Y. Guan interned at Tencent AI Lab.
† Corresponding authors.

specific treatments being deployed [35]. Whole-slide imaging, as the technique that translates the tissue specimens
on glass slides into digital format without losing the tissue
information, provides a comprehensive view of individual
diseases and their effects on human tissues. Nowadays, the
massive amount of whole-slide images (WSIs) makes the
field of computational pathology an important application
scenario for deep-learning-based computer aided diagnostic systems [14, 17, 18, 23, 27, 36, 39].
WSI classification is a fundamental task in digital pathology. However, the characteristics of pathological images pose unique challenges for deep-learning-based approaches. For example, the ultra-high resolution of WSIs
prevents them from being directly fed into deep neural networks due to the huge memory consumption. In addition,
since manual annotations require non-trivial effort and domain knowledge from pathologists, usually only slide-level
labels are available and pixel- or region-level annotations
are missing. To tackle these challenges, current methods
often adopt a two-stage multiple-instance learning (MIL)
paradigm. In the first stage, a group of disjoint or overlapping ”tissue patches” cropped from WSIs are encoded into
semantic features using an encoder. Then an aggregation
algorithm is designed to integrate these instance-level features to obtain a bag-level (slide-level) representation.
There exist different ways of aggregating patch-level features. A simple yet efficient strategy is to directly pool the
patch features in one WSI [12, 42]. However, WSIs contain tissues of varying morphologies and types. Brute force
pooling of all patch features will dilute distinctive features,
thus resulting in an inadequate representation of WSI. Bag
of visual words (BOVW) is another classical method to describe images, which has been widely used in image representation, classification and retrieval [13,44]. It provides an
intuitive way to build descriptions for unstructured image
data. Compared with pooling-based methods, BOVW can
well delineate the global representation of WSI.
Despite the concise and straightforward definition, both
pooling-based and BOVW-based methods are pre-defined
and non-trainable. Recent approaches typically employ at-

18813

