BaLeNAS: Differentiable Architecture Search via the Bayesian Learning Rule
Miao Zhang1 Shirui Pan2 Xiaojun Chang3,4 Steven Su5 * Jilin Hu1 Gholamreza Haffari2 Bin Yang1
1
Aalborg University 2 Monash University 3 ReLER, AAII, UTS
4
RMIT University 5 Shandong First Medical University
{miaoz, hujilin, byang}@cs.aau.dk, xiaojun.chang@uts.edu.au
{shirui.pan, gholamreza.haffari}@monash.edu, steven.su@uts.edu.au

Abstract
Differentiable Architecture Search (DARTS) has received
massive attention in recent years, mainly because it signiﬁcantly reduces the computational cost through weight sharing and continuous relaxation. However, more recent works
ﬁnd that existing differentiable NAS techniques struggle to
outperform naive baselines, yielding deteriorative architectures as the search proceeds. Rather than directly optimizing
the architecture parameters, this paper formulates the neural architecture search as a distribution learning problem
through relaxing the architecture weights into Gaussian distributions. By leveraging the natural-gradient variational
inference (NGVI), the architecture distribution can be easily
optimized based on existing codebases without incurring
more memory and computational consumption. We demonstrate how the differentiable NAS beneﬁts from Bayesian
principles, enhancing exploration and improving stability.
The experimental results on NAS benchmark datasets conﬁrm the signiﬁcant improvements the proposed framework
can make. In addition, instead of simply applying the argmax
on the learned parameters, we further leverage the recentlyproposed training-free proxies in NAS to select the optimal
architecture from a group architectures drawn from the optimized distribution, where we achieve state-of-the-art results
on the NAS-Bench-201 and NAS-Bench-1shot1 benchmarks.
Our best architecture in the DARTS search space also obtains competitive test errors with 2.37%, 15.72%, and 24.2%
on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and ImageNet, respectively.

1. Introduction
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) [12, 25–27, 38, 45,
52–56] is attaining increasing attention in the deep learning community by automating the labor-intensive and timeconsuming neural network design process. More recently,
NAS has achieved the state-of-the-art results on various deep
* Corresponding Author: Steven Su

learning applications, including image classiﬁcation [41], object detection [11], stereo matching [13]. Although NAS has
the potential to ﬁnd high-performing architectures without
human intervention, the early NAS methods have extremelyhigh computational requirements [18, 37]. This high computational requirement in NAS is unaffordable for most researchers and practitioners. Since then, more researchers
shift to improve the efﬁciency of NAS methods [19, 28, 36].
Weight sharing NAS, also called One-Shot NAS [2, 36], deﬁnes the search space as a supernet, and only the supernet
is trained for once during the architecture search. The architecture evaluation is based on inheriting weights from
the supernet without retraining, thus signiﬁcantly reducing
the computational cost. Differentiable architecture search
(DARTS) [31], which is one of the most representative works,
further relaxes the discrete search space into continuous
space and jointly optimize supernet weights and architecture parameters with gradient descent, to further improve
efﬁciency. Through employing two techniques, weight sharing [2, 36] and continuous relaxation [6, 15, 31, 46], DARTS
reformulates the discrete operation selection problem in NAS
as a continuous magnitude optimization problem, which reduces the computational cost signiﬁcantly and completes the
architecture search process within several hours on a single
GPU.
Despite notable beneﬁts on computational efﬁciency from
differentiable NAS, more recent works ﬁnd it is still unreliable [8, 50] to directly optimize the architecture magnitudes.
For example, DARTS is unable to stably obtain excellent
solutions and yields deteriorative architectures during the
search proceeds, performing even worse than random search
in some cases [49]. This critical weakness is termed as instability in differentiable NAS [50]. Zela et al. [50] empirically
point out that the instability of DARTS is highly correlated
with the dominant eigenvalue of the Hessian of the validation loss with respect to the architectural parameters, while
which increases during the architecture search. Accordingly,
they proposed a simple early-stopping criterion based on
this dominant eigenvalue to robustify DARTS. In addition,

11871

