Automatic Color Image Stitching Using Quaternion Rank-1 Alignment
Jiaxue Li and Yicong Zhou*
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau
Macau, China
lijiaxue7@gmail.com, yicongzhou@um.edu.mo

Abstract
Color image stitching is a challenging task in real-world
applications. This paper first proposes a quaternion rank1 alignment (QR1A) model for high-precision color image
alignment. To solve the optimization problem of QR1A, we
develop a nested iterative algorithm under the framework of
complex-valued alternating direction method of multipliers.
To quantitatively evaluate image stitching performance, we
propose a perceptual seam quality (PSQ) measure to calculate misalignments of local regions along the seamline. Using QR1A and PSQ, we further propose an automatic color
image stitching (ACIS-QR1A) framework. In this framework, the automatic strategy and iterative learning strategy
are developed to simultaneously learn the optimal seamline
and local alignment. Extensive experiments on challenging
datasets demonstrate that the proposed ACIS-QR1A is able
to obtain high-quality stitched images under several difficult scenarios including large parallax, low textures, moving objects, large occlusions or/and their combinations.

1. Introduction
Color image stitching refers to the generation of a large
image with a broader field of view from multiple partial
overlapped color images. As a fundamental task of image
processing, it plays a crucial role in diverse applications
such as photogrammetry in remote sensing [17], stereoscopic stitching in virtual reality [6] and panoramic stitching in autonomous driving [28]. However, generating highquality stitched images remains a challenging problem, especially in presence of large parallax, low textures, moving
objects, large occlusions or/and their combinations.
Conventionally, the image stitching process contains
three steps: first, estimate alignment models to warp input images onto a common coordinate system; second, detect an invisible seam in the overlapping area; third, utilize an image blending technique along this seam to splice
* Corresponding author.

aligned images into a larger image. According to the alignment methods in the first step, image stitching works can be
broadly classified into feature-based and pixel-based.
In the feature-based methods, the development of image
stitching technologies follows two mainstreams: to devise
an optimal global alignment, and to search a local alignment enabling an optimal seamline. In the first mainstream,
spatially-varying warping methods were proposed to improve the global alignment accuracy [8, 12, 22, 30]. They
calculated multiple local adaptive transformations over the
whole overlapping area to align images as much as possible. To maintain image naturalness, shape-preserving methods were developed by integrating homography with the
similarity transformation [3, 15, 20]. Inspired by contentpreserving warping (CPW) [23], the mesh-warping methods
were as well as adopted for local adjustments to the alignment accuracy and image naturalness [5, 6, 11, 32]. However, their underlying assumption is that the spatial relations
among the neighboring objects should be consistent in different input images. Their estimated local transformations
are varied continuously, and hence they perform very well
only in presence of small or moderate parallax.
To handle large parallax, the seam-driven strategy was
introduced in the second mainstream. The seam-driven
methods first estimated local alignment proposals and then
selected the optimal one with the best seam quality to create the final stitching result [9, 21, 32]. It’s noteworthy that
given the same aligned area, different seam calculations
usually produce various seamlines such that the stitched images are diverse as well [14]. And the evaluation of seam
qualities directly decides the final stitched image. However,
these methods put major efforts into generating local alignment proposals while limited considerations on their seamline proposals. Therefore, the simple methods for seamline
calculation and evaluation could degrade their final stitching
performances implicitly. Additionally, most of them employ the seam quality as a metric to select ready alignment
models, instead of guiding the process of alignment model
estimation. As a result, the generated best seam from these
local alignment proposals cannot guarantee to achieve an

19720

