Gradient-SDF: A Semi-Implicit Surface Representation for 3D Reconstruction
Christiane Sommer∗ Lu Sang∗ David Schubert
Technical University of Munich
Computer Vision Group

Daniel Cremers

{c.sommer, lu.sang, d.schubert, cremers}@tum.de

.

Abstract
We present Gradient-SDF, a novel representation for 3D
geometry that combines the advantages of implict and explicit representations. By storing at every voxel both the
signed distance field as well as its gradient vector field,
we enhance the capability of implicit representations with
approaches originally formulated for explicit surfaces. As
concrete examples, we show that (1) the Gradient-SDF allows us to perform direct SDF tracking from depth images,
using efficient storage schemes like hash maps, and that
(2) the Gradient-SDF representation enables us to perform
photometric bundle adjustment directly in a voxel representation (without transforming into a point cloud or mesh),
naturally a fully implicit optimization of geometry and camera poses and easy geometry upsampling. Experimental
results confirm that this leads to significantly sharper reconstructions. Since the overall SDF voxel structure is still
respected, the proposed Gradient-SDF is equally suited for
(GPU) parallelization as related approaches.

Figure 1. Our Gradient-SDF (middle) is a hybrid representation
between standard signed distance fields stored in a voxel grid
(left) and the explicit geometry representation using surfels (right):
while we inherit the implicit nature of standard SDF voxels, we
store gradients per voxel, which is similar to the surface normal
property of a surfel. This combines the advantages of implicit representations, such as the possibility for direct SDF tracking, with
those of explicit ones, for instance the possibility to perform bundle adjustment.

1. Introduction
The representation of 3D geometry in computer vision is
a long-studied research topic. Mathematically, a surface is
a 2D manifold embedded in R3 . However, when it comes
to implementing this on a computer, the question of discretization comes up: how can we represent a surface with
possibly infinite amount of detail and large extent with a finite amount of memory and variables with finite precision?
Different answers to this question exist, and which one is
most suitable highly depends on the concrete problem one
wants to solve.
On the one hand, there are explicit representations, such
as point clouds, surfel clouds or polygon meshes. They directly sample points on the surface together with additional
information like surface normals or point radius (for sur∗ These authors contributed equally.

fels), or connectivity of points (for meshes). This is useful
for applications such as bundle adjustment, where surface
points are reprojected into different camera frames.
On the other hand, we have implicit representations, that
take a different approach: the surface is encoded implicitly
by assigning each point p in the ambient space R3 a scalar
value, such as a binary occupancy, or a (signed) distance
to the nearest surface point. Signed distance fields (SDFs)
have some useful properties, for instance, unlike explicit
representations, they allow for changes of surface topology,
and they can be updated very easily. There are different
ways to store SDFs, the more traditional one being a voxel
grid, where 3D space is partitioned into voxels, i.e., cubes of
a given size. Each voxel contains the SDF value of its center point, sometimes truncated to a certain value. Such voxel
grids can be stored either densely, or sparsely using e.g. oc-

6280

