Instance Segmentation with
Mask-supervised Polygonal Boundary Transformers
Justin Lazarow

Weijian Xu
UC San Diego

Zhuowen Tu

{jlazarow, wex041, ztu}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we present an end-to-end instance segmentation method that regresses a polygonal boundary for each
object instance. This sparse, vectorized boundary representation for objects, while attractive in many downstream
computer vision tasks, quickly runs into issues of parity that
need to be addressed: parity in supervision and parity in
performance when compared to existing pixel-based methods. This is due in part to object instances being annotated with ground-truth in the form of polygonal boundaries
or segmentation masks, yet being evaluated in a convenient manner using only segmentation masks. Our method,
BoundaryFormer, is a Transformer based architecture that
directly predicts polygons yet uses instance mask segmentations as the ground-truth supervision for computing the
loss. We achieve this by developing an end-to-end differentiable model that solely relies on supervision within the
mask space through differentiable rasterization. BoundaryFormer matches or surpasses the Mask R-CNN method in
terms of instance segmentation quality on both COCO and
Cityscapes while exhibiting significantly better transferability across datasets.

1. Introduction
Image segmentation [23] and scene labeling [28, 30] are
amongst the most studied topics in computer vision. In addition to pixel-wise masks, representing segments/objects
using vectorized boundary representations has applications
and significance in many downstream tasks such as shape
recognition [2], tracking [4], image understanding [31],
medical imaging [26], and 3D reconstruction [5].
The recently emerged instance segmentation task (objects or areas of interest) [10] greatly propels the practical
significance for object segmentation. Unlike detection, instance segmentation predicts the detailed extent of an object
rather than a coarse bounding box. However, while a bounding box can be represented by only two coordinate pairs
Code at https : / / github . com / mlpc - ucsd /
BoundaryFormer.

person

motorcycle

Figure 1. We present a model of instance segmentation which predicts the boundaries of each object in the form of a polygon. This
treats instance segmentation as a regression problem and allows
for end-to-end differentiability of predictions. At the same time,
our model requires no sacrifices in terms of resulting segmentation
quality nor introduces additional supervision requirements compared algorithms which directly predict masks.

and is therefore easily turned into a regression problem,
there are difficulties when deciding how to best represent
and predict the segmentation of an object. These difficulties
combined with a historical preference for convolutional operations has led the computer vision community to become
mask-centric. This entails almost all segmentation models
relying on a spatially dense function which outputs a binary confidence to determine whether each pixel belongs to
a particular object. This is in contrast to a boundary-centric
notion where a sparse set of structured points are predicted
to denote the boundary of the object in question. Polygons
are one natural choice for this structure. However, because
of some inherent difficulties along with mask-centric biases,
polygons have large hurdles to overcome. First, there is
not an immediately obvious metric (and thus loss) for polygons. Second, the training regimes of mask-based models
often relies on operations and augmentations that are inherently difficult to robustly and efficiently implement on
polygons directly. This includes even basic operations like
cropping and intersection. Finally, evaluation of segmentation quality is performed with respect to masks and not
contours which leads to a possible mismatch in training and

4382

