OccAM’s Laser: Occlusion-based Attribution Maps
for 3D Object Detectors on LiDAR Data
David Schinagl1,2

Georg Krispel1

Horst Possegger1

Peter M. Roth3,4 Horst Bischof1,2
{david.schinagl,georg.krispel,possegger,bischof}@icg.tugraz.at,
peter.roth@tum.de
1
2
Graz University of Technology
Christian Doppler Laboratory for Embedded Machine Learning
3
Technical University of Munich 4 University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna

Abstract
While 3D object detection in LiDAR point clouds is wellestablished in academia and industry, the explainability of
these models is a largely unexplored field. In this paper,
we propose a method to generate attribution maps for the
detected objects in order to better understand the behavior of such models. These maps indicate the importance
of each 3D point in predicting the specific objects. Our
method works with black-box models: We do not require
any prior knowledge of the architecture nor access to the
model’s internals, like parameters, activations or gradients.
Our efficient perturbation-based approach empirically estimates the importance of each point by testing the model
with randomly generated subsets of the input point cloud.
Our sub-sampling strategy takes into account the special
characteristics of LiDAR data, such as the depth-dependent
point density. We show a detailed evaluation of the attribution maps and demonstrate that they are interpretable and
highly informative. Furthermore, we compare the attribution maps of recent 3D object detection architectures to provide insights into their decision-making processes.

1. Introduction
Driven by the race to autonomous driving, the interest
in 3D object detection is increasing in both, industry and
the research community. Especially the detection of objects
in point clouds acquired with LiDAR (Light Detection and
Ranging) sensors is of great interest. On the one hand, this
can be seen by the number and volume of published datasets
that include LiDAR data, e.g. [3, 4, 8, 12, 42] and, on the
other hand, by the number of recent publications that deal
with this topic, e.g. [11, 14, 18, 33, 35, 36, 46, 49–54, 60]. In
contrast, the explainability of these detectors based on deep
neural networks is a rather unexplored area. For a safetyrelevant area such as autonomous driving, however, it is of
particular importance to make the decisions of these inher-

Car

Car

Car

Cyclist

Pedestrian
(Wall)

Car

Figure 1. Our attribution maps show the importance of individual
LiDAR points for the black-box detection model’s decisions.

ently opaque models more transparent.
An established technique for the analysis of models
based on deep neural networks operating on image data is
the generation of attribution or saliency maps, e.g. [30, 39,
41,43,55,55]. The goal is to visualize the importance of input pixels on the model’s decision-making process. These
have been proven useful for interpreting detections or analyzing the learned features. However, for models operating
on point clouds there are only a few approaches that address
the generation of point-level attribution maps, e.g. [10, 58].
These focus exclusively on the analysis of point cloud classification models. The analyzed models operate on artificially generated point clouds derived from CAD models,
such as in the ModelNet dataset [48]. Moreover, these attribution map approaches assume prior knowledge of the architecture and require access to the gradients of the model.
Thus, they are only applicable for the analysis of white-

1141

