Vector Quantized Diffusion Model for Text-to-Image Synthesis
Fang Wen2
Jianmin Bao2 *
Lu Yuan3
Baining Guo2
2
3
Microsoft Research
Microsoft Cloud+AI

Shuyang Gu1
Dong Chen2
Bo Zhang2
Dongdong Chen3
1
University of Science and Technology of China
gsy777@mail.ustc.edu.cn

{doch,jianbao,fangwen,zhanbo,dochen,luyuan,bainguo}@microsoft.com

Abstract

text generation (i.e., machine translation) to text-to-image
generation. Based on the AR model, recent work DALLE [48] has achieved impressive results for text-to-image
generation.
Despite their success, existing text-to-image generation
methods still have weaknesses that need to be improved.
One issue is the unidirectional bias. Existing methods predict pixels or tokens in the reading order, from top-left
to bottom-right, based on the attention to all prefix pixels/tokens and the text description. This fixed order introduces unnatural bias in the synthesized images because important contextual information may come from any part of
the image, not just from left or above. Another issue is
the accumulated prediction errors. Each step of the inference stage is performed based on previously sampled tokens – this is different from that of the training stage, which
relies on the so-called “teacher-forcing” practice [15] and
provides the ground truth for each step. This difference is
important and its consequence merits careful examination.
In particular, a token in the inference stage, once predicted,
cannot be corrected and its errors will propagate to the subsequent tokens.
We present the vector quantized diffusion (VQDiffusion) model for text-to-image generation, a model
that eliminates the unidirectional bias and avoids accumulated prediction errors. We start with a vector quantized variational autoencoder (VQ-VAE) and model its latent space by learning a parametric model using a conditional variant of the Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic
Model (DDPM) [23, 59], which has been applied to image synthesis with compelling results [12]. We show that
the latent-space model is well-suited for the task of textto-image generation. Roughly speaking, the VQ-Diffusion
model samples the data distribution by reversing a forward
diffusion process that gradually corrupts the input via a
fixed Markov chain. The forward process yields a sequence
of increasingly noisy latent variables of the same dimensionality as the input, producing pure noise after a fixed
number of timesteps. Starting from this noise result, the
reverse process gradually denoises the latent variables to-

We present the vector quantized diffusion (VQ-Diffusion)
model for text-to-image generation. This method is based
on a vector quantized variational autoencoder (VQ-VAE)
whose latent space is modeled by a conditional variant
of the recently developed Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DDPM). We find that this latent-space method
is well-suited for text-to-image generation tasks because
it not only eliminates the unidirectional bias with existing methods but also allows us to incorporate a mask-andreplace diffusion strategy to avoid the accumulation of errors, which is a serious problem with existing methods. Our
experiments show that the VQ-Diffusion produces significantly better text-to-image generation results when compared with conventional autoregressive (AR) models with
similar numbers of parameters. Compared with previous
GAN-based text-to-image methods, our VQ-Diffusion can
handle more complex scenes and improve the synthesized
image quality by a large margin. Finally, we show that the
image generation computation in our method can be made
highly efficient by reparameterization. With traditional AR
methods, the text-to-image generation time increases linearly with the output image resolution and hence is quite
time consuming even for normal size images. The VQDiffusion allows us to achieve a better trade-off between
quality and speed. Our experiments indicate that the VQDiffusion model with the reparameterization is fifteen times
faster than traditional AR methods while achieving a better image quality. The code and models are available at
https://github.com/cientgu/VQ-Diffusion.

1. Introduction
Recent success of Transformer [11, 65] in neural language processing (NLP) has raised tremendous interest
in using successful language models for computer vision
tasks. Autoregressive (AR) model [4, 46, 47] is one of the
most natural and popular approach to transfer from text-to* Corresponding author.

10696

