Towards Accurate Facial Landmark Detection via Cascaded Transformers
Hui Li∗1 ,

Zidong Guo∗1 , Seon-Min Rhee2 , Seungju Han2 , Jae-Joon Han2
1
Samsung R&D Institute China Xi’an (SRCX)
2
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT), South Korea

hui01.li, zidong.guo, s.rhee, sj75.han, jae-joon.han@samsung.com

Abstract
Accurate facial landmarks are essential prerequisites for
many tasks related to human faces. In this paper, an accurate facial landmark detector is proposed based on cascaded transformers. We formulate facial landmark detection
as a coordinate regression task such that the model can be
trained end-to-end. With self-attention in transformers, our
model can inherently exploit the structured relationships between landmarks, which would beneﬁt landmark detection
under challenging conditions such as large pose and occlusion. During cascaded reﬁnement, our model is able to
extract the most relevant image features around the target
landmark for coordinate prediction, based on deformable
attention mechanism, thus bringing more accurate alignment. In addition, we propose a novel decoder that reﬁnes image features and landmark positions simultaneously. With few parameter increasing, the detection performance improves further. Our model achieves new state-ofthe-art performance on several standard facial landmark
detection benchmarks, and shows good generalization ability in cross-dataset evaluation.

backbone

Initial Query

···
1st decoder
layer

2nd decoder
layer

···

Figure 1. Illustration of our entire framework. The initial query
and landmark locations are generated based on the image features,
and are continuously updated along with the decoding process.

heatmap regression module [17, 28]. Heatmap-based methods [23, 27, 34] usually predict heatmaps by fully convolutional networks and then obtain the landmarks according
to the peak probability locations on the heatmaps. Since
heatmap-based models can preserve the spatial structure of
image features, they have better performance than coordinate regression-based models generally.
Although heatmap-based methods have relatively higher detection accuracy, they suffer from three major issues.
1) The required post-processing step is non-differentiable,
which disables the end-to-end training. 2) Considering the
computational complexity, the resolution of heatmaps is
usually lower than that of the input images, resulting in a
quantization error inevitably and limiting the performance.
3) They concern more on local texture information and neglect global sensing on face shape, making them vulnerable
to large appearance variation such as occlusions.
In contrast, coordinate regression based methods can bypass the aforementioned drawbacks and enable end-to-end
model training. However, the fully connected layers destroy
the spatial structure of local image features, which deteriorates the localization performance greatly [10].
In this work, we propose a coordinate regressionbased model, Deformable Transformer Landmark Detector
(DTLD), for accurate facial landmark detection. On one
hand, our model avoids the aforementioned shortcomings
of heatmap-based methods, and can be well-trained end-

1. Introduction
Facial landmark detection aims to automatically localize
ﬁducial facial landmark points on human faces. It serves
as an essential step for several facial analysis tasks, such as
face recognition, facial expression analysis, face frontalization and 3D face reconstruction [29].
Facial landmark detection has received signiﬁcant improvement in recent years. Existing approaches mainly fall
into two categories, i.e., coordinate regression-based methods and heatmap-based methods. Coordinate regressionbased methods [7, 31] map the input image to landmark
coordinates via fully connected prediction layers. To improve accuracy, coordinate regression is usually cascaded as a coarse-to-ﬁne manner [4, 15] or integrated with
∗ The ﬁrst two authors equally contributed to this work. H.Li is the
corresponding author.

4176

