Semi-Supervised Learning of Semantic Correspondence with Pseudo-Labels
Jiwon Kim1 * Kwangrok Ryoo1 * Junyoung Seo1 * Gyuseong Lee1 *
Daehwan Kim2 Hansang Cho2 Seungryong Kim1†
1
Korea University, Seoul, Korea 2 Samsung Electro-Mechanics, Suwon, Korea
{naancoco,kwangrok21,se780,jpl358,seungryong kim}@korea.ac.kr
{daehwan85.kim,hansang.cho}@samsung.com

Abstract
Establishing dense correspondences across semantically
similar images remains a challenging task due to the significant intra-class variations and background clutters. Traditionally, a supervised learning was used for training the
models, which required tremendous manually-labeled data,
while some methods suggested a self-supervised or weaklysupervised learning to mitigate the reliance on the labeled
data, but with limited performance.
In this paper, we present a simple, but effective solution for semantic correspondence that learns the networks in a semi-supervised manner by supplementing few
ground-truth correspondences via utilization of a large
amount of confident correspondences as pseudo-labels,
called SemiMatch. Specifically, our framework generates the pseudo-labels using the model’s prediction itself
between source and weakly-augmented target, and uses
pseudo-labels to learn the model again between source
and strongly-augmented target, which improves the robustness of the model. We also present a novel confidence
measure for pseudo-labels and data augmentation tailored
for semantic correspondence. In experiments, SemiMatch
achieves state-of-the-art performance on various benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Establishing dense correspondences across semantically
similar images, depicting different instances of the same object or scene category, can facilitate many Computer Vision
applications such as semantic segmentation [42,52,61], object detection [34], or image editing [25, 33]. Unlike classical dense correspondence problems such stereo matching or
optical flow [21, 58], semantic correspondence poses additional challenges from large intra-class appearance and ge* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

(a) Supervised loss

(b) Self-supervised loss

(c) Unsupervised loss (Ours)

(d) Semi-supervised loss (Ours)

Figure 1. Comparison of semantic correspondence methods
in terms of different formulation of supervision. Conventional
methods leverage either (a) supervised loss using sparse groundtruth keypoint matches [16,43,45] or (b) self-supervised loss using
synthetic flow field with random geometric parameters [40,48,63].
Unlike them, we present (c) unsupervised loss using pseudo-labels
from a matching probability and (d) semi-supervised loss using
both sparse ground-truth keypoints and confident pseudo-labels.

ometric variations [10, 16, 23].
Although formulated in various ways, most recent approaches [9,36,40,41,43,45,48,49,51,54,63,64] addressed
these challenges by carefully designing deep neural networks, such as CNNs [36, 40, 43, 45, 48, 49, 51, 54, 63, 64] or
Transformers [9, 59], based models. The most straightforward way to formulate a mapping function is to use groundtruth correspondences between the image pairs. Recent approaches [9, 70], including conventional approaches, have
been formulated in a supervised fashion (Fig. 1a). However,
ground-truth keypoint pairs on the most standard benchmarks [15,44] can be the inherent bottleneck [10,16,43,45]
because they are annotated subjectively and sparsely.
To alleviate the reliance on the ground-truth data, some
methods [40, 48, 63, 64] presented a self-supervised learning framework (Fig. 1b), using synthetic geometric warps
of an image to generate a synthetic image pair. Although it
turns out that it is an appealing alternative, using synthetic
image pairs cannot account for extreme intra-class appear-

19699

