Single-Stage is Enough: Multi-Person Absolute 3D Pose Estimation
Lei Jin1 , Chenyang Xu1 , Xiaojuan Wang1† , Yabo Xiao1 , Yandong Guo2 , Xuecheng Nie3 , Jian Zhao4†
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
OPPO Research Institute
3
National University of Singapore
4
Institute of North Electronic Equipment
{jinlei,xuchenyang,wj271,xiaoyabo}@bupt.edu.cn, guoyandong@oppo.com, niexuecheng@u.nus.edu,
zhaojian90@u.nus.edu *

Abstract
The existing multi-person absolute 3D pose estimation
methods are mainly based on two-stage paradigm, i.e., topdown or bottom-up, leading to redundant pipelines with
high computation cost. We argue that it is more desirable
to simplify such two-stage paradigm to a single-stage one
to promote both efﬁciency and performance. To this end,
we present an efﬁcient single-stage solution, Decoupled Regression Model (DRM), with three distinct novelties. First,
DRM introduces a new decoupled representation for 3D pose,
which expresses the 2D pose in image plane and depth information of each 3D human instance via 2D center point (center of visible keypoints) and root point (denoted as pelvis),
respectively. Second, to learn better feature representation
for the human depth regression, DRM introduces a 2D Poseguided Depth Query Module (PDQM) to extract the features
in 2D pose regression branch, enabling the depth regression
branch to perceive the scale information of instances. Third,
DRM leverages a Decoupled Absolute Pose Loss (DAPL)
to facilitate the absolute root depth and root-relative depth
estimation, thus improving the accuracy of absolute 3D pose.
Comprehensive experiments on challenging benchmarks including MuPoTS-3D and Panoptic clearly verify the superiority of our framework, which outperforms the state-of-the-art
bottom-up absolute 3D pose estimation methods.

1. Introduction
Estimating 3D human pose from a monocular RGB camera is a signiﬁcant task in computer vision and artiﬁcial
intelligence, due to its foundation in many higher-level applications, e.g., robotics [41], action recognition [8, 15], animation [36, 37], human-object interaction detection [6, 12, 38],
virtual ﬁtting [11], etc. With the recent notable progress in
* Corresponding authors: Xiaojuan Wang and Jian Zhao.

13086

Person
Detector

Single-Person
Pose Estimator
(a) Top-down Method

Keypoint
Detector

Keypoint
Partitioner
(b) Bottom-up Method
...

...

Model
2D Pose Regression Depth Regression

(c) Our Single-stage Solution

Figure 1. Comparison between our single-stage solution and existing top-down and bottom-up methods for the multi-person 3D pose
estimation.

single-person based 3D pose estimation [3, 7, 23, 25, 33], a
more realistic and challenging problem setting has attracted
increasing attention, i.e., to estimate 3D human pose for
multiple persons from a single image.
In general, existing multi-person 3D pose estimation
paradigms can be classiﬁed as top-down and bottom-up methods, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (a), (b), respectively. Top-down
approaches [1, 13, 20, 30] use a human detector to obtain the
bounding box of each person, and then perform the singleperson pose estimation, while bottom-up approaches [19,39]
estimate the poses of all persons simultaneously, and then
combine the keypoints belonging to the same person. The
former category estimates pose for each person separately,
hence the total computation cost grows linearly with the
number of people in the image; the latter category requires
grouping the keypoints into corresponding persons, leading
to redundant computational complexity.
Despite the recent popularity and promising perfor-

