Neural Template: Topology-aware Reconstruction and Disentangled Generation of 3D Meshes

1

Ka-Hei Hui1 * Ruihui Li2,1∗ Jingyu Hu1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{khhui,jyhu,cwfu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

2

Chi-Wing Fu1
Hunan University

liruihui@hnu.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper introduces a novel framework called DTNet for 3D mesh reconstruction and generation via Disentangled Topology. Beyond previous works, we learn a
topology-aware neural template specific to each input then
deform the template to reconstruct a detailed mesh while
preserving the learned topology. One key insight is to decouple the complex mesh reconstruction into two sub-tasks:
topology formulation and shape deformation. Thanks to the
decoupling, DT-Net implicitly learns a disentangled representation for the topology and shape in the latent space.
Hence, it can enable novel disentangled controls for supporting various shape generation applications, e.g., remix
the topologies of 3D objects, that are not achievable by
previous reconstruction works. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our method1 is able to produce highquality meshes, particularly with diverse topologies, as
compared with the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Polygonal meshes, as a compact 3D shape representation, are widely used in many applications, such as modeling, rendering, and animation. In recent years, generative
modeling and reconstruction of 3D meshes has received increasing interest and we may also guide the generative process by using various forms of input, e.g., images [22,43,63]
and point sets [10, 14, 25]. Yet, typical challenges remain—
how to deal with the diverse topologies of 3D meshes, and
also how to effectively provide high-level controls for new
shape generation, e.g., in a topology-aware manner.
To directly reconstruct a 3D mesh, one popular scheme
is to learn to deform the vertices of an initial template [5,
37, 43, 52, 56, 62, 63], e.g., a manually-defined skeleton or a
universal sphere, into the target mesh. However, the topologies of the final reconstructed meshes are typically limited
by the template model. To address this, other works learn to
cover a 3D mesh with planar or curved patches [22,64]; yet,
the visual quality is often tampered due to the patch mis* Joint first authors
1 Code available at https://github.com/edward1997104/

Neural-Template.

Figure 1. Our DT-Net learns to construct a topology-aware neural
template (b) adapted to the input (a) and then deform it towards an
accurate 3D mesh while preserving the initial (learned) topology.
This decoupled design enables a disentangled latent representation of topology (ZT ) and shape (ZS ), promoting controllable 3D
mesh generation, e.g., remixing codes for object re-synthesis.

alignment, so the resulting meshes often have rough surface
appearance. While other 3D representations such as voxels [20, 61, 65, 66, 71, 72], point clouds [2, 16, 28], and implicit functions [3, 21, 39, 44, 55] have been explored, these
representations typically require conversions to meshes via
a post-processing step for supporting visual applications.
Another drawback is that most works focus on capturing
the mesh geometry directly in a single step, without providing high-level interpretability, e.g., structure or topology.
So, it is particularly hard to control the mesh generation
process. Some recent works tried to address this shortcoming by generating objects using parts and parts composition, e.g., in terms of voxels [68], point clouds [40, 67], and
meshes [17]. While the approach allows certain part-aware
generation, these works highly rely on the availability and
the quality of the extra parts annotations.
In this paper, we present a novel framework, namely
DT-Net, for 3D mesh reconstruction and generation via
disentangled topology (DT). Distinctively, DT-Net enables
the reconstruction of high-quality 3D meshes with diverse
topologies, well-adapting to the input, e.g., images or voxels. Also, our novel design facilitates controllability in the
generative process, since DT-Net implicitly learns a disentangled latent representation for the topology and shape.
Therefore, we can achieve disentangled mesh generations
with separate topology and shape manipulations.

18572

