LASER: LAtent SpacE Rendering for 2D Visual Localization
Zhixiang Min1 Naji Khosravan2 Zachary Bessinger2 Manjunath Narayana2
Sing Bing Kang2 Enrique Dunn1 Ivaylo Boyadzhiev2
1
2
Stevens Institute of Technology
Zillow Group

Abstract
LASER (Ours)

We present LASER, an image-based Monte Carlo Localization (MCL) framework for 2D floor maps. LASER introduces the concept of latent space rendering, where 2D
pose hypotheses on the floor map are directly rendered
into a geometrically-structured latent space by aggregating viewing ray features. Through a tightly coupled rendering codebook scheme, the viewing ray features are dynamically determined at rendering-time based on their geometries (i.e. length, incident-angle), endowing our representation with view-dependent fine-grain variability. Our
codebook scheme effectively disentangles feature encoding
from rendering, allowing the latent space rendering to run
at speeds above 10KHz. Moreover, through metric learning, our geometrically-structured latent space is common to
both pose hypotheses and query images with arbitrary field
of views. As a result, LASER achieves state-of-the-art performance on large-scale indoor localization datasets (i.e.
ZInD [5] and Structured3D [38]) for both panorama and
perspective image queries, while significantly outperforming existing learning-based methods in speed.

1. Introduction
Camera localization aims to estimate the spatial relationship between a given input image w.r.t. an environmental representation. Diverse application-driven variants
have been addressed in the computer vision, robotics, and
AR/VR literature. Particular problem instances are defined
in terms of the scope of the pose geometric model (e.g.
SE(2) vs SE(3)), the type of input query imagery (e.g. RGB,
depth), as well as the type of the environmental geometric
reference (e.g. geometric maps, registered image collections). Instances where the queries and the geometric reference share the same domain define camera localization as a
direct geometric registration problem (e.g. ICP [20], SfMbased geometric verification [25]). Conversely, whenever
query observations and the geometric reference are from
different domains, it requires the design of integrative crossmodality data representations able to distinguish and associate input observations and reference data.

Learning-based MCL
𝑥

𝜃

𝑥

𝑦

𝑦

CNN
Rendering
Codebooks

Latent Space
Rendering

Encode

Render

Camera Pose Hypotheses

CNN

Query Images

Metric Space

Posterior

Figure 1. LASER diagram. Learning-based MCL frameworks
encode camera pose hypotheses and query images into a common
metric space to measure their similarities. Compared to existing
works, LASER directly renders latent features and has a reduced
sampling dimension.

This work focuses on solving for the camera pose of a
query panorama/perspective image w.r.t. a 2D floor map,
under the Monte Carlo Localization (MCL) framework [7].
MCL adopts a generative framework, where the solution
(i.e. camera pose) space is systematically sampled to render observation hypotheses and states the problem in terms
of a maximum likelihood search and/or optimization w.r.t.
a query observation. Note that in this work, we solely focus on improving the measurement model, hence we are
only interested in localizing individual queries without initialization. Yet, it is straight-forward to integrate our work
into a full MCL framework with customizable temporal updates. Conventional MCL methods [7, 33] require depth
sensors and have limited robustness to environmental variability (e.g. furniture/object changes) due to their explicit
geometric modeling. Extensions leveraging image-based
room layout estimation [2, 31] address content variability at
the expense of imposing environmental or capture assumptions such as Manhattan world, known ceiling or camera
height. Recent supervised learning approaches [12,36] have
learned a common latent space for both synthesized and

11122

