Depth-Aware Generative Adversarial Network
for Talking Head Video Generation
Fa-Ting Hong1
1

Longhao Zhang2

Li Shen2

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, HKUST

Dan Xu1 *
2

Alibaba Cloud

fhongac@cse.ust.hk, longhao.zlh@alibaba-inc.com, lshen.lsh@gmail.com, danxu@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Talking head video generation aims to produce a synthetic human face video that contains the identity and pose
information respectively from a given source image and a
driving video. Existing works for this task heavily rely on
2D representations (e.g. appearance and motion) learned
from the input images. However, dense 3D facial geometry
(e.g. pixel-wise depth) is extremely important for this task
as it is particularly beneficial for us to essentially generate
accurate 3D face structures and distinguish noisy information from the possibly cluttered background. Nevertheless,
dense 3D geometry annotations are prohibitively costly for
videos and are typically not available for this video generation task. In this paper, we introduce a self-supervised
face-depth learning method to automatically recover dense
3D facial geometry (i.e. depth) from the face videos without the requirement of any expensive 3D annotation data.
Based on the learned dense depth maps, we further propose to leverage them to estimate sparse facial keypoints
that capture the critical movement of the human head. In a
more dense way, the depth is also utilized to learn 3D-aware
cross-modal (i.e. appearance and depth) attention to guide
the generation of motion fields for warping source image
representations. All these contributions compose a novel
depth-aware generative adversarial network (DaGAN) for
talking head generation. Extensive experiments conducted
demonstrate that our proposed method can generate highly
realistic faces, and achieve significant results on the unseen
human faces. 1

1. Introduction
In this paper, we target the task of generating a realistic talking head video of a person using a source image of
that person and a driving video, possibly derived from another person [27, 28, 31]. In the real world, a wide range of
practical applications can be benefited from this task such
* Corresponding author
1 https://github.com/harlanhong/CVPR2022-DaGAN

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1. Qualitative results of the learned depth maps (Fig. 1b)
of the face images (Fig. 1a) using a self-supervised manner, and
dense depth-aware attention maps (Fig. 1c), which can attend to
important semantic parts of the face such as eyes.

as role-playing video games and virtual anchors.
Rapid progress has been achieved on talking head video
generation in terms of both quality and robustness in recent
years, using generative adversarial networks (GANs) [5]. A
successful direction for the task in the literature focuses on
decoupling identity and pose information from the face images [22, 24, 31]. For instance, pioneering works [22, 24]
propose to model relative poses between two face images
based on estimated sparse facial keypoints, and the poses
are further used to generate dense motion fields, which
warps the feature maps of the source image to drive the image generation. Similarly, Eurkov et al. [1] aimed to specifically learn two latent codes for the pose and the identity, and
then input them into a designed generator network for face
video synthesis. More than that, data augmentation strategies [1,39] are also explored to more effectively perform the
disentanglement of the pose and identity information. Although these methods show highly promising performance
on the task, they still pay large attention to learning more
representative 2D appearance and motion features from the
input images. However, for face video generation, 3D dense
geometry is critically important for the task while rarely investigated in the existing methods.
The dense 3D geometry (e.g. pixel-level depth) can bring

3397

