Continual Stereo Matching of Continuous Driving Scenes
with Growing Architecture
Chenghao Zhang1,2 , Kun Tian1,2 , Bin Fan3 , Gaofeng Meng1,2,4 *, Zhaoxiang Zhang1,4 , Chunhong Pan1
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Automation and Electrical Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing
4
CAS Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HK Institute of Science and Innovation

1

{chenghao.zhang, kun.tian, gfmeng, zxzhang, chpan}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, {bin.fan}@ieee.org

Abstract
The deep stereo models have achieved state-of-the-art
performance on driving scenes, but they suffer from severe
performance degradation when tested on unseen scenes.
Although recent work has narrowed this performance gap
through continuous online adaptation, this setup requires
continuous gradient updates at inference and can hardly
deal with rapidly changing scenes. To address these challenges, we propose to perform continual stereo matching
where a model is tasked to 1) continually learn new scenes,
2) overcome forgetting previously learned scenes, and 3)
continuously predict disparities at deployment. We achieve
this goal by introducing a Reusable Architecture Growth
(RAG) framework. RAG leverages task-specific neural unit
search and architecture growth for continual learning of
new scenes. During growth, it can maintain high reusability by reusing previous neural units while achieving good
performance. A module named Scene Router is further introduced to adaptively select the scene-specific architecture
path at inference. Experimental results demonstrate that
our method achieves compelling performance in various
types of challenging driving scenes.

1. Introduction
The reconstruction of the surrounding 3D scene structure is the foundation of many vision tasks. Depth is the
useful precursor to sensing 3D geometry, which is preferentially recovered by well-posed stereo matching due to its
simple settings, high accuracy, and acceptable cost. Benefiting from the convolutional neural networks (CNNs), deep
stereo methods have achieved remarkable progress recently
in driving scenes [3, 5, 6, 14, 45, 48], constantly improving
* Corresponding author.

Scene Router

...

...

Images of New Scenes

...

Growing
Architecture

...

Figure 1. Schematic representation of our framework deployed on
real-world continuous driving scenes. The scene-specific architecture path will be loaded for inference according to Scene Router.

stereo benchmarks like KITTI [11, 26].
However, deep stereo models suffer from performance
degradation when deployed to unseen scenarios [41]. This
is often caused by the gap between training and testing data
domains, e.g., synthetic [25] and real-world data [11, 26].
Domain-adaptive methods [22,29,39] can achieve good performance, but they inherently rely on the types of scenes
available at training time. Unfortunately, collecting enough
data from all kinds of scenes at hand, such as various
weather and road conditions in autonomous driving, is quite
expensive and unfeasible in reality.
Imagine a car driving in real-world scenarios shown in
Fig. 1. The car may experience continuous scenes changing
from cloudy to rainy, or from the city to the countryside.
A stereo model with a single fixed architecture can hardly
perform well on all types of scenes. Moreover, it is also difficult to continue to learn new scenes without forgetting previous knowledge. For optimal performance, an ideal model

18901

