Trajectory Optimization for Physics-Based Reconstruction of
3d Human Pose from Monocular Video
Erik Gärtner1,2

Mykhaylo Andriluka1
1

Hongyi Xu1

Cristian Sminchisescu1

Google Research, 2 Lund University
erik.gartner@math.lth.se

{mykhayloa,hongyixu,sminchisescu}@google.com

Abstract
We focus on the task of estimating a physically plausible articulated human motion from monocular video. Existing approaches that do not consider physics often produce temporally inconsistent output with motion artifacts,
while state-of-the-art physics-based approaches have either
been shown to work only in controlled laboratory conditions or consider simplified body-ground contact limited to
feet. This paper explores how these shortcomings can be
addressed by directly incorporating a fully-featured physics
engine into the pose estimation process. Given an uncontrolled, real-world scene as input, our approach estimates
the ground-plane location and the dimensions of the physical body model. It then recovers the physical motion by performing trajectory optimization. The advantage of our formulation is that it readily generalizes to a variety of scenes
that might have diverse ground properties and supports
any form of self-contact and contact between the articulated body and scene geometry. We show that our approach
achieves competitive results with respect to existing physicsbased methods on the Human3.6M benchmark [13], while
being directly applicable without re-training to more complex dynamic motions from the AIST benchmark [36] and to
uncontrolled internet videos.

Figure 1. Example results of our approach on internet videos of
dynamic motions. Note that our model can reconstruct physically
plausible articulated 3d motion even in the presence of complex
contact with the ground: full body contact (top row), feet and
hands (middle), and feet and knee contacts (bottom).

1. Introduction
In this paper, we address the challenge of reconstructing physically plausible articulated 3d human motion from
monocular video aiming to complement the recent methods [15, 16, 23, 42, 42, 48] that achieve increasingly more
accurate 3d pose estimation results in terms of standard
joint accuracy metrics, but still often produce reconstructions that are visually unnatural.
Our primary mechanism to achieve physical plausibility is to incorporate laws of physics into the pose estima-

tion process. This naturally allows us to impose a variety
of desirable properties on the estimated articulated motion,
such as temporal consistency and balance in the presence of
gravity. Perhaps one of the key challenges in using physics
for pose estimation is the inherent complexity of adequately
modeling the diverse physical phenomena that arise due to
interactions of people with the scene. In the recent literature [29–31, 43] it is common to keep the physics model
simple to enable efficient inference. For example, most of

13106

