Unsupervised Representation Learning for Binary Networks
by Joint Classifier Learning
Dahyun Kim1,2
1
Upstage AI Research

Jonghyun Choi2,3,†
2
3
NAVER AI Lab.
Yonsei University

kdahyun@upstage.ai

jc@yonsei.ac.kr

65

Self-supervised learning is a promising unsupervised
learning framework that has achieved success with large
floating point networks. But such networks are not readily deployable to edge devices. To accelerate deployment
of models with the benefit of unsupervised representation
learning to such resource limited devices for various downstream tasks, we propose a self-supervised learning method
for binary networks that uses a moving target network. In
particular, we propose to jointly train a randomly initialized
classifier, attached to a pretrained floating point feature extractor, with a binary network. Additionally, we propose a
feature similarity loss, a dynamic loss balancing and modified multi-stage training to further improve the accuracy,
and call our method BURN. Our empirical validations over
five downstream tasks using seven datasets show that BURN
outperforms self-supervised baselines for binary networks
and sometimes outperforms supervised pretraining. Code
is availabe at https://github.com/naver-ai/burn.

55

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has achieved great success with floating point (FP) networks in recent years [4,
5, 7, 9, 13, 14, 16, 18, 20, 28, 41, 42, 44, 50]. Models learned
by SSL methods perform on par with or even outperform
the ones learned by supervised pretraining by the help of
large scale unlabeled data in a number of downstream tasks
such as image classification [1, 5], semi-supervised finetuning [5, 7, 18] and object detection [20]. While recent
works [5, 7, 18, 20] from resourceful research groups have
shown that the gains from SSL scale up with model size
and/or dataset size used for pretraining, there is little work
where the resulting pretrained models are small in size, i.e.,
quantized. SSL for such small models is important since it
could expedite the AI deployment for a wide range of appliThis work was done while DK and JC were an intern and an AI technical
advisor at NAVER AI Lab., respectively. † indicates corresponding author.

Accuracy or mAP (%)

Abstract

45
35
Tuned MoCov2
S2-BNN
BURN (Ours)
Supervised Pre.
15 Obj. Det. Lin. Eval
25

SS 1%

SS 10%

Downstream Tasks

FS K=1 Transfer (CUB)

Figure 1. Comparison of various representation learning methods on multiple downstream tasks (pretrained with ImageNet).
‘Obj. Det.’ refers to object detection, ‘Lin. Eval’ refers to linear
evaluation, ’SS 1/10% refers to semi-supervised fine-tuning with
1 or 10% data respectively,‘FS K=1’ refers to few-shot learning
with 1 shot, and ‘Transfer (CUB)’ means transfer learning to the
CUB dataset. ‘Tuned MoCov2’ and ‘S2-BNN’ are SSL methods
from [39]. Proposed BURN outperforms all comparable methods
in various tasks, and even the Supervised Pre. in certain tasks.

cations onto models with high efficiency in computational
and memory costs, and energy consumption [12]. At the
extreme of resource constrained scenarios, binary networks
exhibit superior efficiency and the accuracy is being significantly improved [2, 3, 23, 31–34, 38]. Thus, developing
an SSL method for binary networks could further accelerate the deployment of models to edge devices for various
downstream tasks, yet is seldom explored.
Providing additional supervisory signals with a pretrained FP network by using the KL divergence loss between the softmax outputs from the classifiers of the FP target network and binary network, which we denote as ‘supervised KL div.’, has become a popular and effective method
for training binary networks [2, 3, 32, 34]. Recently, [39]
propose an unsupervised representation learning method for
binary networks based on the supervised KL div. method.
To extract meaningful softmax probabilities from the FP
network, they pretrain the classifier as well as the feature

9747

