Large-scale Video Panoptic Segmentation in the Wild: A Benchmark
Jiaxu Miao1,2 Xiaohan Wang1 Yu Wu2 Wei Li1 Xu Zhang1 Yunchao Wei3 Yi Yang1†
1
CCAI, Zhejiang University 2 Baidu Research 3 Beijing Jiaotong University
jiaxumiao@zju.edu.cn, yangyics@zju.edu.cn

Figure 1. Examples of our large-scale VIdeo Panoptic Segmentation in the Wild (VIPSeg) dataset.

Abstract
In this paper, we present a new large-scale dataset for
the video panoptic segmentation task, which aims to assign semantic classes and track identities to all pixels in
a video. As the ground truth for this task is difficult to annotate, previous datasets for video panoptic segmentation
are limited by either small scales or the number of scenes.
In contrast, our large-scale VIdeo Panoptic Segmentation
in the Wild (VIPSeg) dataset provides 3,536 videos and
84,750 frames with pixel-level panoptic annotations, covering a wide range of real-world scenarios and categories.
To the best of our knowledge, our VIPSeg is the first attempt to tackle the challenging video panoptic segmentation
task in the wild by considering diverse scenarios. Based
on VIPSeg, we evaluate existing video panoptic segmentation approaches and propose an efficient and effective
clip-based baseline method to analyze our VIPSeg dataset.
Our dataset is available at https://github.com/
VIPSeg-Dataset/VIPSeg-Dataset/.

1. Introduction
Panoptic segmentation unifies semantic and instance
segmentation tasks by assigning a semantic label and an instance ID to every pixel in an image, which is a fundamental
research topic in computer vision and has many practical
applications such as detailed action understanding, video
† Corresponding author.
‡ Part of this work was done when Jiaxu Miao was an intern at Baidu

Research.

editing, autonomous driving, and augmented reality. Recently, plenty of approaches [15,16,26,27,29,31,34,51,63,
68, 74] have been proposed for panoptic segmentation and
achieved remarkable progress.
Although the image panoptic segmentation task has been
well explored, video panoptic segmentation [26] (VPS) is
still a challenging problem. VPS model should not only
provide unique and consistent semantic predictions within
a video, but also associate instance IDs for the same object
across frames. Recently some approaches and datasets [26,
48, 60, 61] have been proposed for video panoptic segmentation. However, there are many limitations in current VPS benchmarks. First, existing VPS datasets [26, 60]
are small-scaled due to the exhausting labeling cost. For
example, Cityscapes-VPS [26] only contains 500 videos
with six annotated frames per video. KITTI-STEP [60]
and MOTChallenge-STEP [60] only contain 50 and 4 video
sequences, respectively. The video panoptic segmentation
task is constrained by existing datasets due to their insufficient videos [60] and short video length [26]. Second, the
diversity of existing VPS datasets is restricted, i.e., only the
street view scene is considered in previous datasets. Thus,
the categories of things with pixel-level annotation are limited and biased. Some previous datasets [60] only focus
on people and vehicles. The diversity issue prevents these
datasets from being general in real-world applications (e.g.
video editing, augmented reality), which contains many
scenes and hundreds of things in our daily life.
To advance the research on video panoptic segmentation, we present a new dataset in this work, targeting largescale VIdeo Panoptic Segmentation in the wild (VIPSeg).

21033

