CAFE: Learning to Condense Dataset by Aligning Features
Kai Wang1 * Bo Zhao2 * Xiangyu Peng1 Zheng Zhu3 Shuo Yang4 Shuo Wang5
Guan Huang 3 Hakan Bilen2 Xinchao Wang 1 Yang You1†
1
National University of Singapore 2 The University of Edinburgh 3 PhiGent Robotics
4
University of Technology Sydney 5 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Code: https://github.com/kaiwang960112/CAFE

Abstract
Dataset condensation aims at reducing the network
training effort through condensing a cumbersome training set into a compact synthetic one. State-of-the-art approaches largely rely on learning the synthetic data by
matching the gradients between the real and synthetic data
batches. Despite the intuitive motivation and promising results, such gradient-based methods, by nature, easily overft to a biased set of samples that produce dominant gradients, and thus lack a global supervision of data distribution. In this paper, we propose a novel scheme to Condense
dataset by Aligning FEatures (CAFE), which explicitly attempts to preserve the real-feature distribution as well as
the discriminant power of the resulting synthetic set, lending itself to strong generalization capability to various architectures. At the heart of our approach is an effective
strategy to align features from the real and synthetic data
across various scales, while accounting for the classifcation of real samples. Our scheme is further backed up by a
novel dynamic bi-level optimization, which adaptively adjusts parameter updates to prevent over-/under-ftting. We
validate the proposed CAFE across various datasets, and
demonstrate that it generally outperforms the state of the
art: on the SVHN dataset, for example, the performance
gain is up to 11%. Extensive experiments and analysis verify the effectiveness and necessity of proposed designs.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have demonstrated unprecedented results in many if not all applications in computer vision [9, 21, 39, 27, 10, 23, 29, 8, 46, 49, 28, 38, 37,
36]. These gratifying results, nevertheless, come with costs:
the training of DNNs heavily rely on the sheer amount of
data, sometimes up to tens of millions of samples, which
* Equal contribution. (kai.wang@comp.nus.edu.sg, bo.zhao@ed.ac.uk)
† Corresponding author (youy@comp.nus.edu.sg).

ConvNet/ResNet18 Iter0
All Samples

ConvNet Iter500
ResNet18 Iter500
Large Gradients Samples of ConvNet and ResNet18

(a) The gradient distribution changes from a uniform to long-tailed
distribution during the training. Meanwhile, the overlap of largegradient samples are small among different architectures.
Gradient Based methods Synthetic Images

Category 1 Category 2

Synthetic Images

Our CAFE

Synthetic Images

Category 1 Category 2

Real Images

(b) The visualization of synthetic images and their distributions
generated by gradient matching and CAFE. ConvNet is used.

Figure 1: (a) At the later training stage, most examples
do not contribute meaningful gradients, making the synthetic set learned by gradient matching extremely bias towards those large-gradient samples, which downgrades its
generalization to unseen architectures. (b) Compared with
gradient-based method [53], the synthetic set learned by our
approach effectively captures the whole distribution thus
generalizes well to other network architectures.

consequently requires enormous computational resources.
Numerous research endeavours have, therefore, focused
on alleviating the cumbersome training process through
constructing small training sets [1, 14, 7, 13, 42, 31, 33, 44,
45, 50]. One classic approach is known as coreset or subset selection [1, 31, 12], which aims to obtain a subset of
salient data points to represent the original dataset of interest. Nevertheless, coreset selection is typically a NP-hard
problem [19], making it computationally intractable over
large-scale datasets. Most existing approaches have thus re-

12196

