OCSampler: Compressing Videos to One Clip with Single-step Sampling
Jintao Lin1
Haodong Duan2
Kai Chen3,4
Dahua Lin2
Limin Wang1
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 3 SenseTime Research 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory
jintaolin@smail.nju.edu.cn

dh019@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

dhlin@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

chenkai@sensetime.com

lmwang@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Videos incorporate rich semantics as well as redundant
information. Seeking a compact yet effective video representation, e.g., sample informative frames from the entire
video, is critical to efficient video recognition. There have
been works that formulate frame sampling as a sequential
decision task by selecting frames one by one according to
their importance. In this paper, we present a more efficient framework named OCSampler, which explores such
a representation with one short clip. OCSampler designs a
new paradigm of learning instance-specific video condensation policies to select frames only in a single step. Rather
than picking up frames sequentially like previous methods,
we simply process a whole sequence at once. Accordingly,
these policies are derived from a light-weighted skim network together with a simple yet effective policy network.
Moreover, we extend the proposed method with a frame
number budget, enabling the framework to produce correct
predictions in high confidence with as few frames as possible. Experiments on various benchmarks demonstrate the
effectiveness of OCSampler over previous methods in terms
of accuracy and efficiency. Specifically, it achieves 76.9%
mAP and 21.7 GFLOPs on ActivityNet with an impressive
throughput: 123.9 Video/s on a single TITAN Xp GPU.

1. Introduction
With the explosive popularity of social media platforms
as well as bountiful online video content, there comes
wider attention on effective and scalable approaches that
can deal with actions or events recognition in the face
of the video data deluge. To this end, most efforts have
been devoted to exploring a complicated temporal module to capture relationships across the time dimension by
densely applying 2D-CNNs [11, 20, 22, 29, 34, 42] or 3D: Corresponding author.

(a) Input Video (label: Rollerblading)

Step-2

Step-6

Step-4

Step-1

Step-7

Step-3

Step-8

Step-5

(b) FrameExit method

Step-1

Step-2

Step-3

Step-4

Step-6

Step-5

(c) Context-based sequential methods (e.g., AdaFrame)

Step-1

OCSampler
FrameExit 76.1
AdaFrame

76.9

123.9

79.0
26.1

21.7

71.5

mAP (%)

Step-1

Step-1

(d) OCSampler (ours)

GFLOPs

6.4

19.1

Throughput (Videos/s)

(e) Results of different methods on ActivityNet-v1.3

Figure 1. Comparisons of other methods and our proposed
OCSampler. Most existing works reduce computational cost
by regarding the frame selection problem as a sequential decision task, while OCSampler aims to perform efficient inference
by making one-step decision with holistic views. Our method
achieves excellent performance on accuracy, theoretical computational expense, and actual inference throughout.

CNNs [3,6,7,10,28,31,32]. Though achieving superior performance, the exorbitant computational expense limits the
application of these models in real-world scenarios where
the deployment is resource-constrained and requires to process high data volumes with stringent latency and throughput requirements.
To mitigate this issue, a large body of research has been
focusing on designing light-weighted modules [9, 22, 27,
28, 33, 33, 40, 47] to bring efficiency improvements. Being
unaware of the complexity of video contents and instancespecific difficulties for video recognition, these models treat

13894

