Hire-MLP: Vision MLP via Hierarchical Rearrangement
Jianyuan Guo1,3 ,* Yehui Tang1,2* , Kai Han1 , Xinghao Chen1 ,
†
†
Han Wu3 , Chao Xu2 , Chang Xu3 , Yunhe Wang1
1

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab. 2 School of Artificial Intelligence, Peking University.
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, University of Sydney.

3

{jianyuan.guo, kai.han, yunhe.wang}@huawei.com, yhtang@pku.edu.cn, c.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Previous vision MLPs such as MLP-Mixer and ResMLP
accept linearly flattened image patches as input, making
them inflexible for different input sizes and hard to capture
spatial information. Such approach withholds MLPs from
getting comparable performance with their transformerbased counterparts and prevents them from becoming a
general backbone for computer vision. This paper presents
Hire-MLP, a simple yet competitive vision MLP architecture
via Hierarchical rearrangement, which contains two levels of rearrangements. Specifically, the inner-region rearrangement is proposed to capture local information inside
a spatial region, and the cross-region rearrangement is proposed to enable information communication between different regions and capture global context by circularly shifting
all tokens along spatial directions. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the effectiveness of Hire-MLP as a versatile
backbone for various vision tasks. In particular, Hire-MLP
achieves competitive results on image classification, object
detection and semantic segmentation tasks, e.g., 83.8% top1 accuracy on ImageNet, 51.7% box AP and 44.8% mask
AP on COCO val2017, and 49.9% mIoU on ADE20K, surpassing previous transformer-based and MLP-based models with better trade-off for accuracy and throughput.

1. Introduction
Attention mechanism based transformers have shown
great superiority in the realm of natural language processing in recent years. Several works such as ViT [11] and
DeiT [49] propose to transfer the transformers into visual
recognition tasks [15], and have achieved awesome results
which are comparable with conventional convolutional neural networks (CNNs). However, the heavy computational
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author. Mindspore [24] code:
https://gitee.com/mindspore/models/tree/master/research/cv/HireMLP.
Pytorch [37] code: https://github.com/huawei-noah/CV-Backbones.

burdens caused by the self-attention modules in transformers withhold the models from better trade-off between accuracy and latency. Recently, models composed of only
multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) have become a new trend in
vision community [47, 48]. These MLP-based models can
achieve comparable results with CNNs while discarding the
heavy self-attention module. For example, MLP-Mixer [47]
extracts per-location information through MLPs that are applied to every image patch, and captures long-range information through MLPs that are applied across patches.
Although MLP-Mixer can obtain the global receptive
field, there are two intractable flaws that prevent the model
from becoming a more general backbone for vision tasks:
(i) The number of the patches (tokens) will change as the
input size changes, which means it cannot be directly finetuned at other resolutions that are different from those used
in pre-training phase, making MLP-Mixer infeasible to be
transferred into downstream vision tasks such as detection
and segmentation. (ii) MLP-Mixer rarely explores the local information, which is demonstrated as an useful inductive bias in both CNNs and transformer-based architectures [18, 55]. The above challenges naturally motivate us
to explore an efficient MLP-based architecture which can
encode both local and global information while being compatible with flexible input resolutions at the same time.
To address the two aforementioned challenges, we propose the Hire-MLP, which innovates the existing MLPbased models by using hierarchical rearrangement operations. Taking the first challenge into account, the sequence
of tokens in MLP-Mixer [47] are denoted as X ∈ RHW ×C ,
where HW and C denote the number of tokens and channels, respectively. MLP-Mixer first uses a token-mixing
MLP which acts on the columns of X to map RHW 7→
RHW , and then uses a channel-mixing MLP which acts on
the rows of X to map RC 7→ RC . The parameters of the
token-mixing MLP are configured by the number of tokens
HW , which depends on the resolution of input images and
results in the first challenge. To this end, we construct our
Hire-MLP merely by channel-mixing MLPs applied on the

826

