LAR-SR: A Local Autoregressive Model for Image Super-Resolution
†

†

Baisong Guo1*, Xiaoyun Zhang1*, Haoning Wu1 , Yu Wang1,2 , Ya Zhang1,2 , Yan-Feng Wang1,2
1
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{stilltooyoung,xiaoyun.zhang,whn15698781666,yuwangsjtu,ya zhang,wangyanfeng}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Previous super-resolution (SR) approaches often formulate SR as a regression problem and pixel wise restoration, which leads to a blurry and unreal SR output. Recent works combine adversarial loss with pixel-wise loss to
train a GAN-based model or introduce normalizing flows
into SR problems to generate more realistic images. As another powerful generative approach, autoregressive (AR)
model has not been noticed in low level tasks due to its
limitation. Based on the fact that given the structural information, the textural details in the natural images are locally related without long term dependency, in this paper we
propose a novel autoregressive model-based SR approach,
namely LAR-SR, which can efficiently generate realistic SR
images using a novel local autoregressive (LAR) module.
The proposed LAR module can sample all the patches of
textural components in parallel, which greatly reduces the
time consumption. In addition to high time efficiency, it is
also able to leverage contextual information of pixels and
can be optimized with a consistent loss. Experimental results on the widely-used datasets show that the proposed
LAR-SR approach achieves superior performance on the visual quality and quantitative metrics compared with other
generative models such as GAN, Flow, and is competitive
with the mixture generative model.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed great progress in deep
learning based method for image super-resolution (SR)
[5, 14, 33]. Most of the existing methods formulate image
SR as a pixel-wise regression problem, which is optimized
with a pixel-wise loss such as L1 or MSE. As image superresolution is inherently an ill-posed problem, when trained
with many-to-one mapping between the high resolution images and the low resolution images, the regression-based
models, with the per-pixel loss design, tend to adopt the av* Equal contribution(co-first authors).
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. The purpose of regression-based methods (a) is to minimize the pixel-wise loss, i.e., MSE-loss or L1-loss between the
ground truth and the output, which results in blur images lacking
of details. Our algorithm is based on the autoregresssive method
(b), which considers the relation between adjacent pixels. According to the HR datasets, the first pixel has a probability of 3/4 of
0 and a probability of 1/4 of 1. Once we sample the first pixel as
0, the second pixel has a posterior probability of 2/3 of 0 and a
posterior probability of 1/3 of 1 et al.

erage of all possible HR images, thus suffering from blurry
and unreal SR images. See Figure 1(a) for an illustration.
To generate more realistic images, Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [7]-based models and Flow [4]-based
models have recently been introduced into image superresolution. Both types of these methods generate all the
pixels in parallel where the correlation between pixels is
implicitly embedded in the latent space. During the training
procedure, the discriminator or the invertable network maps
the normal distribution to the joint distribution of the pixels. Thus GAN-based and Flow-based models can generate
high-fidelity details compared with traditional regressionbased models. However, GAN-based models pose the challenge of joint optimization, while Flow-based models are
limited by the specific invertable network.
As another powerful generative model, autoregressive
model has recently been explored in image synthesis tasks
[6], which expressively learn relationships among its input.
Because Taming transformer [6] is designed for general im-

1909

