PhyIR: Physics-based Inverse Rendering for Panoramic Indoor Images
Zhen Li1

Lingli Wang1
Xiang Huang1
Cihui Pan1, *
1
2
Realsee
Northwestern Polytechnical University

Jiaqi Yang2, *

yodlee@mail.nwpu.edu.cn,{wanglingli008,huangxiang003,pancihui001}@ke.com,jqyang@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Inverse rendering of complex material such as glossy,
metal and mirror material is a long-standing ill-posed problem in this area, which has not been well solved. Previous approaches cannot tackle them well due to simplified BRDF and unsuitable illumination representations. In
this paper, we present PhyIR, a neural inverse rendering method with a more completed SVBRDF representation and a physics-based in-network rendering layer, which
can handle complex material and incorporate physical constraints by re-rendering realistic and detailed specular reflectance. Our framework estimates geometry, material and
Spatially-Coherent (SC) illumination from a single indoor
panorama. Due to the lack of panoramic datasets with completed SVBRDF and full-spherical light probes, we introduce an artist-designed dataset named FutureHouse with
high-quality geometry, SVBRDF and per-pixel SpatiallyVarying (SV) lighting. To ensure the coherence of SV lighting, a novel SC loss is proposed. Extensive experiments on
both synthetic and real-world data show that the proposed
method outperforms the state-of-the-arts quantitatively and
qualitatively, and is able to produce photorealistic results
for a number of applications such as dynamic virtual object
insertion.

1. Introduction
Inverse rendering is a fundamental yet challenging task
in computer vision and computer graphics. This task aims
to recover geometry, material and illumination from a single
image. The above properties play a vital role in emerging
applications, such as scene editing and virtual object insertion in mixed reality. All these applications require physically reasonable realism. However, reconstructing physically accurate properties of a scene is very difficult, because
inverse rendering is an ill-posed problem. It contains complicated geometry, different types of material and varying
local illumination, which will result in complex lighting ef* Co-corresponding authors. The project page is at https://lzleejean.github.io/PhyIR

1

2

(b)

(d)

(f)

(c)

(e)

(g)

3

(a)

1
⃝

2
⃝

(h)

3
⃝

Figure 1. Given an LDR panorama (a), we estimate geometry
(b-c), SV illumination and SVBRDFs, including base color (d),
roughness (e) and metalness (f). Our physics-based differentiable
renderer can produce detailed specular reflectance (g) on complex
material. Based on such physical constraint, our predictions are
qualified to produce virtual object insertion (h) with realistic lighting effects, e.g., highlight caused by unseen light source in 1
⃝ and
specular reflectance on the cabinet in 2
⃝.

fects, e.g., specular reflectance on glossy and mirror material, inter-reflection and cast shadows.
There are three main challenges in solving this task physically. 1) Complex material is difficult to model. Most
existing methods assume that all surfaces are Lambertian [2, 21, 27, 30, 34–37, 40, 46, 56] and only produce diffuse reflectance. Some methods handle specular reflectance
in an unphysical way, such as neural residual renderer [39],
additional specular shading [48] and phong parameters [17].
Although some approaches use a relatively physical BRDF
representation [7, 29, 31, 52], complex material, e.g., glossy,
metal and mirror material, still cannot be handled well due
to limited BRDF. Moreover, since the re-renderer is built on
such a limited BRDF, physical constraints cannot be incorporated well. 2) Changeable local illumination is difficult
to represent. The illumination of indoor scene is spatiallyvarying (SV) because of occlusion and non-uniform light
distribution [16], and is also spatially-coherent (SC) due to
coherent variability. Most approaches fail to ensure coher-

12713

