Learning Graph Regularisation for Guided Super-Resolution
Riccardo de Lutio1, * Alexander Becker1,∗ Stefano D’Aronco1
Stefania Russo1
Jan D. Wegner1,2
Konrad Schindler1
1
EcoVision Lab, Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, ETH Zurich
2
Institute for Computational Science, University of Zurich
firstname.lastname@geod.baug.ethz.ch

Abstract

Source

We introduce a novel formulation for guided superresolution. Its core is a differentiable optimisation layer
that operates on a learned affinity graph. The learned
graph potentials make it possible to leverage rich contextual information from the guide image, while the explicit graph optimisation within the architecture guarantees
rigorous fidelity of the high-resolution target to the lowresolution source. With the decision to employ the source
as a constraint rather than only as an input to the prediction, our method differs from state-of-the-art deep architectures for guided super-resolution, which produce targets
that, when downsampled, will only approximately reproduce the source. This is not only theoretically appealing,
but also produces crisper, more natural-looking images. A
key property of our method is that, although the graph connectivity is restricted to the pixel lattice, the associated edge
potentials are learned with a deep feature extractor and can
encode rich context information over large receptive fields.
By taking advantage of the sparse graph connectivity, it becomes possible to propagate gradients through the optimisation layer and learn the edge potentials from data. We
extensively evaluate our method on several datasets, and
consistently outperform recent baselines in terms of quantitative reconstruction errors, while also delivering visually
sharper outputs. Moreover, we demonstrate that our method
generalises particularly well to new datasets not seen during training.

Guide

1. Introduction
Guided super-resolution takes as input two images of
different resolution, a low-resolution source and a highresolution guide from a different domain. It returns a
high-resolution version of the source as output, termed
the target. This task is relevant in many practical appli* Equal contribution.

…

Data fidelity

Receptive field
… Graph
regularisation

…
Learned
graph regulariser

Target

Figure 1. Our method takes as input a low-resolution source image
and a high-resolution guide image of another modality to build a
graph using high-level image features. The graph is then used in a
differentiable optimisation layer as a regularisation to reconstruct
the target.

cations such as medical [62] and satellite imaging [26],
where performing a diagnosis or analysis from low-quality
images can be extremely difficult. Another very popular example in computer vision is upsampling depth maps,
where the low-resolution depth is the source, a conventional grayscale or RGB image is the guide, and the target is a high-resolution depth map. Consumer-grade depth
sensors provide low-resolution depth maps, but a highresolution RGB camera is usually mounted on the same device and can acquire a high-resolution image of the same
scene. Guided super-resolution methods can be divided into
two main categories, conventional and deep learning-based
methods. The former typically cast the task into an optimisation problem [7, 8, 10, 12]. The goal is to create a highresolution target image that, when downsampled, matches
the source, while at the same time complying with an appropriate regularisation term that favours a desired image
characterstic such as (piecewise) smoothness. Deep learning methods [15, 17–19, 52] instead rely on a dataset of
source/guide/target triplets to learn a feed-forward mapping
from the source and guide to the target. To that end the
model must learn the statistical correlations that allow it to
transfer high-frequency details from the guide to the tar-

1979

