Neural Convolutional Surfaces
Luca Morreale1 *

Noam Aigerman2
Paul Guerrero2
Vladimir G. Kim2
1
2
University College London
Adobe Research

Niloy J. Mitra1,2

patch detail maps

NCS
ground truth
surface map
coarse base
map
ground truth shape

coarse base shape

~1.8MB

NCS (ours)

~400KB, Error x1.0

NGLOD

~400KB, Error x7.0

ACORN

~400KB, Error x7.8

Figure 1. Neural Convolutional Surfaces (NCS) can faithfully represent a given ground-truth shape while disentangling coarse geometry
from fine details, leading to a highly-accurate representation of the shape. Compared to other state-of-the-art methods neuralLOD [34] and
Acorn [23], NCS achieves significantly more accurate results for the same memory footprint.

Abstract
This work is concerned with a representation of shapes
that disentangles fine, local and possibly repeating geometry, from global, coarse structures. Achieving such disentanglement leads to two unrelated advantages: i) a significant compression in the number of parameters required
to represent a given geometry; ii) the ability to manipulate either global geometry, or local details, without harming the other. At the core of our approach lies a novel
pipeline and neural architecture, which are optimized to
represent one specific atlas, representing one 3D surface.
Our pipeline and architecture are designed so that disentanglement of global geometry from local details is accomplished through optimization, in a completely unsupervised
manner. We show that this approach achieves better neural shape compression than the state of the art, as well
as enabling manipulation and transfer of shape details.
Project page http://geometry.cs.ucl.ac.uk/
projects/2022/cnnmaps/.

* Partially worked on the project during internship at Adobe Research.

1. Introduction
Triangle meshes have been the most popular representation across much of geometry processing since its early
stages, however research has been devoted to devising novel
representations of geometry to circumvent many of the
shortcoming of triangular meshes. Lately, the rising prominence of deep learning has lead researchers to investigate
ways to represent shapes via neural networks. While the
immediate use of neural networks in this context is to represent entire shape spaces by using the same set of weights
to decode any shape from a shared latent space, other methods use a shape-specific set of weights to represent a specific instance. This approach captures geometric detail efficiently and accurately and creates outputs that are on par
with existing 3D models, while holding novel properties
not attainable with surface meshes, such as differentiability. These neural representations for shape instances were
demonstrated to be useful in geometry processing applications such as efficient rendering [34], level of details [23],
surface parameterization, and inter-surface mapping [26].
The choice of the shape representation, and of the neural network’s architecture, plays a critical role in how efficiently the capacity of the network is utilized. Existing

19333

