All-photon Polarimetric Time-of-Flight Imaging
Seung-Hwan Baek1,2

Felix Heide1

Princeton University1

POSTECH2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Depth cameras have equipped us with the ability to acquire scene geometry that is essential for 3D vision both
directly as a geometric input to a perception or reconstruction method, and indirectly, as training data for supervised
learning in rich 3D vision datasets [9,11,42]. As such, depth
sensor have fueled diverse applications across domains, including autonomous vehicles, virtual and augmented reality, mobile photography, and robotics. A large body of prior
work explores different approaches to extract depth, including parallax [37], defocus [23], double refraction [4], and
correlation imaging [22]. In particular, pulsed ToF cameras [32] have been rapidly adopted across application domains for their high depth precision, low baseline, long

Incident light

# of detected photons

Time-of-flight (ToF) sensors provide an image modality fueling diverse applications, including LiDAR in autonomous driving, robotics, and augmented reality. Conventional ToF imaging methods estimate depth by sending
pulses of light into a scene and measuring the ToF of the
first-arriving photons directly reflected from a scene surface
without any temporal delay. As such, all photons following this first response are typically considered as unwanted
noise. In this paper, we depart from the principle of using first-arriving photons and propose an all-photon ToF
imaging method that relies on the temporal-polarimetric
analysis of first- and late-arriving photons which encode
rich scene information in terms of geometry and material.
To this end, we propose a novel temporal-polarimetric reflectance model, an efficient capture method, and a reconstruction method that exploits the temporal-polarimetric
changes of light reflected by the surface and sub-surface
reflection. The proposed all-photon polarimetric ToF imaging method allows us to acquire depth, surface normals, and
material parameters of a scene by utilizing all photons captured by the system, whereas conventional ToF imaging only
obtains coarse depth from the first-arriving photons. We
validate our method in simulation and experimentally with
a prototype system.

Temporal-polarimetric outgoing light

Surface

Sub-surface

Polarized

Unpolarized

Polarization
states

Scene

Geometric & material properties
Depth
Surface normals
Material & scattering properties

Time of flight

Figure 1. All-photon polarimetric ToF imaging. In contrast to
conventional ToF imaging methods that analyze the first-reflected
light, we propose to capture and exploit both early and late photons and untangle them via polarization. We analyze temporalpolarimetric characteristics of surface and sub-surface reflections
that enable us to infer scene parameters (depth, normals, and material parameters) from all captured photons.

range and robustness to scene texture.
ToF cameras directly measure the round-trip return time
of light emitted into a scene. This requires high-speed sensors and electronics that can time-tag photon arrival events,
such as single-photon avalanche diode (SPAD) and timecorrelated single-photon counting (TSCPC) electronics. By
repeating pulses and recording arrival events hundreds of
thousands of times per measurement, these pulsed ToF cameras are capable of recording an entire temporal histogram
for each pixel, reporting the number of photons detected by
the sensor for each travel time bin.
Photons that arrive at different times at a single pixel can
be broadly categorized into two temporally distinct components that sum up to the total measured photons. The first
group of photons originates from the light directly reflected
off from an object surface. Therefore, this surface reflection allows for estimating the object depth directly from its
ToF measurement. Surface reflection often has higher intensity in comparison to the other component. As a result,
one common practice for ToF depth imaging is to estimate

17876

