3DeformRS: Certifying Spatial Deformations on Point Clouds
Gabriel Pérez S.⇤,1,2
1

Juan C. Pérez⇤,2
Motasem Alfarra⇤,2
Bernard Ghanem2

Universidad Nacional de Colombia, 2 King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
1

2

Silvio Giancola2

gaperezsa@unal.edu.co

{juan.perezsantamaria,motasem.alfarra,silvio.giancola,bernard.ghanem}@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
3D computer vision models are commonly used in
security-critical applications such as autonomous driving
and surgical robotics. Emerging concerns over the robustness of these models against real-world deformations must
be addressed practically and reliably. In this work, we
propose 3DeformRS, a method to certify the robustness of
point cloud Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) against realworld deformations. We developed 3DeformRS by building upon recent work that generalized Randomized Smoothing (RS) from pixel-intensity perturbations to vector-field
deformations. In particular, we specialized RS to certify
DNNs against parameterized deformations (e.g. rotation,
twisting), while enjoying practical computational costs.
We leverage the virtues of 3DeformRS to conduct a comprehensive empirical study on the certified robustness of
four representative point cloud DNNs on two datasets and
against seven different deformations. Compared to previous
approaches for certifying point cloud DNNs, 3DeformRS
is fast, scales well with point cloud size, and provides
comparable-to-better certificates. For instance, when certifying a plain PointNet against a 3 z rotation on 1024point clouds, 3DeformRS grants a certificate 3⇥ larger and
20⇥ faster than previous work 1 .

1. Introduction
Perception of 3D scenes plays a critical role in applications such as autonomous navigation [14] and robotics [32].
The success of autonomous driving cars and surgical robots
largely depends on their ability to understand the surrounding scenes. Recent works [36, 37, 46, 51] demonstrated
the capability of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) to process 3D point clouds. These advances allowed DNNs to
achieve exceptional performance in challenging 3D tasks,
* Denotes Equal Contribution. The order is random.
Work done during Gabriel’s internship at KAUST.
1 Code: https://github.com/gaperezsa/3DeformRS

Figure 1. Randomized Smoothing for Point Cloud DNNs. We
certify the prediction of a DNN on the input point cloud via randomized smoothing by constructing a smooth DNN ĝ around the
original DNN f . For an input p, a parametric transformation ⌫ +✏ ,
and a parameter , the Smooth DNN predicts the expected value
of the predictions from transformed versions of p.

such as shape classification [45, 49], object detection [17]
and semantic segmentation [3, 12]. Despite the superior
performance of DNNs over traditional approaches, explaining the logic behind their decisions and understanding their
limitations is extremely challenging. For instance, earlier
works [22, 50] elucidated the limitations of point cloud
DNNs to withstand tiny and meaningless perturbations in
their input, known as adversarial attacks. The vulnerability of point cloud DNNs against adversarial attacks underscores the importance of considering their robustness for
security-critical applications.
The study of adversarial robustness in the image domain
demonstrated that defenses [20] are often later broken by
more sophisticated attacks [4, 8, 11]. This phenomenon
poses a difficulty for evaluating robustness [7]. Such difficulty found response in the domain of certified robustness,

15169

