OpenTAL: Towards Open Set Temporal Action Localization
Wentao Bao, Qi Yu, Yu Kong
Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, NY 14623, USA
{wb6219, qi.yu, yu.kong}@rit.edu

 

Abstract

 

 





  

 





 





 











    

Temporal Action Localization (TAL) has experienced remarkable success under the supervised learning paradigm.
However, existing TAL methods are rooted in the closed set
assumption, which cannot handle the inevitable unknown
actions in open-world scenarios. In this paper, we, for the
ﬁrst time, step toward the Open Set TAL (OSTAL) problem
and propose a general framework OpenTAL based on Evidential Deep Learning (EDL). Speciﬁcally, the OpenTAL
consists of uncertainty-aware action classiﬁcation, actionness prediction, and temporal location regression. With
the proposed importance-balanced EDL method, classiﬁcation uncertainty is learned by collecting categorical evidence majorly from important samples. To distinguish the
unknown actions from background video frames, the actionness is learned by the positive-unlabeled learning. The
classiﬁcation uncertainty is further calibrated by leveraging the guidance from the temporal localization quality. The
OpenTAL is general to enable existing TAL models for open
set scenarios, and experimental results on THUMOS14 and
ActivityNet1.3 benchmarks show the effectiveness of our
method. The code and pre-trained models are released at
https://www.rit.edu/actionlab/opental.

1. Introduction
Temporal Action Localization (TAL) aims to temporally localize and recognize human actions in an untrimmed
video. With the success of deep learning in video understanding [4,10,15,20,34] and object detection [3,9,49], TAL
has experienced remarkable advance in recent years [12,36,
62, 69]. However, these works are rooted in the closed set
assumption that testing videos are assumed to contain only
the pre-deﬁned action categories, which is impractical in an
open world where unknown human actions are inevitable to
appear. In this paper, we for the ﬁrst time step forward the
Open Set Temporal Action Localization (OSTAL) problem.
OSTAL aims to not only temporally localize and recognize the known actions but also reject the localized unknown actions. As shown in Fig. 1, given an untrimmed

 

 

Figure 1. OSTAL and TAL Tasks. The OSTAL task is different
from the TAL in that, there exist unknown actions in untrimmed
open-world videos and the OSTAL models need to reject the positively localized action (e.g., HammerThrow) as the Unknown,
rather than falsely assign it a known label such as the LongJump.

video (the top row) from open world, traditional TAL (the
middle row) could falsely accept the unknown action clip
HammerThrow as one of the known actions such as the
LongJump, while the proposed OSTAL (the bottom row)
could correctly reject the clip as the Unknown. Besides,
both tasks need to differentiate between foreground actions
and the Backgrounds which are purely background frames.
The proposed OSTAL task is fundamentally more challenging than both the TAL and the closely relevant open set
recognition (OSR) [51] problems. On one hand, the recognition and localization of known actions become harder due
to the mixture of background frames and the unknown foreground actions. Existing TAL methods typically assign
the mixture with an non-informative Background label or
a wrong action label, which are unable to differentiate between them. On the other hand, different to the OSR problem, rejecting an unknown action is conditioned on positively localizing a foreground action so that the localization
quality is critical to the OSTAL.
To tackle these challenges, we propose a general framework OpenTAL by decoupling the overall OSTAL objective
into three interconnected components: uncertainty-aware
action classiﬁcation, actionness prediction, and temporal location regression. In essence, the foreground actions are
distinguished from the background by the actionness prediction and localized by the temporal localization, while the
known and unknown foreground actions are discriminated

2979

