RigNeRF: Fully Controllable Neural 3D Portraits
ShahRukh Athar*
Stony Brook University
sathar@cs.stonybrook.edu

Zexiang Xu
Adobe Research
zexu@adobe.com

Eli Shechtman
Adobe Research
elishe@adobe.com

(a) Pose Control

Kalyan Sunkavalli
Adobe Research
sunkaval@adobe.com

Zhixin Shu
Adobe Research
zshu@adobe.com

(b) Expression Control (c) Novel View Synthesis

(d) Video based reanimation with novel view synthesis

Figure 1. Our method, RigNeRF, enables full control of head-pose and facial expression of a human portrait using a 3DMM-guided
deformable neural radiance field. With a short portrait video for training, RigNeRF can reanimate the subject with arbitrary (a) head-pose
and (b) facial expressions. It also allows controllable viewpoints of the 3D scene (c). Naturally RigNeRF can be used to transfer facial
animation from a driving video sequence to the 3D portraits faithfully (d).

Abstract

expression controls.

Volumetric neural rendering methods, such as neural radiance fields (NeRFs), have enabled photo-realistic novel
view synthesis. However, in their standard form, NeRFs do
not support the editing of objects, such as a human head,
within a scene. In this work, we propose RigNeRF, a system
that goes beyond just novel view synthesis and enables full
control of head pose and facial expressions learned from a
single portrait video. We model changes in head pose and
facial expressions using a deformation field that is guided
by a 3D morphable face model (3DMM). The 3DMM effectively acts as a prior for RigNeRF that learns to predict
only residuals to the 3DMM deformations and allows us
to render novel (rigid) poses and (non-rigid) expressions
that were not present in the input sequence. Using only a
smartphone-captured short video of a subject for training,
we demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on free view
synthesis of a portrait scene with explicit head pose and

1. Introduction
Photo-realistic editing of human portraits is a longstanding topic in the computer graphics and computer vision
community. It is desirable to be able to control certain attributes of a portrait, such as 3D viewpoint, lighting, head
pose, and even facial expression, after capturing. It also has
great potential in AR/VR applications where a 3D immersive
experience is valuable. However, it is a challenging task:
modeling and rendering a realistic human portrait with complete control over 3D viewpoint, facial expressions, and head
pose in natural scenes remains elusive, despite the longtime
interest and recently increased research.
3D Morphable Face Models (3DMMs) [4] were among
the earliest attempts towards a fully controllable 3D human
* Work done while interning at Adobe Research.

20364

