Unseen Classes at a Later Time? No Problem
Hari Chandana Kuchibhotla‡∗, Sumitra S Malagi‡∗, Shivam Chandhok  ‡ , Vineeth N Balasubramanian‡
‡

Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, India  INRIA, Universite Grenoble Alpes

{ai20resch11006,cs20mtech14006,vineethnb}@iith.ac.in,chandhokshivam@gmail.com

Abstract
Recent progress towards learning from limited supervision has encouraged efforts towards designing models that
can recognize novel classes at test time (generalized zeroshot learning or GZSL). GZSL approaches assume knowledge of all classes, with or without labeled data, beforehand. However, practical scenarios demand models that
are adaptable and can handle dynamic addition of new
seen and unseen classes on the fly (i.e continual generalized zero-shot learning or CGZSL). One solution is to sequentially retrain and reuse conventional GZSL methods,
however, such an approach suffers from catastrophic forgetting leading to suboptimal generalization performance.
A few recent efforts towards tackling CGZSL have been limited by difference in settings, practicality, data splits and
protocols followed – inhibiting fair comparison and a clear
direction forward. Motivated from these observations, in
this work, we firstly consolidate the different CGZSL setting
variants and propose a new Online-CGZSL setting which
is more practical and flexible. Secondly, we introduce a
unified feature-generative framework for CGZSL that leverages bi-directional incremental alignment to dynamically
adapt to addition of new classes, with or without labeled
data, that arrive over time in any of these CGZSL settings.
Our comprehensive experiments and analysis on five benchmark datasets and comparison with baselines show that our
approach consistently outperforms existing methods, especially on the more practical Online setting.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have shown great
promise as predictive models and are increasingly being
used for various computer vision applications. However,
their reliance on large-scale labeled datasets limit their use
in practical scenarios encountered in the real-world. The
occurrence of objects in the real world inherently follows
long-tailed distributions [16, 35], implying that visual data
sampled from the real world may not be readily available
∗ equal contribution

Figure 1. Illustration of proposed setting. Applicability of a Generalized Zero-shot Learning (GZSL) model (row 1) and our proposed model
(row 2) in a real-world scenario on dynamic addition of new seen (depicted
in yellow) and unseen (depicted in blue) categories. The GZSL setting
does not allow dynamic addition of newer classes, seen or unseen, that are
added over time. Our proposed CGZSL setting is more flexible and can
tackle dynamic changes in the initial pool of seen and unseen categories,
enhancing model scalability and applicability in practical settings.

for all categories of interest at the same time. Thus, it is
required for models to have the ability to generalize and
recognize novel objects semantically similar to the ones encountered during training even though visual data for these
novel classes is not seen by the model. Existing efforts aim
to tackle this problem, by designing generalized zero-shot
learning (GZSL) models that are equipped with the ability
to generalize to unseen classes at test time.
Another important aspect of object occurrence in the real
world is the gradual addition of object categories with time.
This can be attributed to the discovery of new objects or the
continuous nature of data collection process owing to which
a previously rare object may have abundantly available samples at a later stage. However, existing GZSL approaches
are not designed to tackle dynamic addition of classes in
the initial pool of seen and unseen categories, limiting their
scalability and applicability in challenging practical settings. Fig. 1 illustrates the shortcomings of a GZSL model
in such practical settings where classes arrive over time. Evidently, the GZSL setting is limiting, and is unable to adapt
to dynamic changes to the initial pool of categories brought
by the gradual addition of new seen and unseen classes over

9245

