Fourier PlenOctrees for Dynamic Radiance Field Rendering in Real-time
Liao Wang1∗

Jiakai Zhang1∗

Xinhang Liu1

Fuqiang Zhao1

Yanshun Zhang3

Yingliang Zhang3
Minye Wu2
Jingyi Yu1#
Lan Xu1,4#
1
2
3
ShanghaiTech University
KU leuven
DGene
4
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging

Abstract
Implicit neural representations such as Neural Radiance
Field (NeRF) have focused mainly on modeling static objects captured under multi-view settings where real-time
rendering can be achieved with smart data structures, e.g.,
PlenOctree. In this paper, we present a novel Fourier
PlenOctree (FPO) technique to tackle efficient neural modeling and real-time rendering of dynamic scenes captured
under the free-view video (FVV) setting. The key idea
in our FPO is a novel combination of generalized NeRF,
PlenOctree representation, volumetric fusion and Fourier
transform. To accelerate FPO construction, we present a
novel coarse-to-fine fusion scheme that leverages the generalizable NeRF technique to generate the tree via spatial blending. To tackle dynamic scenes, we tailor the implicit network to model the Fourier coefficients of timevarying density and color attributes. Finally, we construct
the FPO and train the Fourier coefficients directly on the
leaves of a union PlenOctree structure of the dynamic sequence. We show that the resulting FPO enables compact memory overload to handle dynamic objects and supports efficient fine-tuning. Extensive experiments show that
the proposed method is 3000 times faster than the original
NeRF and achieves over an order of magnitude acceleration over SOTA while preserving high visual quality for the
free-viewpoint rendering of unseen dynamic scenes.

1. Introduction
Interactive and immersive applications, such as Telepresence and Virtual Reality (VR), make plenty use of freeviewpoint videos to provide unique and fully controllable
viewing experiences. At the core are fast generation and
real-time rendering at new viewpoints with ultra-high pho* Authors contributed equally to this work. # The corresponding
authors are Jingyi Yu (yujingyi@shanghaitech.edu.cn) and Lan Xu (xulan1@shanghaitech.edu.cn).

Dynamic Viewer

FPS=101
T=14
Dynamic Viewer

FPS=100
T=16
Dynamic Viewer

FPS=102
T=18

Figure 1. Our method achieves a photo-realistic rendered result for
dynamic scenes in real-time based on our novel Fourier PlenOctree
structure.

torealism. Traditional image-based modeling and rendering
approaches rely on feature matching and view interpolation,
whereas the latest neural rendering techniques are able to integrate the two processes into a deep net that simultaneously
represents the geometry and appearance for efficient rendering. By far, most neural rendering techniques have focused
on modeling static objects and employing smart data structures. For example, volumetric neural modeling techniques
[28, 32] overcome many limitations of traditional methods, including tailored matching algorithms and optimization procedures and can even tackle non-Lambertian materials. The seminal work of the Neural Radiance Field (NeRF)
[32] learns a neural representation based on MLP to represent static scenes as radiance fields with the property of density and color. It only requires calibrated multi-view images
to produce compelling free-viewpoint rendering. However,
the MLP structure is still too slow to achieve real-time performance. Existing techniques explore using thousands of
tiny MLPs [45], applying factorization [13], tailored volumetric data structures [16, 69], and primitive-based rendering [29]. Despite their effectiveness, very few techniques
are directly applicable to handle dynamic scenes, in particular, objects with non-rigid deformations such as the human
body. In this work, we present a novel neural representation for generating free-viewpoint videos from multi-view

13524

