Sign Language Video Retrieval with Free-Form Textual Queries
Amanda Duarte1,2
1

Samuel Albanie3

Xavier Giró-i-Nieto1,4

Gül Varol5

Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Spain 2 Barcelona Supercomputing Center, Spain
3
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, UK
4
Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial, CSIC-UPC, Spain
5
LIGM, École des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, France
https://imatge-upc.github.io/sl_retrieval/

Abstract

sign language
video database

How to groom a cat
Text query

Sign languages are the primary means of communication among deaf communities. They are visual, complex,
evolved languages that employ combinations of manual and
non-manual markers such as movements of the face, body
and hands to convey information [56].
Recent developments in automatic speech recognition
(ASR) for spoken languages [14,15,65,70] have enabled automatic captioning of vast swathes of video content hosted
1 The terminology “natural language query” is commonly used to describe unconstrained textual queries in spoken languages. However, since
sign languages are also natural languages, we adopt for the term “free-form
textual query” instead.

cross-modal
retrieval

…

1. Introduction

sign language video

…

Systems that can efficiently search collections of sign
language videos have been highlighted as a useful application of sign language technology. However, the problem of
searching videos beyond individual keywords has received
limited attention in the literature. To address this gap, in
this work we introduce the task of sign language retrieval
with free-form1 textual queries: given a written query (e.g.
a sentence) and a large collection of sign language videos,
the objective is to find the signing video that best matches
the written query. We propose to tackle this task by learning
cross-modal embeddings on the recently introduced largescale How2Sign dataset of American Sign Language (ASL).
We identify that a key bottleneck in the performance of the
system is the quality of the sign video embedding which suffers from a scarcity of labelled training data. We, therefore,
propose S POT-A LIGN, a framework for interleaving iterative rounds of sign spotting and feature alignment to expand
the scope and scale of available training data. We validate
the effectiveness of S POT-A LIGN for learning a robust sign
video embedding through improvements in both sign recognition and the proposed video retrieval task.

video-subtitle pairs
seen during training

I am going
to teach you
how to ...
written translation

Joint embedding space

Video representation
Text representation
Video encoder
Text encoder

Figure 1. Text-based sign language video retrieval: In this work
we introduce sign language video retrieval with free-form textual
queries, the task of searching collections of sign language videos
to find the best match for a free-form textual query, going beyond
individual keyword search.

on platforms such as YouTube. In addition to rendering the
videos more accessible, this captioning yields a second important benefit: it allows the content of the videos to be
indexed and efficiently searched with text queries. By contrast, the same automatic captioning capability (and hence
searchability) does not exist for sign language content. Indeed, recent work has drawn attention to the pressing need
to develop systems that can index archives of sign language
videos to render them searchable [6]. Without these tools,
sign language video creators must type the spoken language
translation of their content if they want to reach the same
discoverability as their spoken language counterparts.
One solution might appear to be to use sign language
translation systems to perform video captioning, analogous
to ASR cascading in spoken content retrieval [34]. Unfortunately, while promising translation results have been
demonstrated in constrained domains of discourse (such as

14094

