Computing Wasserstein-p Distance Between Images with Linear Cost
Yidong Chen1,2 Chen Li1 Zhonghua Lu1,∗
1
Computer Network Information Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
chenyidong@cnic.cn, lichen@sccas.cn, zhlu@cnic.cn

Abstract
When the images are formulated as discrete measures,
computing Wasserstein-p distance between them is challenging due to the complexity of solving the corresponding Kantorovich’s problem. In this paper, we propose a
novel algorithm to compute the Wasserstein-p distance between discrete measures by restricting the optimal transport (OT) problem on a subset. First, we define the restricted OT problem and prove the solution of the restricted problem converges to Kantorovich’s OT solution. Second, we propose the SparseSinkhorn algorithm for the restricted problem and provide a multi-scale algorithm to estimate the subset. Finally, we implement the proposed algorithm on CUDA and illustrate the linear computational
cost in terms of time and memory requirements. We compute Wasserstein-p distance, estimate the transport mapping, and transfer color between color images with size
ranges from 64 × 64 to 1920 × 1200. (Our code is available
at https://github.com/ucascnic/CudaOT)

1. Introduction
The long history of optimal transport (OT) problems can
be traced back to the pioneering work of Monge (1781),
Toloston (1930), Kantorovich (1942) and Brenier (1991)
[6]. To this day, this theory has provided a fertile ground for
research with deep connections to convexity [18], partial differential equations [8], economic problems [13], machine
learning [3] and computer vision [28].
The theory of OT defines a distance on probability measures, called the Wasserstein distance. The Wasserstein distance can not be calculated analytically in most cases and it
is computationally more costly than Lp -distance. The computational effort to calculate Wasserstein distance and solve
optimal coupling remains the bottleneck in many applications as the problem size grows. Consequently, efficient algorithms for computing Wasserstein distance are needed.
The straightforward way to solve the discrete OT problems is to use linear programming based algorithms such as

the Hungarian method [26], the auction algorithm [4] and
the network simplex [31], which are typically numerically
robust. The limitation of them is the algorithmic complexity, especially the memory requirements for solving large
problems. The approximation based methods, however, add an entropy entry to the original formulation and make the
objective be a strongly convex function, which helps develop iteration based algorithms such as the Sinkhorn algorithm [41], the Greenkhorn algorithm [2] and Screening
Sinkhorn [1]. The Sinkhorn algorithm provides an efficient
and scalable approximation to the original OT problem and
it is easy to be parallelized. However, for large problems, it
is costly to store the dense matrix in memory and numerical
issues appear as some of the elements of the kernel become
too negligible to be stored as positive numbers and become
instead null. The Greenkhorn, has a better performance of
convergence compared to the Sinkhorn and the computational cost is much lower since it only requires updating a
specific row or column in each iteration, but it remains a numerical issue for large discrete OT problems. An effective
way to remove the numerical issues of the Sinkhorn algorithm is conducting the iteration on a log domain [25, 40],
which guarantees a bounded kernel during every iteration.
The drawback is that it requires many additional computations of exponential operation in each iteration. A stabilized sparse algorithm, which brings the idea of generating a stabilized kernel during every iteration, was studied
in [37] to not only remove numerical issues of the Sinkhorn
algorithm but also solve the discrete OT problem between
large point clouds. A related scaling algorithm was studied
in [10] for computing the unbalanced OT problems. The
limitation of the sparse algorithm is that it requires considerable time to generate the sparse kernel during iterations.
The multi-scale scheme for measures approximation was studied in [30] for solving the semi-discrete OT problems
and showed a significant improvement in terms of solution
time and memory requirements for solving the discrete OT
problems such as the Shielding method [36], which is efficient for computing Wasserstein-2 distance but converges
very slow for computing Wasserstein-1 distance. There are

519

