Diffusion Autoencoders: Toward a Meaningful and Decodable Representation
Konpat Preechakul

Real image

Wavy hair

Nattanat Chatthee Suttisak Wizadwongsa
VISTEC, Thailand

Real image

Smiling

Younger

Real image

Supasorn Suwajanakorn

Real image

Older

Real image

Figure 1. Attribute manipulation and interpolation on real images. Diffusion autoencoders can encode any image into a two-part latent
code that captures both semantics and stochastic variations and allows near-exact reconstruction. This latent code can be interpolated or
modified by a simple linear operation and decoded back to a highly realistic output for various downstream tasks.

Abstract
Diffusion probabilistic models (DPMs) have achieved remarkable quality in image generation that rivals GANs’.
But unlike GANs, DPMs use a set of latent variables that
lack semantic meaning and cannot serve as a useful representation for other tasks. This paper explores the possibility of using DPMs for representation learning and seeks
to extract a meaningful and decodable representation of
an input image via autoencoding. Our key idea is to use
a learnable encoder for discovering the high-level semantics, and a DPM as the decoder for modeling the remaining
stochastic variations. Our method can encode any image
into a two-part latent code where the first part is semantically meaningful and linear, and the second part captures
stochastic details, allowing near-exact reconstruction. This
capability enables challenging applications that currently
foil GAN-based methods, such as attribute manipulation on
real images. We also show that this two-level encoding improves denoising efficiency and naturally facilitates various
downstream tasks including few-shot conditional sampling.
Please visit our page: https://Diff-AE.github.io/

1. Introduction
Diffusion-based (DPMs) [22, 46] and score-based [49]
generative models have recently succeeded in synthesizing realistic and high-resolution images, rivaling those from
GANs [11, 15, 23]. These two models are closely related

and, in practice, optimize similar objectives. Numerous
applications have emerged notably in the image domain,
such as image manipulation, translation, super-resolution
[8,32,35,43], in speech and text domains [5,6], or 3D point
cloud [34]. Recent studies have improved DPMs further in
both theory and practice [25,29,31]. In this paper, however,
we question whether DPMs can serve as a good representation learner. Specifically, we seek to extract a meaningful and decodable representation of an image that contains
high-level semantics yet allows near-exact reconstruction of
the image. Our exploration focuses on diffusion models, but
the contributions are applicable also to score-based models.
One way to learn a representation is through an autoencoder. There exists a certain kind of DPM [47] that can act
as an encoder-decoder that converts any input image x0 into
a spatial latent variable xT by running the generative process backward. However, the resulting latent variable lacks
high-level semantics and other desirable properties, such
as disentanglement, compactness, or the ability to perform
meaningful linear interpolation in the latent space. Alternatively, one can use a trained GAN for extracting a representation using the so-called GAN inversion [28,58], which
optimizes for a latent code that reproduces the given input.
Even though the resulting code carries rich semantics, this
technique struggles to faithfully reconstruct the input image. To overcome these challenges, we propose a diffusionbased autoencoder that leverages the powerful DPMs for
decodable representation learning.

10619

