ScePT: Scene-consistent, Policy-based Trajectory Predictions for Planning
Yuxiao Chen1
Boris Ivanovic1
Marco Pavone1,2
1
2
NVIDIA Research
Stanford University
{yuxiaoc, bivanovic, mpavone}@nvidia.com, pavone@stanford.edu

Abstract
Trajectory prediction is a critical functionality of autonomous systems that share environments with uncontrolled agents, one prominent example being self-driving
vehicles. Currently, most prediction methods do not enforce scene consistency, i.e., there are a substantial amount
of self-collisions between predicted trajectories of different agents in the scene. Moreover, many approaches generate individual trajectory predictions per agent instead of
joint trajectory predictions of the whole scene, which makes
downstream planning difficult. In this work, we present
ScePT, a policy planning-based trajectory prediction model
that generates accurate, scene-consistent trajectory predictions suitable for autonomous system motion planning. It
explicitly enforces scene consistency and learns an agent
interaction policy that can be used for conditional prediction. Experiments on multiple real-world pedestrians and
autonomous vehicle datasets show that ScePT matches current state-of-the-art prediction accuracy with significantly
improved scene consistency. We also demonstrate ScePT’s
ability to work with a downstream contingency planner.

1. Introduction
Predicting the future motion of uncontrolled agents is
critical to the safety of autonomous systems that interact
with them. A prominent example is self-driving cars, where
the ego-vehicle shares the road with other road users such
as vehicles, pedestrians, and cyclists. The prediction task
is difficult as humans are notoriously uncertain and inconsistent. For example, it is well-known that humans demonstrate multimodal behaviors in the context of driving, such
as being simultaneously able to maintain their current lane,
change lanes, yield, or overtake in the future. As a result, early works on human driving behavior prediction [37]
were not accurate enough to be used in an autonomous vehicle’s motion planning stack. To remedy this, many researchers have been developing phenomenological methods, i.e., methods that learn the behavior of agents from a
wealth of data (e.g., [2, 28, 29, 44]), to great effect.
In a typical autonomy stack, the trajectory prediction
module is followed by a planning module which takes the

Figure 1. An illustration of ScePT’s output, comprised of multimodal trajectory predictions for each agent. Different stroke type
(solid, dashed, dotted) represents the different modes of the sceneconsistent joint trajectory prediction. Agents in a scene are partitioned into highly-interacting cliques, an example of which is
visualized with yellow dashed lines.

predicted trajectories of surrounding agents and plans the
ego-motion accordingly. With this downstream planner in
mind, several requirements, in addition to prediction accuracy, emerge, and are discussed in detail below.

1.1. Desiderata
Typical features desired for a trajectory prediction model
include high prediction accuracy, fast inference speed, and
calibrated uncertainties. When predictions are subsequently
consumed by a downstream planner, the following features
are also critical for overall system performance:
Compatibility: Trajectory predictions for different agents
in a scene should be compatible with each other within a
single joint prediction. In particular, collisions among predicted trajectories should be rare, as collisions are themselves rare in reality.
Tractable Joint Trajectory Prediction: As mentioned previously, the future motion of the agents can be multimodal.
In a scene consisting of multiple agents, if the multimodal
predictions are generated for individual nodes, a downstream motion planner needs to consider all combinations
of these trajectory predictions. Since the number of modes
grows exponentially with the number of agents, the planner

17103

