UCC: Uncertainty guided Cross-head Co-training for Semi-Supervised Semantic
Segmentation
Jiashuo Fan1 Bin Gao2 Huan Jin 2 Lihui Jiang 2 *
1
2
Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have witnessed great successes in semantic segmentation, which requires a large
number of labeled data for training. We present a novel
learning framework called Uncertainty guided Cross-head
Co-training (UCC) for semi-supervised semantic segmentation. Our framework introduces weak and strong augmentations within a shared encoder to achieve co-training,
which naturally combines the benefits of consistency and
self-training. Every segmentation head interacts with its
peers and, the weak augmentation result is used for supervising the strong. The consistency training samples’ diversity can be boosted by Dynamic Cross-Set Copy-Paste
(DCSCP), which also alleviates the distribution mismatch
and class imbalance problems. Moreover, our proposed
Uncertainty Guided Re-weight Module (UGRM) enhances
the self-training pseudo labels by suppressing the effect
of the low-quality pseudo labels from its peer via modeling uncertainty. Extensive experiments on Cityscapes and
PASCAL VOC 2012 demonstrate the effectiveness of our
UCC. Our approach significantly outperforms other stateof-the-art semi-supervised semantic segmentation methods.
It achieves 77.17%, 76.49% mIoU on Cityscapes and PASCAL VOC 2012 datasets respectively under 1/16 protocols, which are +10.1%, +7.91% better than the supervised
baseline.

1. Introduction
Image semantic segmentation is an important and hot
topic in the computer vision field, which can be applied
to autonomous driving [24], medical image processing and
smart city. In the past few years, semantic segmentation
methods based on deep neural networks (DNNs) have made
tremendous progress, such as [3, 5, 20, 30]. However, most
of these methods involve pixel-level manual labeling, which
is quite expensive and time-consuming.
To effectively utilize unlabeled images, the consistency
regularization based methods have been widely used in
* Corresponding Author: jianglihui1@huawei.com

semi-supervised learning [11, 18, 27]. It promotes the network to generate similar predictions for the same unlabeled
image with different augmentations by calculating the difference between outputs as the loss function. Among them,
data augmentation is commonly used in consistency regularization, and [29, 36] serve a pool of data augmentation
policies by designing the search space. Additionally, FixMatch [26] shows its effectiveness by enforcing consistency
constraints on predictions generated by weak and strong
augmentation. Despite the success of consistency regularization, we find that the network performance tends to reach
its bottleneck in the high-data regime.
Another semi-supervised learning method, self-training,
could fully use massive data. It incorporates pseudo labels on the unlabeled images obtained from the segmentation model to guide its learning process and then retrains the segmentation model with both labeled and unlabeled data. However, the traditional self-training procedure has its inherent drawbacks: the noise of pseudo labels may accumulate and influence the whole training process. As an extension of self-training, co-training [23, 42]
lets multiple individual learners learn from each other instead of collapsing to themselves. To fully take the merit
of consistency regularization and co-training, we propose
a Cross-head Co-training learning framework incorporated
with weak and strong augmentation. Comparing multiple
models, we could achieve co-training with minimal additional parameters by the shared encoder, which enforces
constraints on different learners and avoids them from converging in the opposite direction.
Our method also benefits from the learners’ diversity.
Co-training will fall into self-training without diversity, and
consistency training on the same prediction will also be
meaningless for the lack of diversity. The diversity inherently comes from the randomness in the strong augmentation function (the unlabeled examples for two heads are differently augmented and pseudo-labeled) and different learners’ initialization. Copy-Paste (CP) is also an alternative
way to boost training samples’ diversity, and recent work
[42] has proved its effectiveness. However, the plain CP
has its inherent drawback caused by two problems. The
first is the distribution mismatch between labeled data and

9947

