Joint Global and Local Hierarchical Priors for Learned Image Compression
Jun-Hyuk Kim1 * Byeongho Heo2 Jong-Seok Lee1
1
School of Integrated Technology, Yonsei University 2 NAVER AI Lab
{junhyuk.kim, jong-seok.lee}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract

bh.heo@navercorp.com

Transformation

Entropy coding
Bitstream

Recently, learned image compression methods have outperformed traditional hand-crafted ones including BPG.
One of the keys to this success is learned entropy models
that estimate the probability distribution of the quantized
latent representation. Like other vision tasks, most recent
learned entropy models are based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs). However, CNNs have a limitation in
modeling long-range dependencies due to their nature of
local connectivity, which can be a significant bottleneck in
image compression where reducing spatial redundancy is
a key point. To overcome this issue, we propose a novel
entropy model called Information Transformer (Informer)
that exploits both global and local information in a contentdependent manner using an attention mechanism. Our experiments show that Informer improves rate–distortion performance over the state-of-the-art methods on the Kodak and Tecnick datasets without the quadratic computational complexity problem. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/naver-ai/informer.

1. Introduction
More than one trillion photos are taken every year and
the number is increasing [12], leading to an ever-increasing
demand for improved compression efficiency. Recently, advances in deep learning have led to significant progress in
learned image compression [7, 8, 16, 26, 32, 36, 40, 43–45].
Generally, learned image compression follows a transform
coding framework [22] consisting of transformation and entropy coding (see the top of Fig. 1). In this framework,
an image is first transformed into a quantized latent representation that enables more effective compression than the
original image. Then, the quantized latent representation is
encoded to a bitstream by a standard entropy coding algorithm (e.g., arithmetic coding [42]). An entropy model, i.e.,
a prior probability model on the quantized latent representation, is required for the entropy coding algorithm. Deep
* Work done while doing an internship at NAVER AI Lab.

Input image

Entropy model

(a) CNN-based approach

(b) Informer (ours)

Local & content-independent

Global & content-dependent

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed method. Our Informer is a
learned entropy model capturing global dependencies in a contentdependent manner using the attention mechanism [46].

neural networks are employed for the transformation and
entropy model in this framework [7, 8, 16, 32, 36, 40, 43],
where both are learned in an end-to-end manner to fully utilize the strong capability of deep neural networks [25].
Since the length of the bitstream relies on the entropy
model, designing an accurate entropy model is important for
compression efficiency, which is our main focus in this paper. The goal of entropy models is to estimate a joint probability distribution over the elements of the quantized latent
representation. A simple way to do this is to assume complete independence among the elements [7]. However, this
approach yields limited compression efficiency since the assumption does not hold in most practical cases [8]. Thus,
how to model the remaining dependencies has been an important issue in learned image compression [8,32,36,40]. It
is popular to extract additional features, called “hyperprior”
or “hierarchical prior”, capturing the dependencies from the
latent representation using convolutional neural networks
(CNNs). This approach has contributed to learning accurate
entropy models, making learned image compression methods outperform hand-crafted image codes such as BPG [10].
However, despite the significant progress, CNN-based
entropy models still have limitations in capturing the dependencies due to the nature of CNNs. First, existing entropy
models do not make full use of global information due to

5992

