Interactive Multi-Class Tiny-Object Detection
Chunggi Lee Seonwook Park Heon Song Jeongun Ryu
Sanghoon Kim Haejoon Kim Sérgio Pereira Donggeun Yoo
Lunit Inc.
{cglee, spark, heon.song, rjw0205, seiker, oceanjoon, sergio, dgyoo}@lunit.io
An annotator clicks on some
instances and classes

C3Det detects many objects from
different classes, even for classes
not specified by the annotator

The annotator clicks on a few objects
that were omitted in the previous step

More objects are detected

Eventually, all objects are detected

few more
clicks

Figure 1. C3Det is a deep learning framework for interactive tiny-object detection that relates multiple annotator clicks to multiple instances
and multiple classes of objects (each object class is depicted with a different color), in order to reduce overall annotation cost.

Abstract
Annotating tens or hundreds of tiny objects in a given
image is laborious yet crucial for a multitude of Computer
Vision tasks. Such imagery typically contains objects from
various categories, yet the multi-class interactive annotation setting for the detection task has thus far been unexplored. To address these needs, we propose a novel interactive annotation method for multiple instances of tiny objects
from multiple classes, based on a few point-based user inputs. Our approach, C3Det, relates the full image context
with annotator inputs in a local and global manner via latefusion and feature-correlation, respectively. We perform experiments on the Tiny-DOTA and LCell datasets using both
two-stage and one-stage object detection architectures to
verify the efficacy of our approach. Our approach outperforms existing approaches in interactive annotation, achieving higher mAP with fewer clicks. Furthermore, we validate
the annotation efficiency of our approach in a user study
where it is shown to be 2.85x faster and yield only 0.36x
task load (NASA-TLX, lower is better) compared to manual
annotation. The code is available at https://github.
com/ChungYi347/Interactive-Multi-ClassTiny-Object-Detection.

1. Introduction
Large-scale data and annotations are crucial for successful deep learning [22]. However in many real-world problems, annotations are very labor-intensive and expensive to
acquire [8]. Annotation costs increase even higher when
handling numerous tiny objects such as in remote sens-

ing [7, 15, 33], extreme weather research [24], and microscope image analysis [12, 16]. These settings often require
highly-skilled annotators and accordingly high compensation. For instance, cell annotation in Computational Pathology requires expert physicians (pathologists), whose training involves several years of clinical residency [3, 31]. Reducing cost and effort for these annotators would directly
enable the collection of new large-scale tiny-object datasets,
and contribute to higher model performances.
Several prior works have been proposed to reduce annotation cost in other tasks. Interactive segmentation methods [23, 35] focus on reducing the number of interactions in
the segmentation of a single foreground object, which can
be classified as a “many interactions to one instance” approach. However, tiny-objects annotation can benefit from
a “many interactions to many instances” approach as one
image can contain many instances. Object counting methods [4, 26] count multiple instances from a few user clicks
and do follow a “many interactions to many instances” approach. However, these methods highlight only objects of
the same class as the one being counted and thus can be
classified as a “one class to one class” approach. However, images with tiny-objects are often composed of objects from multiple classes. Thus, tiny-object annotation
should implement a “many classes to many classes” approach.
To address the above needs, we propose C3Det, an effective interactive annotation framework for tiny object detection. Fig. 1 shows how a user interacts with C3Det to
create bounding-boxes of numerous tiny objects from multiple classes. Once a user clicks on a few objects and provides their class information, C3Det takes those as inputs

14136

