Sub-word Level Lip Reading With Visual Attention
K R Prajwal Triantafyllos Afouras Andrew Zisserman
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford
{prajwal,afourast,az}@robots.ox.ac.uk
https://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/˜vgg/research/vtp-for-lip-reading

Abstract
The goal of this paper is to learn strong lip reading
models that can recognise speech in silent videos. Most
prior works deal with the open-set visual speech recognition problem by adapting existing automatic speech recognition techniques on top of trivially pooled visual features.
Instead, in this paper, we focus on the unique challenges encountered in lip reading and propose tailored solutions. To
this end, we make the following contributions: (1) we propose an attention-based pooling mechanism to aggregate
visual speech representations; (2) we use sub-word units
for lip reading for the first time and show that this allows
us to better model the ambiguities of the task; (3) we propose a model for Visual Speech Detection (VSD), trained
on top of the lip reading network. Following the above,
we obtain state-of-the-art results on the challenging LRS2
and LRS3 benchmarks when training on public datasets,
and even surpass models trained on large-scale industrial
datasets by using an order of magnitude less data. Our best
model achieves 22.6% word error rate on the LRS2 dataset,
a performance unprecedented for lip reading models, significantly reducing the performance gap between lip reading and automatic speech recognition. Moreover, on the
AVA-ActiveSpeaker benchmark, our VSD model surpasses
all visual-only baselines and even outperforms several recent audio-visual methods.

1. Introduction
Lip reading, or visual speech recognition, is the task of
recognising speech from silent video. It has many practical
applications which include improving speech recognition in
noisy environments, enabling silent dictation, or dubbing
and transcribing archival silent films [25]. It also has important medical applications, such as helping speech impaired
individuals, e.g. people suffering from Lou Gehrig’s disease
speak [54], or enabling people with aphonia (loss of voice)
to communicate just by using lip movements.
Lip reading and audio-based automatic speech recog-

nition (ASR) both have the common goal of transcribing
speech, however, they differ regarding the input: while in
ASR the input signal is an audio waveform, in essence, a
one-dimensional time series, lip reading has to deal with
high-dimensional video inputs that have both temporal and
spatial complexity. This makes training large end-to-end
models harder due to GPU memory and computation constraints. Furthermore, understanding speech from visual information alone is challenging due to the inherent ambiguities present in the visual stream, i.e. the existence of homophemes where different characters that are visually indistinguishable (e.g. ‘pa’, ‘ba’, and ‘ma’). That lip reading
is a much harder task is also supported by the fact that although humans can understand speech reasonably well even
in the presence of noise and across a variety of accents, they
perform relatively poorly on lip reading [7, 16].
Designing a lip reading model requires both a visual
component – mouth movements need to be identified – as
well as a temporal sequence modelling component, which
typically involves learning a language model that can resolve ambiguities in individual lip shapes. Recent developments in deep learning models and the availability of largescale annotated datasets has led to breakthroughs surpassing
human performance [16]. However, most of these works
have taken the approach of adapting techniques used for
ASR and machine translation, without catering to the particularities of the vision problem.
The conjecture in this paper is that the performance of
lip reading, in terms of both accuracy and data efficiency,
can be improved if the model is designed from the start taking into account the peculiarities of the visual, rather than
the audio domain. To this end, we consider both the visual
encoding and the text tokenisation.
Visual encoding. Our first contribution is the design of a
novel visual backbone for lip reading. The spatiotemporal
complexity in lip reading requires dealing with problems
such as tracking the mouth in moving talking heads. This is
usually achieved with complicated pre-processing pipelines
based on facial landmarks. However, those are sub-optimal
in many cases. For example, landmarks don’t work well in

5162

