Towards Principled Disentanglement for Domain Generalization
Hanlin Zhang1,* Yi-Fan Zhang2,* Weiyang Liu3,4 Adrian Weller3,5 Bernhard Schölkopf4 Eric P. Xing1,6
1

4

Carnegie Mellon University 2 Chinese Academy of Science 3 University of Cambridge
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen 5 Alan Turing Institute 6 MBZUAI * Equal Contribution

1. Introduction
Learning representations that can reflect intrinsic class
semantics and also render strong invariance to cross-domain
variation is of great significance to robustness and generalization in deep learning. Despite being empirically effective
on many visual recognition benchmarks [65], modern neural networks are still prone to learning shortcuts that stem
from spurious correlations [24], resulting in poor out-ofdistribution (OOD) generalization. To tackle this challenge,
domain generalization (DG) has emerged as an increasingly
important task where the goal is to learn invariant representations over source domains that are generalizable to
distributions different from those seen during training [55].
In order to improve OOD generalization, efforts have
Code repository: https://github.com/hlzhang109/DDG

...

Variation Encoder

v1

Generator

vn
v
...

Semantic Encoder

s1

sn

s

Diversify variation

A fundamental challenge for machine learning models
is generalizing to out-of-distribution (OOD) data, in part
due to spurious correlations. To tackle this challenge, we
first formalize the OOD generalization problem as constrained optimization, called Disentanglement-constrained
Domain Generalization (DDG). We relax this non-trivial
constrained optimization problem to a tractable form with
finite-dimensional parameterization and empirical approximation. Then a theoretical analysis of the extent to which the
above transformations deviates from the original problem is
provided. Based on the transformation, we propose a primaldual algorithm for joint representation disentanglement and
domain generalization. In contrast to traditional approaches
based on domain adversarial training and domain labels,
DDG jointly learns semantic and variation encoders for
disentanglement, enabling flexible manipulation and augmentation on training data. DDG aims to learn intrinsic
representations of semantic concepts that are invariant to
nuisance factors and generalizable across domains. Comprehensive experiments on popular benchmarks show that DDG
can achieve competitive OOD performance and uncover
interpretable salient structures within data.

Input with limited variation

Abstract

Minimize semantic gap

Figure 1. An illustration of DDG based on disentanglement of digit labels
(semantics) and rotated angles (variation across domains). DDG seeks to
minimize the semantic difference of the generated samples from the same
class while diversifying the variation across source domains.

been made from a diverse set of directions, such as domain
adaptation [5, 6, 23, 84], self-supervised learning [12, 29],
causal inference [56, 61, 67, 81], invariant risk regularization
[3, 42, 51], angular alignment regularization [18, 48, 49], distributionally robust optimization [7] and data augmentation
[4, 77, 82]. However, having no access to target domain data
poses great challenges. Two main lines of research seek to
address this. First, training domain labels are assumed to be
available in [3, 23, 47, 60, 66] such that the divergence to
different domains can be minimized. However, these domain
labels are often impractical or prohibitively expensive to
obtain [28]. Moreover, it is non-trivial to minimize domain
divergence with domain adversarial training which is notoriously hard to converge [63]. The second line of works tries
to model the cross-domain distribution shifts and capture the
semantic invariance [37, 62, 78]. However, it has been found
in [27] that this goal can be very difficult to achieve. What
makes the problem even more challenging is the inconsistency of the evaluation protocol. Surprisingly, [27] shows
that even the standard empirical risk minimization could
outperform many recently proposed models under certain
conditions. Motivated by these challenges, we aim to disentangle variations and semantics in a principled way, and then
verify the effectiveness of our method under a consistent
evaluation protocol [27].
A key desideratum for DG is to ensure the invariance of
learned representations to all possible inter-class variations.

8024

