Stable Long-Term Recurrent Video Super-Resolution
Benjamin Naoto Chiche 1,2 , Arnaud Woiselle 1 , Joana Frontera-Pons 2,3 , Jean-Luc Starck 2
1
2

Safran Electronics & Defense, F-91344 Massy, France

AIM, CEA, CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay, Université Paris Cité, F-91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France
3

DR2I, Institut Polytechnique des Sciences Avancées, F-94200 Ivry-sur-Seine, France

benjamin.chiche@safrangroup.com, arnaud.woiselle@safrangroup.com
joana.frontera-pons@cea.fr, https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2177-7794

Abstract
Recurrent models have gained popularity in deep learning (DL) based video super-resolution (VSR), due to their
increased computational efficiency, temporal receptive field
and temporal consistency compared to sliding-window
based models. However, when inferring on long video sequences presenting low motion (i.e. in which some parts of
the scene barely move), recurrent models diverge through
recurrent processing, generating high frequency artifacts.
To the best of our knowledge, no study about VSR pointed
out this instability problem, which can be critical for some
real-world applications. Video surveillance is a typical example where such artifacts would occur, as both the camera
and the scene stay static for a long time.
In this work, we expose instabilities of existing recurrent VSR networks on long sequences with low motion. We
demonstrate it on a new long sequence dataset Quasi-Static
Video Set, that we have created. Finally, we introduce a
new framework of recurrent VSR networks that is both stable and competitive, based on Lipschitz stability theory. We
propose a new recurrent VSR network, coined Middle Recurrent Video Super-Resolution (MRVSR), based on this
framework. We empirically show its competitive performance on long sequences with low motion.

1. Introduction
Video super-resolution (VSR) is an inverse problem that
extends single-image super-resolution (SISR). While SISR
aims to generate a high-resolution (HR) image from its lowresolution (LR) version, in VSR the goal is to reconstruct a
sequence of HR images from the sequence of their LR counterparts. The idea behind VSR, which makes it fundamentally different from SISR, is that the fusion of several LR
images produces an HR image. Therefore, VSR requires
to accumulate information over a number of LR frames as

(a) GT

(b) Bicubic

(c) RLSP

(d) MRVSR (Ours)

Figure 1. A comparison between a state-of-the-art recurrent VSR
network (RLSP) and our proposed network. The former generates
high frequency artifacts on long sequences with low motion. The
proposed network does not.

large as possible. Classical VSR methods based on the image sequence formation model, knowledge on motion and
iterative algorithms [2,12] could fill this requirement. However, these iterative algorithms are relatively slow and not
suitable for real-world applications. Moreover, they perform poorly when the image sequence formation model and
the assumptions on motion are too simplified.
VSR has recently benefited from DL methods [3,7–9,20,
26, 29] that can overcome some of the drawbacks of classical methods. Deep VSR networks can efficiently learn
complex spatio-temporal statistics from a training dataset
of natural videos, and once trained the reconstruction is
faster. There are broadly two classes of deep VSR methods.
The first one groups sliding-window based models. These
models [8, 9, 13, 26, 29] take a batch of multiple LR frames
as input to fuse them and reconstruct an HR frame. In most
cases, this batch contains 5 to 7 LR frames. Therefore, the
temporal receptive field—i.e. the number of LR frames that
are used in order to super-resolve a frame—is limited to 7.

837

