Beyond a Pre-Trained Object Detector:
Cross-Modal Textual and Visual Context for Image Captioning
Chia-Wen Kuo
Georgia Tech

Zsolt Kira
Georgia Tech

albert.cwkuo@gatech.edu

zkira@gatech.edu

Object-centric information
ü Man
ü Yellow tennis ball
ü Red tennis racquet
ü White shoes

Abstract
Significant progress has been made on visual captioning,
largely relying on pre-trained features and later fixed object
detectors that serve as rich inputs to auto-regressive models. A key limitation of such methods, however, is that the
output of the model is conditioned only on the object detector’s outputs. The assumption that such outputs can represent all necessary information is unrealistic, especially
when the detector is transferred across datasets. In this
work, we reason about the graphical model induced by
this assumption, and propose to add an auxiliary input to
represent missing information such as object relationships.
We specifically propose to mine attributes and relationships
from the Visual Genome dataset and condition the captioning model on them. Crucially, we propose (and show to
be important) the use of a multi-modal pre-trained model
(CLIP) to retrieve such contextual descriptions. Further,
object detector models are frozen and do not have sufficient
richness to allow the captioning model to properly ground
them. As a result, we propose to condition both the detector
and description outputs on the image, and show qualitatively and quantitatively that this can improve grounding.
We validate our method on image captioning, perform thorough analyses of each component and importance of the
pre-trained multi-modal model, and demonstrate significant
improvements over the current state of the art, specifically
+7.5% in CIDEr and +1.3% in BLEU-4 metrics.

1. Introduction
For vision-and-language (VL) tasks such as generating
textual descriptions of an image (image captioning) [1, 9,
24], it is crucial to encode the input image into a representation that contains relevant information for the downstream language task. Earlier works use an ImageNet pretrained model to encode the input image [24, 51], while recent works achieve much better performance by using objects detected by an object detector (e.g. Faster R-CNN [41]

Object predicates
✗ Man holding a racquet
✗ Man tossing a tennis ball
✗ Man wearing shoes
Image and scene level info
✗ Tennis court
✗ Outdoor
✗ Sunny weather

Figure 1. Most existing VL methods encode the input image by
a set of objects detected by a frozen pre-trained object detector.
This set of detected objects may be able to provide object-centric
information such as object classes, locations, and attributes, but
may fail to encode other information also crucial for the target VL
tasks such as object predicates and image/scene level information.

pre-trained on Visual Genome [27]) [1,25,39]. The detected
objects encode more fine-grained information from the input image such as object classes, locations, and attributes,
hence achieving substantially better performance.
Despite the success of encoding the input image with detected objects, the object detector is pre-trained on datasets
such as Visual Genome and kept frozen during the training
of the target VL task (on a different dataset). This leads
to two major issues as illustrated in Figure 1: (1) the detector may be good at encoding object-centric information
but not at many other kinds of information necessary for
the target VL task such as the relationship between objects
and image/scene level information; and (2) the conditional
relationship between the detected objects and the input image is not jointly optimized for the target VL task so that
features computed by the object detector cannot be refined
before sending into the VL model, potentially resulting in
poor features that are difficult to ground, for example.
For (1), most existing works follow prior works [1] to
pre-train the object detector on Visual Genome for object
17969

