Wnet: Audio-Guided Video Object Segmentation via Wavelet-Based
Cross-Modal Denoising Networks
Wenwen Pan1,† , Haonan Shi1,† , Zhou Zhao1,* , Jieming Zhu2 , Xiuqiang He2 , Zhigeng Pan3 , Lianli Gao4 ,
Jun Yu5 , Fei Wu1,6 , Qi Tian7 ,
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, 3 Hangzhou Normal University,
4
The University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, 5 Hangzhou Dianzi University,
6
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Study of Zhejiang University, 7 Huawei Cloud & AI
{wenwenpan, shihn, zhaozhou}@zju.edu.cn, jiemingzhu@ieee.org, hexiuqiang1@huawei.com,
zgpan@hznu.edu.cn, lianli.gao@uestc.edu.cn, yujun@hdu.edu.cn, wufei@cs.zju.edu.cn,
tian.qi1@huawei.com

a green colored parrot is standing left with the group of parrots in the person hand

Abstract
Audio-Guided video object segmentation is a challenging problem in visual analysis and editing, which automatically separates foreground objects from the background in
a video sequence according to the referring audio expressions. However, existing referring video object segmentation works mainly focus on the guidance of text-based
referring expressions, due to the lack of modeling the semantic representations of audio-video interaction contents.
In this paper, we consider the problem of audio-guided
video semantic segmentation from the viewpoint of end-toend denoising encoder-decoder network learning. We propose the wavelet-based encoder network to learn the crossmodal representations of the video contents with audio-form
queries. Specifically, we adopt the multi-head cross-modal
attention layers to explore the potential relations of video
and query contents. A 2-dimension discrete wavelet transform is merged into the transformer encoder to decompose
the audio-video features. Next, we maximize mutual information between the encoded features and multi-modal features after cross-modal attention layers to enhance the audio guidance. Then, a self attention-free decoder network
is developed to generate the target masks with frequencydomain transforms. In addition, we construct the first largescale audio-guided video semantic segmentation dataset.
The extensive experiments show the effectiveness of our
method1 .

† Equal contribution.
* Corresponding Author.
1 Code is available at: https://github.com/asudahkzj/Wnet.git

(emphasis)

(emphasis)

(emphasis)

Segmentation Masks

Figure 1. The audio-guided video object segmentation task.

1. Introduction
Referring video object segmentation aims to segment
video objects referred by given language expressions, which
has attracted wide attention due to its applicability to many
practical problems including video analysis and video editing [33,35,49,50,61]. Currently, most referring video object
segmentation approaches mainly focus on the guidance of
text-guided referring expressions [18, 19, 31, 33, 35, 49, 61,
63], which can learn the multi-modal representation from
the interaction network layer, and then generate the object
masks to the given text references. The existing works have
achieved promising performance in text-based video object
segmentation, but they may still be ineffectively applied to
the audio-guided video object segmentation due to the lack
of modeling the semantic representation of audio-video interaction contents.
The audio-guided video analysis is a simulation of human cognition, comparing with the text-guided analysis
[44]. Humankind use speech exclusively long before the
invention of writing. People also learn and use language in
the real world, as to collaborate, describe and relate their visual environment, talk about each other, and so on. Furthermore, in the natural scene, audio interaction is more convenient and common than text interaction. Although audio

1320

