Improving Adversarially Robust Few-shot Image Classification with
Generalizable Representations
∗

Junhao Dong1 , Yuan Wang1 , Jianhuang Lai1,2,3 and Xiaohua Xie1,2,3
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University, China
2
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
{dongjh8, wangy975}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {stsljh, xiexiaoh6}@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Few-Shot Image Classification (FSIC) aims to recognize
novel image classes with limited data, which is significant
in practice. In this paper, we consider the FSIC problem
in the case of adversarial examples. This is an extremely
challenging issue because current deep learning methods
are still vulnerable when handling adversarial examples,
even with massive labeled training samples. For this problem, existing works focus on training a network in the metalearning fashion that depends on numerous sampled fewshot tasks. In comparison, we propose a simple but effective baseline through directly learning generalizable representations without tedious task sampling, which is robust to
unforeseen adversarial FSIC tasks. Specifically, we introduce an adversarial-aware mechanism to establish auxiliary supervision via feature-level differences between legitimate and adversarial examples. Furthermore, we design a
novel adversarial-reweighted training manner to alleviate
the imbalance among adversarial examples. The feature
purifier is also employed as post-processing for adversarial
features. Moreover, our method can obtain generalizable
representations to remain superior transferability, even facing cross-domain adversarial examples. Extensive experiments show that our method can significantly outperform
state-of-the-art adversarially robust FSIC methods on two
standard benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Current deep learning methods have made significant
progress on several computer vision tasks [8, 11, 12, 14, 21].
However, these methods often depend on a high computational budget and abundant data, which is costly to collect in
the real-world setting. To address this issue, few-shot learning aims at developing efficient learning algorithms with
∗ Corresponding Author

Legitimate

Adversarial

“Guitar”
79.3% confidence

Adversarial
Perturbation

Standard few-shot classifier

Legitimate few-shot features

“Lion”
90.1% confidence

Adversarially robust few-shot classifier

Adversarial features

Figure 1. The adversarial example can be obtained by adding a
nearly undetectable adversarial perturbation (magnified for visibility) to the legitimate example, which can cause a misclassification
with high confidence. Compared with the standard few-shot classifier, the adversarially robust classifier learns a robust decision
boundary to classify adversarial examples correctly.

limited data [5, 22, 25–27]. In practice, there also exists a
potential security threat to deep neural networks from adversarial examples [28]. Adversarial examples are some
tailored examples with almost no differences from natural
examples in human vision, but can strongly disturb the inference of neural networks [3,13]. Due to the scarce data for
building the robust decision boundary, current deep learning
methods even suffer more severe attacks from adversarial
examples in the few-shot setting [7].
The primary purpose of adversarially robust Few-Shot
Image Classification (FSIC) is to build models that perform
well in standard few-shot classification and are simultaneously robust against adversarial examples, as shown in Figure 1. Because of the limited data and the existence of adversarial examples, adversarially robust FSIC still remains
a challenging problem. Nevertheless, existing researches

9025

