Structured Sparse R-CNN for Direct Scene Graph Generation
Yao Teng
Limin Wang
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
tengyao19980325@gmail.com, lmwang@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

leg

short
on

Scene graph generation (SGG) is to detect object pairs
with their relations in an image. Existing SGG approaches
often use multi-stage pipelines to decompose this task into
object detection, relation graph construction, and dense
or dense-to-sparse relation prediction. Instead, from a
perspective on SGG as a direct set prediction, this paper
presents a simple, sparse, and unified framework, termed as
Structured Sparse R-CNN. The key to our method is a set
of learnable triplet queries and a structured triplet detector which could be jointly optimized from the training set
in an end-to-end manner. Specifically, the triplet queries
encode the general prior for object pairs with their relations, and provide an initial guess of scene graphs for subsequent refinement. The triplet detector presents a cascaded architecture to progressively refine the detected scene
graphs with the customized dynamic heads. In addition, to
relieve the training difficulty of our method, we propose a
relaxed and enhanced training strategy based on knowledge distillation from a Siamese Sparse R-CNN. We perform experiments on several datasets: Visual Genome and
Open Images V4/V6, and the results demonstrate that our
method achieves the state-of-the-art performance. In addition, we also perform in-depth ablation studies to provide insights on our structured modeling in triplet detector design and training strategies. The code and models
are made available at https://github.com/MCGNJU/Structured-Sparse-RCNN .

1. Introduction
Scene graph generation (SGG) [45] aims at detecting objects with their pairwise relations in an image. This structured representation could serve as an effective and compact representation for high-level visual understanding tasks
such as image captioning [47, 48] and visual question answering [2, 11, 32]. Structure information between visual
entities is the key to the success of many SGG methods.
: Corresponding author.

shirt

on

on on

logo
wearing
wearing
wearing
on woman
on
shoe

fence

pole

Figure 1. An example of scene graph generation. The scene graph
is relatively sparser than the fully connected graph.

To capture this structure information, most existing methods typically follows a multi-stage pipeline to decompose
this complex task into sub-tasks of object detection, fullyconnected relation graph construction, dense relation classification [37, 49, 52], or dense-to-sparse relation classification [46], as shown in Fig. 2. These well-established methods often rely heavily on object detection performance and
involve redundant computation for fully-connected relation
graph construction.
In addition to structure information, we observe that
sparsity is another important property on relation detection
in natural images. For example, in Fig. 1, the ground-truth
triplets of ⟨ leg, on, woman ⟩ and ⟨ logo, on, shirt ⟩ are more
commonly expressed than the relation between logo and leg.
Most existing dense or dense-to-sparse detection methods
for SGG fails to well capture the general sparse and semantic priors. Accordingly, inspired by the recent sparse object
detectors (e.g. DETR [3], Sparse R-CNN [34]), we present
a new perspective on SGG by treating it as a direct sparse
set prediction problem. However, unlike sparse object detection, sparse SGG is much more challenging due to its
inherent difficulty in object pairing and relation prediction.
In this paper, we propose a direct sparse scene graph
generation framework without explicit object detection and
relation graph construction for inference, coined as Structured Sparse R-CNN. As shown in Fig. 2c, the key to
our Structured Sparse R-CNN is a set of learnable triplet
queries and a structured triplet detector. These learnable
triplet queries, composed of two object boxes, two object
content vectors and one relation content vector, are responsible for capturing the general prior for sparse detection
and encoding the spatial and appearance information of objects and their relation. Based on the input of CNN fea-

19437

