Unsupervised Pre-training for Temporal Action Localization Tasks
Can Zhang1 * Tianyu Yang2 Junwu Weng2 Meng Cao1 Jue Wang2 Yuexian Zou1B
1
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University 2 Tencent AI Lab
mengcao@pku.edu.cn

arphid@gmail.com

Abstract
Unsupervised video representation learning has made
remarkable achievements in recent years. However, most
existing methods are designed and optimized for video classification. These pre-trained models can be sub-optimal
for temporal localization tasks due to the inherent discrepancy between video-level classification and clip-level localization. To bridge this gap, we make the first attempt to
propose a self-supervised pretext task, coined as Pseudo
Action Localization (PAL) to Unsupervisedly Pre-train feature encoders for Temporal Action Localization tasks (UPTAL). Specifically, we first randomly select temporal regions, each of which contains multiple clips, from one video
as pseudo actions and then paste them onto different temporal positions of the other two videos. The pretext task is
to align the features of pasted pseudo action regions from
two synthetic videos and maximize the agreement between
them. Compared to the existing unsupervised video representation learning approaches, our PAL adapts better to
downstream TAL tasks by introducing a temporal equivariant contrastive learning paradigm in a temporally dense
and scale-aware manner. Extensive experiments show that
PAL can utilize large-scale unlabeled video data to significantly boost the performance of existing TAL methods.
Our codes and models will be made publicly available at
https://github.com/zhang-can/UP-TAL.

1. Introduction
Model pre-training is an effective technique for training
deep networks in many computer vision tasks. The core
idea is to learn general representations on large-scale labeled or unlabeled data, and utilize the learned representations to improve the performance of downstream tasks with
limited data. This is especially beneficial for tasks that require enormous human effort to annotate data, such as temporal action localization (TAL).
Despite the prevailing use of ready-made feature extrac* Work done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab.

WE0001WU@e.ntu.edu.sg
zouyx@pku.edu.cn

34
32
30

Accuracy (%)

tianyu-yang@outlook.com

mAP@AVG (%)

zhangcan@pku.edu.cn

90

TAC
MoCo-v2
Ours

80
70

28
(a) Action Localization (TAL)

(b) Action Classification (TAC)

Figure 1. Comparison of Kinetics-400 pre-trained models by
fine-tuning on downstream TAL (ActivityNet v1.3) and TAC
(UCF101) datasets. ‘TAC’ means supervised TAC pre-training,
and we treat MoCo-v2 [16] with video input as our baseline.
Instance-level discrimination is not well-aligned with TAL, thus
unsupervised pre-training tailored for TAL is on demand.

tors [10, 48, 55] pre-trained on temporal action classification (TAC) in TAL, this pre-training strategy is sub-optimal
as the inherent discrepancy between TAC and TAL exists.
Without a doubt, this discrepancy impedes further performance improvement of TAL. Though some recent works
[1, 61, 62] attempt to tackle this issue, they still rely on
large-scale annotated video data. Recently, unsupervised
pre-training has attracted great attention due to its potentials
in exploiting large amounts of unlabeled data. Contrastive
learning [15, 16, 25, 29, 43] is one of the most popular directions that focus on instance discrimination, which pulls
instance-level positive pairs closer while repelling negative
ones apart in the embedding space. To fill the gap between
the upstream pre-training and the downstream tasks, recent
contrastive learning methods focus on specifically designing pretext tasks for various downstream image tasks, e.g.,
object detection [56,59,64], semantic segmentation [51,56],
etc. In contrast, the progress of unsupervised pre-training in
video domain is relatively lagging behind and most existing
methods [2,28,32,44,45,53] are still designed and evaluated
for classification tasks.
In this paper, we make the first attempt on unsupervised pre-training for TAL tasks. One possible way [45]
to achieve this is to directly extend the image contrastive
learning idea to the video domain, where a video is treated

14031

