SimT: Handling Open-set Noise for Domain Adaptive Semantic Segmentation
Xiaoqing Guo1
Jie Liu1
Tongliang Liu2
Yixuan Yuan1∗
1
2
City University of Hong Kong
University of Sydney
{xqguo.ee, jliu.ee}@my.cityu.edu.hk

tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
This paper studies a practical domain adaptive (DA) semantic segmentation problem where only pseudo-labeled
target data is accessible through a black-box model. Due
to the domain gap and label shift between two domains,
pseudo-labeled target data contains mixed closed-set and
open-set label noises. In this paper, we propose a simplex
noise transition matrix (SimT) to model the mixed noise
distributions in DA semantic segmentation and formulate
the problem as estimation of SimT. By exploiting computational geometry analysis and properties of segmentation, we
design three complementary regularizers, i.e. volume regularization, anchor guidance, convex guarantee, to approximate the true SimT. Specifically, volume regularization minimizes the volume of simplex formed by rows of the nonsquare SimT, which ensures outputs of segmentation model
to fit into the ground truth label distribution. To compensate for the lack of open-set knowledge, anchor guidance
and convex guarantee are devised to facilitate the modeling
of open-set noise distribution and enhance the discriminative feature learning among closed-set and open-set classes.
The estimated SimT is further utilized to correct noise issues in pseudo labels and promote the generalization ability of segmentation model on target domain data. Extensive
experimental results demonstrate that the proposed SimT
can be flexibly plugged into existing DA methods to boost
the performance. The source code is available at https:
//github.com/CityU-AIM-Group/SimT.

1. Introduction
DA semantic segmentation aims to adapt a segmentation
model for the target domain through transferring knowledge from a source domain [22]. Considering the inefficient transmission and privacy issues in source domain
knowledge, effective adaptation with only pseudo-labeled
target data obtained through a black-box model is practical in real-world deployments [19]. This paper mainly focuses on this realistic scenario, and the challenge of this DA

yxyuan.ee@cityu.edu.hk

semantic segmentation problem lies in noisy pseudo labels
generated for target domain data. To mitigate noisy adaptation, some methods leverage confidence score [13, 25, 50]
or uncertainty [17, 46] to select reliable pseudo labels. For
example, prior work [50] defines a threshold to eliminate
low-confidence pseudo-labeled pixels. However, simply
dropping confusing pixels with highly potential noise labels might lead to learn from a biased data distribution
[48]. In fact, confusing pixels are more prone to be mislabeled and critical for accurate predictions, hence need to
be carefully addressed. Instead of discarding unreliable
pseudo-labeled target data, other methods denoise pseudo
labels based on prototypes [42] or correct supervision signal
through noise transition matrix (NTM) [11]. Nevertheless,
these approaches heavily rely on the assumption of a shared
label set between two domains and only consider the closedset noisy pseudo labels. In real-world scenarios, the label
space of target domain may not be consistent with that of
source domain, and open-set class instances are commonly
encountered in target domain. Hence, enhancing the segmentation performance on target domain needs to carefully
address confusing pixels and open-set label noises.
With the aforementioned aims, we model the closedset and open-set noise distributions in target pseudo labels
through a SimT, which is a class-dependent and instanceindependent transition matrixa . Then the modeled noise
distribution is leveraged to rectify supervision signals (i.e.
loss) derived from noisy labels, thus all target samples are
fully utilized. Therefore, the problem of alleviating closedset and open-set noise issues can be treated as the problem of estimating SimT. To give an intuitive explanation of
SimT, we interpret SimT through a geometric analysis on a
toy example in Figure 1. In this toy example, SimT is defined as a matrix T ∈ [0, 1]5×3 , as illustrated in Figure 1
(a). Each row, i.e. T c,: , indicates the probability of label c
flipping to three classes, which can be regarded as a threedimensional point within the blue triangle of Figure 1 (b)
since coordinates of this point add up to 1. The first three
rows [T 1,: , T 2,: , T 3,: ] of SimT model closed-set noise dis-

∗ Yixuan Yuan is the corresponding author.

This work was supported by Hong Kong Research Grants Council
(RGC) General Research Fund 11211221(CityU 9043152).

a The complex instance-dependent label noise in real-world can be well
approximated by class-dependent label noise when the noise rate is low [4].

7032

