NODEO: A Neural Ordinary Differential Equation Based Optimization
Framework for Deformable Image Registration
Yifan Wu* Tom Z. Jiahao* Jiancong Wang Paul A. Yushkevich M. Ani Hsieh
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
{yfwu, zjh}@seas.upenn.edu

{jiancong.wang, pauly2}@pennmedicine.upenn.edu

mya@seas.upenn.edu

a

b

c

d

James C. Gee

e

gee@upenn.edu

f

g

h

i

j

J

I

J𝜓

|D𝜓|

𝜓
Figure 1. 2D image registration using our framework. The rows show (J) the moving images, (I) fixed images, (Jψ ) warped moving
images, (|Dψ |) Jacobian determinants of the transformation ψ, and visualization of ψ respectively. The columns (b)(d)(f)(h)(j) incorporate
a fixed boundary constraint, as indicated by the box with solid red line, while (a)(c)(e)(g)(i) do not (box with dotted red line).

Abstract
Deformable image registration (DIR), aiming to find spatial
correspondence between images, is one of the most critical
problems in the domain of medical image analysis. In this
paper, we present a novel, generic, and accurate diffeomorphic image registration framework that utilizes neural ordinary differential equations (NODEs). We model each voxel
as a moving particle and consider the set of all voxels in a
3D image as a high-dimensional dynamical system whose
trajectory determines the targeted deformation field. Our
method leverages deep neural networks for their expressive
power in modeling dynamical systems, and simultaneously
optimizes for a dynamical system between the image pairs
and the corresponding transformation. Our formulation al*Equal contribution.

lows various constraints to be imposed along the transformation to maintain desired regularities. Our experiment
results show that our method outperforms the benchmarks
under various metrics. Additionally, we demonstrate the
feasibility to expand our framework to register multiple image sets using a unified form of transformation,which could
possibly serve a wider range of applications.

1. Introduction
Deformable image registration (DIR) is a process for establishing spatial correspondences between images. The term
“deformable” points to the nonlinear and dense nature of the
required transformation. DIR has a broad range of applications including normalization of population studies, quantifying changes in longitudinal imaging, accounting for mo210804

