Few-shot Learning with Noisy Labels
Kevin J Liang1

Samrudhdhi B. Rangrej2 Vladan Petrovic1
1
Facebook AI Research 2 McGill University

Tal Hassner1

kevinjliang@fb.com

Abstract
Few-shot learning (FSL) methods typically assume clean
support sets with accurately labeled samples when training
on novel classes. This assumption can often be unrealistic:
support sets, no matter how small, can still include mislabeled samples. Robustness to label noise is therefore essential for FSL methods to be practical, but this problem
surprisingly remains largely unexplored. To address mislabeled samples in FSL settings, we make several technical
contributions. (1) We offer simple, yet effective, feature aggregation methods, improving the prototypes used by ProtoNet, a popular FSL technique. (2) We describe a novel
Transformer model for Noisy Few-Shot Learning (TraNFS).
TraNFS leverages a transformer’s attention mechanism to
weigh mislabeled versus correct samples. (3) Finally, we
extensively test these methods on noisy versions of MiniImageNet and TieredImageNet. Our results show that TraNFS
is on-par with leading FSL methods on clean support sets,
yet outperforms them, by far, in the presence of label noise.

1. Introduction
Modern few-shot learning (FSL) methods aim to learn
classifiers for novel classes from only a handful of examples. These methods, however, generally assume that the
few support set samples used for training were carefully selected to represent their class. Unfortunately, real-world settings rarely offer such guarantees. In fact, even carefully annotated and curated datasets often contain mislabeled samples [9, 33, 45, 53], due to automated weakly supervised annotation, ambiguity, or even human error.
Whereas there are plenty of methods designed for learning with noise in many-shot supervised settings [1, 19, 20,
25, 31, 51], noise in few-shot settings remains largely unexplored. This dearth is surprising considering the utility of
FSL methods in settings where human supervision cannot
easily be provided: e.g. in fully automated systems which
learn many novel classes [12,43,56,57], making human curation of the labels of every support set, unrealistic.
Fig. 1 shows the challenge of learning from few, possibly

Figure 1. Few-shot learning with mislabeled samples. A 5-shot,
5-way support set of MiniImageNet [48] images. Rows show support set samples of each novel class. Two samples in each row
were mislabeled by symmetric label flips (Sec. 6.1). Can you spot
which ones? See Supp. for answers and more examples.

mislabeled, examples. It presents a sample 5-shot, 5-way
support set from MiniImageNet [48]. Each row includes the
support set training images of one of the five classes. Two
of the samples in each row are mislabeled with symmetric label noise (Sec. 6.1). With so few examples, spotting
mislabeled images can be difficult, even for humans with
considerable prior knowledge, which FSL methods lack.
As we later demonstrate empirically, FSL methods are
especially vulnerable to such label noise. When training
from few samples, each sample represents a significant contribution to the final decision boundary. Thus, even a single noisy example can be destructive to the model’s accuracy. We illustrate this observation in Fig. 2, which reports
the performance of ProtoNet [40], a popular FSL method,
on MiniImageNet with noisy labels. ProtoNet averages the
convolutional features of each class’s support set into class
prototypes. Queries are then classified by the class of their
nearest neighbor prototype. Fig. 2 shows the effect of increasing the number of mislabeled samples, compared with
a model trained after mislabeled samples were removed

9089

