Camera-Conditioned Stable Feature Generation for Isolated Camera Supervised
Person Re-IDentification
Chao Wu1 , Wenhang Ge4 , Ancong Wu4 , Xiaobin Chang1,2,3 *
1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Sun Yat-sen University, China

2

Guangdong Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis and Processing, Guangzhou 510006, P.R.China

3

Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
4

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China

wuch76@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, gewh@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wuanc@mail.sysu.edu.cn, changxb3@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
To learn camera-view invariant features for person ReIDentification (Re-ID), the cross-camera image pairs of
each person play an important role. However, such crossview training samples could be unavailable under the ISolated Camera Supervised (ISCS) setting, e.g., a surveillance
system deployed across distant scenes. To handle this challenging problem, a new pipeline is introduced by synthesizing the cross-camera samples in the feature space for model
training. Specifically, the feature encoder and generator
are end-to-end optimized under a novel method, CameraConditioned Stable Feature Generation (CCSFG). Its joint
learning procedure raises concern on the stability of generative model training. Therefore, a new feature generator, σ-Regularized Conditional Variational Autoencoder (σReg. CVAE), is proposed with theoretical and experimental
analysis on its robustness. Extensive experiments on two
ISCS person Re-ID datasets demonstrate the superiority of
our CCSFG to the competitors. 1

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) aims to retrieve the
same person across different cameras in a surveillance network. Extracting the discriminative view-invariant features
of person images play a central role for the Re-ID task.
With the cross-camera images of each person available during training, existing methods have made great progress under different settings, e.g., the supervised [2, 38, 42, 50] and
the unsupervised [5, 21, 23, 40]. The importance of crosscamera samples for model training is also demonstrated.
However, such cross-camera person images are not guaranteed during training under some realistic scenarios. For
* indicates corresponding author.
1 https://github.com/ftd-Wuchao/CCSFG

ID 1

ID 1

ID 2

ID 2

(a) Conventional setting

(b) ISCS setting

Figure 1. Illustrations of the training samples under different
person Re-ID settings. The light-blue areas indicate the feature
space. Different shapes corresponding to identities. Different colors mean under different cameras. (a) Cross-camera person images
are available under the conventional settings. (b) No cross-camera
image pairs under the ISCS setting for model training.

example, a surveillance system is needed to re-identify a
person across distant scenes, e.g., different cities, and each
camera is isolated. It is too expensive to collect sufficient
cross-camera person images for model training. A more applicable solution is exploiting the large amount of cameraspecific images of different persons instead. As the crosscamera image pairs no longer exist during training, many
existing methods [17, 38, 50, 57] fail to obtain the ideal performance on such data. This challenging person Re-ID setting, called ISolated Camera Supervised (ISCS), is first proposed by [52] as Single-Camera-Training (SCT). The comparison between different settings is shown in Fig. 1.
To handle the challenging ISCS settings, existing methods [10, 52] explicitly align the feature distributions across
cameras with new losses and network architectures. In this

20238

