RSTT: Real-time Spatial Temporal Transformer for Space-Time Video
Super-Resolution
Zhicheng Geng1∗

Luming Liang2∗†

Tianyu Ding2

Ilya Zharkov2

1

2
University of Texas, Austin
Microsoft
zhichenggeng@utexas.edu, {lulian,tianyuding,zharkov}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Space-time video super-resolution (STVSR) is the task of
interpolating videos with both Low Frame Rate (LFR) and
Low Resolution (LR) to produce High-Frame-Rate (HFR)
and also High-Resolution (HR) counterparts. The existing
methods based on Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
succeed in achieving visually satisfied results while suffer from slow inference speed due to their heavy architectures. We propose to resolve this issue by using a spatialtemporal transformer that naturally incorporates the spatial and temporal super resolution modules into a single
model. Unlike CNN-based methods, we do not explicitly use separated building blocks for temporal interpolations and spatial super-resolutions; instead, we only use a
single end-to-end transformer architecture. Specifically, a
reusable dictionary is built by encoders based on the input LFR and LR frames, which is then utilized in the decoder part to synthesize the HFR and HR frames. Compared with the state-of-the-art TMNet [54], our network is
60% smaller (4.5M vs 12.3M parameters) and 80% faster
(26.2fps vs 14.3fps on 720 × 576 frames) without sacrificing much performance. The source code is available at
https://github.com/llmpass/RSTT.

1. Introduction
Space-time video super-resolution (STVSR) refers to the
task of simultaneously increasing spatial and temporal resolutions of low-frame-rate (LFR) and low-resolution (LR)
videos, which appears in a wide variety of multimedia applications such as video compression [36], video streaming [51], video conferencing [45] and so on. In the stage of
deployment, many of them have stringent requirements for
the computational efficiency, and only LFR and LR frames
can be transferred in real-time. STVSR becomes a natural
∗ Equal contribution. This work was done when Zhicheng Geng was
an intern at Applied Sciences Group, Microsoft. † Corresponding author,
llmpass@gmail.com.

Figure 1. Performance of RSTT on Vid4 dataset [21] using
small (S), medium (M) and large (L) architectures compared
to other baseline models. In the top, we plot FPS versus PSNR.
Note that 24 FPS is the standard cinematic frame rate [42]. In
the bottom, we plot the number of parameters (in millions) versus
PSNR. We omit the STARnet here since it is significantly larger
than others while performs the worst; see Table 1 for details.

remedy in this scenario for recovering the high-frame-rate
(HFR) and high-resolution (HR) videos. However, the performance of existing STVSR approaches are far from being
real-time, and a fast method without sacrificing much visual
quality is crucial for practical applications.

17441

