Fast Algorithm for Low-rank Tensor Completion in Delay-embedded Space
Ryuki Yamamoto∗ , Hidekata Hontani∗ , Akira Imakura† , and Tatsuya Yokota∗,⋆
∗
Nagoya Institute of Technology, Aichi, Japan,
r.yamamoto.496@stn.nitech.ac.jp, {hontani, t.yokota}@nitech.ac.jp
⋆
†

RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Tokyo, Japan
University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan, imakura@cs.tsukuba.ac.jp

Abstract
Tensor completion using multiway delay-embedding
transform (MDT) (or Hankelization) suffers from the large
memory requirement and high computational cost in spite
of its high potentiality for the image modeling. Recent studies have shown high completion performance with a relatively small window size, but experiments with large window
sizes require huge amount of memory and cannot be easily
calculated. In this study, we address this serious computational issue, and propose its fast and efficient algorithm.
Key techniques of the proposed method are based on two
properties: (1) the signal after MDT can be diagonalized
by Fourier transform, (2) an inverse MDT can be represented as a convolutional form. To use the properties, we
modify MDT-Tucker [26], a method using Tucker decomposition with MDT, and introducing the fast and efficient
algorithm. Our experiments show more than 100 times acceleration while maintaining high accuracy, and to realize
the computation with large window size.

1. Introduction
Tensor/matrix completion using a Multiway Delayembedding Transform (MDT) (or multiway Hankelization)
has become a very important framework in recent years
[12,16–19,21,22,25,26,28]. The MDT constructs a Hankel
(structured) tensor from an original tensor, and it is known
that the Hankel tensor has low-rank structure in many cases
such as images and videos [3, 9]. Then, various low-rank
tensor completion methods [1, 6, 8, 10, 11, 20, 30] can be directly applied into the Hankel tensor, and return the completed tensor by inverse MDT of it (see Fig. 1).
Although tensor processing using MDT has been actively studied in recent years, there is a bottleneck of high
This work was supported in part by Japan Science and Technology
Agency (JST) ACT-I under Grant JPMJPR18UU, and in part by JSPS
KAKENHI under Grant 20H04208.

MDT-Tucker
Completed
tensor

Incomplete
tensor
(1) MDT

Proposed
Incomplete
tensor

(3) Inverse MDT

(2) Low-rank
tensor completion

Completed
tensor

Direct, fast, and efficient completion

Figure 1. Conceptual illustrations of MDT-Tucker [26] and the
proposed method. MDT-Tucker consists of three steps of MDT,
low-rank tensor completion, and inverse MDT. By contrast, the
proposed method directly obtains the completed tensor.
Table 1. Memory requirements (double precision) for a Hankel
structured tensor obtained by MDT with delay window size τ .
Input tensor size

τ =1

τ = 16

τ = 32

256
256 × 256
256 × 256 × 256

2.04KB
524KB
134MB

30.8KB
118MB
458GB

57.6MB
414MB
2.99TB

memory requirements and expensive computations. For example, Tab. 1 shows the memory requirements for MDT,
where τ is a delay window size. In a rough calculation, the
number of entries will be τ N times that of the original in
case of an N -th order tensor. In a case of MDT-Tucker [26]
(Tucker decomposition (TKD) with MDT), many iterations
of singular value decomposition (SVD) in alternating least
squares (ALS) algorithm are applied to such a huge tensor,
and it is highly expensive for large τ .
In this study, we address this issue, and propose a fast
alternative method for MDT-Tucker. First, we focus on the
redundant circulant structure of Hankel tensor. There are
prior studies on fast processing of Hankel matrices/tensors
[4, 13, 14, 24], and these results are very useful. The key
ideas in these studies are the Fourier diagonalization of
a circulant matrix and the fast convolutional operation in
Fourier space, and we also use these results in our study.

2058

