IntentVizor: Towards Generic Query Guided Interactive Video Summarization
Guande Wu *

Jianzhe Lin *
Claudio T. Silva
New York University
{guandewu, jianzhelin, csilva}@nyu.edu

Abstract
"Table"

The target of automatic video summarization is to create a short skim of the original long video while preserving the major content/events. There is a growing interest
in the integration of user queries into video summarization
or query-driven video summarization. This video summarization method predicts a concise synopsis of the original
video based on the user query, which is commonly represented by the input text. However, two inherent problems
exist in this query-driven way. First, the text query might
not be enough to describe the exact and diverse needs of
the user. Second, the user cannot edit once the summaries
are produced, while we assume the needs of the user should
be subtle and need to be adjusted interactively. To solve
these two problems, we propose IntentVizor, an interactive
video summarization framework guided by generic multimodality queries. The input query that describes the user’s
needs are not limited to text but also the video snippets. We
further represent these multi-modality finer-grained queries
as user ‘intent’, which is interpretable, interactable, editable, and can better quantify the user’s needs. In this paper, we use a set of the proposed intents to represent the
user query and design a new interactive visual analytic interface. Users can interactively control and adjust these
mixed-initiative intents to obtain a more satisfying summary
through the interface. Also, to improve the summarization quality via video understanding, a novel GranularityScalable Ego-Graph Convolutional Networks (GSE-GCN)
is proposed. We conduct our experiments on two benchmark
datasets. Comparisons with the state-of-the-art methods
verify the effectiveness of the proposed framework. Code
and dataset are available at https://github.com/
jnzs1836/intent-vizor.

1. Introduction
With the online explosive video content, an increasing need has been identified for automatic video summa* equal contribution

Textual

Intent
Module

Visual

Intent

#1
#2
#3

Interaction
Summary
Module
Summary

a

b

Figure 1. Illustration of our IntentVizor framework. We take query
“Table” as an example. Generic queries, including text/video snippets related to “Table” are inputs of the model. The intent module
transforms these queries into a probability distribution over the
basis intents, followed by the summary module, which generates a
video summary by combing the basis intents and their probability
values. As the user can find the underlying visual semantic meaning of each basis intents (e.g., in the figure, basis intent #1: the
dining table; #2: the working table), they can adjust the distribution of these basis intents through our proposed interface (Fig. 4)
to satisfy their needs, and the final generated summaries can be
updated accordingly/iteratively.

rization in recent years. Traditional video summarization methods usually generate concise/representative summary that contains the entities and events with high priority from the video and with low repetition and redundancy using unsupervised [5, 15, 16, 20, 25, 38, 45], supervised [7, 26, 27, 44, 47, 48, 51] and reinforcement learning
ways [2, 49]. However, such a summary cannot satisfy the
needs of users and be of low practical value. As the elongated video, especially when captured in the realistic scenario, may cover a wide range of topics, only fractional
content of specific topics will meet the user’s needs. Based

10503

