FisherMatch: Semi-Supervised Rotation Regression via Entropy-based Filtering
Yingda Yin

Yingcheng Cai
He Wang†
Peking University

Abstract
Estimating the 3DoF rotation from a single RGB image is an important yet challenging problem. Recent works
achieve good performance relying on a large amount of
expensive-to-obtain labeled data. To reduce the amount
of supervision, we for the first time propose a general
framework, FisherMatch, for semi-supervised rotation regression, without assuming any domain-specific knowledge
or paired data. Inspired by the popular semi-supervised
approach, FixMatch, we propose to leverage pseudo label filtering to facilitate the information flow from labeled
data to unlabeled data in a teacher-student mutual learning framework. However, incorporating the pseudo label
filtering mechanism into semi-supervised rotation regression is highly non-trivial, mainly due to the lack of a reliable confidence measure for rotation prediction. In this
work, we propose to leverage matrix Fisher distribution to
build a probabilistic model of rotation and devise a matrix
Fisher-based regressor for jointly predicting rotation along
with its prediction uncertainty. We then propose to use the
entropy of the predicted distribution as a confidence measure, which enables us to perform pseudo label filtering
for rotation regression. For supervising such distributionlike pseudo labels, we further investigate the problem of
how to enforce loss between two matrix Fisher distributions. Our extensive experiments show that our method can
work well even under very low labeled data ratios on different benchmarks, achieving significant and consistent performance improvement over supervised learning and other
semi-supervised learning baselines. Our project page is at
https://yd-yin.github.io/FisherMatch.

1. Introduction
Incorporating deep neural networks to perform rotation
regression is exerting an ever-important influence in computer vision, graphics and robotics. This is now one of the
key technology in enabling a multitude of applications such
as camera relocalization and visual odometry [6, 11], ob† He Wang and Baoquan Chen are the corresponding authors ({hewang,
baoquan}@pku.edu.cn).

Baoquan Chen†

ject pose estimation and tracking [41, 44], and 6DoF robot
grasping [5, 15]. One of the major obstacles to improving rotation regression is expensive rotation annotations.
Though many large-scale image datasets have been curated
with sufficient semantic annotations, obtaining a large-scale
real dataset with rotation annotations can be extremely laborious, expensive and error-prone [43]. With the amount
of labeled data being the bottleneck, there is a demand for
methods that can leverage unlabeled data.
Regarding training models with fewer labels, semisupervised learning (SSL) has been a powerful approach,
mitigating the requirement for labeled data by providing a
means of leveraging unlabeled data and thus attracting more
and more attention.
Recent years have witnessed many processes in semisupervised classification [4, 12, 20, 36, 37], semi-supervised
object detection [25, 40], and semi-supervised human and
hand pose estimation [17, 32]. However, only few works
address semi-supervised rotation regression, with most of
them leveraging domain-specific knowledge, e.g., temporal smoothness of object pose [24] and strong assumptions,
e.g., paired images from different viewpoints [27].
The underlying reason for little work in this field is that
rotation regression is very unique and challenging. First, it
is undesirable to turn the rotation regression into a classification problem. Given that 3D rotation space is continuous,
discretizing the space into a small number of bins will lead
to limited accuracy, which is intolerable for many applications involving rotation estimation. Also, rotation regression is even not a standard regression problem. Given that
rotation space SO(3) is a non-Euclidean manifold [51], a
general regression algorithm needs to be tailored, taking the
nonlinear structure of the rotation space into account. This
further makes semi-supervised rotation regression a more
challenging and less studied topic.
In this work, for the first time, we propose a general
framework, namely FisherMatch, for semi-supervised rotation regression. The problem we tackle is very general: using a neural network to regress rotation from a single RGB
image. Inspired by a popular semi-supervised learning approach, FixMatch [36], initially developed for classification
tasks, we attempt to process rotation regression problems in

11164

