Cross Modal Retrieval with Querybank Normalisation
Simion-Vlad Bogolin1,2,*
Hailin Jin3
Yang Liu1,4,†
1

Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford
4

2

Ioana Croitoru1,2,*
Samuel Albanie1,5,†
5

Wangxuan Inst. of Computer Technology, Peking University

Abstract

fl

1. Introduction
As the improving price-performance of hardware underpinning sensors, storage and networking continues to enable the expansion of humanity’s digital archives, the capacity to efficiently search data takes on greater commercial and scientific importance. An appealing way to search
such data is via natural language queries, in which the user
describes the target of their search exactly as they would to
another human, rather than employing specialised database
languages such as Structured Query Language (SQL).
Towards this goal, a rich body of research literature has

Adobe Research

Department of Engineering, University Cambridge

The Hubness Problem

Profiting from large-scale training datasets, advances
in neural architecture design and efficient inference, joint
embeddings have become the dominant approach for tackling cross-modal retrieval. In this work we first show
that, despite their effectiveness, state-of-the-art joint embeddings suffer significantly from the longstanding “hubness problem” in which a small number of gallery embeddings form the nearest neighbours of many queries. Drawing inspiration from the NLP literature, we formulate a
simple but effective framework called Querybank Normalisation (QB-N ORM) that re-normalises query similarities
to account for hubs in the embedding space. QB-N ORM
improves retrieval performance without requiring retraining. Differently from prior work, we show that QB-N ORM
works effectively without concurrent access to any test set
queries. Within the QB-N ORM framework, we also propose a novel similarity normalisation method, the Dynamic
Inverted Softmax, that is significantly more robust than existing approaches. We showcase QB-N ORM across a range
of cross modal retrieval models and benchmarks where it
consistently enhances strong baselines beyond the state of
the art. Code is available at https://vladbogo.
github.io/QB-Norm/.

* Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors.

3

Inst. of Mathematics of the Romanian Academy

Queries
q1

Gallery
x1

q2

Hub
x2

Cosine
Similarities

Problem: Gallery sample x2 (a "hub") has
high similarity to both queries. Note: edge
width denotes similarity strength.

Retrieval Results
Query
Query

q1 retrieves x2

q2 retrieves x2

Querybank Normalisation
Queries
q1

Gallery
x1

q2

Hub
x2
QB-Norm
Similarities

b1
b2
Querybank

Solution: Reduce the
in uence of the hub with
QB-Norm similarities.

Retrieval Results
Query
Query

q1 retrieves x1

q2 retrieves x2

Figure 1. Left: The hubness problem. We consider the problem of cross modal retrieval in which queries q1 and q2 are compared against a gallery of samples, x1 and x2 . As we show in
Sec. 3.2, the high-dimensional joint embeddings employed by
modern methods for cross-modal retrieval suffer from the “hubness problem” [80]. A hub (e.g. x2 ) is the nearest neighbour to
multiple queries (q1 and q2 ), producing poor quality retrieval results (bottom left). Right: Querybank Normalisation employs a
querybank to normalise similarities, reducing the similarity of hub
x2 to query q1 , improving the retrieval results (bottom right).

studied the problem of cross modal retrieval, the task of
searching a gallery of samples in one modality given a query
in another. In particular, there has been significant progress
in recent years for systems that can efficiently search images [90], audio [74] and videos [103] with natural language
queries by employing cross modal embeddings.
The dominant cross modal embedding paradigm employs deep neural networks that project modality-specific
samples into a high-dimensional, real-valued vector space
in which they can be directly compared via an appropriate
distance metric. A key challenge for such methods, intrinsic to such high-dimensional spaces, is the emergence of
“hubs” [80]—embedding vectors that appear amongst the
nearest neighbour sets of disproportionately many other embedding vectors (Fig. 1, left). To illustrate this challenge,

5194

