Towards Robust Rain Removal Against Adversarial Attacks: A Comprehensive
Benchmark Analysis and Beyond
Yap-Peng Tan1
Alex C. Kot1
Yi Yu1,2
Wenhan Yang1 *
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
2
ROSE Lab, Interdisciplinary Graduate Programme, Nanyang Technological University
1

yuyi0010@e.ntu.edu.sg

{wenhan.yang,eyptan,eackot}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Rain removal aims to remove rain streaks from images/videos and reduce the disruptive effects caused by
rain. It not only enhances image/video visibility but also
allows many computer vision algorithms to function properly. This paper makes the first attempt to conduct a comprehensive study on the robustness of deep learning-based
rain removal methods against adversarial attacks. Our
study shows that, when the image/video is highly degraded,
rain removal methods are more vulnerable to the adversarial attacks as small distortions/perturbations become less
noticeable or detectable. In this paper, we first present a
comprehensive empirical evaluation of various methods at
different levels of attacks and with various losses/targets
to generate the perturbations from the perspective of human perception and machine analysis tasks. A systematic evaluation of key modules in existing methods is performed in terms of their robustness against adversarial attacks. From the insights of our analysis, we construct a
more robust deraining method by integrating these effective modules. Finally, we examine various types of adversarial attacks that are specific to deraining problems and
their effects on both human and machine vision tasks, including 1) rain region attacks, adding perturbations only
in the rain regions to make the perturbations in the attacked rain images less visible; 2) object-sensitive attacks,
adding perturbations only in regions near the given objects.
Code is available at https://github.com/yuyisd/Robust_Rain_Removal.

1. Introduction
Rain removal methods aim to remove the disruptive effects caused by rain streaks to restore a clean version of
the image. It not only largely improves the visibility of the
rainy image but can also improve the performance of many
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Left is from corresponding patch of clean input/output,
and right is from adversarial input/output with perturbation bound
ϵ = 4/255. The semantic segmentation overlap of output is shown
in the last column. The testing image is from RainCityscape [13].

subsequent (downstream) computer vision applications.
Early approaches are mainly model-driven and address
the deraining problem based on the statistical properties of
rain streaks and background scenes, e.g. image decomposition [17], sparse coding [27], and Gaussian mixture
model [26]. These methods can well handle light rain.
However, they fall short in cases of handle heavy rain and
often blur the background scenes. Recently, deep-learning
based deraining methods [9, 41] have become the mainstream. These methods have the capacity to model more
complicated mappings from rain images to clean images
and offer a better performance in terms of less remaining
rain streaks and better preserved background scene. They
also enhanced the performance of practical applications
such as video surveillance.
While many deep learning-based deraining methods
have been introduced, it isn’t a thorough study on the robustness of these methods against adversarial attacks. It
is also a real concern of deraining methods that some unnoticeable perturbations can alter the predicted results of
deep networks [12, 31]. As the rainy images can be usually highly degraded by intensive rain streaks, perturbations
can be easily and noticeably hidden in such images. These
adversarially generated outputs can also compromise the reliability and stability of the subsequent applications such as
video surveillance and autonomous driving, that adopt rain
removal methods as a pre-processing module.

6013

