3D-VField: Adversarial Augmentation of Point Clouds
for Domain Generalization in 3D Object Detection
Alexander Lehner∗,◦,1,2 Stefano Gasperini∗,1,2 Alvaro Marcos-Ramiro2 Michael Schmidt2
Mohammad-Ali Nikouei Mahani2 Nassir Navab1,3 Benjamin Busam1 Federico Tombari1,4
1

Technical University of Munich

2

BMW Group

3

Johns Hopkins University

4

Google

Abstract
As 3D object detection on point clouds relies on the geometrical relationships between the points, non-standard
object shapes can hinder a method’s detection capability.
However, in safety-critical settings, robustness to out-ofdomain and long-tail samples is fundamental to circumvent
dangerous issues, such as the misdetection of damaged or
rare cars. In this work, we substantially improve the generalization of 3D object detectors to out-of-domain data by
deforming point clouds during training. We achieve this
with 3D-VField: a novel data augmentation method that
plausibly deforms objects via vector fields learned in an
adversarial fashion. Our approach constrains 3D points
to slide along their sensor view rays while neither adding
nor removing any of them. The obtained vectors are transferable, sample-independent and preserve shape and occlusions. Despite training only on a standard dataset, such as
KITTI, augmenting with our vector fields significantly improves the generalization to differently shaped objects and
scenes. Towards this end, we propose and share CrashD: a
synthetic dataset of realistic damaged and rare cars, with a
variety of crash scenarios. Extensive experiments on KITTI,
Waymo, our CrashD and SUN RGB-D show the generalizability of our techniques to out-of-domain data, different
models and sensors, namely LiDAR and ToF cameras, for
both indoor and outdoor scenes. Our CrashD dataset is
available at https://crashd-cars.github.io.

1. Introduction
With the established wide-spread progress of learningbased methods tackling a variety of perception tasks (e.g.,
∗ The authors contributed equally.
◦ Contact author: Alexander Lehner (alexander.lehner@tum.de).

Work partly sponsored by the German Federal Ministry for Economic
Affairs and Energy (grant 19A19005B), VDA KI-Absicherung project.

out-of-domain samples

baseline: PointPillars

3D-VField [ours]

Figure 1. Predictions of PointPillars [18] trained on KITTI [13],
without and with our adversarial augmentations on out-of-domain
samples from the proposed CrashD dataset. CrashD comprises
rare (top) and damaged (bottom) vehicles, resulting in natural adversarial examples [17]. As the models were applied to CrashD
without fine-tuning, due to the different object shapes, the standard PointPillars delivered two false negatives and a false positive.
Images used with courtesy of BeamNG GmbH.

object detection, semantic and panoptic segmentation), a recent trend denoted a focus shift towards ensuring the safe
applicability of these powerful approaches in critical scenarios, such as autonomous driving and robotics [27]. This
has led to the pursuit of improving the model robustness and
generalization [12,22,37], especially against out-of-domain
data, which can naturally occur in the real world [17]. Such
approaches include domain adaptation [39] and generalization [37], uncertainty estimation [11], simulations [4], and
adversarial alterations [35].
Since corner cases are difficult to be captured as they occur in a dynamic real-life scenario, current datasets include
only a limited amount of them, if any [5], leaving most of
these cases out-of-domain. However, taking care of corner cases is particularly important in safety-critical settings,
where long-tail and out-of-distribution samples could lead
to dangerous issues if not accounted for during training [5].
While several works have addressed some of these concerns on the imaging domain [4, 11, 16, 26], this is still

17295

