REX: Reasoning-aware and Grounded Explanation
Shi Chen
Qi Zhao
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Minnesota
{chen4595, qzhao}@umn.edu

Abstract

Comb

Reasoning Process:
Select (comb)

Effectiveness and interpretability are two essential properties for trustworthy AI systems. Most recent studies in
visual reasoning are dedicated to improving the accuracy
of predicted answers, and less attention is paid to explaining the rationales behind the decisions. As a result, they
commonly take advantage of spurious biases instead of actually reasoning on the visual-textual data, and have yet
developed the capability to explain their decision making
by considering key information from both modalities. This
paper aims to close the gap from three distinct perspectives: first, we define a new type of multi-modal explanations that explain the decisions by progressively traversing
the reasoning process and grounding keywords in the images. We develop a functional program to sequentially execute different reasoning steps and construct a new dataset
with 1,040,830 multi-modal explanations. Second, we identify the critical need to tightly couple important components across the visual and textual modalities for explaining the decisions, and propose a novel explanation generation method that explicitly models the pairwise correspondence between words and regions of interest. It improves
the visual grounding capability by a considerable margin,
resulting in enhanced interpretability and reasoning performance. Finally, with our new data and method, we perform
extensive analyses to study the effectiveness of our explanation under different settings, including multi-task learning
and transfer learning. Our code and data are available at
https://github.com/szzexpoi/rex.

1. Introduction
One of the fundamental goals in artificial intelligence is
to develop intelligent systems that are able to reason and
explain with the complexity of real-world data to make decisions. While explaining decisions is an integral part of
human communication, understanding and reasoning, existing visual reasoning models typically answer questions
without explaining the rationales behind their answers. As a

Heart

Select (heart)

Common (comb, heart)

Explanation: Because both
Question: What is common to the
comb and the heart?
Answer: color.

and

are red.

Figure 1. Illustration of our explanation that is derived from the
reasoning process (with different reasoning steps color coded) and
explicitly grounds key objects in the image.

result, despite the significantly increased accuracy achieved
by powerful deep neural networks [2, 16, 21, 23, 26, 35], existing methods commonly take advantage of spurious data
biases [27] and it is difficult to understand if they make decisions by truly understanding the causal relationships between multi-modal inputs and the answers.
An important line of research to tackle the issues is to
improve the interpretability of visual reasoning models with
multi-modal explanations [7, 22, 28, 31, 39, 40, 43]. While
showing usefulness in highlighting important visual regions
and providing user-friendly textual descriptions, these approaches suffer from two major limitations: (1) Existing
explanations are typically defined in the forms of attention
maps or free-formed natural language. Attention maps capture the salient regions for generating the answers but fall
short of explaining how different regions contribute to the
decision-making process. On the other hand, unconstrained
textual explanations could be highly diverse and often inconsistent when explaining the same decision. Both of them
lack the capability to illustrate the reasoning process behind a decision. (2) The explanations of different modalities are loosely connected and modeled with separate processes [22, 31, 40]. This not only undermines the capability
of explaining models’ rationales with multiple modalities,
but can also result in contradictory explanations [40]. For

15586

