GRAM: Generative Radiance Manifolds for 3D-Aware Image Generation
Yu Deng*1,2 Jiaolong Yang2 Jianfeng Xiang∗3,2 Xin Tong2
1
Tsinghua University 2 Microsoft Research Asia 3 USTC
{t-yudeng,jiaoyan,v-jxiang,xtong}@microsoft.com

Figure 1. Image samples randomly generated by our method (256×256 resolution). Trained on unstructured image collections (FFHQ [25]
and Cats [67] in this figure), our method can generate view-controllable images that are of high quality (e.g., see the fine details) and strong
3D consistency (e.g., see the correct parallax when view changes). (Animations, more results and code can be found on the project page)

Abstract
3D-aware image generative modeling aims to generate
3D-consistent images with explicitly controllable camera
poses. Recent works have shown promising results by training neural radiance field (NeRF) generators on unstructured 2D images, but still cannot generate highly-realistic
images with fine details. A critical reason is that the high
memory and computation cost of volumetric representation
learning greatly restricts the number of point samples for
radiance integration during training. Deficient sampling
not only limits the expressive power of the generator to handle fine details but also impedes effective GAN training due
to the noise caused by unstable Monte Carlo sampling. We
propose a novel approach that regulates point sampling and
radiance field learning on 2D manifolds, embodied as a set
of learned implicit surfaces in the 3D volume. For each
viewing ray, we calculate ray-surface intersections and accumulate their radiance generated by the network. By training and rendering such radiance manifolds, our generator
can produce high quality images with realistic fine details
and strong visual 3D consistency. 1
* Work done when YD and JX were interns at MSRA.
1 Project page: https://yudeng.github.io/GRAM/

1. Introduction
Learning 3D-aware image generation with Generative
Adversarial Networks (GAN) [17] has attracted a surge of
attention in recent years [10–12,21,31,41,42,44,55]. Given
an unstructured 2D image collection, GANs are trained to
synthesize geometrically-consistent multiview imagery of
novel instances. In particular, methods [10, 21, 55] that
use the volumetric rendering paradigm [15, 24] to composite an output image have demonstrated impressive results
with more “strict” 3D consistency by virtue of an explicit,
physics-based rendering process.
Notwithstanding the promising results shown by these
methods, the image quality still lags far behind traditional
2D image synthesis, for which state-of-the-art GAN models [25, 26] can generate high-resolution and photorealistic images. One prominent hurdle is the high computation
and memory requirements for training a volumetric representation. Methods [10, 55] that use neural radiance field
(NeRF) [39] generators can greatly reduce the complexity
of voxel-based approaches [21], but the volume integrations
approximated by sampling points along viewing rays are
still costly for both training and inference.
This problem becomes even more pronounced in GAN

10673

