C2AM Loss: Chasing a Better Decision Boundary for Long-Tail Object Detection
Tong Wang1,2 , Yousong Zhu1 , Yingying Chen1 , Chaoyang Zhao1,4 , Bin Yu1,2 , Jinqiao Wang1,2,3 , Ming Tang1
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
4
Development Research Institute of Guangzhou Smart City, Guangzhou, China
{tong.wang,yousong.zhu,yingying.chen,chaoyang.zhao,bin.yu,jqwang,tangm}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Long-tail object detection suffers from poor performance
on tail categories. We reveal that the real culprit lies in the
extremely imbalanced distribution of the classifier’s weight
norm. For conventional softmax cross-entropy loss, such
imbalanced weight norm distribution yields ill conditioned
decision boundary for categories which have small weight
norms. To get rid of this situation, we choose to maximize the cosine similarity between the learned feature and
the weight vector of target category rather than the innerproduct of them. The decision boundary between any two
categories is the angular bisector of their weight vectors.
Whereas, the absolutely equal decision boundary is suboptimal because it reduces the model’s sensitivity to various categories. Intuitively, categories with rich data diversity should occupy a larger area in the classification space
while categories with limited data diversity should occupy
a slightly small space. Hence, we devise a Category-Aware
Angular Margin Loss (C2AM Loss) to introduce an adaptive angular margin between any two categories. Specifically, the margin between two categories is proportional
to the ratio of their classifiers’ weight norms. As a result,
the decision boundary is slightly pushed towards the category which has a smaller weight norm. We conduct comprehensive experiments on LVIS dataset. C2AM Loss brings
4.9∼5.2 AP improvements on different detectors and backbones compared with baseline.

1. Introduction
Object detection is one of the most essential tasks in
computer vision [11, 16, 31, 32]. Modern object detectors [1, 3, 6, 12, 21, 22, 24, 31, 40, 44, 45] have achieved

(b)

(a)

(c)

Figure 1. (a) is the classifier’s weight norm distribution of a naive
Mask R-CNN model trained with LVIS v1.0 training split [13]. Xaxis is the sorted category index based on the category frequency.
Y-axis shows the weight norm; (b) shows the precisions AP m of
the first 100 categories. (c) shows the precisions of the last 100
categories.

promising results on challenging PASCAL VOC [9] and
COCO [23] datasets. Both of these two benchmarks are curated to keep the relative balance between categories. However, in real-world scenarios, data always obeys the Zipfian [29] distribution where a large number of tail categories
have few samples. Although current detectors perform well
on balanced datasets, they all suffer from severe performance degradation on tail classes when facing extremely
imbalanced datasets. Thus, long-tail object detection remains a major challenge for researchers.
A model that minimizes empirical risk on long-tail training datasets is seriously biased towards head categories
since they contribute most of the training data. To overcome
this issue, previous literatures typically adopt two types of
measures, namely, data re-sampling [8, 14, 27, 33] and loss
re-weighting [34, 35, 38, 39]. Data re-sampling pins hope

6980

