Few-shot Backdoor Defense Using Shapley Estimation
Jiyang Guan1,2 ,* Zhuozhuo Tu3∗ , Ran He1,2†, Dacheng Tao4,3
1
NLPR &CRIPAC, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
The University of Sydney, Australia
4
JD Explore Academy, China
guanjiyang2020@ia.ac.cn, zhtu3055@uni.sydney.edu.au,
rhe@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract
Deep neural networks have achieved impressive performance in a variety of tasks over the last decade, such as autonomous driving, face recognition, and medical diagnosis.
However, prior works show that deep neural networks are
easily manipulated into specific, attacker-decided behaviors
in the inference stage by backdoor attacks which inject malicious small hidden triggers into model training, raising
serious security threats. To determine the triggered neurons
and protect against backdoor attacks, we exploit Shapley
value and develop a new approach called Shapley Pruning (ShapPruning) that successfully mitigates backdoor attacks from models in a data-insufficient situation (1 image
per class or even free of data). Considering the interaction
between neurons, ShapPruning identifies the few infected
neurons (under 1% of all neurons) and manages to protect
the model’s structure and accuracy after pruning as many
infected neurons as possible. To accelerate ShapPruning,
we further propose discarding threshold and ϵ-greedy strategy to accelerate Shapley estimation, making it possible to
repair poisoned models with only several minutes. Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and robustness of our
method against various attacks and tasks compared to existing methods.

1. Introduction
Over the past years, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) play
a great role in machine learning and are applied in many
critical domains such as face recognition [39], image generation [11, 12], autonomous driving [7], and medical diagnosis [22, 45]. However, because of a lack of transparency
and interpretability [21, 27, 44], DNNs are easy to be ma* This work was done when he was research intern at JDEA
† Corresponding author

nipulated by an adversary into attacker-decided behaviors
and make serious mistakes in security-related areas, causing
serious threats and concerns. For example, it has been observed that adding deliberate and small distortion to the images in inference stage(i.e., adversarial examples) can cause
misclassification in neural network classifiers [15].
Backdoor attacks, on the other hand, are a different type
of attack, making use of opacity and overfitting of DNNs
to create a maliciously trained network which achieves
state-of-the-art performance on normal samples but behaves
badly on specific attacker-chosen inputs. Gu et al. [16]
demonstrates that, compared with adversarial examples,
backdoor attacks can cause wrong predictions in models
with much smaller distortion. Meanwhile, for black-box
models like DNNs, it is difficult to identify the backdoor,
and we can only use the test dataset to judge whether they
are poisoned. Thus, the backdoor attack is more imperceptible and dangerous [1,8]. Furthermore, as training on cloud
or directly using the third-party trained models becomes
more common today [47], backdoor attacks have more access to the models’ training procedure. Thus, it is much
easier for them to inject triggers into models in recent years.
The vulnerabilities to backdoor attacks raise concerns
about the security of DNNs [24], and many defense methods have been proposed, trying to mitigate backdoor from
the models e.g. Fine Pruning [25], Neural Cleanse [41],
GangSweep [48] etc. However, these methods need a relatively large amount of clean data (e.g. 10% of training data
required in Neural Cleanse), and can’t locate poisoned neurons accurately (e.g. pruning 70% of all neurons in Fine
Pruning). To determine the poisoned neurons and mitigate
backdoor, we introduce Shapley value and propose a ShapPruning framework to guide detecting the attacked neurons,
which successfully mitigates backdoor in the given models.
Shapley value is a concept from game theory and is used
to allocate worth to cooperative players [2, 13, 36]. We use
Shapley value to attribute the overall backdoor behavior to

13358

