GraftNet: Towards Domain Generalized Stereo Matching with a
Broad-Spectrum and Task-Oriented Feature
Biyang Liu 1,2 , Huimin Yu 1,2,3,4 , Guodong Qi 1,2
College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University
2
ZJU-League Research & Development Center, 3 State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
4
Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Information Processing, Communication and Networking
1

{biyangliu, yhm2005, guodong qi}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Although supervised deep stereo matching networks
have made impressive achievements, the poor generalization ability caused by the domain gap prevents them from
being applied to real-life scenarios. In this paper, we propose to leverage the feature of a model trained on largescale datasets to deal with the domain shift since it has
seen various styles of images. With the cosine similarity
based cost volume as a bridge, the feature will be grafted
to an ordinary cost aggregation module. Despite the broadspectrum representation, such a low-level feature contains
much general information which is not aimed at stereo
matching. To recover more task-specific information, the
grafted feature is further input into a shallow network to
be transformed before calculating the cost. Extensive experiments show that the model generalization ability can be
improved significantly with this broad-spectrum and taskoriented feature. Specifically, based on two well-known architectures PSMNet and GANet, our methods are superior
to other robust algorithms when transferring from SceneFlow to KITTI 2015, KITTI 2012, and Middlebury. Code is
available at https://github.com/SpadeLiu/Graft-PSMNet.

(a) Left Image
Error Rate = 12.0%

(c) Baseline Concat
Error Rate = 10.2%

(e) Baseline Cosine

(b) Ground Truth
Error Rate = 41.9%

(d) c with a BS feature
Error Rate = 3.1%

(f) e with a BS feature

Figure 1. The toy experiment to validate the grafting operation.
Two models with the cost volume formed by feature concatenation (Subfigure c) and cosine similarity (Subfigure e) are trained
on SceneFlow, then their feature extraction modules are replaced
with a Broad-Spectrum feature (Subfigure d and f). For the four
models, the 3-pixel error rates on a KITTI sample are labeled.

1. Introduction

life applications. Synthetic data [20] is sufficient while the
domain gap between the source and the target images prevents the models from generalizing well. There are three
solutions to this issue: the unsupervised image reconstruction loss [34, 35], domain adaptation techniques [18, 31],
and domain generalized approaches [2, 45]. In this paper,
we focus on the third situation which is more challenging
since the target images are not available during training.

As a low-cost means to acquire depth, stereo matching
has been studied as a fundamental problem in the vision society for decades. Given a rectified image pair, the objective
is to search for the corresponding points and calculate their
disparities. Stereo matching algorithms generally involve
four steps [27]: matching cost computation, cost aggregation, disparity optimization, and disparity refinement.
Although Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) based
supervised stereo matching methods have achieved admirable performances, huge amounts of annotated data are
required to train the models, which is cumbersome for real-

In domain generalized stereo matching, feature representation plays a crucial role [45] since the feature extraction
module directly confronts images from different domains.
Then a question is raised: can the goal be achieved by replacing the feature extraction module of an ordinary stereo
matching network (ordinary means it is trained with synthetic data) with a broad-spectrum feature (i.e. the feature
of a model trained on large-scale datasets)? Since this feature has seen various styles of images and learns to generalize well. In traditional algorithms, various feature descriptors [13] and cost aggregation methods [12, 42] could be

13012

