Physical Inertial Poser (PIP): Physics-aware Real-time Human Motion Tracking
from Sparse Inertial Sensors
Xinyu Yi1
Yuxiao Zhou1
Vladislav Golyanik2
1

School of Software and BNRist, Tsinghua University

Marc Habermann2
Christian Theobalt2
2

Soshi Shimada2
Feng Xu1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus

Abstract
Motion capture from sparse inertial sensors has shown
great potential compared to image-based approaches since
occlusions do not lead to a reduced tracking quality and the
recording space is not restricted to be within the viewing
frustum of the camera. However, capturing the motion and
global position only from a sparse set of inertial sensors is
inherently ambiguous and challenging. In consequence, recent state-of-the-art methods can barely handle very long
period motions, and unrealistic artifacts are common due
to the unawareness of physical constraints. To this end, we
present the first method which combines a neural kinematics estimator and a physics-aware motion optimizer to track
body motions with only 6 inertial sensors. The kinematics module first regresses the motion status as a reference,
and then the physics module refines the motion to satisfy
the physical constraints. Experiments demonstrate a clear
improvement over the state of the art in terms of capture
accuracy, temporal stability, and physical correctness.

1. Introduction
Capturing the motion of real humans is a long-standing
and challenging problem with many applications in computer vision and graphics, movie production, gaming, AR,
and VR. However, due to its articulated structure, capturing the highly complex and potentially fast movements of
the human body is challenging and many works have been
proposed in the past [4, 65, 68, 69, 73, 88].
One category of approaches are image-based where the
actor motion is recovered by analyzing the image data,
This work was supported by Beijing Natural Science Foundation
(JQ19015), the NSFC (No.61727808, 62021002), the National Key R&D
Program of China 2018YFA0704000. This work was supported by
THUIBCS, Tsinghua University and BLBCI, Beijing Municipal Education
Commission. This work was partially supported by the ERC consolidator
grant 4DReply (770784). We thank Notiom [31] for the extensive support
on inertial sensors, and Liuqing Yang, Liangdi Ma, Siyuan Teng, Wenbin
Lin for the help on live demos. Feng Xu is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. PIP captures physically correct human motion, joint
torques, and ground reaction forces solely from a sparse set
of six IMUs. Importantly, PIP runs at 60 frames per second with
only 16ms latency, which enables real-time applications.

which can be either multi-view imagery [4, 6, 58, 82], depth
images [71–73, 84], or a single RGB stream [5, 8, 14, 23, 25,
36, 80, 88]. From the setting, it becomes clear that occlusions (either object-actor or self occlusions) can lead to a
significantly reduced tracking quality. Besides, these methods are sensitive to the lighting and the appearance of the
actor as distinct features need to be extracted from images.
Moreover, many methods assume a static camera, resulting
in a limited space where the subject can be captured. These
drawbacks limit the usability of optical motion capture.
Recently, researchers start to explore alternative sensing devices such as inertial measurement units (IMUs).
Production-ready solutions [31, 67] can track the body motion accurately solely from inertial sensors. However, they
rely on special suits with densely placed sensors (usually 17
IMUs), which are difficult to wear. Besides, the large number of IMUs can hinder the actor’s movement. Having a
sparser set of IMUs on the body is clearly advantageous and
more flexible. However, recent sparse methods [18, 62, 69]
struggle with physical correctness and cannot disambiguate
poses with similar sensor measurements such as sitting and
standing; they are non-causal, i.e., need future information,

13167

