Deblurring via Stochastic Refinement
Jay Whang†∗

Mauricio Delbracio‡
Hossein Talebi‡
Chitwan Saharia‡
Alexandros G. Dimakis†
Peyman Milanfar‡
†
‡
University of Texas at Austin
Google Research
0.012

Image deblurring is an ill-posed problem with multiple
plausible solutions for a given input image. However, most
existing methods produce a deterministic estimate of the
clean image and are trained to minimize pixel-level distortion. These metrics are known to be poorly correlated
with human perception, and often lead to unrealistic reconstructions. We present an alternative framework for blind
deblurring based on conditional diffusion models. Unlike existing techniques, we train a stochastic sampler that refines
the output of a deterministic predictor and is capable of producing a diverse set of plausible reconstructions for a given
input. This leads to a significant improvement in perceptual
quality over existing state-of-the-art methods across multiple
standard benchmarks. Our predict-and-refine approach also
enables much more efficient sampling compared to typical
diffusion models. Combined with a carefully tuned network
architecture and inference procedure, our method is competitive in terms of distortion metrics such as PSNR. These
results show clear benefits of our diffusion-based method
for deblurring and challenge the widely used strategy of
producing a single, deterministic reconstruction.

1. Introduction
Image deblurring is a long-standing problem in computer
vision. Various conditions such as moving objects, camera
shakes, or an out-of-focus lens may contribute to blurring
artifacts. Single image deblurring is a highly ill-posed inverse problem where multiple plausible sharp images could
lead to the very same blurry observation. Nonetheless, most
existing methods produce a single deterministic estimate of
the clean image.
Traditional methods formulate deblurring as a variational
optimization problem and find a solution that satisfies closeness to certain image and/or blur kernel prior [9,18,28,38,58].
With the emergence of deep learning, convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) have become the de-facto standard for
∗ This work was done during an internship at Google Research.

Perceptual Quality (C KID)

Abstract

Proposed Method

0.010
0.008
0.006
0.004
0.002

MIMO-UNet

MIMO-UNet+

HINet
MPRNet

SAPHNet

31.6 31.8 32.0 32.2 32.4 32.6 32.8 33.0 33.2

Distortion (PSNR)

Input

MPRNet

HINet

Ours-SA

Ours

Reference

Figure 1. Top: Perception-Distortion (P-D) trade-off [5] of current
state-of-the-art deblurring methods (top). Our method sets a new
Pareto frontier in the P-D plot and allows us to traverse through the
P-D curve using a single model without retraining or finetuning.
Bottom: Samples from our method compared to other competitive
methods. We include two extremes from our model – one optimized
for perceptual quality (“Ours”) and one for distortion using Sample
Averaging (“Ours-SA”). These correspond to the two end points
of the P-D curve. For the ease of interpretation, we used negative
Kernel Inception Distance [4] (C − KID for a constant C)

deblurring models [14, 35, 40, 59, 63, 65, 66, 74]. Typically,
these CNNs are trained with simulated sharp-blurry image
pairs through supervised learning. Minimizing L1 or L2
pixel loss is perhaps the most widely adopted approach for
training such models. These losses provide a straightforward learning objective and optimize for the popular PSNR

16293

