An Empirical Study of Training End-to-End Vision-and-Language Transformers
Zi-Yi Dou1 ,* Yichong Xu2 , Zhe Gan2 , Jianfeng Wang2 , Shuohang Wang2 , Lijuan Wang2 ,
Chenguang Zhu2 , Pengchuan Zhang2 , Lu Yuan2 , Nanyun Peng1 , Zicheng Liu2 , Michael Zeng2
1
University of California, Los Angeles, 2 Microsoft Corporation
{zdou,violetpeng}@cs.ucla.edu
{yicxu,zhgan,jianfw,shuowa,lijuanw,chezhu,penzhan,luyuan,zliu,nzeng}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Vision-and-language (VL) pre-training has proven to be
highly effective on various VL downstream tasks. While
recent work has shown that fully transformer-based VL
models can be more efficient than previous region-featurebased methods, their performance on downstream tasks
often degrades significantly. In this paper, we present
M ETER, a Multimodal End-to-end TransformER framework, through which we investigate how to design and
pre-train a fully transformer-based VL model in an endto-end manner. Specifically, we dissect the model designs
along multiple dimensions: vision encoders (e.g., CLIPViT, Swin transformer), text encoders (e.g., RoBERTa, DeBERTa), multimodal fusion module (e.g., merged attention
vs. co-attention), architectural design (e.g., encoder-only
vs. encoder-decoder), and pre-training objectives (e.g.,
masked image modeling). We conduct comprehensive experiments and provide insights on how to train a performant VL transformer. M ETER achieves an accuracy of
77.64% on the VQAv2 test-std set using only 4M images for
pre-training, surpassing the state-of-the-art region-featurebased model by 1.04%, and outperforming the previous best
fully transformer-based model by 1.6%. Notably, when further scaled up, our best VQA model achieves an accuracy
of 80.54%. Code and pre-trained models are released at
https://github.com/zdou0830/METER.

1. Introduction
Vision-and-language (VL) tasks, such as visual question answering (VQA) [1] and image-text retrieval [27, 34],
require an AI system to comprehend both the input image and text contents. Vision-and-language pre-training
(VLP) has now become the de facto practice to tackle these
tasks [5, 24, 26, 32, 42, 44]. Specifically, large amounts of
image-caption pairs are fed into a model that consumes both
images and texts to pretrain representations that contain rich
* Work was done when the author interned at Microsoft.

CLIP-ViT, Swin,
BEiT, ....

Decoder
(optional)

Vision Encoder

Merged Attention/
Coattention
a man hitting a
tennis ball with
a racquet.

BERT, RoBERTa,
DeBERTa, ...
Text Encoder

Multimodal Fusion

Pretraining Objectives
Masked Language Modeling,
Image-Text Matching,
Masked Image Modeling,
...

METER

Figure 1. An overview of the proposed M ETER framework. We
systematically investigate how to train a performant vision-andlanguage transformer, and dissect the model designs along multiple dimensions: vision encoder, text encoder, multimodal fusion
module, architectural design (encoder-only vs. encoder-decoder),
and pre-training objectives.

multimodal knowledge and is helpful for downstream tasks.
Transformers [48] are prevalent in natural language processing and have recently shown promising performance
in computer vision [10, 30]. While almost all the existing
VLP models adopt transformers for their multimodal fusion
module, most of them [5, 24, 26, 32, 42, 44] use pre-trained
object detectors (e.g., Faster RCNN [38]) on the vision side
to extract region features from images. This can lead to
several problems: first, the object detectors are not perfect,
but are usually kept frozen during VLP, which limits the capacity of the VLP models; second, it is time-consuming to
extract region features [20]. On the other hand, vision transformers (ViTs) have been an increasingly active research
topic in computer vision and have shown great potential
in vision feature extraction. Therefore, a natural question
arises: can we train a fully transformer-based VLP model
with ViTs as the image encoder?
Recent works [20, 23, 53] that tried to adopt vision transformers have not shown satisfactory performance and typically underperform state-of-the-art region-feature-based
VLP models (e.g., VinVL [57]). To close the performance gap, we present M ETER, a Multimodal End-to-end
TransformER framework, through which we thoroughly investigate how to design and pre-train a fully transformer-

18166

