GAT-CADNet: Graph Attention Network
for Panoptic Symbol Spotting in CAD Drawings
Zhaohua Zheng1,2∗ , Jianfang Li2 *, Lingjie Zhu2 , Honghua Li2 ,
Frank Petzold1 , Ping Tan2,3†
1
Technical University of Munich, 2 Alibaba Group, 3 Simon Fraser University
{zhaohua.zheng,petzold}@tum.de,{wuhui.ljf}@alibaba-inc.com,
{lingjie.zhu.me, howard.hhli}@gmail.com, {pingtan}@sfu.ca

Abstract
Spotting graphical symbols from the computer-aided design (CAD) drawings is essential to many industrial applications. Different from raster images, CAD drawings are
vector graphics consisting of geometric primitives such as
segments, arcs, and circles. By treating each CAD drawing as a graph, we propose a novel graph attention network GAT-CADNet to solve the panoptic symbol spotting
problem: vertex features derived from the GAT branch are
mapped to semantic labels, while their attention scores are
cascaded and mapped to instance prediction. Our key contributions are three-fold: 1) the instance symbol spotting
task is formulated as a subgraph detection problem and
solved by predicting the adjacency matrix; 2) a relative
spatial encoding (RSE) module explicitly encodes the relative positional and geometric relation among vertices to
enhance the vertex attention; 3) a cascaded edge encoding (CEE) module extracts vertex attentions from multiple
stages of GAT and treats them as edge encoding to predict
the adjacency matrix. The proposed GAT-CADNet is intuitive yet effective and manages to solve the panoptic symbol spotting problem in one consolidated network. Extensive experiments and ablation studies on the public benchmark show that our graph-based approach surpasses existing state-of-the-art methods by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Computer-aided design (CAD) is the use of computers to
generate digital 2D or 3D illustrations of a product, aiding
the creation, modification, analysis, or optimization process
during designing and manufacturing. This technology has
been widely used in modern architecture, engineering and
construction (AEC) industries. The CAD drawings usu* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

(a) CAD drawing

(b) Panoptic symbol spotting

(c) Reconstructed BIM model

Figure 1. A patch of floor plan (a) and its panoptic symbol spotting
results (b), where line semantics are color coded and instances are
presented by translucent rectangles. The BIM model (c) with complete semantic and accurate geometry can be reconstructed from
such annotated floor plan. We only show 3D model of wall, windows and doors for the sake of clarity.

ally convey accurate geometry, rich semantic, and domainspecific knowledge of a product design, with basic geometric primitives, such as segments, arcs, circles, and ellipses,
as illustrated in Figs. 1a and 1b.
Spotting and recognizing symbols from the CAD drawings is the first step towards understanding its content,
which is crucial to many real-world industrial applications.
For example, building information modeling (BIM) has
growing demand in various architecture engineering ar-

11747

