Human-Aware Object Placement for Visual Environment Reconstruction
Hongwei Yi1 Chun-Hao P. Huang1 Dimitrios Tzionas1 Muhammed Kocabas1,2
Mohamed Hassan1 Siyu Tang2 Justus Thies1 Michael J. Black1
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 ETH Zürich
{firstname.lastname}@{tuebingen.mpg.de,inf.ethz.ch}

Figure 1. From a monocular video sequence, MOVER reconstructs a 3D scene that best affords humans interacting with it. Existing methods
for monocular 3D scene reconstruction ignore people and produce physically implausible scenes. MOVER takes as input: (1) several images
of human-scene interaction (HSI) from a static camera, (2) a rough estimate of 3D object shape and placement in 3D space [64], and (3)
estimated 3D human bodies interacting with the scene [45, 66]. Each frame contains valuable information about humans, objects, and the
proximal relationship between them. MOVER accumulates this information across frames, to optimize for a physically plausible 3D scene.
The final 3D scene is more accurate than the input and enables reasoning about human-scene contact.

Abstract
Humans are in constant contact with the world as they
move through it and interact with it. This contact is a vital source of information for understanding 3D humans,
3D scenes, and the interactions between them. In fact, we
demonstrate that these human-scene interactions (HSIs) can
be leveraged to improve the 3D reconstruction of a scene
from a monocular RGB video. Our key idea is that, as a
person moves through a scene and interacts with it, we accumulate HSIs across multiple input images, and use these
in optimizing the 3D scene to reconstruct a consistent, physically plausible, 3D scene layout. Our optimization-based
approach exploits three types of HSI constraints: (1) humans who move in a scene are occluded by, or occlude,
objects, thus constraining the depth ordering of the objects,
(2) humans move through free space and do not interpenetrate objects, (3) when humans and objects are in contact,
the contact surfaces occupy the same place in space. Using these constraints in an optimization formulation across
all observations, we significantly improve 3D scene layout
reconstruction. Furthermore, we show that our scene reconstruction can be used to refine the initial 3D human
pose and shape (HPS) estimation. We evaluate the 3D
scene layout reconstruction and HPS estimates qualitatively

and quantitatively using the PROX and PiGraphs datasets.
The code and data are available for research purposes at
https://mover.is.tue.mpg.de.

1. Introduction
Human behavior and the interaction of humans with their
environment are fundamentally about the 3D world. Hence,
3D reconstruction of both the human and scene can facilitate
behavior analysis. Where and how humans interact with a
scene can be used to predict future motions and interactions
for human-centered AI and robots, or to synthesize these for
AR/VR and other computer-graphics applications.
Tremendous progress has been made in reconstructing
3D human bodies [12, 37, 39, 44–46, 58, 66, 67, 79, 92, 93]
and 3D scenes [6, 17, 31, 64, 95] from monocular images
or videos, typically in isolation from each other. In real life,
though, humans always interact with scenes. Consequently,
humans (partially) occlude the scene, and the scene (partially) occludes humans. Strong human-scene occlusion can
cause problems for both scene and human reconstruction.
In contrast, recent work on human-scene interaction
(HSI), estimates humans and scenes together [10, 26, 87].

3959

