Leveraging Real Talking Faces via Self-Supervision for Robust Forgery Detection
Alexandros Haliassos1,†
1

Rodrigo Mira1

Stavros Petridis1,2
2

Imperial College London

Maja Pantic1,2

Meta AI

{alexandros.haliassos14,rs2517,stavros.petridis04,m.pantic}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
One of the most pressing challenges for the detection of
face-manipulated videos is generalising to forgery methods
not seen during training while remaining effective under
common corruptions such as compression. In this paper,
we examine whether we can tackle this issue by harnessing
videos of real talking faces, which contain rich information
on natural facial appearance and behaviour and are readily available in large quantities online. Our method, termed
RealForensics, consists of two stages. First, we exploit the
natural correspondence between the visual and auditory
modalities in real videos to learn, in a self-supervised crossmodal manner, temporally dense video representations that
capture factors such as facial movements, expression, and
identity. Second, we use these learned representations as
targets to be predicted by our forgery detector along with
the usual binary forgery classiﬁcation task; this encourages
it to base its real/fake decision on said factors. We show
that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on
cross-manipulation generalisation and robustness experiments, and examine the factors that contribute to its performance. Our results suggest that leveraging natural and
unlabelled videos is a promising direction for the development of more robust face forgery detectors.

1. Introduction
Automatic face manipulation methods can realistically
change someone’s appearance or expression without requiring substantial human expertise or effort [34, 57, 62, 67, 89].
This technology’s potential social harm has spurred considerable research efforts to detect forgery content [3, 22, 33,
41, 46, 47, 49, 58, 63, 76, 87, 106, 110, 112].
It is known that although deep learning-based detectors
can achieve high accuracy on in-distribution data, performance often plummets on videos generated using novel manipulation methods (i.e., not seen during training) [17, 32,
49, 63, 67, 100, 112].
† Corresponding author.

Stage 1
real
samples

video/audio

cross-modal selfsupervised learning

Stage 2
video
fake
samples

video

multi-task face
forgery detection

temporally
dense video
representations

target
prediction

forgery
detection

labels

Figure 1. Overview of our two-stage method. First, we learn
temporally dense video representations in a self-supervised way,
by exploiting the correspondence between the visual and auditory
modalities of real videos. Second, the network is presented with
real and fake data and is tasked with performing face forgery detection while simultaneously predicting, for the real videos, the
representations learned in stage 1. We use many more real than
fake samples, as the former are more easily acquired.

Various frame-based methods (i.e., that take a single frame as input) have been proposed to tackle crossmanipulation generalisation, including using data augmentation [100], truncating classiﬁers [17], using 3D decomposition [112], amplifying multi-band frequencies [74], and
targeting the blending boundary between the background
and the altered face [63]. Nevertheless, many still significantly underperform on novel forgery types or focus on
low-level cues which can easily be corrupted by common
perturbations like compression [49].
It is reasonable to believe that incorporating the temporal dimension can improve performance, especially since
many synthesis methods do not take into account temporal consistency during the generation process [89]. However, as with frame-based methods, naively training deep
networks on videos can lead to overﬁtting to the seen
forgeries [49, 92, 108]. To counteract this, LipForensics
[49] pre-trains on a large-scale lipreading dataset and then
freezes part of the network to prevent it from focusing on
low-level cues. It achieves strong performance in cross-

14950

