A Stitch in Time Saves Nine:
A Train-Time Regularizing Loss for Improved Neural Network Calibration
Ramya Hebbalaguppe1,2§ Jatin Prakash1§ Neelabh Madan1§ Chetan Arora1
1
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, India 2 TCS Research, India

Truck
69 %
Automobile 29 %
Airplane
0.8 %

Airplane 52 %
Bird
47 %
Frog
0.0 %

Truck
99 %
Automobile 0.0 %
Airplane
0.0 %

(a) GT: Bird

Input Image

TS Calibrated

Ours
1.0

Class: Cow

ܰ‫ܮܮ‬

Airplane 92 %
Bird
7.2 %
Frog
0.0 %

ܱ‫ݏݎݑ‬

https://github.com/mdca-loss

(b) GT: Truck

Person 99 %
Dog
0.2 %
Guitar 0.0 %

Guitar 45 %
Person 30 %
Dog
8.4 %

Class: Person

ܰ‫ܮܮ‬

Guitar 95 %
Person 2.0 %
Dog
1.2 %

ܱ‫ݏݎݑ‬

0.6

Person 99 %
Dog
0.1 %
Guitar 0.0 %

(c) GT: Person

0.8

(e) Class Activation Maps (CAMs)

0.2

0.0

ܱ‫ݏݎݑ‬

ܰ‫ܮܮ‬

(d) GT: Person

0.4

(f) Class-wise Reliability Diagrams

Figure 1. We present a new regularizing loss (MDCA) for train time calibration of Deep Neural Networks (DNN). Figures (a)-(d) shows
comparison with a model trained using Cross Entropy loss (NLL), and ours (FL + MDCA). In (a), a DNN trained using NLL makes an incorrect
but over-confident prediction. Whereas, training with MDCA reduces the confidence of the mis-predicted label, and increases confidence
of the second-highest confident, but correct label. In (b) for a CIFAR 10 minority class, “truck”, a model trained with MDCA confidently
predicts the correct label as compared to a NLL trained model. In (c) and (d), we show an image from in-domain and out-of-domain dataset.
In (c), picture is taken from “Photo” domain (in-domain) of the PACS [30] dataset on which we trained the DNN. Both the models trained
with our method as well as NLL predict high confidence score for the correct label. However, in (d), when we change the domain to “Art”
(out-of-domain), we see NLL trained model makes highly over-confident mistake on domain shift, whereas, MDCA regularized model remains
calibrated. In (e) we show the Class Activation Maps (CAMs) for a model calibrated with Temperature Scaling (TS), and ours for label
cow (top row), and person (bottom row). More accurate CAMs show that training with MDCA improves model explainability. (f) shows
class-wise reliability diagrams of models trained with NLL and our method. Latter leads to models which are calibrated for all classes.

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are known to make overconfident mistakes, which makes their use problematic in
safety-critical applications. State-of-the-art (SOTA) calibration techniques improve on the confidence of predicted labels
alone, and leave the confidence of non-max classes (e.g. top2, top-5) uncalibrated. Such calibration is not suitable for
§ Equal contribution

label refinement using post-processing. Further, most SOTA
techniques learn a few hyper-parameters post-hoc, leaving
out the scope for image, or pixel specific calibration. This
makes them unsuitable for calibration under domain shift,
or for dense prediction tasks like semantic segmentation. In
this paper, we argue for intervening at the train time itself,
so as to directly produce calibrated DNN models. We propose a novel auxiliary loss function: Multi-class Difference
in Confidence and Accuracy (MDCA), to achieve the same.

16081

