SpaceEdit: Learning a Unified Editing Space for
Open-Domain Image Color Editing
Jing Shi1

Ning Xu2 Haitian Zheng1 Alex Smith2 Jiebo Luo1
1
2
University of Rochester
Adobe Research
Multimodal Image Editing

Input

Exemplar Pair

Chenliang Xu1

Transferred

(c)

(a)

“Gloomy”

“Sunset”

“Aurora”

Input Pair

Retrieved

(d)

(b)

“White leaves”

“Blue leaves”

“Yellow leaves”

Cluster: Vignette

(e)

Figure 1. We propose a new image editing paradigm with a unified model that can handle various open-domain image editing tasks: (a)
multimodal image editing, (b) language-guided image editing, (c) examplar-based image editing, (d) editing style retrieval, (e) editing style
clustering. Images in (c)-(e) are visualized as half-before half-after edited.

Abstract
Recently, large pretrained models (e.g., BERT, StyleGAN, CLIP) show great knowledge transfer and generalization capability on various downstream tasks within their
domains. Inspired by these efforts, in this paper we propose
a unified model for open-domain image editing focusing on
color and tone adjustment of open-domain images while
keeping their original content and structure. Our model
learns a unified editing space that is more semantic, intuitive, and easy to manipulate than the operation space (e.g.,
contrast, brightness, color curve) used in many existing
photo editing softwares. Our model belongs to the imageto-image translation framework which consists of an image
encoder and decoder, and is trained on pairs of beforeand-after edited images to produce multimodal outputs. We
show that by inverting image pairs into latent codes of the

learned editing space, our model can be leveraged for various downstream editing tasks such as language-guided image editing, personalized editing, editing-style clustering,
retrieval, etc. We extensively study the unique
properties of
-0.41_d3e45fc7-4e78-4b86-a8f4-4d2070f775e6_proxy_before
the editing space in experiments and demonstrate superior
performance on the aforementioned tasks1 .

1. Introduction -0.38_060c42bc-fb20-4b45-a0b0-dd677c01bdb5_proxy_before
Image editing has shown wide spectrum of applications
in various scenarios including image retouching [12, 40],
style transfer [48, 49], language-guided image editing [18,
23, 26, 39], image harmonization [11], colorization [51],
etc. However, the current research landscape independently
studies these tasks on small and diverse datasets, underscoring the commonality of the image editing required for each
1 Code and supplementary material can be found at the project page
https://jshi31.github.io/SpaceEdit

19730

