Estimating Example Difficulty using Variance of Gradients
Chirag Agarwal
MDSR Lab, Adobe

Daniel D’souza
ML Collective

Sara Hooker
Google Research

chiragagarwall12@gmail.com

ddsouza@umich.edu

shooker@google.com

Abstract
In machine learning, a question of great interest is understanding what examples are challenging for a model to
classify. Identifying atypical examples ensures the safe deployment of models, isolates samples that require further
human inspection and provides interpretability into model
behavior. In this work, we propose Variance of Gradients
(VoG) as a valuable and efficient metric to rank data by
difficulty and to surface a tractable subset of the most challenging examples for human-in-the-loop auditing. We show
that data points with high VoG scores are far more difficult
for the model to learn and over-index on corrupted or memorized examples. Further, restricting the evaluation to the
test set instances with the lowest VoG improves the model’s
generalization performance. Finally, we show that VoG is a
valuable and efficient ranking for out-of-distribution detection.

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, machine learning models are
increasingly deployed to high-stake decision applications
such as healthcare [4, 20, 52, 70], self-driving cars [51]
and finance [53]. For gaining trust from stakeholders and
model practitioners, it is important for deep neural networks
(DNNs) to make decisions that are interpretable to both researchers and end-users. To this end, for sensitive domains,
there is an urgent need for auditing tools which are scalable
and help domain experts audit models.
Reasoning about model behavior is often easier when
presented with a subset of data points that are relatively
more difficult for a model to learn. Besides aiding interpretability through case-based reasoning [11, 30, 39], it can
also be used to surface a tractable subset of atypical examples for further human auditing [46, 73], for active learning
to inform model improvements, and to choose not to classify some instances when the model is uncertain [7, 14, 21].
One of the biggest bottlenecks for human auditing is the
large scale of modern datasets and the cost of annotating individual features [3, 38, 68]. Methods which automatically

surface a subset of relatively more challenging examples for
human inspection help prioritize limited human annotation
and auditing time. Despite the urgency of this use-case,
ranking examples by difficulty has had limited treatment in
the context of deep neural networks due to the computational cost of ranking a high dimensional feature space.
Present work. A popular interpretability tool is saliency
maps, where each of the features of the input data are scored
based on their contribution to the final output [64]. However, these explanations are typically for a single prediction and generated after the model is trained. Our goal is
to leverage these explanations to automatically surface a
subset of relatively more challenging examples for human
inspection to help prioritize limited human annotation and
auditing time. To this end, we propose a ranking method
across all examples that instead measures the per-example
change in explanations over training. Examples that are difficult for a model to learn will exhibit higher variance in
gradient updates throughout training. On the other hand, the
backpropagated gradients of the samples that are relatively
easier will exhibit lower variance because the loss from
these examples does not consistently dominate the model
training.
We term this class normalized ranking mechanism Variance of Gradients (VoG) and demonstrate that VoG is a
meaningful way for ranking data by difficulty and surfacing a tractable subset of the most challenging examples for
human-in-the-loop auditing across a variety of large-scale
datasets. VoG assigns higher scores to test set examples that
are more challenging for the model to classify and proves to
be an efficient tool for detecting out-of-distribution (OoD)
samples. VoG is model and domain-agnostic as all that is
required is the backpropagated gradients from the model.
Contributions. We demonstrate consistent results across
two architectures and three datasets – Cifar-10, Cifar-100
[43] and ImageNet [61]. Our contributions can be enumerated as follows:
1. We present Variance of Gradients (VoG) – a classnormalized gradient variance score for determining the
relative ease of learning data samples within a given

10368

