MSG-Transformer: Exchanging Local Spatial Information by
Manipulating Messenger Tokens
Jiemin Fang1,2 , Lingxi Xie3 , Xinggang Wang2†, Xiaopeng Zhang3 , Wenyu Liu2 , Qi Tian3
1
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Huazhong University of Science & Technology
2
School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science & Technology 3 Huawei Inc.
{jaminfong, xgwang, liuwy}@hust.edu.cn
{198808xc, zxphistory}@gmail.com

Abstract
Transformers have offered a new methodology of designing neural networks for visual recognition. Compared
to convolutional networks, Transformers enjoy the ability
of referring to global features at each stage, yet the attention module brings higher computational overhead that
obstructs the application of Transformers to process highresolution visual data. This paper aims to alleviate the
conflict between efficiency and flexibility, for which we propose a specialized token for each region that serves as a
messenger (MSG). Hence, by manipulating these MSG tokens, one can flexibly exchange visual information across
regions and the computational complexity is reduced. We
then integrate the MSG token into a multi-scale architecture named MSG-Transformer. In standard image classification and object detection, MSG-Transformer achieves
competitive performance and the inference on both GPU
and CPU is accelerated. Code is available at https:
//github.com/hustvl/MSG-Transformer.

1. Introduction
The past decade has witnessed the convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) dominating the computer vision community. As one of the most popular models in deep learning,
CNNs construct a hierarchical structure to learn visual features, and in each layer, local features are aggregated using
convolutions to produce features of the next layer. Though
simple and efficient, this mechanism obstructs the communication between features that are relatively distant from
each other. To offer such an ability, researchers propose to
replace convolutions by the Transformer, a module which
is first introduced in the field of natural language processing [50]. It is shown that Transformers have the potential to
† Corresponding author.

The work was done during Jiemin Fang’s internship at Huawei Inc.

tian.qi1@huawei.com

learn visual representations and achieve remarkable success
in a wide range of visual recognition problems including
image classification [13, 39], object detection [4], semantic
segmentation [61], etc.
The Transformer module works by using a token to formulate the feature at each spatial position. The features
are then fed into self-attention computation and each token, according to the vanilla design, can exchange information with all the others at every single layer. This design facilitates the visual information to exchange faster but
also increases the computational complexity, as the computational complexity grows quadratically with the number of
tokens – in comparison, the complexity of a regular convolution grows linearly. To reduce the computational costs,
researchers propose to compute attention in local windows
of the 2D visual features. However constructing local attention within overlapped regions enables communications
between different locations but causes inevitable memory
waste and computation cost; computing attention within
non-overlapped regions impedes information communications. As two typical local-attention vision Transformer
methods, HaloNet [49] partitions query features without
overlapping but overlaps key and value features by slightly
increasing the window boundary; Swin Transformer [31]
builds implicit connections between windows by alternatively changing the partition style in different layers, i.e.,
shifting the split windows. These methods achieve competitive performance compared to vanilla Transformers, but
HaloNet still wastes memories and introduces additional
cost in the key and value; Swin Transformer relies on frequent 1D-2D feature transitions, which increase the implementation difficulty and additional latency.
To alleviate the burden, this paper presents a new
methodology towards more efficient exchange of information. This is done by constructing a messenger (MSG) token in each local window. Each MSG token takes charge
of summarizing information in the corresponding window

12063

