SC2 -PCR: A Second Order Spatial Compatibility for Efficient and Robust
Point Cloud Registration
Zhi Chen1

Kun Sun2

Fan Yang1

Wenbing Tao1∗

1

National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Multi-spectral Information Processing,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
2
Hubei Key Laboratory of Intelligent Geo-Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, China University of Geosciences, China
{z chen, fanyang, wenbingtao}@hust.edu.cn; sunkun@cug.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we present a second order spatial compatibility (SC2 ) measure based method for efficient and robust
point cloud registration (PCR), called SC2 -PCR 1 . Firstly,
we propose a second order spatial compatibility (SC2 ) measure to compute the similarity between correspondences. It
considers the global compatibility instead of local consistency, allowing for more distinctive clustering between inliers and outliers at early stage. Based on this measure, our
registration pipeline employs a global spectral technique to
find some reliable seeds from the initial correspondences.
Then we design a two-stage strategy to expand each seed to
a consensus set based on the SC2 measure matrix. Finally,
we feed each consensus set to a weighted SVD algorithm
to generate a candidate rigid transformation and select the
best model as the final result. Our method can guarantee
to find a certain number of outlier-free consensus sets using fewer samplings, making the model estimation more efficient and robust. In addition, the proposed SC2 measure is
general and can be easily plugged into deep learning based
frameworks. Extensive experiments are carried out to investigate the performance of our method.

1. Introduction
The alignment of two 3D scans of the same scene, known
as Point Cloud Registration(PCR), plays an important role
in areas such as Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
(SLAM) [7, 24, 40], augmented reality [4, 11] and robotics applications [34]. A canonical solution first establishes
feature correspondences and then estimates the 3D rotation
∗ Corresponding author.
1 Code will be available
ZhiChen902/SC2-PCR.

at

https : / / github . com /

Figure 1. (a): A toy example in which red and green line segments
represent outliers and inliers, respectively. (b): The first order
compatibility matrix of (a). As highlighted by yellow, the outliers have very high compatibility scores with some inliers. (c): A
binarized compatibility matrix of (b) after thresholding. (d): The
proposed second order compatibility matrix of (a). By contrast,
the values in the rows and columns of the outliers are small.

and translation that can best align the shared parts. However, due to challenges such as partial overlap or feature
ambiguity, model estimation is prone to outliers in the correspondences, leading to inaccurate or wrong alignment.
RANSAC [25] pioneers the iterative sampling strategy
for model estimation. However, it needs more time to converge or sometimes there is no guarantee of an accurate solution due to massive outliers. Spatial Compatibility (SC)
[5, 35, 45, 57] is a widely used similarity measure for boosting the robustness and efficiency of the rigid transformation
estimation. It assumes that two correspondences will have
higher score if the difference of spatial distance between
′
′
them, e.g. |d12 − d12 | or |d16 − d16 | in Fig. 1(a), is minor.

13221

