Direct Voxel Grid Optimization:
Super-fast Convergence for Radiance Fields Reconstruction
Cheng Sun1,2

Min Sun1,3

Hwann-Tzong Chen1,4

chengsun@gapp.nthu.edu.tw

sunmin@ee.nthu.edu.tw

htchen@cs.nthu.edu.tw

Abstract
We present a super-fast convergence approach to reconstructing the per-scene radiance field from a set of images
that capture the scene with known poses. This task, which is
often applied to novel view synthesis, is recently revolutionized by Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) for its state-of-the-art
quality and flexibility. However, NeRF and its variants require a lengthy training time ranging from hours to days for
a single scene. In contrast, our approach achieves NeRFcomparable quality and converges rapidly from scratch in
less than 15 minutes with a single GPU. We adopt a representation consisting of a density voxel grid for scene geometry
and a feature voxel grid with a shallow network for complex view-dependent appearance. Modeling with explicit
and discretized volume representations is not new, but we
propose two simple yet non-trivial techniques that contribute
to fast convergence speed and high-quality output. First,
we introduce the post-activation interpolation on voxel density, which is capable of producing sharp surfaces in lower
grid resolution. Second, direct voxel density optimization
is prone to suboptimal geometry solutions, so we robustify
the optimization process by imposing several priors. Finally,
evaluation on five inward-facing benchmarks shows that our
method matches, if not surpasses, NeRF’s quality, yet it only
takes about 15 minutes to train from scratch for a new scene.
Code: https:// github.com/ sunset1995/ DirectVoxGO.

1. Introduction
Achieving free-viewpoint navigation of 3D objects or
scenes from only a set of calibrated images as input is a demanding task. For instance, it enables online product showcase to provide an immersive user experience comparing
to static image demonstration. Recently, Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRFs) [37] have emerged as powerful representations yielding state-of-the-art quality on this task.
1 National Tsing Hua University
2 ASUS AICS Department
3 Joint Research Center for AI Technology and All Vista Healthcare
4 Aeolus Robotics

23.64 PSNR.
32.72 PSNR.
34.22 PSNR.
Ours at 2.33 mins.
Ours at 5.07 mins.
Ours at 13.72 mins.
(a) The synthesized novel view by our method at three training checkpoints.

(b) The training curves of different methods on Lego scene. The training time of each
method is measured on our machine with a single NVIDIA RTX 2080 Ti GPU.

Figure 1. Super-fast convergence by our method. The key to
our speedup is to optimize the volume density modeled in a dense
voxel grid directly. Note that our method needs neither a conversion
step from any trained implicit model (e.g., NeRF) nor a crossscene pretraining, i.e., our voxel grid representation is directly and
efficiently trained from scratch for each scene.

Despite its effectiveness in representing scenes, NeRF is
known to be hampered by the need of lengthy training time
and the inefficiency in rendering new views. This makes
NeRF infeasible for many application scenarios. Several
follow-up methods [15, 18, 29, 30, 42, 43, 66] have shown significant speedup of FPS in testing phase, some of which even
achieve real-time rendering. However, only few methods
show training times speedup, and the improvements are not
comparable to ours [1, 10, 31] or lead to worse quality [6, 59].
On a single GPU machine, several hours of per scene optimization or a day of pretraining is typically required.
To reconstruct a volumetric scene representation from a
set of images, NeRF uses multilayer perceptron (MLP) to
implicitly learn the mapping from a queried 3D point (with
a viewing direction) to its colors and densities. The queried
properties along a camera ray can then be accumulated into a
pixel color by volume rendering techniques. Our work takes
inspiration from the recent success [15, 18, 66] that uses
classic voxel grid to explicitly store the scene properties,

5459

