How many Observations are Enough?
Knowledge Distillation for Trajectory Forecasting
Alessio Monti1
1

Angelo Porrello1
Lamberto Ballan2

Simone Calderara1
Rita Cucchiara1

University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Italy

Abstract
Accurate prediction of future human positions is an essential task for modern video-surveillance systems. Current
state-of-the-art models usually rely on a “history” of past
tracked locations (e.g., 3 to 5 seconds) to predict a plausible
sequence of future locations (e.g., up to the next 5 seconds).
We feel that this common schema neglects critical traits of
realistic applications: as the collection of input trajectories
involves machine perception (i.e., detection and tracking),
incorrect detection and fragmentation errors may accumulate in crowded scenes, leading to tracking drifts. On this
account, the model would be fed with corrupted and noisy
input data, thus fatally affecting its prediction performance.
In this regard, we focus on delivering accurate predictions when only few input observations are used, thus potentially lowering the risks associated with automatic perception. To this end, we conceive a novel distillation strategy
that allows a knowledge transfer from a teacher network to
a student one, the latter fed with fewer observations (just
two ones). We show that a properly defined teacher supervision allows a student network to perform comparably to
state-of-the-art approaches that demand more observations.
Besides, extensive experiments on common trajectory forecasting datasets highlight that our student network better
generalizes to unseen scenarios.

1. Introduction
Pedestrian trajectory forecasting deals with predicting
future paths through the exploitation of individual trajectory
information and mutual influence between pedestrians. This
task has several practical applications in advanced surveillance systems [24], behavioral analysis [32], intrusion detection [39], smart vehicles and autonomous systems [4,37].
While several recent works focused on novel deepnetwork architectures tailored for this task [14, 15, 20, 35,
49, 52], we believe the inference phase of a trajectory pre-

2

Pasquale Coscia2

University of Padova, Italy

dictor has not been thoroughly addressed and investigated
yet. Typically, data-driven models are trained and evaluated on large public datasets of tracked trajectories refined
with a human intervention to correct missed detections and
identity switches. However, this process is unfeasible at inference time: therefore, the input trajectories required to
condition the prediction have to be automatically extracted
by a tracking system.
In this regard, the widely adopted 8-12 protocol [1,15,20,
22,34,48,52] (i.e., 8 input time steps and 12 ones for prediction), which require data collected at 2.5 FPS, does not provide a large margin of correction for the above situations. In
real-time applications, a visual tracking system may provide
inaccurate observations for sequences of such length [12]:
occlusions, false detections and non-rigid shape deformations pose non-trivial issues.
To overcome the aforementioned limitations, one potential solution is to reduce the length of the input trajectories to the extent we can minimize the tracking associations errors. Based on this intuition, this work proposes
an approach based on Knowledge Distillation [18], which
recovers a reliable proxy of the same information obtained
with more input observations. We show that it allows for
an effective inference schema, requiring fewer samples than
the training one. We also demonstrate that properly conditioning a model on shorter input trajectories provides more
room to generalize across different experimental settings.
From a technical perspective, this work implements our
idea by deploying a teacher-student paradigm [18]: a student network is trained to mimic a teacher’s behaviour
using less input observations. Each network devises a
transformer-based architecture that accounts for both spatial and temporal interactions through an attention mechanism. To deal with a limited number of observations, we
propose a distillation procedure that acts on both encoder
and decoder stacks of the transformer architecture. Finally,
our objective function takes into account ground-truth data
and distillation losses to conveniently match teacher and
student internal representations.

6553

