MS-TCT: Multi-Scale Temporal ConvTransformer for Action Detection
Rui Dai1,2 ,

Srijan Das3 , Kumara Kahatapitiya3 ,
1
Inria 2 Université Côte d’Azur
1,2

Michael S. Ryoo3 , François Brémond1,2
Stony Brook University

3

{name.surname}@inria.fr

Abstract
Action detection is a significant and challenging task, especially in densely-labelled datasets of untrimmed videos.
Such data consist of complex temporal relations including
composite or co-occurring actions. To detect actions in
these complex settings, it is critical to capture both shortterm and long-term temporal information efficiently. To
this end, we propose a novel ‘ConvTransformer’ network
for action detection: MS-TCT1 . This network comprises
of three main components: (1) a Temporal Encoder module which explores global and local temporal relations at
multiple temporal resolutions, (2) a Temporal Scale Mixer
module which effectively fuses multi-scale features, creating a unified feature representation, and (3) a Classification
module which learns a center-relative position of each action instance in time, and predicts frame-level classification
scores. Our experimental results on multiple challenging
datasets such as Charades, TSU and MultiTHUMOS, validate the effectiveness of the proposed method, which outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on all three datasets.

1. Introduction
Action detection is a well-known problem in computer
vision, which is aimed towards finding precise temporal
boundaries among actions occurring in untrimmed videos.
It aligns well with real-world settings, because every minute
of a video is potentially filled with multiple actions to be detected and labelled. There are public datasets [10, 41, 51]
which provide dense annotations to tackle this problem,
having an action distribution similar to the real-world.
However, such data can be challenging, with multiple actions occurring concurrently over different time spans, and
having limited background information. Therefore, understanding both short-term and long-term temporal dependencies among actions is critical for making good predictions.
For instance, the action of ‘taking food’ (see Fig. 1) can
get context information from ‘opening fridge’ and ‘making
sandwich’, which correspond to the short-term and long1 Code/ Models: https://github.com/dairui01/MS-TCT

Figure 1. Complex temporal relations in untrimmed videos:
Here, we show a typical distribution of actions in a denselylabelled video, which consists of both long-term and short-term
dependencies among actions.

term action dependencies, respectively. Also, the occurrence of ‘putting something on the table’ and ‘making sandwich’ provide contextual information to detect the composite action ‘cooking’. This example shows the need for an
effective temporal modeling technique for detecting actions
in a densely-labelled videos.
Towards modeling temporal relations in untrimmed
videos, multiple previous methods [8, 9, 11, 12, 30, 38] use
1D temporal convolutions [30]. However, limited by their
kernel size, convolution-based methods can directly access
local information only, not learning direct relations between
temporally-distant segments in a video (here, we consider a
set of consecutive frames as a segment). Thus, such methods fail to model long-range interactions between segments
which may be important for action detection. With the success of Transformers [16, 34, 44, 56] in natural language
processing and more recently in computer vision, recent
methods [42, 43] have leveraged multi-head self-attention
(MHSA) to model long-term relations in videos for action detection. Such attention mechanisms can build direct one-to-one global relationships between each temporal
segment (i.e., temporal token) of a video to detect highlycorrelated and composite actions. However, existing methods rely on modeling such long-term relationships on input
frames themselves. Here, a temporal token covers only a
few frames, which is often too short w.r.t. to the duration

20041

