Spectral Unsupervised Domain Adaptation for Visual Recognition
Jingyi Zhang1,2, * Jiaxing Huang2,∗ Zichen Tian1 Shijian Lu1,2,†
1
S-lab 2 School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
{Jingyi.Zhang, Jiaxing.Huang, Zichen.Tian, Shijian.Lu}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Though unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) has
achieved very impressive progress recently, it remains a
great challenge due to missing target annotations and the
rich discrepancy between source and target distributions.
We propose Spectral UDA (SUDA), an effective and efficient
UDA technique that works in the spectral space and can
generalize across different visual recognition tasks. SUDA
addresses the UDA challenges from two perspectives. First,
it introduces a spectrum transformer (ST) that mitigates
inter-domain discrepancies by enhancing domain-invariant
spectra while suppressing domain-variant spectra of source
and target samples simultaneously. Second, it introduces
multi-view spectral learning that learns useful unsupervised
representations by maximizing mutual information among
multiple ST-generated spectral views of each target sample.
Extensive experiments show that SUDA achieves superior
accuracy consistently across different visual tasks in object
detection, semantic segmentation and image classification.
Additionally, SUDA also works with the transformer-based
network and achieves state-of-the-art performance on object detection.

1. Introduction
Deep learning techniques [29,44,71] have achieved great
success in various visual recognition tasks such as image
classification [29,44,71], image segmentation [3,10,51,63]
and object detection [8,20,21,50,60,61]. The great success
is at the price of large quantities of annotated training data
which are often prohibitively laborious and time-consuming
to collect [14, 15, 18, 49]. One alternative that could mitigate this constraint is to leverage the off-the-shelf labeled
data from one or multiple related source domains. However, the model trained with source-domain data often experiences clear performance drop while applied to a target
domain where the data often have discrepant distributions
as compared with the source-domain data [13, 68, 72].
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Image Decomposition
Source
Real-World
Image

Large
Inter-Domain
Discrepancy

Target
Clipart-Style
Image

(a)

Image Recomposition

Low
Frequency

Middle
Frequency

High
Frequency

Spectrum Transformer
Suppress Domain-Variant Contents
Enhance Domain-Invariant Contents

Domain-Variant
Color and Style

Domain-Invariant
Contour and Texture

(b)

Transformed
Source Image

Small
Inter-Domain
Discrepancy

Transformed
Target Image

(c)

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed spectrum transformer (ST):
For images of different domains with clear distribution discrepancies as shown in (a), ST converts them into frequency space
and decomposes the converted frequency signals into multiple frequency
components (FCs) in low, middle, and high frequency
Spectrum Transformation
bands as shown in (b). It learns to identify and enhance domaininvariant FCs andReal-World
suppress Low
domain-variant
FCsFrequency
which High
effectively
Frequency Middle
Frequency
Source Image
mitigates the inter-domain discrepancy as shown in (c). Note we
increase the image contrast for better visualizing (c).

Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) has been explored to mitigate
the discrepancy between source and tarClipart-Style
Color and Style
Contour and Texture
Target Image
get domains. One
typical approach is image-to-image translation with generative adversarial networks (GANs) which
aligns source and target data in the input space by modifying
source data to have similar styles as target data [40, 43, 48].
However, image-to-image translation needs to learn large
amounts of parameters which is usually computationally
intensive. In addition, it impairs the end-to-end feature
of UDA as it needs to train GANs first before applying
them for image translation [40, 43, 48]. Further, it could
degrade UDA by undesirably modifying domain-invariant
image structures that are closely entangled with domainvariant image styles in the spatial space [23, 89].
We propose Spectral UDA (SUDA) that tackles UDA
challenges by learning domain-invariant spectral features
efficiently and effectively. SUDA works from two per-

9829

