3DAC: Learning Attribute Compression for Point Clouds
Guangchi Fang1,2 , Qingyong Hu3 , Hanyun Wang4 , Yiling Xu5 , Yulan Guo1,2,6 *
1
Sun Yat-sen University, 2 The Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, 3 University of Oxford
4
Information Engineering University, 5 Shanghai Jiaotong University
6
National University of Defense Technology

Abstract
We study the problem of attribute compression for largescale unstructured 3D point clouds. Through an in-depth
exploration of the relationships between different encoding
steps and different attribute channels, we introduce a deep
compression network, termed 3DAC, to explicitly compress
the attributes of 3D point clouds and reduce storage usage in this paper. Specifically, the point cloud attributes
such as color and reflectance are firstly converted to transform coefficients. We then propose a deep entropy model
to model the probabilities of these coefficients by considering information hidden in attribute transforms and previous
encoded attributes. Finally, the estimated probabilities are
used to further compress these transform coefficients to a
final attributes bitstream. Extensive experiments conducted
on both indoor and outdoor large-scale open point cloud
datasets, including ScanNet and SemanticKITTI, demonstrated the superior compression rates and reconstruction
quality of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
As a common 3D data representation, point clouds have
been widely used in a variety of real applications such as
mixed reality [28], self-driving vehicles [16, 21], and highresolution mapping [20, 37]. Thanks to the remarkable
progress achieved in 3D acquisition, point clouds become
increasingly accessible. However, the storage and transmission of massive irregularly sampled points pose a new
challenge to existing compression techniques. In particular, along with the raw 3D coordinates of points, the compression of their attributes (e.g., color, reflectance) is also
non-trivial1 . In this regard, we will study effective attribute
compression for unstructured point clouds in this paper.
To achieve point cloud attribute compression, early
* Corresponding author: Yulan Guo (guoyulan@sysu.edu.cn).
1 For example, with the standard point cloud compression algorithm of

MPEG (i.e., G-PCC [39]), attribute compression takes up to 60% and 90%
of the overall bitstream for lossy and lossless compression, respectively.

Raw Point Cloud (Ground Truth)
BPP: 24

3D Auto-Encoder
BPP: 12.34 PSNR 𝑦𝑦 : 25.57

G-PCC
BPP: 11.91 PSNR 𝑦𝑦 : 51.77

Ours
BPP: 8.62 PSNR 𝑦𝑦 : 52.98

Figure 1. Qualitative point cloud attribute compression results of
3D auto-encoder, G-PCC, and our method on the ScanNet [10].
Bits Per Point (BPP) and Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR) of
the luminance component are reported. Note that, the raw point
clouds usually use uint8 RGB values (i.e., 8 × 3 = 24 BPP).

works [11,29,30,41,42,45,48,57] usually apply image processing techniques to 3D point clouds. In particular, early
methods usually follow a two-step framework, i.e., initial
coding of attributes and entropy coding of transform coefficients. A number of approaches focus on developing sophisticated initial coding algorithms, which convert point
cloud attributes to coefficients in a specific domain. However, entropy coding, which further losslessly encodes coefficients to a final bitstream, has been largely overlooked.
There are only a few entropy coders [18, 26, 39] have been
proposed for attribute compression in recent works. In
general, entropy coding is independently included in the
aforementioned attribute compression framework with initial coding. More specifically, these traditional hand-crafted
entropy coders take coefficients as a sequence of symbols
and estimate the probability distribution2 only considering
2 According to the information theory [40], a lower bound of bitrate
can be achieved by an entropy coder given the actual distribution of the
transmitted coefficients.

14819

