Enabling Equivariance for Arbitrary Lie Groups
Lachlan E. MacDonald,* Sameera Ramasinghe, Simon Lucey
Australian Institute for Machine Learning
University of Adelaide, Australia

Abstract
Although provably robust to translational perturbations,
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are known to suffer
from extreme performance degradation when presented at
test time with more general geometric transformations of
inputs. Recently, this limitation has motivated a shift in focus from CNNs to Capsule Networks (CapsNets). However,
CapsNets suffer from admitting relatively few theoretical
guarantees of invariance. We introduce a rigourous mathematical framework to permit invariance to any Lie group
of warps, exclusively using convolutions (over Lie groups),
without the need for capsules. Previous work on group convolutions has been hampered by strong assumptions about
the group, which precludes the application of such techniques to common warps in computer vision such as affine
and homographic. Our framework enables the implementation of group convolutions over any finite-dimensional
Lie group. We empirically validate our approach on the
benchmark affine-invariant classification task, where we
achieve ∼30% improvement in accuracy against conventional CNNs while outperforming most CapsNets. As further illustration of the generality of our framework, we train
a homography-convolutional model which achieves superior robustness on a homography-perturbed dataset, where
CapsNet results degrade.

1. Introduction
Symmetry (reversible, composable change) is ubiquitous
in the visual reality perceived by humans. It is therefore no
surprise that symmetry now occupies a fundamental and increasingly well-understood role in machine learning, particularly in computer vision [6, 5, 8, 33, 34, 31, 11, 22, 3, 32].
Invariance with respect to symmetries is particularly desirable in machine learning. Presently this is frequently
achieved by training models on large volumes of symmetryperturbed data. However, where there is a paucity of data or
a need for explainability, architectural approaches such as
* lachlan.macdonald@adelaide.edu.au

Figure 1: Domains of applicability of our framework and
existing convolutional frameworks.

CapsNets may be preferable [16, 29, 13].
CapsNets admit very few theoretical guarantees of invariance [19]. However they are not the only means of
achieving architectural invariance. Provable architectural
invariance to translational symmetries is already pervasive
in computer vision in the form of CNNs. The convolutions
implemented in modern CNNs are, by definition, sums over
responses between filter and feature, as the filter is translated across different positions. Crucially, these operations
are equivariant in the sense that translating the input feature and then convolving is the same as first convolving and
then translating the response. Carefully designed downsampling operations [37] turn this equivariance into invariance,
so that translation of the input signal does not change the response. The respect of CNNs for the spatial locality inherent in natural images, together with their equi/in-variance,
constitute the inductive biases that have seen CNNs become
the industry standard in many computer vision tasks.
More recently still, in the seminal paper by Cohen et.
al. [6], it was observed that the translational convolutions
of CNNs could be replaced by more general group convolutions that have for decades played an important role in
mathematics, particularly in operator theory and noncommutative geometry [9, 17]. Given a group G of warps, a
G-convolution is a sum over warps belonging to G of responses between a warped filter and feature; when G is the
group of translations, one recovers ordinary convolution as
18183

