UniCoRN: A Uniﬁed Conditional Image Repainting Network
Jimeng Sun#1
1
2

Shuchen Weng#2

Zheng Chang1

Si Li∗1

Boxin Shi2,3,4

School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3

Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Peking University
4

Beijing Academy of Artiﬁcial Intelligence

{sjm,zhengchang98,lisi}@bupt.edu.cn, {shuchenweng,shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

Unified CIR

1. Introduction
Advanced image editing is desired in various applications such as colorizing old photos [8, 19, 42, 43], repairing damaged regions [23, 35, 37, 38], blending multiple images [25, 34, 41], and so on. With rapid progress in improving generative networks, skill barriers of using image editing tools have been lowered. For example, users can transform any photo into the style of a “famous painter” simply
by providing one of his own works [14].
To “free” the users from requiring professional skills
while maintaining the “freedom” to realize their ideas
for editing an image, conditional image repainting (CIR)
# Equal contributions. * Corresponding author.

Repainted

Color

UniCoRN

‫̱ܰݖ‬ሺͲǡͳሻ

Texture

Geometry Background

Ours

Compositing phase

Repainted
Generation phase

Geometry

Background
Color

Input conditions

Two-phase CIR

Texture

Conditional image repainting (CIR) is an advanced image editing task, which requires the model to generate visual content in user-speciﬁed regions conditioned on multiple cross-modality constraints, and composite the visual
content with the provided background seamlessly. Existing
methods based on two-phase architecture design assume
dependency between phases and cause color-image incongruity. To solve these problems, we propose a novel Uniﬁed
Conditional image Repainting Network (UniCoRN). We
break the two-phase assumption in the CIR task by constructing the interaction and dependency relationship between background and other conditions. We further introduce the hierarchical structure into cross-modality similarity model to capture feature patterns at different levels and
bridge the gap between visual content and color condition.
A new L ANDSCAPE -CIR dataset is collected and annotated
to expand the application scenarios of the CIR task. Experiments show that UniCoRN achieves higher synthetic quality, better condition consistency, and more realistic compositing effect.

Input conditions
hair: brown
skin:
white and orange
upper: white
coat: black
skirt: yellow
shoes: black

Original

(a)

(b)

(c)

MISC

Figure 1. Illustration of the CIR task. Given an original image and
input conditions, the model needs to repaint the user-speciﬁed regions (geometry) to synthesize a new appearance, and composite
it with the input background regions seamlessly. The bottom row
visualizes the pipeline of a representative two-phase CIR method
called “MISC” [33], where (a), (b), and (c) are the output of the
generation phase, visualization of meaningless background with
purple mask, and the input of the compositing model, respectively.
Compared with the two-phase CIR repainted result (highlighted in
pink), our uniﬁed CIR repainted result (highlighted in blue) improves the appearance of the repainted image in synthetic quality,
condition consistency, and compositing effect.

[32, 33] has been proposed. For the CIR task, “repainting” means some regions of an existing image are repainted
with new visual content, and “conditional” means such new
visual content is generated from cross-modality input conditions which consist of texture (random noise), color (attribute or language), geometry (segmentation mask), and
background (RGB image). An example of the CIR task is
shown in the top row of Fig. 1.
Existing CIR methods [32,33] are implemented in a two-

11369

