360-Attack: Distortion-Aware Perturbations from Perspective-Views
Yunjian Zhang1,2 Yanwei Liu1,∗ Jinxia Liu3 Jingbo Miao1,2
Antonios Argyriou4 Liming Wang1 Zhen Xu1
1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academic of Sciences, 3 Zhejiang Wanli University, 4 University of Thessaly
{zhangyunjian, liuyanwei}@iie.ac.cn, liujinxia1969@126.com, miaojingbo@iie.ac.cn
{wangliming, xuzhen}@iie.ac.cn

Abstract
The application of deep neural networks (DNNs) on 360degree images has achieved remarkable progress in the recent years. However, DNNs have been demonstrated to
be vulnerable to well-crafted adversarial examples, which
may trigger severe safety problems in the real-world applications based on 360-degree images. In this paper, we
propose an adversarial attack targeting spherical images,
called 360-attactk, that transfers adversarial perturbations
from perspective-view (PV) images to a final adversarial
spherical image. Given a target spherical image, we first
represent it with a set of planar PV images, and then perform 2D attacks on them to obtain adversarial PV images.
Considering the issue of the projective distortion between
spherical and PV images, we propose a distortion-aware
attack to reduce the negative impact of distortion on attack.
Moreover, to reconstruct the final adversarial spherical image with high aggressiveness, we calculate the spherical
saliency map with a novel spherical spectrum method and
next propose a saliency-aware fusion strategy that merges
multiple inverse perspective projections for the same position on the spherical image. Extensive experimental results show that 360-attack is effective for disturbing spherical images in the black-box setting. Our attack also proves
the presence of adversarial transferability from Z2 to SO(3)
groups.

1. Introduction
Previous studies have shown that deep neural networks
(DNNs) are vulnerable to carefully crafted adversarial examples [10, 28, 36, 40]. Many attack algorithms have been
proposed for various tasks, including image classification
[16], video caption [39], 3D mesh classification [33], and
point cloud recognition [43]. However, during the investi∗ Yanwei Liu is the corresponding author.

gation of this issue, the security of DNNs applying to spherical images has been largely ignored.
Recently, we have observed an increasing number of
computer vision problems requiring spherical signals, for
instance, omnidirectional RGB-D images generated from
panorama cameras [4,17], 360-degree videos captured from
sensors on self-driving cars [15, 47], and spherical data projected from the 3D domain [12]. Inspired by the remarkable
success of DNNs in various tasks, many approaches have
been proposed to apply DNNs on spherical images to solve
real world problems, including advanced driver assistance
systems (ADAS) [24], autonomous navigation [13, 22, 29],
and VR/AR applications [35, 45].
DNNs used for spherical images typically operate in two
domains: the spherical domain and the panoramic domain.
The first type of models, referred to spherical models, directly dispose the spherical image in the spherical domain
[7, 8, 12], while models on the planar domain, which are
called panoramic models, operate on the panorama transformed from the spherical image [19, 34, 46].
Due to the extensive applications of spherical images, the
vulnerability of DNNs used for applications around them
needs further investigation. A straightforward way to generate adversarial spherical images is to attack the spherical or
panoramic models in the white-box setting directly. However, these models are difficult to obtain in practice due to
their greatly divergent principles, and backpropagation on
them is of low efficiency, compared to the same operation
on standard planar CNNs [34]. Another intractable problem of attacking the panoramic model is that the panoramas usually suffer from great distortion compared to the
raw spherical images, reducing the effect of the added perturbations when the adversarial panoramas are re-projected
to the original spherical domain. Therefore, an efficient attack method with less distortion is required. Considering
the perspective views of a spherical image are less distorted
and can be processed with a simple planar network, in this
paper, we propose to generate adversarial spherical exam-

15035

