Investigating Top-k White-Box and Transferable Black-box Attack
Chaoning Zhang, Philipp Benz, Adil Karjauv, Jae Won Cho, Kang Zhang, In So Kweon
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
chaoningzhang1990@gmail.com

Abstract
Existing works have identified the limitation of top-1 attack success rate (ASR) as a metric to evaluate the attack
strength but exclusively investigated it in the white-box setting, while our work extends it to a more practical blackbox setting: transferable attack. It is widely reported that
stronger I-FGSM transfers worse than simple FGSM, leading to a popular belief that transferability is at odds with
the white-box attack strength. Our work challenges this
belief with empirical finding that stronger attack actually
transfers better for the general top-k ASR indicated by the
interest class rank (ICR) after attack. For increasing the
attack strength, with an intuitive analysis on the logit gradient from the geometric perspective, we identify that the
weakness of the commonly used losses lie in prioritizing the
speed to fool the network instead of maximizing its strength.
To this end, we propose a new normalized CE loss that
guides the logit to be updated in the direction of implicitly
maximizing its rank distance from the ground-truth class.
Extensive results in various settings have verified that our
proposed new loss is simple yet effective for top-k attack.
Code is available at: https://bit.ly/3uCiomP

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are widely known to be
vulnerable to adversarial examples [15,16,39,43], which are
crafted by adding imperceptible or quasi-imperceptible perturbations to natural images. This intriguing phenomenon
has inspired a vibrant field of studying the model robustness [30, 32, 36, 40]. One intriguing property of adversarial
examples is the widely known transferability from one (surrogate) model to another (target) model [12, 25]. This property has been exploited for the transferable black-box attack
as well as enhancing query-based black-box attack [19].
It is widely reported that I-FGSM increases the attack
strength of FGSM, but at the cost of a lower transfer rate.
This leads to a popular belief that the white-box strength
of an attack is at odds with its transferability [22]. Lower
transfer rates of I-FGSM are often attributed to the conjec-

ture that longer iterations lead to over-fitting to the surrogate model [6, 22]. Partly due to this concern, conventionally, existing works on transferable attack often adopt a limited number of iterations T , typically set to /α where 
and α are the maximum L∞ budget and step size, respectively. In contrast, we show that this phenomenon can be at
least partially explained by the lower perturbation magnitude of I-FGSM and a larger T improves the transferability,
eventually outperforming FGSM given a sufficiently large
T . We further demonstrate that complementary to existing
techniques, increasing T consistently enhances the transferability and then saturates to a plateau.
Conventionally, attack success rate (ASR), also called
fooling ratio (FR), is commonly used for evaluating strength
in white-box, and transferability in black-box attacks. However, ASR does not provide an in-depth indication of attack
strength. In essence, ASR only indicates whether an interest class, ground-truth class in the non-targeted or target
class in targeted setting, ranks top-1 in the adversarial example. It would be interesting to know the ASR@k, i.e.
beyond from top-1 to top-k, to have a wide-range evaluation of attack strength. To this end, we introduce a new
metric termed interest class rank (ICR), which facilitates
the ASR@k evaluation and, more importantly constitutes a
single unified value indicating the top-k attack strength.
Increasing T enhances both top-k adversarial strength
and transferability, suggesting top-k attack strength is also
transferable. However, simply increasing the T is not
enough to lead to a strong top-k attack. We identify that
the reason lies in the commonly used cross-entropy (CE)
loss or C&W loss which prioritize the speed of fooling the
network instead of maximizing its distance from the interest (ground-truth) class. To this end, we propose Relative Cross-Entropy (RCE) loss for boosting stronger topk attack. Our new loss achieves close-to-optimal top-k
strength in white-box attack, outperforming existing losses
by a large margin, consequently leading to a stronger top-k
transferable attack.
Contributions. Our work is the first to attempt the task
of top-k transferable attack. A major obstacle towards this
task is a popular belief on strength and transferability, which

15085

