MaskGIT: Masked Generative Image Transformer
Huiwen Chang
(a) Class-conditional Image Generation

Han Zhang Lu Jiang Ce Liu˚
Google Research

William T. Freeman

(b) Image Manipulation

(c) Image Extrapolation

Flamingo

Input

Tram

Input

Figure 1. Example generation by MaskGIT on image synthesis and manipulation tasks. We show that MaskGIT is a flexible model
that can generate high-quality samples on (a) class-conditional synthesis, (b) class-conditional image manipulation, e.g. replacing selected
objects in the bounding box with ones from the given classes, and (c) image extrapolation. Examples shown here have resolutions 512ˆ512,
512ˆ512, and 512ˆ2560 in the three columns, respectively. Zoom in to see the details.

Abstract
Generative transformers have experienced rapid popularity growth in the computer vision community in synthesizing high-fidelity and high-resolution images. The best
generative transformer models so far, however, still treat an
image naively as a sequence of tokens, and decode an image
sequentially following the raster scan ordering (i.e. lineby-line). We find this strategy neither optimal nor efficient.
This paper proposes a novel image synthesis paradigm using a bidirectional transformer decoder, which we term
MaskGIT. During training, MaskGIT learns to predict randomly masked tokens by attending to tokens in all directions. At inference time, the model begins with generating
all tokens of an image simultaneously, and then refines the
image iteratively conditioned on the previous generation.
Our experiments demonstrate that MaskGIT significantly
outperforms the state-of-the-art transformer model on the
ImageNet dataset, and accelerates autoregressive decoding
by up to 48x. Besides, we illustrate that MaskGIT can be
easily extended to various image editing tasks, such as inpainting, extrapolation, and image manipulation. Project
page: masked-generative-image-transformer.github.io.

1. Introduction
Deep image synthesis as a field has seen a lot of progress
in recent years. Currently holding state-of-the-art results are
˚ Currently affiliated with Microsoft Azure AI.

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), which are capable of synthesizing high-fidelity images at blazing speeds.
They suffer from, however, well known issues include training instability and mode collapse, which lead to a lack of
sample diversity. Addressing these issues still remains open
research problems.
Inspired by the success of Transformer [46] and GPT [5]
in NLP, generative transformer models have received growing interests in image synthesis [7, 15, 37]. Generally, these
approaches aim at modeling an image like a sequence and
leveraging the existing autoregressive models to generate
image. Images are generated in two stages; the first stage
is to quantize an image to a sequence of discrete tokens (or
visual words). In the second stage, an autoregressive model
(e.g., transformer) is learned to generate image tokens sequentially based on the previously generated result (i.e. autoregressive decoding). Unlike the subtle min-max optimization used in GANs, these models are learned by maximum likelihood estimation. Because of the design differences, existing works have demonstrated their advantages
over GANs in offering stabilized training and improved distribution coverage or diversity.
Existing works on generative transformers mostly focus
on the first stage, i.e. how to quantize images such that information loss is minimized, and share the same second
stage borrowed from NLP. Consequently, even the stateof-the-art generative transformers [15, 35] still treat an image naively as a sequence, where an image is flattened into

11315

