Deep Unlearning via Randomized Conditionally Independent Hessians
Ronak Mehta*1

Sourav Pal*1

Vikas Singh1

Sathya N. Ravi2

ronakrm@cs.wisc.edu

spal9@wisc.edu

vsingh@biostat.wisc.edu

sathya@uic.edu

1

University of Wisconsin-Madison

Abstract
Recent legislation has led to interest in machine unlearning, i.e., removing specific training samples from a
predictive model as if they never existed in the training
dataset. Unlearning may also be required due to corrupted/adversarial data or simply a user’s updated privacy requirement. For models which require no training (k-NN), simply deleting the closest original sample
can be effective. But this idea is inapplicable to models
which learn richer representations. Recent ideas leveraging
optimization-based updates scale poorly with the model dimension d, due to inverting the Hessian of the loss function.
We use a variant of a new conditional independence coefficient, L-CODEC, to identify a subset of the model parameters with the most semantic overlap on an individual sample
level. Our approach completely avoids the need to invert a
(possibly) huge matrix. By utilizing a Markov blanket selection, we premise that L-CODEC is also suitable for deep unlearning, as well as other applications in vision. Compared
to alternatives, L-CODEC makes approximate unlearning
possible in settings that would otherwise be infeasible, including vision models used for face recognition, person reidentification and NLP models that may require unlearning samples identified for exclusion. Code is available at
https://github.com/vsingh-group/LCODECdeep-unlearning

1. Introduction
As personal data becomes a valuable commodity, legislative efforts have begun to push back on its widespread collection/use particularly for training ML models. Recently,
a focus is the “right to be forgotten” (RTBF), i.e., the right
of an individual’s data to be deleted from a database (and
derived products). Despite existing legal frameworks on
fair use, industry scraping has led to personal images being
used without consent, e.g. [20]. Large datasets are not only
stored for descriptive statistics, but used in training large
* Joint First Authors.

2

University of Illinois at Chicago

models. While regulation (GDPR, CCPA) has not specified
the extent to which data must be forgotten, it poses a clear
question: is deletion of the data enough, or does a model
trained on that data also needs to be updated?
Recent work by [6, 7] has identified scenarios where
trained models are vulnerable to attacks that can reconstruct
input training data. More directly, recent rulings by the Federal Trade Commission [12, 24] have ordered companies to
fully delete and destroy not only data, but also any model
trained using those data. While deletion and (subsequent)
full model retraining without the deleted samples is possible, most in-production models require weeks of training
and review, with extensive computational/human resource
cost. With additional deletions, it is infeasible to retrain
each time a new delete request comes in. So, how to update
a model ensuring the data is deleted without retraining?
Task. Given a set of input data S : {zi }ni=1 ∼ D of
size n, training simply identifies a hypothesis ŵ ∈ W via
an iterative scheme wt+1 = wt − g(ŵ, z ′ ) until convergence, where g(·, z ′ ) is a stochastic gradient of a fixed loss
function. Once a model at convergence is found, machine
unlearning aims to identify an update to ŵ through an analogous one-shot unlearning update:
 \label {eq:unlearn} w' = \hat {w} + g_{\hat {w}}\left (z'\right ),

(1)

for a given sample z ′ ∈ S that is to be unlearned.
Contributions. We address several computational issues
with existing approximate formulations for unlearning by
taking advantage of a new statistical scheme for sufficient
parameter selection. First, in order to ensure that a sample’s
impact on the model predictions is minimized, we propose
a measure for computing conditional independence called
L-CODEC which identifies the Markov Blanket of parameters to be updated. Second, we show that the L-CODEC
identified Markov Blanket enables unlearning in previously
infeasible deep models, scaling to networks with hundreds
of millions of parameters. Finally, we demonstrate the ability of L-CODEC to unlearn samples and entire classes on
networks, from CNNs/ResNets to transformers, including
face recognition and person re-identification models.

10422

