A Hybrid Egocentric Activity Anticipation Framework via Memory-Augmented
Recurrent and One-shot Representation Forecasting
Tianshan Liu and Kin-Man Lam
Department of Electronic and Information Engineering
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
tianshan.liu@connect.polyu.hk, enkmlam@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Egocentric activity anticipation involves identifying the
interacted objects and target action patterns in the near
future. A standard activity anticipation paradigm is recurrently forecasting future representations to compensate
the missing activity semantics of the unobserved sequence.
However, the limitations of current recursive prediction
models arise from two aspects: (i) The vanilla recurrent units are prone to accumulated errors in relatively long
periods of anticipation. (ii) The anticipated representations may be insufficient to reflect the desired semantics of the
target activity, due to lack of contextual clues. To address
these issues, we propose “HRO”, a hybrid framework that
integrates both the memory-augmented recurrent and oneshot representation forecasting strategies. Specifically, to
solve the limitation (i), we introduce a memory-augmented
contrastive learning paradigm to regulate the process of
the recurrent representation forecasting. Since the external memory bank maintains long-term prototypical activity
semantics, it can guarantee that the anticipated representations are reconstructed from the discriminative activity
prototypes. To further guide the learning of the memory
bank, two auxiliary loss functions are designed, based on
the diversity and sparsity mechanisms, respectively. Furthermore, to resolve the limitation (ii), a one-shot transferring paradigm is proposed to enrich the forecasted representations, by distilling the holistic activity semantics after the target anticipation moment, in the offline training.
Extensive experimental results on two large-scale data sets
validate the effectiveness of our proposed HRO method.

1. Introduction
With the popularity of wearable cameras, e.g., GoPro, egocentric perception has attracted extensive attention over
the past decade [40, 51]. Among the diverse egocentric vision tasks [3, 28, 34, 45], anticipating the near future activi-

Figure 1. Illustration of task definition and basic pipeline for egocentric activity anticipation.

ties is a crucial high-level task, due to its wide-spread realworld applications [16, 32], e.g., human-robot interaction,
autonomous driving, abnormal event alerts, etc. However,
anticipating an unseen egocentric-activity before it starts is
non-trivial, because of a number of challenges, such as the
semantics gap between past and future events, the scarcity of useful clues in incomplete observations, and frequent
ego-motion and cluttered backgrounds in egocentric videos.
Therefore, egocentric activity anticipation (EAA) is still a
challenging task.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, following the definition in [8],
the “observation time” to is the temporal length of the observed video clip, and the ”anticipation time” ta indicates
the temporal interval before the target anticipation moment.
Thus, the goal of the EAA task is to anticipate an egocentric activity occurring at moment δs , by merely observing
a video clip in the range of [δs − (to + ta ), δs − ta ], i.e.,
preceding the target activity beginning at moment δs by a
duration ta . Recurrent forecasting [12, 54] is a commonly
used paradigm for anticipating future activities, as it is flexible to predict results at any moment. Typically, the recursive anticipation model summarizes the past observations,
and then forecasts what will occur in the near future. This
process is continuously conducted until the target anticipation moment δs arrives. Therefore, the performance of a
recursive anticipation system depends on whether it is able

13904

