Global Sensing and Measurements Reuse for Image Compressed Sensing
Zi-En Fan, Feng Lian,* Jia-Ni Quan
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
fze0012@stu.xjtu.edu.cn,lianfeng1981@mail.xjtu.edu.cn,jiani quan@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, deep network-based image compressed sensing methods achieved high reconstruction quality and reduced computational overhead compared with traditional
methods. However, existing methods obtain measurements
only from partial features in the network and use it only
once for image reconstruction. They ignore there are low,
mid, and high-level features in the network [38] and all of
them are essential for high-quality reconstruction. Moreover, using measurements only once may not be enough for
extracting richer information from measurements. To address these issues, we propose a novel Measurements Reuse
Convolutional Compressed Sensing Network (MR-CCSNet)
which employs Global Sensing Module (GSM) to collect all
level features for achieving an efﬁcient sensing and Measurements Reuse Block (MRB) to reuse measurements multiple times on multi-scale. Finally, we conduct a series of
experiments on three benchmark datasets to show that our
model can signiﬁcantly outperform state-of-the-art methods. Code is available at: https://github.com/
fze0012/MR-CCSNet.

1. Introduction
Compressed Sensing [11](CS), a signal processing technique for efﬁciently acquiring and reconstructing a signal,
has developed rapidly and attracted the attention of many
researchers. Given a high-dimensional signal x ∈ RN , the
measurements of x, denoted by y ∈ RM , is formulated as
y = Φx, where Φ ∈ RM ×N is sensing matrix and M
N is
sampling ratio. Because M  N , recovering x is generally
impossible for the ill-posed problem. CS shows that the
signal x can be reconstructed from y with high probability
when the signal x is sparse in some domain [6, 12].
In the study of image CS, the two core problems are (1)
the design of sensing matrix and (2) recovering the original signal x from its linear measurements y. For the former
one, many matrices [1, 10, 15, 16, 25] are proposed, but they
* Corresponding author.

are hand-designed and ignore there are statistical correlation
between different elements of signal. For the latter one, the
papers of [7, 23, 30, 41, 42] propose methods for exploring
image priors and combining optimization criteria and iterative thresholding algorithms [17]. These methods require
high computational overhead and perform poorly when the
sampling ratio is extremely low.
In recent years, deep learning has been widely used in
computer vision and shows superior performance [21, 24].
Researchers were inspired to solve these two challenges of
CS with deep learning, called Deep Compressed Sensing
(DCS). A few DCS methods [27, 28, 32, 34, 40] have been
proposed and achieve promising results since the powerful
learning and representation capabilities of neural networks.
Despite their success, existing DCS methods only use a
convolutional layer to learn the sensing matrix, which ignores the spatial features in the image. In addition, because the residual architecture is widely used in reconstruction network, the reconstruction quality relies on it. To address these issues, Zheng et al. proposed RK-CCSNet [43].
For the former one, RK-CCSNet use the Sequential Convolutional Module (SCM) to gradually compact the image
size through a sequence of ﬁlters. For the latter one, RKCCSNet proposed the second-order residual architecture according to the relationship between ResNet [18] and Ordinary Differential Equation.
Although RK-CCSNet proposed an effective strategy for
image CS, it always suffers from these problems: (1) There
are hierarchical nature of the features in the convolutional
neural networks (CNNs): the low, mid, and high layer learn
features such as edges, complex textures, and objects, respectively. But RK-CCSNet only samples from the highest layer, which ignores a large amount of rich features
contained in those neglected layers; (2) Existing methods
[27, 32, 40, 43] recover the original image from measurements using deep learning, which takes measurements as
input and use it only once. It extracts features from measurements in a rather shallow manner.
To address these issues, we propose Global Sensing
Module (GSM) and Measurements Reuse Block (MRB). In
GSM, as shown in Fig. 1, we ﬁrst use a convolutional layer

8954

