Distinguishing Unseen from Seen for Generalized Zero-shot Learning
Hongzu Su1 Jingjing Li12 * Zhi Chen3 Lei Zhu4 Ke Lu1
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Electronic and Information Engineering of UESTC in Guangdong
3
The University of Queensland 4 Shandong Normal University

Abstract
Generalized zero-shot learning (GZSL) aims to recognize samples whose categories may not have been seen at
training. Recognizing unseen classes as seen ones or vice
versa often leads to poor performance in GZSL. Therefore, distinguishing seen and unseen domains is naturally
an effective yet challenging solution for GZSL. In this paper, we present a novel method which leverages both visual and semantic modalities to distinguish seen and unseen categories. Specifically, our method deploys two variational autoencoders to generate latent representations for
visual and semantic modalities in a shared latent space, in
which we align latent representations of both modalities by
Wasserstein distance and reconstruct two modalities with
the representations of each other. In order to learn a clearer
boundary between seen and unseen classes, we propose a
two-stage training strategy which takes advantage of seen
and unseen semantic descriptions and searches a threshold
to separate seen and unseen visual samples. At last, a seen
expert and an unseen expert are used for final classification. Extensive experiments on five widely used benchmarks
verify that the proposed method can significantly improve
the results of GZSL. For instance, our method correctly recognizes more than 99% samples when separating domains
and improves the final classification accuracy from 72.6%
to 82.9% on AWA1.

1. Introduction
Conventional visual classification tasks deal with the
same object categories in training and testing stage, i.e.,
samples in the training set and testing set have the same
label space. Generally, methods for these tasks cannot correctly recognize samples which did not appear in training
categories. Unfortunately, unseen categories are often involved in many real-world applications since the training
dataset is finite. Zero-shot learning (ZSL) [10, 11, 14, 26,
32, 43] aims to handle unseen or novel instances by lever* Jingjing Li is the corresponding author. Email: lijin117@yeah.net

aging shared representations of visual and semantic modalities. In conventional ZSL [1, 25], a model recognizes samples only from unseen domain. Generalized zero-shot learning (GZSL) is a more challenging task which handles visual
samples from both seen and unseen domains.
Early ZSL methods focus on embedding visual and semantic representations into a shared space [2, 3, 14, 17, 36,
38], e.g., mapping visual features into semantic space, or
vice versa, and measuring similarity between two modalities. Recently, generating synthetic unseen visual features
is widely adopted [8,27,28,33,37,41,43]. Generative methods firstly train a generative model such as GAN [18] or
VAE [23] and synthesize a batch of features with unseen
semantic attributes. Then a classifier is trained with seen
samples and synthesized unseen samples to distinguish different classes. Since GZSL involves both seen and unseen
categories, separating seen and unseen domains [5,7,12,31]
is a reasonable solution. Once seen and unseen domains are
separated, the GZSL problem is decomposed to a conventional zero-shot learning task and arbitrary seen and unseen
experts can be adopted to accomplish classification.
Although separating seen and unseen domains is promising, it is quite challenging to distinguish seen and unseen
visual features. For instance, as illustrated in Figure 1,
killerwhale and humpbackwhale are categories can be
accessed during the training phase, dolphin is the unseen
category for testing. These three species share a large
number of common visual features and semantic attributes.
Then generator is prone to generate features of dolphin
highly similar to killerwhale and humpbackwhale for
lacking visual prior of category dolphin in the training
phase. Therefore, in the testing phase, a sample of dolphin
is prone to be wrongly recognized as killerwhale or
humpbackwhale. This phenomenon results in low classification accuracy on unseen classes. Since the supervision
information of training is from seen categories, it is a disaster for unseen categories with similar samples in seen domains. Therefore, distinguishing seen and unseen samples
is essential to promote GZSL performance.
In this paper, we focus on accurately separating seen and

7885

