M3 L: Language-based Video Editing via Multi-Modal Multi-Level Transformers
Tsu-Jui Fu† , Xin Eric Wang‡ , Scott T. Grafton† , Miguel P. Eckstein† , William Yang Wang†
†

UC Santa Barbara ‡ UC Santa Cruz

tsu-juifu@ucsb.edu, {scott.grafton, miguel.eckstein}@psych.ucsb.edu
william@cs.ucsb.edu, xwang366@ucsc.edu

Abstract
Video editing tools are widely used nowadays for digital design. Although the demand for these tools is high, the
prior knowledge required makes it difficult for novices to
get started. Systems that could follow natural language instructions to perform automatic editing would significantly
improve accessibility. This paper introduces the languagebased video editing (LBVE) task, which allows the model to
edit, guided by text instruction, a source video into a target
video. LBVE contains two features: 1) the scenario of the
source video is preserved instead of generating a completely
different video; 2) the semantic is presented differently in
the target video, and all changes are controlled by the given
instruction. We propose a Multi-Modal Multi-Level Transformer (M3 L) to carry out LBVE. M3 L dynamically learns
the correspondence between video perception and language
semantic at different levels, which benefits both the video
understanding and video frame synthesis. We build three
new datasets for evaluation, including two diagnostic and
one from natural videos with human-labeled text. Extensive
experimental results show that M3 L is effective for video
editing and that LBVE can lead to a new field toward visionand-language research.

1. Introduction
Video is one of the most direct ways to convey information, as people are used to interacting with this world via dynamic visual perception. Nowadays, video editing tools like
Premiere and Final Cut are widely applied for digital design usages, such as film editing or video effects. However,
those applications require prior knowledge and complex operations to utilize successfully, which makes it difficult for
novices to get started. For humans, natural language is the
most natural way of communication. If a system can follow
the given language instructions and automatically perform
related editing actions, it will significantly improve accessi-

Figure 1. The introduced language-based video editing (LBVE)
task. LBVE requires to edit a source video S into the target video
T guided by the instruction X.

bility and meet the considerable demand.
In this paper, we introduce language-based video editing (LBVE), a general V2V task, where the target video
is controllable directly by language instruction. LBVE
treats a video and an instruction as the input, and the target video is edited from the textual description. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the same person performs different hand
gestures guided by the instruction. Different from text-tovideo (T2V) [3,34,38,43], video editing enjoys two following feature: 1) the scenario (e.g., scene or humans) of the
source video is preserved instead of generating all content
from scratch; 2) the semantic (e.g., property of the object or
moving action) is presented differently in the target video.
The main challenge of LBVE is to link the video perception with language understanding and reflect what semantics should be manipulated during the video generation but
under a similar scenario. People usually take further editing
steps onto a base video rather than create all content from
the beginning. We believe that our LBVE is more practical
and corresponding to human daily usage.
To tackle the LBVE task, we propose a multi-modal
multi-level transformer (M3 L) to perform video editing
conditioning on the guided text. As shown in Fig. 2, M3 L
contains a multi-modal multi-level Transformer where the
encoder models the moving motion to understand the entire
video, and the decoder serves as a global planner to generate

10513

