Unbiased Teacher v2: Semi-supervised Object Detection
for Anchor-free and Anchor-based Detectors
Yen-Cheng Liu1 , Chih-Yao Ma2 , Zsolt Kira1
1
Georgia Institute of Technology, 2 Meta
{ycliu, zkira}@gatech.edu, cyma@fb.com

Abstract
With the recent development of Semi-Supervised Object
Detection (SS-OD) techniques, object detectors can be improved by using a limited amount of labeled data and abundant unlabeled data. However, there are still two challenges
that are not addressed: (1) there is no prior SS-OD work
on anchor-free detectors, and (2) prior works are ineffective when pseudo-labeling bounding box regression. In this
paper, we present Unbiased Teacher v2, which shows the
generalization of SS-OD method to anchor-free detectors
and also introduces Listen2Student mechanism for the unsupervised regression loss. Specifically, we first present a
study examining the effectiveness of existing SS-OD methods
on anchor-free detectors and find that they achieve much
lower performance improvements under the semi-supervised
setting. We also observe that box selection with centerness
and the localization-based labeling used in anchor-free detectors cannot work well under the semi-supervised setting.
On the other hand, our Listen2Student mechanism explicitly prevents misleading pseudo-labels in the training of
bounding box regression; we specifically develop a novel
pseudo-labeling selection mechanism based on the Teacher
and Student’s relative uncertainties. This idea contributes
to favorable improvement in the regression branch in the
semi-supervised setting. Our method, which works for both
anchor-free and anchor-based methods, consistently performs favorably against the state-of-the-art methods in VOC,
COCO-standard, and COCO-additional.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models have achieved remarkable performance on object detection tasks in recent years, though the
strong performance heavily relies on training a network with
abundant images with human-annotated labels. To reduce
the label supervision for training object detectors, SemiSupervised Object Detection (SS-OD) methods have been
proposed to leverage only limited labeled data but more abun-

dant unlabeled data to improve performance [5, 9, 20, 26, 38].
Existing state-of-the-art SS-OD methods apply self-training
techniques, which generate pseudo-labels and enforce the
consistency between unlabeled data with different augmentations. Despite the significant improvement, there are still
two remaining issues that are left untackled: (1) there is no
prior SS-OD work on anchor-free detectors and (2) prior
works are ineffective in pseudo-labeling on the bounding
box regression.
First, anchor-free detectors have been recently getting
more attention in the community of object detection [11, 15,
16, 29, 30, 37, 42], with the promise of achieving competitive
accuracy, computational efficiency, and potential generalization to new datasets or environments [37]. In spite of
these advances, existing SS-OD works [9, 20, 26] mainly focus on anchor-based detectors (e.g., Faster-RCNN [21] and
SSD [19]) but do not empirically verify their effectiveness on
anchor-free detectors. In fact, when we adapt recent state-ofthe-art SS-OD methods to anchor-free detectors, we observe
that, compared with its improvement on anchor-based models, the improvement is much smaller on anchor-free models
(see Figure 1a and Table 1). With extensive analysis provided in Section 3.2, we find that some advanced techniques
performing favorably in the fully-supervised setting do not
work in the semi-supervised setting with limited supervision. For example, the centerness score becomes unreliable
for box selection under the semi-supervised setting, and
the localization-based labeling method is not robust to the
localization noise in pseudo-labels.
Second, following the Teacher-Student framework, the
existing SS-OD works [26, 38] apply an unsupervised regression loss with the pseudo-boxes generated from confidence thresholding (i.e., a threshold on the box score).
However, we find that this approach inherits some potential
issues that can be further addressed. For instance, (1) instead
of using one single metric (e.g., box score or box IoU) to
jointly represent the quality of four boundaries, the confidence/uncertainty of each boundary should be predicted individually; (2) confidence in the classification branch might
not be able to reflect the quality of boundary prediction on

9819

