No Pain, Big Gain: Classify Dynamic Point Cloud Sequences with Static Models
by Fitting Feature-level Space-time Surfaces
Jia-Xing Zhong, Kaichen Zhou, Qingyong Hu , Bing Wang, Niki Trigoni, Andrew Markham
Deparment of Computer Science, University of Oxford
{jiaxing.zhong, rui.zhou, qingyong.hu, bing.wang, niki.trigoni, andrew.markham}@cs.ox.ac.uk

Point Cloud Sequence

Abstract
Scene flow is a powerful tool for capturing the motion
field of 3D point clouds. However, it is difficult to directly
apply flow-based models to dynamic point cloud classification since the unstructured points make it hard or even
impossible to efficiently and effectively trace point-wise
correspondences. To capture 3D motions without explicitly tracking correspondences, we propose a kinematicsinspired neural network (Kinet) by generalizing the kinematic concept of ST-surfaces to the feature space. By
unrolling the normal solver of ST-surfaces in the feature space, Kinet implicitly encodes feature-level dynamics and gains advantages from the use of mature backbones for static point cloud processing. With only minor
changes in network structures and low computing overhead, it is painless to jointly train and deploy our framework with a given static model. Experiments on NvGesture, SHREC’17, MSRAction-3D, and NTU-RGBD demonstrate its efficacy in performance, efficiency in both the number of parameters and computational complexity, as well
as its versatility to various static backbones. Noticeably,
Kinet achieves the accuracy of 93.27% on MSRAction-3D
with only 3.20M parameters and 10.35G FLOPS. The code
is available at https://github.com/jx-zhong-for-academicpurpose/Kinet.

1. Introduction
Due to continued miniaturization and mass production,
3D sensors are becoming less esoteric and increasingly
prevalent in geometric perception tasks. These sensors typically represent scene geometry through a point cloud, which
is an unordered and irregular data structure consisting of
distinct spatial 3D coordinates. As a fundamental problem in point cloud understanding, classification of static
scenes [11, 30, 72] or objects [7, 58, 59] has witnessed rapid
advances over the past few years. Whilst impressive, these
techniques do not directly account for the fact that the real
3D world is also changing, through egocentric and/or al-

Static Model (Spatial)

Aggregation

Flow Estimation

Estimated Scene Flow

Static Model (Temporal)

(a) Vanilla two-stream framework based on physical scene flow.
Point Cloud Sequence

ST-normal Estimation

Feature-level
ST-surface

Static Model (Spatial)

Aggregation

Kinematic Learning Unit
Dynamic Learning Module (Temporal)

(b) Kinematic two-stream framework guided by feature-level ST-surfaces.

Figure 1. Comparison between the flow-based framework and
ours. With neither explicit point-wise correspondence estimation
nor the stand-alone temporal branch, our framework is lightweight
and efficient.

locentric motion. To better understand our time-varying
world, a handful of recent works [15–17,44,47,48,80] have
been applied to dynamic point cloud classification, a task in
which the model is required to output a video-level category
for a given sequence of 3D point clouds.
As a natural extension of 2D optical flow, 3D scene flow
captures the motion field of point clouds. Based on optical
flow, two-stream networks [6, 19, 68, 76, 89] have already
proven to be successful in image-based video classification.
Hence, it should be a natural choice to classify dynamic
point clouds with the help of scene flow. However, to the
best of our knowledge, scene flow has not been utilized
in point cloud sequences despite the prevalence of mature
scene flow estimators [3, 22, 24, 43, 50, 56, 73, 82].
What then hampers us from applying scene flow to dynamic point cloud classification? Although scene flow is
a powerful tool, it is difficult to estimate it efficiently and
effectively from sequential point clouds - the computation
of 3D scene flow inevitability has higher time expenditure,

8510

