Ensembling Off-the-shelf Models for GAN Training
Nupur Kumari 1

Richard Zhang2
Eli Shechtman2
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
Adobe

Jun-Yan Zhu1

Abstract

z∼

z
¨G

z

The advent of large-scale training has produced a cornucopia of powerful visual recognition models. However,
generative models, such as GANs, have traditionally been
trained from scratch in an unsupervised manner. Can the
collective “knowledge” from a large bank of pretrained vision models be leveraged to improve GAN training? If so,
with so many models to choose from, which one(s) should
be selected, and in what manner are they most effective?
We find that pretrained computer vision models can significantly improve performance when used in an ensemble of
discriminators. Notably, the particular subset of selected
models greatly affects performance. We propose an effective selection mechanism, by probing the linear separability
between real and fake samples in pretrained model embeddings, choosing the most accurate model, and progressively
adding it to the discriminator ensemble. Interestingly, our
method can improve GAN training in both limited data and
large-scale settings. Given only 10k training samples, our
FID on LSUN C AT matches the StyleGAN2 trained on 1.6M
images. On the full dataset, our method improves FID by
1.5 to 2× on cat, church, and horse categories of LSUN.

D
D̂1

VGG-16
(Classification)

Swin-T
(Detection)

Swin-T
(Segmentation)

ViT (CLIP)

Swin-T(MoBY)

ViT (DINO)

···

F : Off-the-shelf Model Bank

F̂1

Ĉ1

D̂K

F̂K

ĈK

F̂k ∈ F
F

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Vision-aided GAN training. The model bank F consists of widely used and state-of-the-art pretrained networks. We
automatically select a subset {F̂ }K
k=1 from F, which can best distinguish between real and fake distribution. Our training procedure
consists of creating an ensemble of the original discriminator D
and discriminators D̂k = Ĉk ◦ F̂k based on the feature space of
selected off-the-shelf models. Ĉk is a shallow trainable network
over the frozen pretrained features.

Image generation inherently requires being able to capture and model complex statistics in real-world visual phenomenon. Computer vision models, driven by the success
of supervised and self-supervised learning techniques [15,
17, 33, 66, 78], have proven effective at capturing useful representations when trained on large-scale data [69, 92, 103].
What potential implications does this have on generative
modeling? If one day, perfect computer vision systems could
answer any question about any image, could this capability
be leveraged to improve image synthesis models?
Surprisingly, despite the aforementioned connection between synthesis and analysis, state-of-the-art generative adversarial networks (GANs) [9, 39, 40, 101] are trained in an
unsupervised manner without the aid of such pretrained networks. With a plethora of useful models easily available in
the research ecosystem, this presents a missed opportunity
to explore. Can the knowledge of pretrained visual represen-

tations actually benefit GAN training? If so, with so many
models, tasks, and datasets to choose from, which models
should be used, and in what manner are they most effective?
In this work, we study the use of a “bank” of pretrained
deep feature extractors to aid in generative model training.
Specifically, GANs are trained with a discriminator, aimed
at continuously learning the relevant statistics differentiating
real and generated samples, and a generator, which aims
to reduce this gap. Naı̈vely using such strong, pretrained
networks as a discriminator leads to the overfitting and overwhelming the generator, especially in limited data settings.
We show that freezing the pretrained network (with a small,
lightweight learned classifier on top as shown in Figure 1)
provides stable training when used with the original, learned
discriminator. In addition, ensembling multiple pretrained
networks encourages the generator to match the real distribution in different, complementary feature spaces.

10651

