Large Loss Matters in Weakly Supervised Multi-Label Classification

1
3

Zeynep Akata2,3,4

Jae Myung Kim2 *

Youngwook Kim1 *

Seoul National University

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems

4

2

Jungwoo Lee1,5

University of Tübingen

Max Planck Institute for Informatics

5

HodooAI Lab

Abstract

1. Introduction
Multi-label classification aims to find all existing objects
or attributes in a single image. It is gaining attention since
the real world is made up of a scene with multiple objects in
it [28, 35]. Moreover, some of the single-label datasets, also
called multi-class datasets, actually have images containing
multiple objects [33, 56]. However, the multi-label classification task has some fundamental difficulties in making a
dataset because it requires annotators to label all categories’
existence/absence for every image. As the number of categories and images in the dataset increase, annotation cost
becomes tremendous [19].
* Equal contribution.

0.12

True negative
False negative

0.10

Early learning phase Memorization phase

0.08
Loss

Weakly supervised multi-label classification (WSML)
task, which is to learn a multi-label classification using partially observed labels per image, is becoming increasingly
important due to its huge annotation cost. In this work, we
first regard unobserved labels as negative labels, casting
the WSML task into noisy multi-label classification. From
this point of view, we empirically observe that memorization effect, which was first discovered in a noisy multi-class
setting, also occurs in a multi-label setting. That is, the
model first learns the representation of clean labels, and
then starts memorizing noisy labels. Based on this finding,
we propose novel methods for WSML which reject or correct the large loss samples to prevent model from memorizing the noisy label. Without heavy and complex components, our proposed methods outperform previous state-ofthe-art WSML methods on several partial label settings including Pascal VOC 2012, MS COCO, NUSWIDE, CUB,
and OpenImages V3 datasets. Various analysis also show
that our methodology actually works well, validating that
treating large loss properly matters in a weakly supervised
multi-label classification. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/snucml/LargeLossMatters.

0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
0

500

1000

1500
Iteration

2000

2500

Figure 1. Memorization in WSML. When training ResNet-50
model on PASCAL VOC dataset with partial label, we set all unobserved labels as negative. These labels are composed of true negative and false negative. We observe that the model first fits into true
negative label (learning), and then fits into false negative (memorization).

To alleviate these issues, weakly supervised learning approach in multi-label classification task (WSML) has been
taken into consideration [2, 18, 36, 50]. In a WSML setting,
labels are given as a form of partial label, which means only
a small amount of categories is annotated per image. This
setting reflects the recently released large-scale multi-label
datasets [12,19] which provide only partial label. Thus, it is
becoming increasingly important to develop learning strategies with partial labels.
There are two naive approaches to train the model with
partial labels. One is to train the model with observed labels
only, ignoring the unobserved labels. The other is to assume
all unobserved labels are negative and incorporate them into
training because majorities of labels are negative in a multilabel setting [32]. As the second one has a limitation that
this assumption produces some noise in a label which hampers the model learning, previous works [7,9,16,21] mostly
follow the first approach and try to explore the cue of unobserved labels using various techniques such as bootstrapping or regularization. However, these approaches include

14156

