Weakly Supervised Temporal Sentence Grounding with
Gaussian-based Contrastive Proposal Learning
Minghang Zheng1 Yanjie Huang1 Qingchao Chen2 Yuxin Peng1 Yang Liu1,3 *
1
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
2
National Institute of Health Data Science, Peking University
3
Beijing Institute for General Artificial Intelligence
{minghang, qingchao.chen, pengyuxin, yangliu}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Temporal sentence grounding aims to detect the most
salient moment corresponding to the natural language
query from untrimmed videos. As labeling the temporal
boundaries is labor-intensive and subjective, the weaklysupervised methods have recently received increasing attention. Most of the existing weakly-supervised methods generate the proposals by sliding windows, which are contentindependent and of low quality. Moreover, they train their
model to distinguish positive visual-language pairs from
negative ones randomly collected from other videos, ignoring the highly confusing video segments within the same
video. In this paper, we propose Contrastive Proposal
Learning(CPL) to overcome the above limitations. Specifically, we use multiple learnable Gaussian functions to generate both positive and negative proposals within the same
video that can characterize the multiple events in a long
video. Then, we propose a controllable easy to hard negative proposal mining strategy to collect negative samples
within the same video, which can ease the model optimization and enables CPL to distinguish highly confusing
scenes. The experiments show that our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance on Charades-STA and ActivityNet Captions datasets. The code and models are available
at https://github.com/minghangz/cpl.

1. Introduction
Temporal sentence grounding aims at localizing the start
and end time of the moment described by a given freeform natural language query in untrimmed videos. Automatic temporal sentence grounding enables us to efficiently find the video moment of interest rather than going
through the whole video, which has broad application potential in video surveillance [6], video summarization [20],
* Corresponding author

Query: A man puts on gloves ready to clean the snow from the car.

…

…

…

Positive proposals

…

(a) Existing methods

…

…

Negative proposals

Query: A man puts on gloves ready to clean the snow from the car.

A man appears Take out gloves Put on gloves Pick up a brush A man in gloves
(beginning)
(climax)
(ending)
with a brush
cleans the snow

Weight

Easy

Hard

Hard
55.6 s

Negative proposals

GT
Positive proposals

(b) Ours

90.9s

Easy
Time

Negative proposals

Figure 1. (a) Existing methods generate proposals by sliding window and focus on distinguishing negative proposals from other
videos. (b) We use multiple learnable Gaussian functions to generate both positive and negative proposals to characterize the temporal structure of events. Our negative proposals are in the same
video and collected from easy to hard.

etc. Fully supervised temporal sentence grounding has
witnessed tremendous achievements recently, however, it
needs laborious manual annotations of temporal boundaries
for every query thus limiting its scalability and practicability in real-world applications. Therefore, the weakly supervised learning schemes, where only the video and natural
language query are required during training, have gained
more attention due to their low annotation cost and reasonable efficiency.
Existing weakly supervised solutions employ either the
multiple instance learning (MIL) based or reconstructionbased paradigms. Specifically, MIL-based methods [11,
12, 19, 21] normally define matched and mismatched videolanguage pairs as positive and negative samples, and learn
the latent cross-modal semantic space by aligning the videolevel visual-textual relationships. Reconstruction-based
method [18, 24, 39] solves the task through joint learning
with the reconstruction loss, assuming that the proposals

15555

