OnePose: One-Shot Object Pose Estimation without CAD Models
Jiaming Sun1,2∗
1

Zihao Wang1∗ Siyu Zhang2∗ Xingyi He1
Guofeng Zhang1 Xiaowei Zhou1†

Zhejiang University

2

SenseTime Research

Abstract
We propose a new method named OnePose for object pose
estimation. Unlike existing instance-level or category-level
methods, OnePose does not rely on CAD models and can
handle objects in arbitrary categories without instanceor category-specific network training. OnePose draws the
idea from visual localization and only requires a simple
RGB video scan of the object to build a sparse SfM model
of the object. Then, this model is registered to new query
images with a generic feature matching network. To
mitigate the slow runtime of existing visual localization
methods, we propose a new graph attention network that
directly matches 2D interest points in the query image with
the 3D points in the SfM model, resulting in efficient and
robust pose estimation. Combined with a feature-based
pose tracker, OnePose is able to stably detect and track
6D poses of everyday household objects in real-time. We
also collected a large-scale dataset that consists of 450 sequences of 150 objects. Code and data are available at the
project page: https://zju3dv.github.io/onepose/.

1. Introduction
Object pose estimation plays an important role in augmented reality (AR). The ultimate goal of object pose estimation in AR is to use arbitrary objects as “virtual anchors” of AR effects, which demands the ability to estimate
poses of surrounding objects in our daily life. Most established works in object pose estimation [16, 26, 46] assume
that the CAD model of the object is known a priori. Since
high-quality CAD models of everyday objects are often inaccessible, the research on object pose estimation for AR
scenarios necessitates new problem settings.
To not rely on instance-level CAD models, many recent
methods have been working on category-level pose estimation [4, 43]. By training a network on different instances in
∗ Equal contribution. The authors from Zhejiang University are affiliated with the State Key Lab of CAD&CG and the ZJU-SenseTime Joint
Lab of 3D Vision. † Corresponding author: Xiaowei Zhou.

3

Hongcheng Zhao3

TUM

Real
Images

Cat. 1

Synthetic
Images
CAD
Model

Cat. N

Instance Level

Pose

Query Image

Video Scan

SfM

One Shot (ours)

Pose

Category Level

GATs
Pose

Figure 1.
Comparison of different problem settings of
instance/category-level object pose estimation and the one-shot
pose estimation proposed in this work. Unlike previous works that
rely on instance- or category-specific network training, the proposed approach only requires a simple video scan of the object to
build a sparse SfM model of the object and uses a generic 3D2D feature matching network (GATs) to estimate its pose, without
CAD models or additional network training.

the same category, the network can learn a category-level
representation of object appearances and shapes and thus
be able to generalize to new instances in the same category. However, such approaches require a large number of
training samples in the same category, which can be hard to
obtain and annotate. Furthermore, the generalization capabilities of category-level methods are not guaranteed when
a new instance has a significantly different appearance or
shape. More importantly, training and deploying a network
for each category are unaffordable in many real world applications, e.g., mobile AR, when the number of object categories to be handled is huge.
To alleviate the demand for CAD models or categoryspecific training, we go back to an “old” problem setting
for object pose estimation, but renovate the entire pipeline
with a new learning-based approach. Similar to the task
of visual localization, which estimates the unknown camera pose given an SfM map of a scene, object pose estimation has long been formulated in the localization-based
setting [21, 35]. Different from instance- or category-level

6825

