Spatial-Temporal Parallel Transformer for Arm-Hand Dynamic Estimation
Shuying Liu,* Wenbin Wu,* Jiaxian Wu, Yue Lin
NetEase Games AI Lab, Guangzhou, China
{liushuying, wuwenbin02, wujiaxian, gzlinyue}@corp.netease.com

Figure 1. We propose Spatial-Temporal Parallel Transformer to estimate arm and hand dynamics from monocular video by utilizing the
arm-hand correlation as well as the temporal information. Row 1: Input video frames. Row 2: Estimated arm and hand dynamics of our
method. The proposed method shows robustness under various challenging scenarios.

Abstract
We propose an approach to estimate arm and hand dynamics from monocular video by utilizing the relationship
between arm and hand. Although monocular full human
motion capture technologies have made great progress in
recent years, recovering accurate and plausible arm twists
and hand gestures from in-the-wild videos still remains a
challenge. To solve this problem, our solution is proposed
based on the fact that arm poses and hand gestures are
highly correlated in most real situations. To fully exploit
arm-hand correlation as well as inter-frame information,
we carefully design a Spatial-Temporal Parallel Arm-Hand
Motion Transformer (PAHMT) to predict the arm and hand
dynamics simultaneously. We also introduce new losses to
encourage the estimations to be smooth and accurate. Besides, we collect a motion capture dataset including 200K
frames of hand gestures and use this data to train our model.
By integrating a 2D hand pose estimation model and a 3D
human pose estimation model, the proposed method can
produce plausible arm and hand dynamics from monocular
video. Extensive evaluations demonstrate that the proposed
method has advantages over previous state-of-the-art approaches and shows robustness under various challenging
* These authors contributed equally to this work.

scenarios.

1. Introduction
Human arm-hand dynamics is an important part of full
human motion capture, and can also be used for the control of human-machine interface. However, although some
methods are proposed to capture full human motion including hand gestures [30, 33, 40, 45, 47], most of them fail to
take into account the correlation between arm and hand,
treating body motion capture and gesture estimation as two
separate tasks, resulting in inaccurate predictions in challenging scenarios. Zhou et al. [47] propose to learn human
motion by considering body-hand correlation, but such correlation is only utilized in predicting 2D hand key-points
and 3D body key-points, the final motion of body and hands
are learned separately by different models. Ng et al. [29] introduce to learn the body-hand correlation to estimate conversational hand gestures. However, the method is restricted
to the domain of conversational gesture prediction and cannot produce arm motions.
In this paper, we focus on the task of capturing accurate
and plausible arm-hand dynamics from monocular video.
Specifically, we introduce a spatial-temporal Parallel ArmHand Motion Transformer (PAHMT) to take full advantage
of arm-hand correlations and inter-frame information. The

20523

