Coupling Vision and Proprioception for Navigation of Legged Robots
Zipeng Fu*1

Ashish Kumar*2
1

Ananye Agarwal1

Haozhi Qi2

Carnegie Mellon University

2

Jitendra Malik2

Deepak Pathak1

UC Berkeley

Abstract
We exploit the complementary strengths of vision and proprioception to develop a point-goal navigation system for
legged robots, called VP-Nav. Legged systems are capable of
traversing more complex terrain than wheeled robots, but to
fully utilize this capability, we need a high-level path planner
in the navigation system to be aware of the walking capabilities of the low-level locomotion policy in varying environments. We achieve this by using proprioceptive feedback to
ensure the safety of the planned path by sensing unexpected
obstacles like glass walls, terrain properties like slipperiness
or softness of the ground and robot properties like extra payload that are likely missed by vision. The navigation system
uses onboard cameras to generate an occupancy map and a
corresponding cost map to reach the goal. A fast marching
planner then generates a target path. A velocity command
generator takes this as input to generate the desired velocity
for the walking policy. A safety advisor module adds sensed
unexpected obstacles to the occupancy map and environmentdetermined speed limits to the velocity command generator.
We show superior performance compared to wheeled robot
baselines, and ablation studies which have disjoint highlevel planning and low-level control. We also show the
real-world deployment of VP-Nav on a quadruped robot
with onboard sensors and computation. Videos at https:
//navigation-locomotion.github.io

1. Introduction
Gibson has famously remarked, “we see in order to move
and we move in order to see.” Although, it would be more
accurate to say that we see and feel in order to move. Vision
and proprioception are complementary senses. Vision is a
distance sense, which allows us to avoid static and dynamic
obstacles. However, vision is slow and cannot directly sense
physical properties of terrains such as softness vs. hardness,
smooth vs. rough. Proprioception (knowledge of agent’s
own body like joint angles, body orientation, foot contacts,
etc.) is fast and gives a direct measurement of physical
environment characteristics. In this paper, we will focus
on exploiting the complementary strengths of vision and
*equal contribution

Figure 1. Example deployment scenarios for our proposed point
goal navigation system for legged robots. The varying terrains on
the way to the goal require the planner to be aware of the robot’s
locomotion capabilities. The proprioceptive coupling between the
locomotion controller and the navigation planner allow the robot to
sense properties of the environment which the vision might miss
(slippery terrain, glass obstacle, etc.).

proprioception for navigation of legged robots. The goal is to
train a legged robot by developing both low-level control of
its motor joints to walk on terrains (i.e., locomotion) as well
as high-level path planning to reach certain goal locations
by autonomously avoiding any obstacles along the way (i.e.,
navigation).
Locomotion and Navigation: Traditionally, locomotion
and navigation are studied as separate problems and then put
together on a robot as individual modules [28, 50, 79, 83].
However, to truly support dynamic goal reaching in complex
terrains, the planner should know about the walking ability
of the robot in different terrains. For instance, a robot navigating to a goal through a slippery patch may either lower
its walking speed or walk around it altogether depending
on its locomotion ability. To facilitate such communication between high-level and low-level, prior works generally
infer a cost map for the planner from an onboard vision
sensor which is only capable of detecting clearly visible ob-

17273

