Complex Backdoor Detection by Symmetric Feature Differencing
Yingqi Liu1 ,* Guangyu Shen1 * , Guanhong Tao1 , Zhenting Wang2 , Shiqing Ma2 , Xiangyu Zhang1
Purdue University1 , Rutgers University2
{liu1751, shen447, taog}@purdue.edu, {zhenting.wang, sm2283}@rutgers.edu, xyzhang@cs.purdue.edu

Abstract
Many existing backdoor scanners work by finding a
small and fixed trigger. However, advanced attacks have
large and pervasive triggers, rendering existing scanners
less effective. We develop a new detection method. It
first uses a trigger inversion technique to generate triggers,
namely, universal input patterns flipping victim class samples to a target class. It then checks if any such trigger is
composed of features that are not natural distinctive features between the victim and target classes. It is based on
a novel symmetric feature differencing method that identifies features separating two sets of samples (e.g., from two
respective classes). We evaluate the technique on a number
of advanced attacks including composite attack, reflection
attack, hidden attack, filter attack, and also on the traditional patch attack. The evaluation is on thousands of models, including both clean and trojaned models, with various
architectures. We compare with three state-of-the-art scanners. Our technique can achieve 80-88% accuracy while
the baselines can only achieve 50-70% on complex attacks.
Our results on the TrojAI competition rounds 2-4, which
have patch backdoors and filter backdoors, show that existing scanners may produce hundreds of false positives (i.e.,
clean models recognized as trojaned), while our technique
removes 78-100% of them with a small increase of false
negatives by 0-30%, leading to 17-41% overall accuracy
improvement. This allows us to achieve top performance on
the leaderboard.

1. Introduction
Backdoor attack (or trojan attack) on deep learning
models injects malicious behaviors such that a compromised model behaves normally on clean inputs and misclassifies inputs stamped with a trigger to a target label
[6, 20, 36, 40, 41]. It becomes a prominent threat due to the
low complexity of launching such attacks, the devastating
consequences especially in safety/security critical applica* Equal contribution

Model

...

Bird

Trigger inversion
vs.
Trojaned

Clean

Figure 1. Backdoor detection by trigger inversion

tions, and the difficulty of defense.
There are a body of existing defense techniques such as
trigger inversion [39, 66], attribution analysis [16, 25], trojaned input detection [14, 64], backdoor removal [34, 37],
and model certification [65]. According to [3, 48], trigger
inversion is an effective technique that can determine if a
model contains backdoor without assuming the availability of any input with trigger. For example, Neural Cleanse
(NC) [66], Artificial Brain Stimulation (ABS) [39], and KArm [55] make use of optimization to invert triggers and
determine if a model is trojaned. They consider each label
in the model as a potential target and use optimization to
check if a small and fixed input pattern, i.e., a trigger, can
be found to cause any input to be misclassified to the label. The intuition is that attackers tend to use small triggers
for attack stealthiness. Figure 1 illustrates trigger inversion.
An input pattern (the circular pattern or the rectangular one
on the bottom) is generated by gradient back-propagation
to flip cat samples to bird. If the subject model is clean,
a large pattern that exhibits a lot of bird features is generated (e.g., the rectangular pattern with the “clean” tag).
In contrast, when the model is trojaned (with a red circular patch), a small pattern containing the trigger features is
inverted (e.g., the circular pattern with the “trojaned”
tag). The size difference of the patterns is critical for these
scanners, that is, a model is flagged as trojaned only when
a small trigger can be found. Observe that inverted patterns
are usually noisy and may not be human interpretable.
While existing techniques are effective for attacks with
small and static triggers, advanced attacks proposed re-

15003

