Target-Relevant Knowledge Preservation for
Multi-Source Domain Adaptive Object Detection
Jiaxi Wu1,2 , Jiaxin Chen2 *, Mengzhe He3 , Yiru Wang4 , Bo Li4 ,
Bingqi Ma4 , Weihao Gan4,5 , Wei Wu4,5 , Yali Wang3 , Di Huang1,2
1
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Science
4
5
SenseTime Research
Shanghai AI Laboratory
{wujiaxi,jiaxinchen,dhuang}@buaa.edu.cn, {hemz, yl.wang}@siat.ac.cn,
{libo, mabingqi, wuwei}@senseauto.com, {wangyiru, ganweihao}@sensetime.com

Abstract
Domain adaptive object detection (DAOD) is a promising way to alleviate performance drop of detectors in new
scenes. Albeit great effort made in single source domain
adaptation, a more generalized task with multiple source
domains remains not being well explored, due to knowledge degradation during their combination. To address
this issue, we propose a novel approach, namely targetrelevant knowledge preservation (TRKP), to unsupervised
multi-source DAOD. Specifically, TRKP adopts the teacherstudent framework, where the multi-head teacher network is
built to extract knowledge from labeled source domains and
guide the student network to learn detectors in unlabeled
target domain. The teacher network is further equipped
with an adversarial multi-source disentanglement (AMSD)
module to preserve source domain-specific knowledge and
simultaneously perform cross-domain alignment. Besides,
a holistic target-relevant mining (HTRM) scheme is developed to re-weight the source images according to the
source-target relevance. By this means, the teacher network
is enforced to capture target-relevant knowledge, thus benefiting decreasing domain shift when mentoring object detection in the target domain. Extensive experiments are conducted on various widely used benchmarks with new stateof-the-art scores reported, highlighting the effectiveness.

1. Introduction
In the past decade, convolutional neural networks [11,26,
37] (CNNs) have achieved great progress and delivered significant improvement in visual object detection [18, 20, 24].
* Corresponding author.

Unfortunately, the well-built detectors suffer from remarkable performance drop when applied to unseen scenes due
to domain shift [39, 47]. Because it is rather expensive and
time-consuming to annotate newly collected data, domain
adaptive object detection (DAOD) [3,5,47] has been receiving increasing attention. It originates from unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) [1, 6, 30], which proves effective in
transferring knowledge from the learned domain (known as
source domain) to a novel domain (known as target domain)
with only unlabeled image for classification. Compared
to UDA, DAOD is even more challenging as it simultaneously locates and classifies all instances of different objects
in images with domain shift, requiring generating domaininvariant representations to reduce such a discrepancy in the
presence of complex foreground and background variations.
Many efforts have been made on DAOD in the literature,
and the methods mainly address it in the paradigm of adversarial feature alignment [15, 25, 39, 47] or semi-supervised
learning [2, 5, 43]. The former directly aligns the features in
the source and target domains through adversarial discriminator confused by gradient reversal layer [25,47], and it can
be fulfilled at the image-level [3, 15], instance-level [3, 25]
or/and category-level [39, 47]. The latter predicts pseudo
labels according to the model trained in the source domain
and adopts them as guidance to the target domain [2,5], and
the domain gap can be bridged through enforcing the model
consistency. Both the two types of methods show promising
results in DAOD for a single pair of source and target.
Multi-source domain adaptation (MSDA) is considered
as a more practical scenario in UDA since it assumes that
various sources are available for better adaptation to the target domain [12, 23, 45]. In addition to the gap between the
source and target domains [12, 40, 44], MSDA also deals
with the discrepancy among different sources to avoid neg-

5301

