Semi-supervised Video Paragraph Grounding with Contrastive Encoder
Xun Jiang1 , Xing Xu1 ,* Jingran Zhang1 , Fumin Shen1 , Zuo Cao2 , Heng Tao Shen1,3
1
Center for Future Media & School of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China 2 MeiTuan 3 Peng Cheng Lab

Abstract
Video events grounding aims at retrieving the most relevant moments from an untrimmed video in terms of a given
natural language query. Most previous works focus on
Video Sentence Grounding (VSG), which localizes the moment with a sentence query. Recently, researchers extended
this task to Video Paragraph Grounding (VPG) by retrieving
multiple events with a paragraph. However, we find the existing VPG methods may not perform well on context modeling and highly rely on video-paragraph annotations. To
tackle this problem, we propose a novel VPG method termed
Semi-supervised Video-Paragraph TRansformer (SVPTR),
which can more effectively exploit contextual information
in paragraphs and significantly reduce the dependency on
annotated data. Our SVPTR method consists of two key
components: (1) a base model VPTR that learns the videoparagraph alignment with contrastive encoders and tackles
the lack of sentence-level contextual interactions and (2) a
semi-supervised learning framework with multimodal feature perturbations that reduces the requirements of annotated training data. We evaluate our model on three widelyused video grounding datasets, i.e., ActivityNet-Caption,
Charades-CD-OOD, and TACoS. The experimental results
show that our SVPTR method establishes the new state-ofthe-art performance on all datasets. Even under the conditions of fewer annotations, it can also achieve competitive
results compared with recent VPG methods.

1. Introduction
Localizing events in a given untrimmed video is one
of the challenging video understanding tasks, which is
first proposed by [1, 7]. Following their works, a list
of promising methods [16, 20, 45–47, 50] has been proposed. However, most existing methods focus on Video
Sentence Grounding (VSG), addressing this problem in
“single-multi” approaches (as shown in Fig. 1(a)), they
ground a moment from a video that consists of several dif* Corresponding author.

Sentence: The man with red shorts serves the ball.

12.91s

13.63s

(a) Video Sentence Grounding
Paragraph:

 Two young girls are standing in the kitchen preparing to cook.
 They then open a box of brownies…get an egg out of the fridge.
 After, the two continue to stir the contents … placing them on a pan.
 Once the cookies are … watch the cookies bake.
 When they are done, they … begin eating.

Multi-Multi Localization
0s

15.67s

28.73s

73.78s

105.12s

(b) Video Paragraph Grounding

130.59s

Figure 1. An illustrative example of VSG and VPG: (a) VSG aims
at retrieving a particular moment with a single sentence. (b) VPG
receives a paragraph consisting of multiple sentences as a query
and localizes multiple events in the untrimmed video.

ferent events according to an individual sentence query.
Contrastively, as illustrated in Fig. 1(b), Video Paragraph
Grounding (VPG), which is recently proposed by [2], addresses the video events grounding task in the “multi-multi”
manner. Specifically, in the VPG task, given a paragraph
describing multiple events instead of a single sentence, it
is expected to localize all of the related moments in an
untrimmed video. Since a paragraph consisting of multiple
sentences in time order contains more temporal information
compared with the single sentence input, it is more informative for retrieving moments in videos.
The previous VPG methods [2, 6, 50] first generate proposals for each sentence, then learn temporal order and semantic relations among these proposals to select desired
candidates. Nevertheless, these methods exist three problems. Firstly, they rely on the temporal information of paragraphs but hardly exploit the contextual information well
from the perspective of text modality. For example, shown
in Fig. 1(b), all the sentences in the paragraph are describ-

2466

