Masked-attention Mask Transformer for Universal Image Segmentation
Bowen Cheng1,2 * Ishan Misra1 Alexander G. Schwing2 Alexander Kirillov1 Rohit Girdhar1
1
Facebook AI Research (FAIR) 2 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC)
https://bowenc0221.github.io/mask2former

Abstract
Image segmentation groups pixels with different semantics, e.g., category or instance membership. Each choice
of semantics defines a task. While only the semantics of
each task differ, current research focuses on designing specialized architectures for each task. We present Maskedattention Mask Transformer (Mask2Former), a new architecture capable of addressing any image segmentation task
(panoptic, instance or semantic). Its key components include masked attention, which extracts localized features by
constraining cross-attention within predicted mask regions.
In addition to reducing the research effort by at least three
times, it outperforms the best specialized architectures by
a significant margin on four popular datasets. Most notably, Mask2Former sets a new state-of-the-art for panoptic
segmentation (57.8 PQ on COCO), instance segmentation
(50.1 AP on COCO) and semantic segmentation (57.7 mIoU
on ADE20K).

1. Introduction
Image segmentation studies the problem of grouping
pixels. Different semantics for grouping pixels, e.g., category or instance membership, have led to different types
of segmentation tasks, such as panoptic, instance or semantic segmentation. While these tasks differ only in semantics,
current methods develop specialized architectures for each
task. Per-pixel classification architectures based on Fully
Convolutional Networks (FCNs) [37] are used for semantic
segmentation, while mask classification architectures [5,24]
that predict a set of binary masks each associated with a
single category, dominate instance-level segmentation. Although such specialized architectures [6, 10, 24, 37] have
advanced each individual task, they lack the flexibility to
generalize to the other tasks. For example, FCN-based architectures struggle at instance segmentation, leading to the
evolution of different architectures for instance segmentation compared to semantic segmentation. Thus, duplicate
research and (hardware) optimization effort is spent on each
* Work done during an internship at Facebook AI Research.

panoptic

instance

57.8
51.1

semantic

50.1

49.5

57.0

52.7

55.6

57.7

40.1

Universal architectures:
Mask2Former (ours)

MaskFormer

SOTA specialized architectures:
Max-DeepLab

Swin-HTC++

BEiT

Figure 1. State-of-the-art segmentation architectures are typically
specialized for each image segmentation task. Although recent
work has proposed universal architectures that attempt all tasks
and are competitive on semantic and panoptic segmentation, they
struggle with segmenting instances. We propose Mask2Former,
which, for the first time, outperforms the best specialized architectures on three studied segmentation tasks on multiple datasets.

specialized architecture for every task.
To address this fragmentation, recent work [14, 62] has
attempted to design universal architectures, that are capable
of addressing all segmentation tasks with the same architecture (i.e., universal image segmentation). These architectures are typically based on an end-to-end set prediction
objective (e.g., DETR [5]), and successfully tackle multiple
tasks without modifying the architecture, loss, or the training procedure. Note, universal architectures are still trained
separately for different tasks and datasets, albeit having the
same architecture. In addition to being flexible, universal
architectures have recently shown state-of-the-art results on
semantic and panoptic segmentation [14]. However, recent work still focuses on advancing specialized architectures [20, 39, 45], which raises the question: why haven’t
universal architectures replaced specialized ones?
Although existing universal architectures are flexible
enough to tackle any segmentation task, as shown in Figure 1, in practice their performance lags behind the best
specialized architectures. For instance, the best reported

1290

