Learning Neural Light Fields with Ray-Space Embedding
Benjamin Attal∗

Jia-Bin Huang

Michael Zollhöfer

Johannes Kopf

Changil Kim

Meta

Reality Labs Research

Meta

Meta

Carnegie Mellon University

https://neural-light-fields.github.io
PSNR (dB)
Ours (no subdivision)

38

NeRF
36

28

X-Fields

Dense (Stanford Light Fields)
NeX

Sparse (NeRF Real Forward-Facing)
Ours

NeRF

26
AutoInt

24

NeX

Ours

Ground truth

Our synthesized views

Ground truth

Ours

NeRF

0.1

1

10
Render time (s)

Figure 1. We present Neural Light Fields with Ray-Space Embedding, which map rays directly to integrated radiance. Our representation
allows for high-quality view synthesis with faithful reconstruction of complex view dependence (left). We are able to synthesize novel views
in a fraction of the time required for the current state-of-the-art approaches, with comparable memory footprint. Our method achieves a
more favorable trade-off between quality, speed, and memory than existing approaches for both dense and sparse light fields (right). See
more visual comparisons including video results in our project website linked above.

Abstract
Neural radiance fields (NeRFs) produce state-of-the-art view
synthesis results, but are slow to render, requiring hundreds
of network evaluations per pixel to approximate a volume
rendering integral. Baking NeRFs into explicit data structures enables efficient rendering, but results in large memory
footprints and, in some cases, quality reduction. Additionally,
volumetric representations for view synthesis often struggle
to represent challenging view dependent effects such as distorted reflections and refractions. We present a novel neural
light field representation that, in contrast to prior work, is
fast, memory efficient, and excels at modeling complicated
view dependence. Our method supports rendering with a
single network evaluation per pixel for small baseline light
fields and with only a few evaluations per pixel for light
fields with larger baselines. At the core of our approach
is a ray-space embedding network that maps 4D ray-space
into an intermediate, interpolable latent space. Our method
achieves state-of-the-art quality on dense forward-facing
datasets such as the Stanford Light Field dataset. In addition,
for forward-facing scenes with sparser inputs we achieve
results that are competitive with NeRF-based approaches
while providing a better speed/quality/memory trade-off with
far fewer network evaluations.
∗ This work was done while Benjamin was an intern at Meta.

1. Introduction
View synthesis is an important problem in computer vision
and graphics. Its goal is to photorealistically render a scene
from unobserved camera poses, given a few posed input images. Existing approaches solve this problem by optimizing
some underlying representation of the scene’s appearance
and geometry and then rendering this representation from
novel views.
View synthesis has recently experienced a renaissance
with an explosion of interest in neural scene representations
— see Tewari et al. [52,53] for a snapshot of the field. Neural
radiance fields [30] are perhaps the most popular of these
neural representations, and methods utilizing them have recently set the state-of-the-art in rendering quality for view
synthesis. A radiance field is a 5D function that maps a 3D
point x and 3D direction ~ω (with only 2 degrees of freedom)
to the radiance leaving x in direction ~ω , as well as the density
of the volume at point x. A neural radiance field or NeRF
represents this function with a neural network. Because volume rendering a NeRF is differentiable, it is straightforward
to optimize by minimizing the difference between ground
truth views at known camera poses and their reconstructions.
The main drawback of neural radiance fields is that volume rendering requires many samples and thus many neural
network evaluations per ray to approximate a volume rendering accurately. Thus, rendering from a NeRF is usually quite
slow. Various approaches exist for baking or caching neural

19819

