3D-aware Image Synthesis via Learning Structural and Textural Representations
Yinghao Xu1 Sida Peng2 Ceyuan Yang1 Yujun Shen3
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Zhejiang University
{xy119, yc019, bzhou}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

pengsida@zju.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Learning 3D-aware image synthesis draws wide attention recently [3,30,35]. An emerging solution is to integrate
a Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [28] into a Generative
Adversarial Network (GAN) [7]. Specifically, the 2D
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) based generator is
replaced with a generative implicit function, which maps
the raw 3D coordinates to point-wise densities and colors
conditioned on the given latent code. Such an implicit
function encodes the structure and the texture of the output
image in the 3D space.
However, there are two problems of directly employing
NeRF [28] in the generator. On one hand, the implicit
function in NeRF produces the color and density for each
3D point using a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) network.

Texture

Faces

Structure

Cars

Making generative models 3D-aware bridges the 2D
image space and the 3D physical world yet remains challenging. Recent attempts equip a Generative Adversarial
Network (GAN) with a Neural Radiance Field (NeRF),
which maps 3D coordinates to pixel values, as a 3D prior.
However, the implicit function in NeRF has a very local
receptive field, making the generator hard to become aware
of the global structure. Meanwhile, NeRF is built on
volume rendering which can be too costly to produce highresolution results, increasing the optimization difficulty. To
alleviate these two problems, we propose a novel framework, termed as VolumeGAN, for high-fidelity 3D-aware
image synthesis, through explicitly learning a structural
representation and a textural representation. We first learn
a feature volume to represent the underlying structure,
which is then converted to a feature field using a NeRFlike model. The feature field is further accumulated into
a 2D feature map as the textural representation, followed
by a neural renderer for appearance synthesis. Such a
design enables independent control of the shape and the
appearance. Project page is at https://genforce.
github.io/volumegan.

shenyujun0302@gmail.com

Viewpoint

Abstract

Bolei Zhou1
3
Bytedance Inc.

Figure 1. Images of faces and cars synthesized by VolumeGAN,
which enables the control of viewpoint, structure, and texture.

With a very local receptive field, it is hard for the MLP
to represent the underlying structure globally when synthesizing images. Thus only using the 3D coordinates as the
inputs [3, 30, 35] is not expressive enough to guide the generator with the global structure. On the other hand, volume
rendering generates the pixel values of the output image
separately, which requires sampling numerous points along
the camera ray regarding each pixel. The computational
cost hence significantly increases when the image size
becomes larger. It may cause the insufficient optimization
of the model training, and further lead to unsatisfying
performance for high-resolution image generation.
Prior work has found that 2D GANs benefits from valid
representations learned by the generator [36, 44, 45]. Such
generative representations describe a synthesis with highlevel features. For example, Xu et al. [44] confirm that
a face synthesis model is aware of the landmark positions
of the output face, and Yang et al. [45] identify the multilevel variation factors emerging from generating bedroom
images. These representative features encode rich texture
and structure information, thereby enhancing the synthesis
quality [16] and the controllability [36] of image GANs. In
contrast, as mentioned above, existing 3D-aware generative
models directly render the pixel values from coordinates [3,
35], without learning explicit representations.
In this work, we propose a new generative model, termed
as VolumeGAN, which achieves 3D-aware image synthesis
through explicitly learning a structural and a textural repre-

18430

