Spatially-Adaptive Multilayer Selection for GAN Inversion and Editing
Gaurav Parmar 1,2
Yijun Li 2
Jingwan Lu 2
Richard Zhang2
1
2
Jun-Yan Zhu
Krishna Kumar Singh
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
Adobe Research
(a) Invertibility Map

(b) Inversion

(c) Edit color

(d) Edit pose
reconstruction

W+
editability
Input

Single
layer
inversion
reconstruction
F10
editability

Spatially-Adaptive
Multilayer Inversion
(ours)

reconstruction

F4
F6

W+

editability

Figure 1. Inverting and editing an image with spatially adaptive multilayer latent codes. Choosing a single latent layer for GAN
inversion leads to a dilemma between obtaining a faithful reconstruction of the input image and being able to perform downstream edits (1st
and 2nd row). In contrast, our proposed method automatically selects the latent space tailored for each region to balance the reconstruction
quality and editability (3rd row). Given an input image, our model predicts an invertibility map (a), which contains the layer index used
for each region. This allows us to precisely reconstruct the input image (b) while preserving editability (c,d).

Abstract
Existing GAN inversion and editing methods work well
for aligned objects with a clean background, such as portraits and animal faces, but often struggle for more difficult categories with complex scene layouts and object occlusions, such as cars, animals, and outdoor images. We
propose a new method to invert and edit such complex images in the latent space of GANs, such as StyleGAN2. Our
key idea is to explore inversion with a collection of layers,
spatially adapting the inversion process to the difficulty of
the image. We learn to predict the “invertibility” of different image segments and project each segment into a latent layer. Easier regions can be inverted into an earlier
layer in the generator’s latent space, while more challenging regions can be inverted into a later feature space. Experiments show that our method obtains better inversion results compared to the recent approaches on complex categories, while maintaining downstream editability. Please
refer to our project page at gauravparmar.com/sam_
inversion.

1. Introduction
The recent advances of Generative Adversarial Networks [19], such as ProGAN [29], the StyleGAN model
family [31–33], and BigGAN [12], have revived the interest in GAN inversion and editing [13, 63]. In GAN editing
pipelines, one first projects an image into the latent space of
a pre-trained GAN, by minimizing the distance between the
generated image and an input image. We can then change
the latent code according to a user edit, and synthesize the
output accordingly. The latent code can then be changed,
in order to satisfy a user edit. The final output image is
synthesized with the updated latent code. Several recent
methods have achieved impressive editing results for real
images [2, 8, 40, 62] using scribbles, text, attribute, and object class conditioning. However, existing methods work
well for human portraits and animal faces but are less applicable to more complex classes such as cars, horses, and
cats. Compared to faces, these objects have more diverse
visual appearance and cluttered backgrounds. In addition,
they tend to be less aligned and more often occluded, all of
which make inversion more challenging.
In this work, we aim to invert complex images better. We

11399

