Neural Shape Mating:
Self-Supervised Object Assembly with Adversarial Shape Priors
Yun-Chun Chen1,2
Haoda Li1,2
Dylan Turpin1,2
Alec Jacobson1,4
Animesh Garg1,2,3
1
2
3
4
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
NVIDIA
Adobe Research, Toronto

Solid Shape Mating

Neural Shape Mating

Shell Shape Mating

Neural Shape Mating

Form Fitting

Neural Shape Mating
Shape Pairs

Point Clouds

Mating Results

Figure 1. Pairwise 3D geometric shape mating. Neural Shape Mating (NSM) takes as input a pair of point clouds of the two shapes
and predicts the mating configuration as output. NSM learns to mate shapes together with self-supervision and does not require semantic
information or target shapes as guidance at test time. Our method can be applied to various shape mating settings, including solid shape
mating (top row), shell shape mating (middle row), and form fitting (bottom row).

Abstract
Learning to autonomously assemble shapes is a crucial
skill for many robotic applications. While the majority of
existing part assembly methods focus on correctly posing
semantic parts to recreate a whole object, we interpret assembly more literally: as mating geometric parts together
to achieve a snug fit. By focusing on shape alignment rather
than semantic cues, we can achieve across category generalization and scaling. In this paper, we introduce a novel task,
pairwise 3D geometric shape mating, and propose Neural
Shape Mating (NSM) to tackle this problem. Given point
clouds of two object parts of an unknown category, NSM
learns to reason about the fit of the two parts and predict
a pair of 3D poses that tightly mate them together. In addition, we couple the training of NSM with an implicit shape
reconstruction task, making NSM more robust to imperfect
point cloud observations. To train NSM, we present a selfsupervised data collection pipeline that generates pairwise
shape mating data with ground truth by randomly cutting
an object mesh into two parts, resulting in a dataset that
consists of 200K shape mating pairs with numerous object
meshes and diverse cut types. We train NSM on the collected

dataset and compare it with several point cloud registration
methods and one part assembly baseline approach. Extensive experimental results and ablation studies under various
settings demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm. Additional material is available at: neural-shapemating.github.io.

1. Introduction
The human-built world is filled with objects that are
shaped to fit, snap, connect, or mate together. Reassembling a broken object and inserting a plug into a socket are
both instances of shape mating. This kind of geometric mating has many practical applications and appears in domains
ranging from computer graphics [28], 3D design [6, 17],
robotics [8, 46, 53, 54], and biology [41]. This paper introduces the problem of pairwise shape mating without known
models, which is an integral subroutine in the broader problem of multi-part geometric assembly including applications
in robotics [27] and AR/VR [42].
There have been many attempts that learn shape-to-shape
matching algorithms in application-specific domains: furniture assembly [15, 27, 29], object assembly [1, 30], and

12724

