Object-Region Video Transformers
Roei Herzig1 Elad Ben-Avraham1 Karttikeya Mangalam2 Amir Bar1 Gal Chechik3
Anna Rohrbach2 Trevor Darrell2 Amir Globerson1
1

Tel Aviv University, 2 UC Berkeley, 3 Bar-Ilan University, NVIDIA Research

𝑇−𝐾

𝑇

𝑇+𝐾

Figure 1. Our ORViT model incorporates object information into video transformer layers. The figure shows the standard (uniformly
spaced) transformer patch-tokens in blue, and object-regions corresponding to detections in orange. In ORViT any temporal patch-token
(e.g., the patch in black at time T ) attends to all patch tokens (blue) and region tokens (orange). This allows the new patch representation
to be informed by the objects. Our method shows strong performance improvement on multiple video understanding tasks and datasets,
demonstrating the value of a model that incorporates object representations into a transformer architecture.

Abstract
Recently, video transformers have shown great success
in video understanding, exceeding CNN performance; yet
existing video transformer models do not explicitly model
objects, although objects can be essential for recognizing
actions. In this work, we present Object-Region Video
Transformers (ORViT), an object-centric approach that extends video transformer layers with a block that directly
incorporates object representations. The key idea is to
fuse object-centric representations starting from early layers and propagate them into the transformer-layers, thus affecting the spatio-temporal representations throughout the
network. Our ORViT block consists of two object-level
streams: appearance and dynamics. In the appearance
stream, an “Object-Region Attention” module applies selfattention over the patches and object regions. In this way,
visual object regions interact with uniform patch tokens
and enrich them with contextualized object information.
We further model object dynamics via a separate “ObjectDynamics Module”, which captures trajectory interactions,
and show how to integrate the two streams. We evaluate our model on four tasks and five datasets: compositional and few-shot action recognition on SomethingElse,
spatio-temporal action detection on AVA, and standard action recognition on Something-Something V2, Diving48 and

Epic-Kitchen100. We show strong performance improvement across all tasks and datasets considered, demonstrating the value of a model that incorporates object representations into a transformer architecture. For code and
pretrained models, visit the project page at https://
roeiherz.github.io/ORViT/

1. Introduction
Consider the simple action of “Picking up a coffee cup”
in Figure 1. Intuitively, a human recognizing this action
would identify the hand, the coffee cup and the coaster,
and perceive the upward movement of the cup. This highlights three important cues needed for recognizing actions:
what/where are the objects? how do they interact? and how
do they move? The above perception process allows easy
generalization to different compositions of actions. For example, the process of “picking up a knife” shares some of
the components with “picking up a coffee cup”, namely,
the way the object and hand move together. More broadly,
representing image semantics using objects facilitates compositional understanding, because many perceptual components remain similar when one object is swapped for another. Thus, a model that captures this compositional aspect
potentially requires less examples to train.
It seems intuitively clear that machine vision models

3148

