Negative-Aware Attention Framework for Image-Text Matching
Kun Zhang1 , Zhendong Mao1 ,* Quan Wang2 , Yongdong Zhang1
1
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China; 2 MOE Key Laboratory of Trustworthy
Distributed Computing and Service, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
kkzhang@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zdmao, zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn, wangquan@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Image-text matching, as a fundamental task, bridges the
gap between vision and language. The key of this task is
to accurately measure similarity between these two modalities. Prior work measuring this similarity mainly based
on matched fragments (i.e., word/region with high relevance), while underestimating or even ignoring the effect
of mismatched fragments (i.e., word/region with low relevance), e.g., via a typical LeaklyReLU or ReLU operation that forces negative scores close or exact to zero in
attention. This work argues that mismatched textual fragments, which contain rich mismatching clues, are also crucial for image-text matching. We thereby propose a novel
Negative-Aware Attention Framework (NAAF), which explicitly exploits both the positive effect of matched fragments and the negative effect of mismatched fragments to
jointly infer image-text similarity. NAAF (1) delicately designs an iterative optimization method to maximally mine
the mismatched fragments, facilitating more discriminative and robust negative effects, and (2) devises the twobranch matching mechanism to precisely calculate similarity/dissimilarity degrees for matched/mismatched fragments
with different masks. Extensive experiments on two benchmark datasets, i.e., Flickr30K and MSCOCO, demonstrate
the superior effectiveness of our NAAF, achieving state-ofthe-art performance. Code will be released at: https:
//github.com/CrossmodalGroup/NAAF.

1. Introduction
Image-text matching, which devotes to bridging the semantic gap between these two heterogeneous modalities, is
a fundamental task in computer vision (CV) and natural language processing (NLP). This matching task aims to search
images for a given textual description or find texts w.r.t. an
image query. The critical challenge of image-text matching lies in accurately learning semantic correspondence be* Zhendong Mao is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. Motivation of the negative-aware attention. (a) Existing methods mainly find matched fragments, e.g., “boys”, “trees”,
to compute image-text (I-T) similarity, while the effect of mismatched fragments, e.g., “football”, is weakened or ignored, by the
typical LeaklyReLU or ReLU. (b) shows the false-positive problem of existing methods, where the I-T pair can still obtain a high
similarity, contributed by most matched fragments, and may rank
quite the top as correct. (c) In our method, both mismatched and
matched fragments are mined to produce negative and positive effects, respectively, thereby downgrading the false-positive pairs.

tween images and texts to measure their similarity.
Generally, there are two paradigms among existing
image-text matching approaches [2, 7, 27]. The first one
tends to perform global-level matching, i.e., finding the semantic correspondence between the full text and the whole
image [3, 9, 24, 43]. They typically project the holistic images and texts into a common latent space and then match
the two modalities. The second paradigm focuses on examining local-level matching, i.e., matching between salient
regions in images and words in texts [19, 23]. Local-level
matching takes into account fine-grained semantic correspondence between images and texts.
Recently, attention-based local-level matching has been
proposed and quickly becomes the mainstream in imagetext matching. SCAN [23], as well as its various variants
[2, 5, 7, 13, 16, 26, 27, 39], is a representative method of this

15661

