Exploring Geometric Consistency for Monocular 3D Object Detection
Qing Lian 1 , Botao Ye2,3 , Ruijia Xu1 , Weilong Yao3 , Tong Zhang1
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
2
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China 3 Autowise.AI
qlianab@connect.ust.hk, botao.ye@vipl.ict.ac.cn, rxuaq@connect.ust.hk,
yaoweilong@autowise.ai, tongzhang@ust.hk

Abstract
This paper investigates the geometric consistency for
monocular 3D object detection, which suffers from the illposed depth estimation. We first conduct a thorough analysis to reveal how existing methods fail to consistently localize objects when different geometric shifts occur. In particular, we design a series of geometric manipulations to
diagnose existing detectors and then illustrate their vulnerability to consistently associate the depth with object apparent sizes and positions. To alleviate this issue, we propose four geometry-aware data augmentation approaches
to enhance the geometric consistency of the detectors. We
first modify some commonly used data augmentation methods for 2D images so that they can maintain geometric consistency in 3D spaces. We demonstrate such modifications
are important. In addition, we propose a 3D-specific image
perturbation method that employs the camera movement.
During the augmentation process, the camera system with
the corresponding image is manipulated, while the geometric visual cues for depth recovery are preserved. We show
that by using the geometric consistency constraints, the proposed augmentation techniques lead to improvements on the
KITTI and nuScenes monocular 3D detection benchmarks
with state-of-the-art results. In addition, we demonstrate
that the augmentation methods are well suited for semisupervised training and cross-dataset generalization.

1. Introduction
Given an input image, the objective of monocular 3D
object detection is to detect objects of interest and recover
their position in 3D space. Recently, it has received increasing attention due to its importance in many downstream
tasks, such as autonomous driving, robot navigation, etc.
Different from stereo or lidar sensors, a monocular camera
requires a lower cost to perceive the surrounding environments. However, it suffers from unreliable depth recovery,
leading to unsatisfied performance for deployment.

“Size + pos” (small depth)

“Size + pos” (large depth)

“Pos only” (large depth)

“Size only” (large depth)

(a) Visualization of different copy-paste manipulation techniques.

7

Expected results
Pos only (baseline)
Size only (baseline)
Size+pos (baseline)
Size+pos (augmentation)

Estimated relative depth

6
5
4
3
2
1
1

2

3

4

True relative depth

5

6

7

(b) Visualization of the estimated depth from the baseline and augmentationenhanced detectors under the copy-paste manipulation (see the details in
Sec 4.2).

Figure 1. We select one of the proposed manipulation techniques (copy-paste) to illustrate the instability of object localization under distortion of objects’ apparent size and vertical position. “Size+pos” denotes geometry-consistent manipulation that
shifts the two visual cues with satisfying geometric constraints,
“Size only” and “Pos only” denote geometry-inconsistent manipulation that only shifts the vertical position or apparent size. The
shaded region indicates the std of the depth in the “Size + pos”
manipulation.

To alleviate the ambiguity in depth estimation, recent
approaches [1, 3, 22, 24] leverage deep neural networks to
model the semantic and geometric information for depth

1685

