Self-supervised object detection from audio-visual correspondence
Triantafyllos Afouras1 *† Yuki M. Asano2 * Francois Fagan3
1

University of Oxford

2

Andrea Vedaldi3

University of Amsterdam

Florian Metze3
3

Meta AI

afourast@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We tackle the problem of learning object detectors without supervision. Differently from weakly-supervised object
detection, we do not assume image-level class labels. Instead, we extract a supervisory signal from audio-visual
data, using the audio component to “teach” the object detector. While this problem is related to sound source localisation, it is considerably harder because the detector must
classify the objects by type, enumerate each instance of the
object, and do so even when the object is silent. We tackle
this problem by first designing a self-supervised framework
with a contrastive objective that jointly learns to classify
and localise objects. Then, without using any supervision,
we simply use these self-supervised labels and boxes to train
an image-based object detector. With this, we outperform
previous unsupervised and weakly-supervised detectors for
the task of object detection and sound source localization.
We also show that we can align this detector to ground-truth
classes with as little as one label per pseudo-class, and
show how our method can learn to detect generic objects
that go beyond instruments, such as airplanes and cats.

1. Introduction
While recent progress in learning image and video representations has been substantial [22, 33, 38, 93], this has
not yet translated into an ability to learn interpretable and
actionable concepts automatically. By that, we mean that
some manual labels are still required in order to map unsupervised representations to useful concepts such as image
classes or object detections. In this paper, we thus consider the problem of learning interpretable concepts without
any manual supervision. In particular, we focus on a problem that has not been explored extensively in the literature:
learning to simultaneously detect and classify objects with
no manual labels at all.
* Joint first authors.
† Work done during an internship at FAIR.

Figure 1. We train an object detector simply by watching
videos. Without using any manual annotations, we learn to detect
different objects in images, by first self-labelling boxes and object
categories and then using those as targets to teach a detector. The
detection results shown are outputs from our trained model; for
visualisation purposes we show Hungarian-matched labels.

This problem is related to weakly supervised object
detection (WSOD [16, 61]), with the difference that, in
WSOD, the learning algorithm is given image-level labels
telling it whether the image contains an occurrence of a
given object type or not. Inspired by recent work in selfsupervised learning, we seek to replace this source of external supervision with an internal supervisory signal extracted from the observation of video data. Videos are far
richer than images, for example because they contain motion. Here, we focus on the multi-modal aspect of videos
and use sound as a weak and noisy cue to learn about objects in the visual component of the data.
The power of multi-modal self-supervision has been
demonstrated before in self-supervised representation
learning, and, closely related, in video clustering [9]. However, while video clustering can provide an interpretation
of the data in terms of discrete classes, it does not provide any information about the location of the relevant ob-

10575

