Parametric Scattering Networks
Shanel Gauthier1,2 ∗ Benjamin Thérien2,3,4∗
Laurent Alsène-Racicot1,2
Muawiz Chaudhary 3,2
Irina Rish1,2
Eugene Belilovsky3,1†
Michael Eickenberg 4†
Guy Wolf1,2†
1
Université de Montréal; 3 Mila – Quebec AI Institute; 2 Concordia University, Montreal, QC, Canada
4
Waterloo University, Waterloo, ON, Canada;5 Flatiron Institute, New York, NY, USA

Abstract
The wavelet scattering transform creates geometric invariants and deformation stability. In multiple signal domains, it has been shown to yield more discriminative representations compared to other non-learned representations
and to outperform learned representations in certain tasks,
particularly on limited labeled data and highly structured
signals. The wavelet filters used in the scattering transform are typically selected to create a tight frame via a parameterized mother wavelet. In this work, we investigate
whether this standard wavelet filterbank construction is optimal. Focusing on Morlet wavelets, we propose to learn
the scales, orientations, and aspect ratios of the filters to
produce problem-specific parameterizations of the scattering transform. We show that our learned versions of the
scattering transform yield significant performance gains in
small-sample classification settings over the standard scattering transform. Moreover, our empirical results suggest
that traditional filterbank constructions may not always be
necessary for scattering transforms to extract effective representations.

1. Introduction
The scattering transform, proposed in [29], is a cascade
of wavelets and complex modulus nonlinearities, which can
be seen as a convolutional neural network (CNN) with fixed,
predetermined filters. This construction can be used to build
representations with geometric invariants and is shown to
be stable to deformations. It has been demonstrated to yield
impressive results on problems involving highly structured
∗ Equal contributions. † Equal senior author contribution. This research
was partially funded by NSERC CGS-M [S.G.,L.A.] and URA [B.T.]
scholarhips; NSERC Discovery Grant RGPIN-2021-04104. [E.B.];
IVADO PRF Grant [I.R.,E.B.,G.W.]; and CIFAR AI Chairs [I.R.,G.W.].
We acknowledge resources provided by Compute Canada and Calcul
Quebec. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and
does not necessarily represent the official views of funding agencies.
Correspondence to:
eugene.belilovsky@concordia.ca,
meickenberg@flatironinstitute.org,
guy.wolf@umontreal.ca

signals [2, 3, 12, 17, 20, 21, 32, 34, 37, 38], outperforming a
number of other classic signal processing techniques. Since
scattering transforms are instantiations of CNNs, they have
been studied as mathematical models for understanding the
impressive success of CNNs in image classification [12,30].
As discussed in [12], first-order scattering coefficients are
similar to SIFT descriptors [27], and higher-order scattering
can provide insight into the information added with depth
[30]. Moreover, theoretical and empirical study of information encoded in scattering networks indicates that they often
promote linear separability, which leads to effective representations for downstream classification tasks [1,12,17,31].
Scattering-based models have been shown to be useful in
several applications involving scarcely annotated or limited
labeled data [12, 17, 33, 36]. Indeed, most breakthroughs
in deep learning in general, and CNNs in particular, involve significant effort in collecting massive amounts of
well-annotated data to be used when training deep overparameterized networks. While big data is becoming increasingly prevalent, there are numerous applications where
the task of annotating more than a small number of samples is infeasible, giving rise to increasing interest in smallsample learning tasks and deep-learning approaches towards them [8, 9, 43]. Recent work has shown that, in image classification, state-of-the-art results can be achieved
by hybrid networks that harness the scattering transform
as their early layers followed by learned layers based on
a wide residual network architecture [33]. Here, we further
advance this research avenue by proposing to use the scattering paradigm not only as fixed preprocessing layers in a
concatenated architecture, but also as a parametric prior to
learn filters in a CNN. This allows us to also shed light on
whether the standard wavelet construction [28] is an optimal
approach for building filterbanks from a mother-wavelet for
discriminative tasks.
Recall that the scattering construction is based on complex wavelets, generated from a mother wavelet via dilations and rotations, aimed to cover the frequency plane
while having the capacity to encode informative variabil-

5749

