P3Depth: Monocular Depth Estimation with a Piecewise Planarity Prior
Vaishakh Patil1
1

Christos Sakaridis1

Alexander Liniger1

Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zürich

2

Luc Van Gool1,2

PSI, KU Leuven

Abstract
Monocular depth estimation is vital for scene understanding and downstream tasks. We focus on the supervised setup, in which ground-truth depth is available only
at training time. Based on knowledge about the high regularity of real 3D scenes, we propose a method that learns
to selectively leverage information from coplanar pixels to
improve the predicted depth. In particular, we introduce a
piecewise planarity prior which states that for each pixel,
there is a seed pixel which shares the same planar 3D surface with the former. Motivated by this prior, we design a
network with two heads. The first head outputs pixel-level
plane coefficients, while the second one outputs a dense offset vector field that identifies the positions of seed pixels.
The plane coefficients of seed pixels are then used to predict
depth at each position. The resulting prediction is adaptively fused with the initial prediction from the first head
via a learned confidence to account for potential deviations from precise local planarity. The entire architecture is
trained end-to-end thanks to the differentiability of the proposed modules and it learns to predict regular depth maps,
with sharp edges at occlusion boundaries. An extensive
evaluation of our method shows that we set the new state of
the art in supervised monocular depth estimation, surpassing prior methods on NYU Depth-v2 and on the Garg split
of KITTI. Our method delivers depth maps that yield plausible 3D reconstructions of the input scenes. Code is available at: https://github.com/SysCV/P3Depth

1. Introduction
Depth estimation is a fundamental problem in computer
vision. It consists in predicting the perpendicular coordinate
of the 3D point depicted at each pixel. Applications range
from robotics to autonomous cars. There is experimental
evidence [84] that depth is the most vital vision-level cue for
executing actions, together with semantic segmentation. In
this work, we focus on monocular depth estimation, which
involves the challenge of scale ambiguity, as the same input
image can be generated by infinitely many 3D scenes.
The current trend in solving this task involves fully convolutional neural networks that output a dense depth predic-

Image

Depth

Intermediate Representations

Figure 1. Real-world 3D scenes have a high degree of regularity.
We propose a method which can exploit this regularity, by implicitly learning intermediate representations that contain useful
information about local planes in the scene. The proposed end-toend model predicts high-quality depth maps with sharp edges at
occlusion boundaries, which yield consistent 3D reconstructions.

tion either with standard supervision on depth [9, 12, 32, 71]
or with self-supervision by using the predicted depth to reconstruct neighboring views of the scene [16, 18, 19, 85].
Most supervised approaches use a pixel-level loss which
treats predictions at different pixels separately. This regime
ignores the high degree of regularity of real-world 3D
scenes, which generally yield piecewise smooth depth maps.
A common choice for modeling this prior knowledge of
the geometry of real 3D scenes are planes [2, 6, 41, 42].
Planes are the local first-order Taylor approximation for locally differentiable depth maps and they are easy to parameterize using three independent coefficients. Once a pixel
is associated with a plane, its depth can be recovered from
the position of the pixel and the coefficients of the associated plane. In [83], such a plane coefficient representation
is used to learn to predict planes explicitly.
We adopt the plane representation from [83], but we depart from the explicit prediction of planes and rather use
this representation as an appropriate output space for defining interactions between pixels based on planarity priors.
In particular, the first head of our network outputs dense
11610

