Habitat-Web: Learning Embodied Object-Search Strategies
from Human Demonstrations at Scale
Ram Ramrakhya1 Eric Undersander2 Dhruv Batra1,2 Abhishek Das2
1
Georgia Institute of Technology 2 Meta AI Research
1

{ram.ramrakhya,dbatra}@gatech.edu

Abstract
We present a large-scale study of imitating human demonstrations on tasks that require a virtual robot to search for
objects in new environments – (1) ObjectGoal Navigation
(e.g. ‘find & go to a chair’) and (2) P ICK &P LACE (e.g. ‘find
mug, pick mug, find counter, place mug on counter’). First,
we develop a virtual teleoperation data-collection infrastructure – connecting Habitat simulator running in a web
browser to Amazon Mechanical Turk, allowing remote users
to teleoperate virtual robots, safely and at scale. We collect
80k demonstrations for O BJECT NAV and 12k demonstrations for P ICK &P LACE, which is an order of magnitude
larger than existing human demonstration datasets in simulation or on real robots. Our virtual teleoperation data
contains 29.3M actions, and is equivalent to 22.6k hours of
real-world teleoperation time, and illustrates rich, diverse
strategies for solving the tasks. Second, we use this data to
answer the question – how does large-scale imitation learning (IL) (which has not been hitherto possible) compare to
reinforcement learning (RL) (which is the status quo)? On
O BJECT NAV, we find that IL (with no bells or whistles) using 70k human demonstrations outperforms RL using 240k
agent-gathered trajectories. This effectively establishes an
‘exchange rate’ – a single human demonstration appears to
be worth ∼4 agent-gathered ones. More importantly, we find
the IL-trained agent learns efficient object-search behavior
from humans – it peeks into rooms, checks corners for small
objects, turns in place to get a panoramic view – none of
these are exhibited as prominently by the RL agent, and to induce these behaviors via contemporary RL techniques would
require tedious reward engineering. Finally, accuracy vs.
training data size plots show promising scaling behavior,
suggesting that simply collecting more demonstrations is
likely to advance the state of art further. On P ICK &P LACE,
the comparison is starker – IL agents achieve ∼18% success on episodes with new object-receptacle locations when
trained with 9.5k human demonstrations, while RL agents
fail to get beyond 0%. Overall, our work provides compelling
evidence for investing in large-scale imitation learning.
Project page: ram81.github.io/projects/habitat-web.

2

{eundersander,abhshkdz}@fb.com

1. Introduction
General-purpose robots that can perform a diverse set of
embodied tasks in a diverse set of environments have to be
good at visual exploration. Consider the canonical example
of asking a household robot, ‘Where are my keys?’. To
answer this (assuming the robot does not remember the
answer from memory), the robot would have to search the
house, often guided by intelligent priors – e.g. peeking into
the washroom or kitchen might be sufficient to be reasonably
sure the keys are not there, while exhaustively searching
the living room might be much more important since keys
are more likely to be there. While doing so, the robot has
to internally keep track of where all it has been to avoid
redundant search, and it might also have to interact with
objects, e.g. check drawers and cabinets in the living room
(but not those in the washroom or kitchen!).
This example illustrates fairly sophisticated exploration, involving a careful interplay of various implicit objectives
(semantic priors, exhaustive search, efficient navigation, interaction, etc.). Many recent tasks of interest in the embodied
AI community – e.g. ObjectGoal Navigation [1, 2], rearrangement [3,4], language-guided navigation [5,6] and interaction [7], question answering [8–12] – involve some flavor
of this visual exploration. With careful reward engineering,
reinforcement learning (RL) approaches to these tasks have
achieved commendable success [13–17]. However, engineering the ‘right’ reward function so that the learned policy
exhibits desired behavior is unintuitive and frustrating (even
for domain experts), expensive (requiring multiple rounds of
retraining under different rewards), and not scalable to new
tasks or behaviors. For complex tasks (e.g. object rearrangement or tasks specified in open-ended natural language), RL
from scratch may not even get off the ground.
In this work, we advance the alternative research agenda of
imitation learning [18] – i.e. collecting a large dataset of
human demonstrations (that implicitly capture intelligent behavior we wish to impart to our agents) and learning policies
directly from these human demonstrations.
First, we develop a safe scalable virtual teleoperation datacollection infrastructure – connecting the Habitat simulator

5173

