Hyperspherical Consistency Regularization
Cheng Tan1,2,∗ , Zhangyang Gao1,2,∗ , Lirong Wu1,2 , Siyuan Li1,2 , Stan Z. Li1,2
1
AI Lab, School of Engineering, Westlake University
2
Institute of Advanced Technology, Westlake Institute for Advanced Study
*{tancheng,gaozhangyang,wulirong,lisiyuan,stan.zq.li}@westlake.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent advances in contrastive learning have enlightened diverse applications across various semi-supervised
fields. Jointly training supervised learning and unsupervised learning with a shared feature encoder becomes a
common scheme. Though it benefits from taking advantage
of both feature-dependent information from self-supervised
learning and label-dependent information from supervised
learning, this scheme remains suffering from bias of the
classifier. In this work, we systematically explore the relationship between self-supervised learning and supervised
learning, and study how self-supervised learning helps robust data-efficient deep learning. We propose hyperspherical consistency regularization (HCR), a simple yet effective plug-and-play method, to regularize the classifier using feature-dependent information and thus avoid bias from
labels. Specifically, HCR first project logits from the classifier and feature projections from the projection head on
the respective hypersphere, then it enforces data points on
hyperspheres to have similar structures by minimizing binary cross entropy of pairwise distances’ similarity metrics. Extensive experiments on semi-supervised and weaklysupervised learning demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method, by showing superior performance with HCR.

1. Introduction
The last decade has witnessed revolutionary advances in
deep learning across various computer vision fields such as
image classification [26,29,38,72], object detection [48,64–
66], and semantic segmentation [25, 47, 67] in the presence
of large-scale labeled datasets. However, massive collection and accurate annotation of datasets are time-consuming
and expensive. In many practical situations, only smallscale high-quality labeled datasets are available. For this
reason, semi-supervised learning (SSL) that learning from
few labeled data and a large number of unlabeled data has
received broad attention [4, 5, 42, 62, 63, 69, 71, 73, 84, 85].
* Equal contribution

𝑓(𝑥$" )

𝑓(𝑥$# )

𝑓(𝑥!" )
𝑓(𝑥!# )

encoder 𝑓

encoder 𝑓

𝑥!

𝑥"

Figure 1. Illustration of contrastive learning on the hypersphere.
Red arrows denote positive pairs tend to attract each other, and the
gray arrow denotes negative pairs tend to repel each other.

With the development of contrastive learning [7, 9–11,
20, 24, 27, 28, 45, 74, 80, 90, 94], recent SSL algorithms [23,
34, 43, 70, 79, 81, 92] tend to extend self-supervised learning into supervised learning by adding a branch network as
a projection head that jointly learns from feature-dependent
and label-dependent information. Though the feature encoder is supposed to learn better by making agreements
from different views on latent spaces, the classifier which
determines the ultimate predictions still suffers from the
bias of semi-supervision or weak-supervision. Typically,
[33, 93] found that data imbalance is not the key issue in
learning high-quality representations from long-tail data,
while simply adjusting the classifier with balanced sampling can effectively alleviate the imblanced bias. This phenomenon suggests that decent representation may help but
not be enough for robust learning, while regularizing the
classifier is necessary to improve learning performance.

7244

