Self-supervised Correlation Mining Network for Person Image Generation
†

Zijian Wang1 , Xingqun Qi1 , Kun Yuan2 , Muyi Sun3
1
School of AI/Auto, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
Kuaishou Technology 3 CRIPAC, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{wangzijianbupt, XingqunQi}@bupt.edu.cn, yuankun03@kuaishou.com,

References

Target Poses

muyi.sun@cripac.ia.ac.cn

Source

Source

Figure 1. Exemplary samples synthesized by our self-supervised person image generation framework. Our method could generate the
same person images with the target poses (left image set), or generate person images with specific attributes referring to different person
images (right image set). Better viewed by zooming in the electronic version.

Abstract
Person image generation aims to perform non-rigid deformation on source images, which generally requires unaligned data pairs for training. Recently, self-supervised
methods express great prospects in this task by merging the
disentangled representations for self-reconstruction. However, such methods fail to exploit the spatial correlation
between the disentangled features. In this paper, we propose a Self-supervised Correlation Mining Network (SCMNet) to rearrange the source images in the feature space,
in which two collaborative modules are integrated, Decomposed Style Encoder (DSE) and Correlation Mining Module
(CMM). Specifically, the DSE first creates unaligned pairs
at the feature level. Then, the CMM establishes the spatial correlation field for feature rearrangement. Eventually,
a translation module transforms the rearranged features to
realistic results. Meanwhile, for improving the fidelity of
cross-scale pose transformation, we propose a graph based
Body Structure Retaining Loss (BSR Loss) to preserve reasonable body structures on half body to full body generation. Extensive experiments conducted on DeepFashion
dataset demonstrate the superiority of our method com† Corresponding author.

pared with other supervised and unsupervised approaches.
Furthermore, satisfactory results on face generation show
the versatility of our method in other deformation tasks.

1. Introduction
Pose guided person image generation is an unaligned image to image translation problem, which aims to change
the posture of a person image given target poses as condition [18, 20, 21, 31, 36, 41]. Person image generation has
shown great potential in many fields, such as film industry
and multimedia creation. However, the difficulty of performing non-rigid deformation makes this task an active
topic in the community of computer vision.
Due to the large spatial misalignment between the source
and target images, existing approaches generally need unaligned data pairs to supervise the training process [18, 21,
31,36,41]. For instance, [31,41] calculate the attention map
between paired poses to guide the anomalous pose deformation. [3,7,25] establish the coordinate offset flow to promote
the position-level source feature sampling for person feature
alignment. With such attention or flow mechanism, the generative methods could be capable to perform spatial transformations when the source images and target poses are

7703

