Transform-Retrieve-Generate:
Natural Language-Centric Outside-Knowledge Visual Question Answering
Feng Gao1

Qing Ping2

Govind Thattai2 Aishwarya Reganti 2 Ying Nian Wu 1
1
University of California, Los Angeles, 2 Amazon

Prem Natarajan2

f.gao@ucla.edu, ywu@stat.ucla.edu, {pingqing,thattg,areganti,premknat}@amazon.com

Abstract
Outside-knowledge visual question answering (OKVQA) requires the agent to comprehend the image, make
use of relevant knowledge from the entire web, and digest
all the information to answer the question. Most previous works address the problem by first fusing the image
and question in the multi-modal space, which is inflexible
for further fusion with a vast amount of external knowledge. In this paper, we call for an alternative paradigm for
the OK-VQA task, which transforms the image into plain
text, so that we can enable knowledge passage retrieval,
and generative question-answering in the natural language
space. This paradigm takes advantage of the sheer volume of gigantic knowledge bases and the richness of pretrained language models. A Transform-Retrieve-Generate
framework (TRiG) framework is proposed1 , which can be
plug-and-played with alternative image-to-text models and
textual knowledge bases. Experimental results show that
our TRiG framework outperforms all state-of-the-art supervised methods by at least 11.1% absolute margin.

1. Introduction
The visual question answering (VQA) task is to provide
a natural language answer to a natural language question
given an image [2]. This task has been well studied in the
research communities, and numerous cross-modal methods
have achieved state-of-the-art performance [6,14,21,30,31,
34, 50, 63, 67, 69]. The knowledge-based visual question
answering (KB-VQA) task requires more extensive learning since the questions can be answered only by referring
to external general knowledge [35, 48, 48, 57, 58]. Most
KB-VQA datasets come with pre-defined knowledge bases,
and each question is annotated with at least one supporting
knowledge fact. Moreover, the recently proposed outsideknowledge visual question answering (OK-VQA) task is the
most open in the sense that any external knowledge can be
1 The code of this work will be made public.

Figure 1. An intuitive example of our TRiG framework on the
OK-VQA problem. Our Framework transform all information into
language space and performs retrieved-based question answering
through generative language models.

used to answer the questions.
Consider the example in Figure 1. As a human, one
needs to first identify objects like giraffes and trees in the
image, and associate the giraffes to the word animal in the
question. Second, the human needs to apply his/her acquired commonsense knowledge about giraffe’s characteristics and answer the question that giraffe is known for having a long neck. For machine learning models to solve the
same problem, there are several unique challenges. First, in
order to answer such a question, one has to align the image,
the question, and the vast amount of knowledge passages
into one common space. One solution is to first fuse the image and question information in the multi-modal space with
pre-trained vision-language models, and then inject knowledge into the multi-modal space. Most previous work on
OK-VQA follow this paradigm, including directly injecting
the knowledge embeddings [12,49] and fusing the output of
a vision-language model with the knowledge graph through
graph convolutional network [39]. However, this paradigm
is at the cost of squeezing the rich representation of the
textual knowledge, in the magnitude of hundreds of millions, into a much smaller multi-modal space. Comparing
to knowledge corpus such as BookCorpus (800M words)

5067

