Surface-Aligned Neural Radiance Fields for Controllable 3D Human Synthesis
Tianhan Xu*
The University of Tokyo

Yasuhiro Fujita
Eiichi Matsumoto
Preferred Networks, Inc.

tianhan.xu@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

{fujita, matsumoto}@preferred.jp

Abstract
We propose a new method for reconstructing controllable implicit 3D human models from sparse multi-view
RGB videos. Our method defines the neural scene representation on the mesh surface points and signed distances
from the surface of a human body mesh. We identify an
indistinguishability issue that arises when a point in 3D
space is mapped to its nearest surface point on a mesh for
learning surface-aligned neural scene representation. To
address this issue, we propose projecting a point onto a
mesh surface using a barycentric interpolation with modified vertex normals. Experiments with the ZJU-MoCap and
Human3.6M datasets show that our approach achieves a
higher quality in a novel-view and novel-pose synthesis than
existing methods. We also demonstrate that our method easily supports the control of body shape and clothes. Project
page: https://pfnet- research.github.io/
surface-aligned-nerf/.

1. Introduction
Human body modeling is a long-studied topic for its
wide range of real-world applications. In visual applications such as movies or games, which often require freeviewpoint rendering, it is common to expect 3D human
models to have controllable properties such as pose, shape,
and clothes. Because manually designing high-quality 3D
human models is usually labor-intensive, increasing studies [1–3, 24, 27, 30, 35, 36] have proposed the reconstruction
of 3D human models using only 2D observations. In this
paper, we focus on the free-viewpoint 3D human synthesis
with the above controllable properties from sparse multiview RGB videos.
Early approaches [6, 42] deformed the pre-scanned template meshes with a skeleton for modeling a human shape
and/or texture. Parametric 3D human models [4, 26, 34]
have been proposed to reconstruct rough human meshes
with pose and body shape estimation. Subsequent studies [1–3, 27] introduced more features, such as per-vertex
deformation or texture, to express richer details. Such
* Work done while the first author interned at Preferred Networks, Inc.

parametric model-based approaches, despite having good
controllable properties, show limitations in representing
clothed humans, particularly when the actual shape differs
significantly from the base parametric mesh estimation.
Neural radiance fields (NeRF) [28], a new form of 3D
scene representation, has recently become the new baseline method in 3D reconstruction for its photorealistic rendering results of novel camera view. NeRF represents
the scene as a continuous volumetric representation using a neural network to regress the color and density at
a given query point from a given view direction. Several approaches [24, 30, 35, 36] have been proposed to incorporate knowledge from a statistical 3D human model
and its pose estimation with NeRF. They differ in how a
query point is transformed and represented. Deformationbased approaches [24, 35] use a deformation field to transform the query point from the observation space to a poseindependent canonical space and then build NeRF in the
canonical space. Other approaches transform the query
points into local coordinate systems [30] or to a latent code
representation [36], with the help of human pose estimation.
In this paper, we propose a new approach for achieving
a dynamic human reconstruction by combining parametric
3D body models such as SMPL [26] with NeRF. The basic idea of our approach is straightforward and simple: we
propose building a NeRF on the mesh surface. We devise
an algorithm to map a query point to a mesh surface point
with a signed height, which can represent the local position
of the point with respect to the mesh. Using the information of the surface point position and the signed height of a
query point as input, we build a surface-aligned NeRF that
is aligned with the mesh surface; thus, it can be easily deformed or controlled according to the base SMPL model.
Our approach has the following advantages: First, with
the help of the devised mapping algorithm, our method does
not rely on a learned deformation field, saving the number
of learned parameters. Second, the models reconstructed
using our method can be controlled directly by the SMPL
parameters, that is, both poses and body shapes. Third, due
to the surface-aligned property, our approach shows a better
generalization ability for a novel human pose synthesis.

15883

