GOAL: Generating 4D Whole-Body Motion for Hand-Object Grasping
Omid Taheri Vasileios Choutas Michael J. Black Dimitrios Tzionas
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
{otaheri, vchoutas, black, dtzionas}@tue.mpg.de

Figure 1. GOAL generates whole-body motions for approaching and grasping an unseen 3D object. The figure shows generated motions
for 2 people (top, bottom), each grasping a different novel object. For each sequence we show 4 different views (left to right), as well as
zoomed-in circular snapshots of the final grasp. GOAL is the first method to generate such a natural motion and grasp for the full body.

Abstract
Generating digital humans that move realistically has
many applications and is widely studied, but existing methods focus on the major limbs of the body, ignoring the hands
and head. Hands have been separately studied, but the focus has been on generating realistic static grasps of objects.
To synthesize virtual characters that interact with the world,
we need to generate full-body motions and realistic hand
grasps simultaneously. Both sub-problems are challenging
on their own and, together, the state space of poses is significantly larger, the scales of hand and body motions differ, and the whole-body posture and the hand grasp must
agree, satisfy physical constraints, and be plausible. Additionally, the head is involved because the avatar must look
at the object to interact with it. For the first time, we address the problem of generating full-body, hand and head
motions of an avatar grasping an unknown object. As input, our method, called GOAL, takes a 3D object, its pose,

and a starting 3D body pose and shape. GOAL outputs a
sequence of whole-body poses using two novel networks.
First, GNet generates a goal whole-body grasp with a realistic body, head, arm, and hand pose, as well as handobject contact. Second, MNet generates the motion between the starting and goal pose. This is challenging, as
it requires the avatar to walk towards the object with footground contact, orient the head towards it, reach out, and
grasp it with a realistic hand pose and hand-object contact. To achieve this the networks exploit a representation
that combines SMPL-X body parameters and 3D vertex offsets. We train and evaluate GOAL, both qualitatively and
quantitatively, on the GRAB dataset. Results show that
GOAL generalizes well to unseen objects, outperforming
baselines. A perceptual study shows that GOAL’s generated motions approach the realism of GRAB’s ground truth.
GOAL takes a step towards generating realistic full-body
object grasping motion. Our models and code are available
at https://goal.is.tue.mpg.de.

13263

