Blended Diffusion for Text-driven Editing of Natural Images
Omri Avrahami1
Dani Lischinski1
Ohad Fried2
1
2
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Reichman University

Abstract
Natural language offers a highly intuitive interface for
image editing. In this paper, we introduce the first solution
for performing local (region-based) edits in generic natural
images, based on a natural language description along with
an ROI mask. We achieve our goal by leveraging and combining a pretrained language-image model (CLIP), to steer
the edit towards a user-provided text prompt, with a denoising diffusion probabilistic model (DDPM) to generate
natural-looking results. To seamlessly fuse the edited region
with the unchanged parts of the image, we spatially blend
noised versions of the input image with the local text-guided
diffusion latent at a progression of noise levels. In addition,
we show that adding augmentations to the diffusion process mitigates adversarial results. We compare against several baselines and related methods, both qualitatively and
quantitatively, and show that our method outperforms these
solutions in terms of overall realism, ability to preserve the
background and matching the text. Finally, we show several
text-driven editing applications, including adding a new object to an image, removing/replacing/altering existing objects, background replacement, and image extrapolation.

1. Introduction
It is said that “a picture is worth a thousand words”, but
recent research indicates that only a few words are often
sufficient to describe one. Recent works that leverage the
tremendous progress in vision-language models and datadriven image generation have demonstrated that text-based
interfaces for image creation and manipulation are now finally within reach [12, 23, 29, 30, 38, 39, 41, 47, 51, 57].
The most impressive results in text-driven image manipulation leverage the strong generative capabilities of modern GANs [6,19,25–27]. However, GAN-based approaches
are typically limited to images from a restricted domain,
on which the GAN was trained. Furthermore, in order to
manipulate real images, they must be first inverted into the
GAN’s latent space. Although many GAN inversion techniques have recently emerged [1–3, 44, 48, 52, 59], it was
also shown that there is a trade-off between the reconstruc-

input+mask

no prompt

input+mask

“big mountain”

“white ball” “bowl of water”

“big wall”

“New York City”

Figure 1. Text-driven object/background replacement: Given
an input image and a mask, we modify the masked area according
to a guiding text prompt, without affecting the unmasked regions.

tion accuracy and the editability of the inverted images [48].
Restricting the image manipulation to a specific region in
the image is another challenge for existing approaches [4].
In this work, we present the first approach for regionbased editing of generic real-world natural images, using
natural language text guidance1 . Specifically, we aim at
a text-driven method that (1) can operate on real images,
rather than generated ones, (2) is not restricted to a specific domain, such as human faces or bedrooms, (3) modifies only a user-specified region, while preserving the rest
of the image, (4) yields globally coherent (seamless) editing
results, and (5) capable of generating multiple results for the
same input, because of the one-to-many nature of the task.
Several examples of such edits are shown in Figure 1.
The demanding image editing scenario described above
has not received much attention in the deep-learning era.
In fact, the most closely related works are classical approaches, such as seamless cloning [14,37] and image completion [21], none of which are text-driven. A more recent related work is zero-shot semantic image painting [4]
in which arbitrary simple textual descriptions can be attributed to the desired location within an image. However,
this method does not operate on real images (requirement
1), does not preserve the background of the image (require1 Code is available at:
https : / / omriavrahami . com /
blended-diffusion-page/

18208

