Moving Window Regression: A Novel Approach to Ordinal Regression
Nyeong-Ho Shin
Korea University

Seon-Ho Lee
Korea University

Chang-Su Kim
Korea University

nhshin@mcl.korea.ac.kr

seonholee@mcl.korea.ac.kr

changsukim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
A novel ordinal regression algorithm, called moving window regression (MWR), is proposed in this paper. First,
we propose the notion of relative rank (ρ-rank), which is
a new order representation scheme for input and reference
instances. Second, we develop global and local relative regressors (ρ-regressors) to predict ρ-ranks within entire and
speciﬁc rank ranges, respectively. Third, we reﬁne an initial rank estimate iteratively by selecting two reference instances to form a search window and then estimating the
ρ-rank within the window. Extensive experiments results
show that the proposed algorithm achieves the state-of-theart performances on various benchmark datasets for facial age estimation and historical color image classiﬁcation. The codes are available at https://github.
com/nhshin-mcl/MWR.

1. Introduction
Ordinal regression aims to predict the rank of an object
instance. It is widely used for computer vision tasks, including facial age estimation [35] and historical color image
(HCI) classiﬁcation [34]. Thus, various ordinal regression
techniques have been developed.
Rank estimation, however, remains challenging because
there is no clear distinction between ranks in many cases.
For example, in facial age estimation, the aging process [2,
46], causing variations in facial shapes, sizes, and texture,
has large individual differences due to numerous factors
such as genes, diet, and lifestyle, and there are no clear aging characteristics in each age class. To address this issue,
extensive researches have been carried out. Recently, Li et
al. [26] used tens of local regressors, each of which learns
aging characteristics within a speciﬁc age range. Also, Lim
et al. [27] proposed the notion of order learning, and Lee
and Kim [22] improved it based on the order-identity decomposition.
To measure the quantity of something, it would be easier
and more accurate if some references are available [4]. For
example, we can estimate the length of an object more accurately if we have a one-meter bar as a reference. In this
18760

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

27

28

29

30

31

32

31

32

Input Image

Age: 29

: Initial Result

: Previous Result

: Refinement Result

: Final Result

Figure 1. In the MWR algorithm for facial age estimation, an initial rank (age) estimate of the input image is reﬁned iteratively by
estimating the ρ-rank within a search window (orange bar). The
window is bounded by the known ranks of two reference images,
and the ρ-rank quantiﬁes how much older or younger the input is
than the references. Each window is centered around the previous result. It is strongly recommended to watch the accompanying
video for an overview of MWR. Also, note that MWR is applicable to general ordinal regression tasks, as well as age estimation.

case, our brains measure the ratio between the lengths of the
object and the bar, instead of the absolute length of the object. Similarly, multiple references of different ranks can offer a useful ordinal scale in rank estimation, as a one-meter
bar does in the length measurement. Therefore, rather than
predicting the absolute rank of an instance directly, we attempt to estimate the relative rank that quantiﬁes how much
greater or smaller the instance is than the references.
Based on the observations, we propose a novel ordinal regression algorithm, called moving window regression
(MWR), which is illustrated in Figure 1. First, we propose
the notion of relative rank (ρ-rank), which quantiﬁes the ordinal relations among the ranks of input and reference instances: the ρ-rank measures how much greater the input
is than the ﬁrst reference and how much smaller it is than
the second one. Second, to estimate the ρ-rank, we develop
a relative regressor (ρ-regressor), composed of an encoder
and a regression module. Third, we propose the MWR process in Figure 1. It obtains an initial rank estimate of an input instance based on the nearest neighbor (NN) criterion.
Then, it reﬁnes the estimate iteratively by selecting two ref-

