Stacked Hybrid-Attention and Group Collaborative Learning
for Unbiased Scene Graph Generation
Xingning Dong1 ,

Tian Gan1†,

Xuemeng Song1 ,
1

2

Shandong University,

dongxingning1998@gmail.com,
jlwu1992@sdu.edu.cn,

Jianlong Wu1 ,

chengyuan.c@antgroup.com,

109355

1. Introduction
Scene Graph Generation (SGG) [41] targets at organizing all the objects and their pairwise relationships into
a compact summary graph. As an intermediate visual
understanding task, SGG could benefit various vision-andlanguage tasks, including cross-modal retrieval [6, 11, 28],
image captioning [2, 10, 51], and visual question answering
[12, 32, 48]. However, SGG is still far from satisfactory for
practical applications due to the insufficient modality fusion
and the biased relationship predictions.
† Corresponding authors.

Imbalanced Instances in Training Set

Scene Graph Generation, which generally follows a
regular encoder-decoder pipeline, aims to first encode the
visual contents within the given image and then parse them
into a compact summary graph. Existing SGG approaches
generally not only neglect the insufficient modality fusion
between vision and language, but also fail to provide informative predicates due to the biased relationship predictions,
leading SGG far from practical. Towards this end, we first
present a novel Stacked Hybrid-Attention network, which
facilitates the intra-modal refinement as well as the intermodal interaction, to serve as the encoder. We then devise
an innovative Group Collaborative Learning strategy to
optimize the decoder. Particularly, based on the observation
that the recognition capability of one classifier is limited
towards an extremely unbalanced dataset, we first deploy
a group of classifiers that are expert in distinguishing
different subsets of classes, and then cooperatively optimize
them from two aspects to promote the unbiased SGG. Experiments conducted on VG and GQA datasets demonstrate
that, we not only establish a new state-of-the-art in the
unbiased metric, but also nearly double the performance
compared with two baselines. Our code is available at
https://github.com/dongxingning/SHA-GCL-for-SGG.

Liqiang Nie1

Ant Group

gantian@sdu.edu.cn,

Abstract

Yuan Cheng2†,

sxmustc@gmail.com
nieliqiang@gmail.com

2

1

Visual Contents

Group 1

Semantic Cues

Group 2

Man

Input Image
Group 3

Dog

Surfboard

Intra-Modal
Refinement
Inter-Modal
Interaction
Intra-Modal
Refinement

Group 4
Group 5

31347

6712
1413

333

50 Predicate Categories within Visual Genome Dataset

Figure 1. Two intentions to promote the unbiased SGG. (1)
For the insufficient modality fusion, we aim to enhance both the
intra-modal refinement and the inter-modal interaction (see the
top-right corner of the figure). And (2) we split the extremely
unbalanced dataset into a set of relatively balanced groups, based
on which we configure the classification space for all the newlyadded classifiers (see the rest part of the figure).

Though it is manifestly proved that incorporating semantic cues (language priors of object class names) into visual
contents (object proposals) could significantly improve the
generation capability [18,21], most of the recent approaches
[17, 26, 30, 31, 42, 43, 46, 47] simply fuse these visual and
semantic features by summing up directly or concatenation,
which limits the model to further infer their interaction
information. To address this under-explored insufficient
modality fusion between visual contents and semantic cues,
we aim to strengthen the encoder via jointly exploring the
intra-modal refinement and the inter-modal interaction, as
illustrated in Figure 1. To implement this intention, we
first design the Self-Attention (SA) unit and the CrossAttention (CA) unit to capture the intra-modal and intermodal information, respectively. We then organize these
two units into a Hybrid-Attention (HA) layer, and stack
several HA layers to build the encoder. The proposed
Stacked Hybrid-Attention (SHA) network could adequately
explore the multi-modal interaction, thus improving the
relationship prediction performance.

19427

