AirObject: A Temporally Evolving Graph Embedding for Object Identification
Nikhil Varma Keetha1,2
Chen Wang1
1
Carnegie Mellon University

Yuheng Qiu1
Kuan Xu3
Sebastian Scherer1
2
3
IIT (ISM) Dhanbad, India
Geek+ Corp

{keethanikhil, xukuanhit}@gmail.com, chenwang@dr.com, {yuhengq, basti}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
✓

Object encoding and identification are vital for robotic
tasks such as autonomous exploration, semantic scene understanding, and re-localization. Previous approaches have
attempted to either track objects or generate descriptors
for object identification. However, such systems are limited to a “fixed” partial object representation from a single
viewpoint. In a robot exploration setup, there is a requirement for a temporally “evolving” global object representation built as the robot observes the object from multiple
viewpoints. Furthermore, given the vast distribution of unknown novel objects in the real world, the object identification process must be class-agnostic. In this context, we
propose a novel temporal 3D object encoding approach,
dubbed AirObject, to obtain global keypoint graph-based
embeddings of objects. Specifically, the global 3D object
embeddings are generated using a temporal convolutional
network across structural information of multiple frames
obtained from a graph attention-based encoding method.
We demonstrate that AirObject achieves the state-of-the-art
performance for video object identification and is robust to
severe occlusion, perceptual aliasing, viewpoint shift, deformation, and scale transform, outperforming the stateof-the-art single-frame and sequential descriptors. To the
best of our knowledge, AirObject is one of the first temporal object encoding methods. Source code is available at
https://github.com/Nik-V9/AirObject.

1. Introduction
Object encoding and identification are crucial for robotic
tasks such as autonomous exploration, semantic scene understanding, and loop closure in simultaneous localization
and mapping (SLAM). For example, object-based semantic SLAM and identification of revisited objects require robust and efficient object encodings [41, 45, 46]. Prior approaches proposed in the literature have attempted to track
object detections [47], use keypoint features [10], and generate graph-based embeddings for object matching [50].
However, such systems are limited to a “fixed” object rep-

✓

✓

Figure 1. Temporally evolving topological graph representations
of objects within a video sequence. We propose a method, AirObject, to match these temporally evolving representations and alleviate problems caused by perceptually-aliased occluded single
frame representations.

resentation from a single viewpoint and are not robust to
severe occlusion, viewpoint shift, perceptual aliasing, or
scale transform. These single frame representations tend to
lead to false correspondences amongst perceptually-aliased
objects, especially when severely occluded. Hence, a robust object encoding method that aggregates the temporally
“evolving” object structures is necessary since we often observe more information when the camera or object moves,
as shown in Figure 1.
In this work, we propose a novel temporal encoding approach, dubbed AirObject, that encapsulates the evolving
topological graph-based representations of objects. It is
very simple and only contains three modules. Specifically,
we use extracted deep learned keypoint features [9] across
multiple frames to form sequences of object-wise topological graph neural networks (GNNs), which on embedding
generate temporal 3D object descriptors. We next employ
a graph attention-based sparse encoding method on these
topological GNNs to generate content graph features and
location graph features representing the structural information of the object. Then, these graph features are aggregated
across multiple frames using a single-layer temporal convolutional network to generate a temporal 3D object descrip-

8407

