Motion-modulated Temporal Fragment Alignment Network For Few-Shot
Action Recognition
∗

Jiamin Wu1 , Tianzhu Zhang1, , Zhe Zhang2 , Feng Wu1 , Yongdong Zhang1
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Lunar Exploration and Space Engineering Center of CNSA
jiaminwu@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {tzzhang, fengwu, zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn,cnclepzz@126.com

Abstract
While the majority of FSL models focus on image classiﬁcation, the extension to action recognition is rather challenging due to the additional temporal dimension in videos.
To address this issue, we propose an end-to-end Motionmodulated Temporal Fragment Alignment Network (MTFAN) by jointly exploring the task-speciﬁc motion modulation and the multi-level temporal fragment alignment for
Few-Shot Action Recognition (FSAR). The proposed MTFAN model enjoys several merits. First, we design a motion modulator conditioned on the learned task-speciﬁc motion embeddings, which can activate the channels related to
the task-shared motion patterns for each frame. Second,
a segment attention mechanism is proposed to automatically discover the higher-level segments for multi-level temporal fragment alignment, which encompasses the frameto-frame, segment-to-segment, and segment-to-frame alignments. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work to
exploit task-speciﬁc motion modulation for FSAR. Extensive
experimental results on four standard benchmarks demonstrate that the proposed model performs favorably against
the state-of-the-art FSAR methods.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved tremendous success in the
ﬁeld of action recognition [31,37,38,43]. However, modern
deep learning approaches require large amounts of annotated data, and collecting these data is laboriously difﬁcult
and costly [1]. To reduce the need for human annotation,
Few-Shot Learning (FSL) [9, 32, 41, 44] has been proposed
and gained increasing interest, which aims at classifying unlabeled samples (query set) into new unseen classes with
only a few labeled examples (support set).
While the majority of FSL models [9, 32, 41, 44] focus
on image classiﬁcation, its extension to video classiﬁcation is rather challenging. This is because videos have a
much more complicated structure than images with an additional temporal dimension [4]. To utilize the temporal
information, some recent methods [3, 4, 25] perform tem∗ Corresponding Author

(a) Frame-to-Frame Alignment (b) Segment-to-Segment Alignment

Query Video: Long Jump

Running

Jumping

Landing

Support Video: Long Jump
(c) Temporal Fragment Alignment

Figure 1. Different ways of alignment. (a), (b): The previous
methods [3, 4, 25] match videos at the single level, i.e., “frame
to frame” or “segment to segment”. (c) The temporal fragment
alignment is performed at multiple levels, i.e., “frame to frame”,
“segment to segment”, and “frame to segment”, which suits the
videos with different speeds in the real-world setting.

poral alignment to match the video frames or segments in
the temporal dimension (see Figure 1), which helps to differ order-sensitive actions. In [4], Cao et al. use Dynamic
Time Warping [24] to ﬁnd the optimal alignment path between frames. Then the video distance is measured as the
alignment cost of frame sequences. In [3] and [25], the attention mechanisms are utilized to achieve temporal alignment. In [3], Bishay et al. ﬁrst uniformly sample segments
from videos, with each of them containing the ﬁxed length
of frames. Then they feed these segments into 3D CNNs to
extract motion features, and conduct segment-level attention for temporal alignment. Similarly, in [25], it randomly
samples pairs/triplets of frames from videos to form video
segments, and performs attention over these segments.
By studying the previous Few-Shot Action Recognition (FSAR) methods that are based on temporal alignment [3, 4, 25], we sum up two aspects that are imperative
for building a robust FSAR model. (1) Task-speciﬁc Motion Pattern Mining. Motion modeling has been proved
essential for action recognition, as videos contain rich temporal structures [19]. Some methods [3, 16, 48] adopt 3D

9151

