ONCE-3DLanes: Building Monocular 3D Lane Detection
Fan Yan1 * Ming Nie1∗ Xinyue Cai2 Jianhua Han2 Hang Xu2 Zhen Yang2
Chaoqiang Ye2 Yanwei Fu1 Michael Bi Mi2 Li Zhang1†
1
School of Data Science, Fudan University 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
https://once-3dlanes.github.io

Abstract
We present ONCE-3DLanes, a real-world autonomous
driving dataset with lane layout annotation in 3D space.
Conventional 2D lane detection from a monocular image
yields poor performance of following planning and control
tasks in autonomous driving due to the case of uneven road.
Predicting the 3D lane layout is thus necessary and enables
effective and safe driving. However, existing 3D lane detection datasets are either unpublished or synthesized from
a simulated environment, severely hampering the development of this ﬁeld. In this paper, we take steps towards addressing these issues. By exploiting the explicit relationship
between point clouds and image pixels, a dataset annotation
pipeline is designed to automatically generate high-quality
3D lane locations from 2D lane annotations in 211K road
scenes. In addition, we present an extrinsic-free, anchorfree method, called SALAD, regressing the 3D coordinates
of lanes in image view without converting the feature map
into the bird’s-eye view (BEV). To facilitate future research
on 3D lane detection, we benchmark the dataset and provide a novel evaluation metric, performing extensive experiments of both existing approaches and our proposed
method.
The aim of our work is to revive the interest of 3D lane
detection in a real-world scenario. We believe our work
can lead to the expected and unexpected innovations in both
academia and industry.

1. Introduction
The perception of lane structure is one of the most fundamental and safety-critical tasks in autonomous driving system. It is developed with the desired purpose of preventing
accidents, reducing emissions and improving the trafﬁc efﬁciency [4]. It serves as a key roll of many applications, such
* The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally to this work.
† Li Zhang (lizhangfd@fudan.edu.cn) is the corresponding author at

School of Data Science and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University

17143

Figure 1. Images and 3D lane examples of ONCE-3DLanes
dataset. ONCE-3DLanes covers various locations, illumination
conditions, weather conditions and with numerous slope scenes.

as lane keeping, high-deﬁnition (HD) map modeling [13],
trajectory planning etc. In light of its importance, there has
been a recent surge of interest in monocular 3D lane detection [6, 7, 10, 15, 32]. However, existing 3D lane detection
datasets are either unpublished, or synthesized in a simulated environment due to the difﬁculty of data acquisition
and high labor costs of annotation. With the only synthesized data, the model inevitably lacks generalization ability
in real-word scenarios. Although beneﬁting from the development of domain adaptation method [8], it still cannot
completely alleviate the domain gap.
Most existing image-based lane detection methods have
exclusively focused on formulating the lane detection problem as a 2D task [29, 34, 35], in which a typical pipeline is
to ﬁrstly detect lanes in the image plane based on semantic segmentation or coordinate regression and then project
the detected lanes in top view by assuming the ground is
ﬂat [28, 33]. With well-calibrated camera extrinsics, the inverse perspective mapping (IPM) is able to obtain an acceptable approximation for 3D lane in the ﬂat ground plane.
However, in real-world driving environment, roads are not
always ﬂat [7] and camera extrinsics are sensitive to vehicle
body motion due to speed change or bumpy road, which will

