Zoom In and Out: A Mixed-scale Triplet Network
for Camouflaged Object Detection
Youwei Pang1†, Xiaoqi Zhao1†, Tian-Zhu Xiang3 , Lihe Zhang1 * and Huchuan Lu1,2
1
Dalian University of Technology, China 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
3
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
{lartpang, zxq}@mail.dlut.edu.cn, tianzhu.xiang19@gmail.com, {zhanglihe, lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Camouflaged objects are often “seamlessly” integrated
into the environment by changing their appearance, coloration or pattern to avoid detection, such as chameleons,
cuttlefishes and flatfishes. This is mainly due to their
self-protection mechanism in the harsh living environment.
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
* Corresponding author.

1

0

×
Image

+

×
SIUs

+

×

=

Top

The recently proposed camouflaged object detection
(COD) attempts to segment objects that are visually blended
into their surroundings, which is extremely complex and difficult in real-world scenarios. Apart from high intrinsic
similarity between the camouflaged objects and their background, the objects are usually diverse in scale, fuzzy in
appearance, and even severely occluded. To deal with these
problems, we propose a mixed-scale triplet network, ZoomNet, which mimics the behavior of humans when observing
vague images, i.e., zooming in and out. Specifically, our
ZoomNet employs the zoom strategy to learn the discriminative mixed-scale semantics by the designed scale integration unit and hierarchical mixed-scale unit, which fully
explores imperceptible clues between the candidate objects
and background surroundings. Moreover, considering the
uncertainty and ambiguity derived from indistinguishable
textures, we construct a simple yet effective regularization
constraint, uncertainty-aware loss, to promote the model
to accurately produce predictions with higher confidence
in candidate regions. Without bells and whistles, our proposed highly task-friendly model consistently surpasses the
existing 23 state-of-the-art methods on four public datasets.
Besides, the superior performance over the recent cuttingedge models on the SOD task also verifies the effectiveness
and generality of our model. The code will be available at
https://github.com/lartpang/ZoomNet.

Bottom

Abstract

HMUs

LastCBR

Pred

UAL

BCEL

L= − |

0

− |

0.5

=

1

+

Supervision

Figure 1. Illustration of ZoomNet. Based on zoom strategy, our
model distills the differentiated features at different “zoom” scales.
Then we design SIUs to screen and aggregate scale-specific features, and HMUs to reorganize and enhance mixed-scale features.
Under the supervision of BCEL and the proposed UAL, the model
produces the accurate and reliable camouflaged object prediction.
Note that BCEL is computed based on ground truth while UAL is
not. f : feature map; A: attention map. LastCBR: the last “ConvBN-ReLU” layer before the prediction. l/m/s: Different input
scales. The whiter region denotes the larger activation response.

Broadly speaking, camouflaged objects also refer to the
objects that are extremely small in size, highly similar to
the background, or heavily obscured. They subtly hide
themselves in the surroundings, making them difficult to
be found, e.g., soldiers wearing camouflaged uniforms and
lions hiding in the grass. Camouflaged object detection
(COD) is far more complex and challenging than traditional salient object detection or other object segmentation. Recently, it has attracted ever-growing research interest from the computer vision community and facilitates
many valuable real-life applications, such as search and rescue [6], species discovery [36], and medical image analysis [8, 9, 12, 18, 55].
Recently, numerous deep learning-based methods have
been proposed and achieved significant progress. Nevertheless, they are still struggled to accurately and reliably detect
camouflaged objects, due to visual insignificance of camouflaged objects, and high diversity in scale, appearance

2160

