A Comprehensive Study of Image Classification Model Sensitivity to
Foregrounds, Backgrounds, and Visual Attributes
Mazda Moayeri1

Phillip Pope1

Yogesh Balaji2

Soheil Feizi1

mmoayeri@umd.edu

pepope@umd.edu

ybalaji@nvidia.com

sfeizi@cs.umd.edu

1

University of Maryland

2

NVIDIA

Abstract
While datasets with single-label supervision have propelled rapid advances in image classification, additional
annotations are necessary in order to quantitatively assess how models make predictions. To this end, for a subset of ImageNet samples, we collect segmentation masks
for the entire object and 18 informative attributes. We
call this dataset RIVAL10 (RIch Visual Attributes with
Localization), consisting of roughly 26k instances over 10
classes. Using RIVAL10, we evaluate the sensitivity of a
broad set of models to noise corruptions in foregrounds,
backgrounds and attributes. In our analysis, we consider
diverse state-of-the-art architectures (ResNets, Transformers) and training procedures (CLIP, SimCLR, DeiT, Adversarial Training). We find that, somewhat surprisingly, in
ResNets, adversarial training makes models more sensitive
to the background compared to foreground than standard
training. Similarly, contrastively-trained models also have
lower relative foreground sensitivity in both transformers
and ResNets. Lastly, we observe intriguing adaptive abilities of transformers to increase relative foreground sensitivity as corruption level increases. Using saliency methods, we automatically discover spurious features that drive
the background sensitivity of models and assess alignment
of saliency maps with foregrounds. Finally, we quantitatively study the attribution problem for neural features by
comparing feature saliency with ground-truth localization
of semantic attributes.

Figure 1. Examples where background noise degrades performance of highly accurate models more than foreground noise.
Gaussian ℓ∞ noise with standard deviation σ = 0.24 shown.
Probabilities are averaged over ten trials. While these examples
are cherry picked, we observe that they are surprisingly prevalent,
and model design can affect the degree to which such cases arise.

1. Introduction
Large scale benchmark datasets like ImageNet [9] that
were constructed with single class label annotation have
propelled rapid advances in the image classification task
[18, 21, 50, 58]. Over the last decade, several network architectures and training procedures were proposed to yield

very high classification accuracies [10, 18, 45, 50]. However, methods to interpret these model predictions and to
diagnose undesirable behaviors are fairly limited. One of
the most popular class of approaches are saliency methods [43, 48, 49, 59] that use model gradients to produce a

19087

