Learning Non-target Knowledge for Few-shot Semantic Segmentation
Xiwen Yao1
Junwei Han1
Ling Shao3
Yuanwei Liu1
Nian Liu2 * Qinglong Cao1
1
2
Northwestern Polytechnical University
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence
3
Terminus Group, China
{liuyuanwei9809, liunian228, caoql19980603, yaoxiwen517, junweihan2010}@gmail.com
ling.shao@ieee.org

Abstract
Existing studies in few-shot semantic segmentation only
focus on mining the target object information, however, often are hard to tell ambiguous regions, especially in nontarget regions, which include background (BG) and Distracting Objects (DOs). To alleviate this problem, we propose a novel framework, namely Non-Target Region Eliminating (NTRE) network, to explicitly mine and eliminate
BG and DO regions in the query. First, a BG Mining
Module (BGMM) is proposed to extract the BG region via
learning a general BG prototype. To this end, we design
a BG loss to supervise the learning of BGMM only using
the known target object segmentation ground truth. Then,
a BG Eliminating Module and a DO Eliminating Module
are proposed to successively filter out the BG and DO information from the query feature, based on which we can
obtain a BG and DO-free target object segmentation result.
Furthermore, we propose a prototypical contrastive learning algorithm to improve the model ability of distinguishing the target object from DOs. Extensive experiments on
both PASCAL-5i and COCO-20i datasets show that our approach is effective despite its simplicity. Code is available
at https://github.com/LIUYUANWEI98/NERTNet

1. Introduction
Due to the rapid development of fully convolutional network (FCN) [21] architectures, deep learning has made
milestone progress in semantic segmentation. Most methods adopt the fully-supervised learning scheme and require
a mass of annotated data for training. Although they can
achieve good performance, their data-hungry nature demands time and labor-consuming image annotations. To
alleviate this problem, few-shot semantic segmentation was
proposed to segment unseen object classes in query images
with only a few annotated samples, namely supports.
Currently, there are many existing researches exploring
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Previous methods often show false positive predictions
in non-target regions. Pixels in red indicate the target objects,
while pixels in green mean false positive predictions.

Figure 2. Comparison between existing framework and ours for
few-shot segmentation. The main difference is that the former only
mines target category information, while we propose to eliminate
co-existing pixels belonging to non-target regions, including the
background (BG) and distracting objects (DO).

various deep learning methods for few-shot semantic segmentation [14, 20, 29, 31, 33, 42]. They usually extract features from both query and support images first, and then
extract the class-specific representation using the support
masks. Finally, a matching network is leveraged to segment
the target object in the query image using the class representation.
Most typically, prototypical learning methods [6, 31, 33,
42,44] use masked average pooling (MAP) on the target object regions of the support images to form a single or a few
prototypes. Then, prototypes are used to segment the target object in the query image via conducting dense feature

11573

