Finding Good Configurations of Planar Primitives in Unorganized Point Clouds
Mulin Yu
Florent Lafarge
Inria - Université Côte d’Azur
firstname.lastname@inria.fr

Abstract
We present an algorithm for detecting planar primitives
from unorganized 3D point clouds. Departing from an initial configuration, the algorithm refines both the continuous plane parameters and the discrete assignment of input points to them by seeking high fidelity, high simplicity
and high completeness. Our key contribution relies upon
the design of an exploration mechanism guided by a multiobjective energy function. The transitions within the large
solution space are handled by five geometric operators that
create, remove and modify primitives. We demonstrate the
potential of our method on a variety of scenes, from organic
shapes to man-made objects, and sensors, from multiview
stereo to laser. We show its efficacy with respect to existing
primitive fitting approaches and illustrate its applicative interest in compact mesh reconstruction, when combined with
a plane assembly method.

1. Introduction
Geometric primitives are popular representations for
processing massive 3D data. Such parametric shapes offer
a more compact yet meaningful description than raw point
clouds or dense meshes [16]. Among the most common
types of primitives, planes are particularly important due to
their relevance to man-made environments, e.g. urban and
indoor scenes. They have been successfully used in many
data processing tasks such as data registration [22, 55], object recognition [40], simultaneous localization and mapping [15, 17], structure from motion [39, 54], urban modeling [12, 56] and surface reconstruction [1, 7].
Fitting planar primitives to 3D point clouds is a longstanding problem in computer vision. This is commonly
formulated as a clustering operation: input points are
grouped into planar components under a user-specified fitting tolerance. Solving this problem is, however, not trivial
as (i) the number of primitives is unknown, and (ii) some input points, called outliers, are associated with no primitive
as they do not fall in the fitting tolerance zones of the primitives. Finding a good configuration of planar primitives is

somehow arbitrary and turns out to be a tradeoff between
three objectives:
1. Fidelity: the distance between a primitive and its associated input points, called inliers, must be small,
2. Simplicity: the number of primitives must be small,
3. Completeness: the ratio of inliers must be high.
Unfortunately, existing methods are not designed to explicitly control these three objectives simultaneously. They usually perform with one, sometimes two, objectives through
either incremental mechanisms [30, 37, 42], multi-labeling
energy minimization models [14, 28, 33] or neural networks
[21, 26, 43] that cannot fully explore the large configuration
space of this problem.
We propose an algorithm for fitting planar primitives to
unorganized point clouds by seeking high fidelity, high simplicity and high completeness altogether. Our key contribution relies on the design and efficient implementation of an
exploration mechanism that refines an initial configuration
by minimizing a multi-objective energy function. The transitions within the large solution space are handled by five
geometric operators that create, remove and modify primitives and re-assign inliers and outliers. The exploration
works in tandem by alternating variational optimization at
the global scale and a priority queue that sorts the local
operations likely to decrease the energy. Optionally, our
method offers the guarantee for not degrading the fidelity,
simplicity and completeness of the initial configuration.
We show the potential of our method on different types
of scenes, from organic to man-made, as well as on multiple
sensors such as laser scanning and multiview stereo (MVS).
We also demonstrate its efficacy with respect to existing approaches and its benefits for reconstructing compact
meshes, when combined with a plane assembly method.

2. Related work
We distinguish four families of methods for fitting planar
primitives to unorganized 3D point clouds. Note that most
of these methods can also detect quadric surface primitives.
Incremental mechanisms. RANSAC and Region Growing are two widely used mechanisms that detect primitives

6367

