Explore Spatio-temporal Aggregation for Insubstantial Object Detection:
Benchmark Dataset and Baseline
Kailai Zhou, Yibo Wang, Tao Lv, Yunqian Li, Linsen Chen, Qiu Shen*, Xun Cao*
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
{calayzhou,ybwang,lvtao,lyq,linsen chen}@smail.nju.edu.cn, {shenqiu,caoxun}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
We endeavor on a rarely explored task named Insubstantial Object Detection (IOD), which aims to localize the object with following characteristics: (1) amorphous shape
with indistinct boundary; (2) similarity to surroundings; (3)
absence in color. Accordingly, it is far more challenging
to distinguish insubstantial objects in a single static frame
and the collaborative representation of spatial and temporal information is crucial. Thus, we construct an IOD-Video
dataset comprised of 600 videos (141,017 frames) covering
various distances, sizes, visibility, and scenes captured by
different spectral ranges. In addition, we develop a spatiotemporal aggregation framework for IOD, in which different backbones are deployed and a spatio-temporal aggregation loss (STAloss) is elaborately designed to leverage the
consistency along the time axis. Experiments conducted on
IOD-Video dataset demonstrate that spatio-temporal aggregation can significantly improve the performance of IOD.
We hope our work will attract further researches into this
valuable yet challenging task. The code will be available at:
https://github.com/CalayZhou/IOD-Video.

Figure 1. Comparisons between the conventional object and insubstantial object. The insubstantial object is more similar to the
background under MS, CC, SS and ED image cues.

1. Introduction
Recently, the emergence of deep learning based approaches [21, 22, 58] has witnessed significant advancements of object detection. Nevertheless, they still face intractable problems on some insubstantial objects captured
by multispectral cameras [26] under specific wavelength,
e.g. smoke, steam and gas leak. Due to frequent occurrences of smoke poisoning, fire accident, toxic gas leakage
and explosion, it is urgent and crucial to realize real-time intelligent monitoring as well as early warning for insubstantial objects. This research topic is fresh and challenging, as
insubstantial objects are quite different from conventional
objects from several aspects.
Classical paper what is an object [1] defined a measure
∗ Corresponding author.

of objectness generic over classes which regards objects as
standalone things with a well-defined boundary and center.
It is considered that any object has at least one of three distinctive characteristics: (1) a well-defined closed boundary
in space; (2) a different appearance from their surroundings;
(3) sometimes it is unique within the image and stands out
as salient. Based on the above observations, Alexe et al. [1]
proposed four image cues to distinguish objects: Multiscale Saliency (MS), Contrast (CC), Edge Density (ED) and
Superpixels Straddling (SS). MS [33] indicates that an object is the salient region with a unique appearance; CC reflects the color dissimilarity between the foreground and
background; ED measures the average edge magnitude as
closed boundary characteristics; SS segments an image into

3104

