SIMBAR: Single Image-Based Scene Relighting For Effective Data
Augmentation For Automated Driving Vision Tasks
Xianling Zhang1* , Nathan Tseng2* , Ameerah Syed1 , Rohan Bhasin1 , Nikita Jaipuria1
1
2
Ford Greenfield Labs, Palo Alto
University of Michigan
{xzhan258, asyed17, rbhasin, njaipuri}@ford.com, tsnathan@umich.edu

Abstract
Real-world autonomous driving datasets comprise of images aggregated from different drives on the road. The
ability to relight captured scenes to unseen lighting conditions, in a controllable manner, presents an opportunity
to augment datasets with a richer variety of lighting conditions, similar to what would be encountered in the realworld. This paper presents a novel image-based relighting pipeline, SIMBAR, that can work with a single image
as input. To the best of our knowledge, there is no prior
work on scene relighting leveraging explicit geometric representations from a single image. We present qualitative
comparisons with prior multi-view scene relighting baselines. To further validate and effectively quantify the benefit of leveraging SIMBAR for data augmentation for automated driving vision tasks, object detection and tracking
experiments are conducted with a state-of-the-art method,
a Multiple Object Tracking Accuracy (MOTA) of 93.3% is
achieved with CenterTrack on SIMBAR-augmented KITTI an impressive 9.0% relative improvement over the baseline
MOTA of 85.6% with CenterTrack on original KITTI, both
models trained from scratch and tested on Virtual KITTI.
For more details and sample relit datasets, please visit our
project website (https://simbarv1.github.io).

1. Introduction
A lack of diversity in lighting conditions is a known issue with manually collected real-world autonomous driving
datasets [1, 3, 14, 18]. For example, KITTI [18] has video
sequences captured only during noon, with similar lighting
and shadow conditions across different sequences. More recent datasets [32, 37, 59], one such as BDD100K [59], are
comparatively better in terms of diversity and have images
captured during multiple times of the day. Still, between
images collected from the same drive, there are minimal
changes in lighting conditions. Furthermore, attempting to
acquire data for all types of lighting conditions is implausible both in terms of time and money.
This lack of diversity in lighting conditions and by ex-

Figure 1. Input images (Left) are shown against SIMBAR-relit
outputs (Middle, Right). SIMBAR synthesized two lighting variations for (a)(b) Div2k, (c) BDD100K and (d) KITTI.

tension, the shadows present within a scene, often serves as
a crucial roadblock in successful real-world deployment of
perception models for safety-critical automated driving applications. Models trained with limited lighting conditions
are unable to generalize to the plethora of lighting conditions encountered in the real-world [26, 28]. The ability to
relight existing datasets in a controllable manner presents
an opportunity to develop improved perception models.
However, scene relighting, in the absence of depth sensors, is an extremely difficult vision task. It implicitly comprises of three main sub-tasks: shadow detection
[10, 25, 53], removal [23, 24, 53] and insertion [61]. Of
these, shadow removal and insertion are most challenging
because shadows blend tightly with the source object geometry [2, 15]. This coupling makes it difficult to separate
the shadow from its parent object without a strong 3D ge-

3718

