Region-Aware Face Swapping
Chao Xu1 *† Jiangning Zhang1† Miao Hua2
1

APRIL Lab, Zhejiang University

Qian He2
2

Zili Yi2

Yong Liu1‡

Bytedance Inc.

{21832066, 186368}@zju.edu.cn, yongliu@iipc.zju.edu.cn
{huamiao, heqian, yizili}@bytedance.com
FaceShifter

SimSwap

Ours

MegaFS

Ours

Source
Target
Source
Target

Figure 1. Comparison with SOTA methods on challenging situations. Left part shows the results of attribute-distinct cases, e.g.,
bangs and the white hair from the source identity, where our method is significantly better than FaceShifter [19] and SimSwap [7] with
higher quality, better identity-consistency, and fewer artifacts. Right part shows high-resolution results of light-changing and in-the-wild
situations with SOTA MegaFS [46], which exists artifacts around face contour and light while our method could better preserve attributes
of the target face. Images are from official attached results or released codes for fair comparisons. Please zoom in for more details.

Abstract
This paper presents a novel Region-Aware Face Swapping (RAFSwap) network to achieve identity-consistent harmonious high-resolution face generation in a local-global
manner: 1) Local Facial Region-Aware (FRA) branch
augments local identity-relevant features by introducing
the Transformer to effectively model misaligned crossscale semantic interaction. 2) Global Source FeatureAdaptive (SFA) branch further complements global identityrelevant cues for generating identity-consistent swapped
faces. Besides, we propose a Face Mask Predictor (FMP)
module incorporated with StyleGAN2 to predict identityrelevant soft facial masks in an unsupervised manner that is
more practical for generating harmonious high-resolution
faces. Abundant experiments qualitatively and quantitatively demonstrate the superiority of our method for generating more identity-consistent high-resolution swapped
faces over SOTA methods, e.g., obtaining 96.70 ID retrieval
that outperforms SOTA MegaFS by 5.87↑.
∗ Work done during an internship at Bytedance.
† Equal contribution.
‡ Corresponding Author.

1. Introduction
Face swapping aims at transferring the identity of the
source identity to the target identity while keeping the
identity-irrelevant attributes of the target face unchanged,
which has attracted widespread attention in the film industry and computer games. Recently, many researchers
have achieved significant progress in face swapping, especially designing inversion-based methods to generate highresolution face images. However, there are two continuously critical issues: 1) How to maintain identity consistency with the source identity, including local and global
facial details. Almost all current methods [7, 19] perform feature interaction only on global feature representation without modeling identity-relevant local regions, e.g.,
lips, nose, brows, and eyes, which will limit the model’s
ability to express identity consistency. 2) How to generate
high-resolution swapped faces while keeping the identityirrelevant details consistent with the target face under the
GAN inversion framework, e.g., background and occlusions. Recent works [38, 46] exploit the StyleGAN2 [17]
as the powerful decoder but fail to maintain the consistency
of the identity-irrelevant attributes of the target face. In this
paper, we are dedicated to solving both the above problems.

7632

