RayMVSNet: Learning Ray-based 1D Implicit Fields for Accurate Multi-View Stereo
Junhua Xi*

Kai Xu†

Yifei Shi*
Yijie Wang
Yulan Guo
National University of Defense Technology

Abstract

Camera ray

Learning-based multi-view stereo (MVS) has by far centered around 3D convolution on cost volumes. Due to the
high computation and memory consumption of 3D CNN,
the resolution of output depth is often considerably limited.
Different from most existing works dedicated to adaptive reﬁnement of cost volumes, we opt to directly optimize the
depth value along each camera ray, mimicking the range
(depth) ﬁnding of a laser scanner. This reduces the MVS
problem to ray-based depth optimization which is much
more light-weight than full cost volume optimization. In
particular, we propose RayMVSNet which learns sequential prediction of a 1D implicit ﬁeld along each camera ray
with the zero-crossing point indicating scene depth. This
sequential modeling, conducted based on transformer features, essentially learns the epipolar line search in traditional multi-view stereo. We also devise a multi-task learning for better optimization convergence and depth accuracy.
Our method ranks top on both the DTU and the Tanks &
Temples datasets over all previous learning-based methods,
achieving overall reconstruction score of 0.33mm on DTU
and f-score of 59.48% on Tanks & Temples.

Feature aggregation

0 mm 5 mm

Baseline
Reference image

0 mm 5 mm

Source image

Source image

Ours

Figure 1. RayMVSNet performs multi-view stereo via predicting 1D implicit ﬁelds on a camera ray basis. The sequential prediction of 1D ﬁeld is light-weight and the monotonicity of raybased distance ﬁeld around surface-crossing points facilitates robust learning, leading to more accurate depth estimation than the
purely cost-volume-based baselines such as MVSNet [42].

still needs to trade off between depth and spatial (image)
resolutions. For example, CasMVSNet [13] opts to narrow
down the range of depth hypothesis to allow high-res depth
estimation, matching the spatial resolution of input RGB.
3D convolution is then naturally conﬁned within the narrow
band, thus degrading the efﬁcacy of 3D feature learning.
In fact, depth map is view-dependent although cost volume is not. Since the target is depth map, reﬁning the cost
volume seems neither economic nor necessary. There could
be a large portion of the cost volume invisible to the view
point. In this work, we advocate direct optimizing the depth
value along each camera ray, mimicking the range (depth)
ﬁnding of a laser scanner. This allows us to convert the
MVS problem into ray-based depth optimization which is,
individually, a much more light-weight task than full cost
volume optimization. We formulate the “range ﬁnding” of
each camera ray as learning a 1D implicit ﬁeld along the ray
whose zero-crossing point indicates the scene depth along
that ray (Figure 1). To do so, we propose RayMVSNet
which learns sequential modeling of multi-view features
along camera rays based on recurrent neural networks.
Technically, we propose two critical designs to facilitate
learning accurate ray-based 1D implicit ﬁelds. Firstly, the
sequential prediction of 1D implicit ﬁeld along a camera
ray is essentially conducting an epipolar line search [2] for

1. Introduction
Learning-based multi-view stereo has gained a surge of
attention recently since the seminal work of MVSNet [42].
The core idea of MVSNet and many followup works is to
construct a 3D cost volume in the frustum of the reference
view through warping the image features of several source
views onto a set of fronto-parallel sweeping planes at hypothesized depths. 3D convolutions are then conducted on
the cost volume to extract 3D geometric features and regress
the ﬁnal depth map of the reference view.
Most existing methods are limited to low-resolution cost
volume since 3D CNN is generally computation and memory consuming. Several recent works proposed to upsample
or reﬁne cost volume aiming at increasing the resolution of
output depth maps [8, 13, 41]. Such reﬁnement, however,
* Joint ﬁrst authors
† Corresponding author: kevin.kai.xu@gmail.com

8595

