DF-GAN: A Simple and Effective Baseline for Text-to-Image Synthesis
Ming Tao1 Hao Tang2 Fei Wu1 Xiaoyuan Jing3 Bing-Kun Bao1 * Changsheng Xu4,5,6
1
Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications 2 CVL, ETH Zürich 3 Wuhan University
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory 5 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
6
NLPR, Institute of Automation, CAS
bingkunbao@njupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Synthesizing high-quality realistic images from text descriptions is a challenging task. Existing text-to-image Generative Adversarial Networks generally employ a stacked
architecture as the backbone yet still remain three flaws.
First, the stacked architecture introduces the entanglements
between generators of different image scales. Second, existing studies prefer to apply and fix extra networks in
adversarial learning for text-image semantic consistency,
which limits the supervision capability of these networks.
Third, the cross-modal attention-based text-image fusion
that widely adopted by previous works is limited on several
special image scales because of the computational cost. To
these ends, we propose a simpler but more effective Deep
Fusion Generative Adversarial Networks (DF-GAN). To be
specific, we propose: (i) a novel one-stage text-to-image
backbone that directly synthesizes high-resolution images
without entanglements between different generators, (ii) a
novel Target-Aware Discriminator composed of MatchingAware Gradient Penalty and One-Way Output, which enhances the text-image semantic consistency without introducing extra networks, (iii) a novel deep text-image fusion block, which deepens the fusion process to make a
full fusion between text and visual features. Compared
with current state-of-the-art methods, our proposed DFGAN is simpler but more efficient to synthesize realistic
and text-matching images and achieves better performance
on widely used datasets. Code is available at https:
//github.com/tobran/DF-GAN .

1. Introduction
The last few years have witnessed the great success of
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [8] for a variety
of applications [4, 27, 48]. Among them, text-to-image synthesis is one of the most important applications of GANs.
* Corresponding Author

Figure 1. (a) Existing text-to-image models stack multiple generators to generate high-resolution images. (b) Our proposed DFGAN generates high-quality images directly and fuses the text and
image features deeply by our deep text-image fusion blocks.

It aims to generate realistic and text-consistent images from
the given natural language descriptions. Due to its practical value, text-to-image synthesis has become an active
research area recently [3, 9, 13, 19–21, 32, 33, 35, 51, 53, 60].
Two major challenges for text-to-image synthesis are the
authenticity of the generated image, and the semantic consistency between the given text and the generated image.
Due to the instability of the GAN model, most recent models adopt the stacked architecture [56,57] as the backbone to
generate high-resolution images. They employ cross-modal
attention to fuse text and image features [37, 50, 56, 57, 60]
and then introduce DAMSM network [50], cycle consistency [33], or Siamese network [51] to ensure the textimage semantic consistency by extra networks.
Although impressive results have been presented by previous works [9,19,21,32,33,51,60], there still remain three
problems. First, the stacked architecture [56] introduces entanglements between different generators, and this makes
the final refined images look like a simple combination of
fuzzy shape and some details. As shown in Figure 1(a),
the final refined image has a fuzzy shape synthesized by
G0 , coarse attributes (e.g., eye and beak) synthesized by

16515

