Time3D: End-to-End Joint Monocular 3D Object Detection and Tracking for
Autonomous Driving
Peixuan Li
SAIC PP-CEM

Jieyu Jin
SAIC PP-CEM

lipeixuan@saicmotor.com

jinjieyu@saicmotor.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
3D object detection is an essential task for Autonomous
Driving. Compared with LiDAR system, monocular cameras are cheap, stable, and flexible, favored by massproduced cars [4, 9, 18, 19]. However, monocular 3D object
detection is a natural ill-posed problem for the lack of depth
information, making it difficult to estimate an accurate and
stable state of the 3D target [19, 22]. A typical solution is to
smooth the previous and current state through 2D multiple

Uncertainty
Mono3D

Spatial-Temporal
Information Flow

Tracking

Label

…

While separately leveraging monocular 3D object detection and 2D multi-object tracking can be straightforwardly
applied to sequence images in a frame-by-frame fashion,
stand-alone tracker cuts off the transmission of the uncertainty from the 3D detector to tracking while cannot pass
tracking error differentials back to the 3D detector. In
this work, we propose jointly training 3D detection and 3D
tracking from only monocular videos in an end-to-end manner. The key component is a novel spatial-temporal information flow module that aggregates geometric and appearance features to predict robust similarity scores across all
objects in current and past frames. Specifically, we leverage
the attention mechanism of the transformer, in which selfattention aggregates the spatial information in a specific
frame, and cross-attention exploits relation and affinities of
all objects in the temporal domain of sequence frames. The
affinities are then supervised to estimate the trajectory and
guide the flow of information between corresponding 3D
objects. In addition, we propose a temporal -consistency
loss that explicitly involves 3D target motion modeling into
the learning, making the 3D trajectory smooth in the world
coordinate system. Time3D achieves 21.4% AMOTA, 13.6%
AMOTP on the nuScenes 3D tracking benchmark, surpassing all published competitors, and running at 38 FPS, while
Time3D achieves 31.2% mAP, 39.4% NDS on the nuScenes
3D detection benchmark.

Monocular Video

Gradient

Smooth Trajectory
FV

3D Box

2D Box

Category

Velocity

Attribute

BEV

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed Time3D. Given a monocular video sequence, Time3D joint learn monocular 3D object detection and 3D tracking, and output smooth trajectories, 2D boxes,
3D boxes, category, velocity, and motion attribute. Time3D is
trained end-to-end, so it can feed forward the uncertainty and
backward the error gradient.

object trackers(MOT) [5, 20].
Following the “tracking-by-detection” paradigm [2, 30,
37], a widely used contemporary strategy first computes
past trajectory representations and detected objects. Later,
that association module is used to compute the similarity
between the current objects across the past frames to estimate their tracks. Most of the existing methods following
this pipeline try to build several different cues, including
re-identification(Re-ID) models [25, 40, 41], motion modeling [12, 15], and hybrid models [1]. Currently, most of
these models are still hand-crafted so that the corresponding tracker can only follow the detector independently. The
recent studies of 2D MOT try to establish a deep learning
association in tracking [3, 29, 43]. However, these methods still encounter three shortcomings in autonomous driving scenarios: 1) They treat detection and association separately, in which stand-alone tracking module cuts off the
transmission of the uncertainty from the 3D detector to
tracking while cannot differential pass error back to the 3D
detector. 2) The objects from the same category often have
similar appearance information and often undergo frequent

3885

