Cross Domain Object Detection by Target-Perceived Dual Branch Distillation
Mengzhe He1,3 , Yali Wang∗1,6 , Jiaxi Wu5 , Yiru Wang2 ,
Hanqing Li2 , Bo Li2 , Weihao Gan2,4 , Wei Wu2,4 , Yu Qiao†1,4
1 ShenZhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2

3

SenseTime Research
5

Beihang University

University of Chinese Academy of Science
6

4

Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai, China

SIAT Branch, Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society

{hemz,yl.wang,yu.qiao}@siat.ac.cn, wujiaxi@buaa.edu.cn
{lihanqing,libo,wuwei}@senseauto.com, {wangyiru,ganweihao}@sensetime.com

Abstract
Cross domain object detection is a realistic and challenging
task in the wild. It suffers from performance degradation
due to large shift of data distributions and lack of instancelevel annotations in the target domain. Existing approaches
mainly focus on either of these two difficulties, even though
they are closely coupled in cross domain object detection.
To solve this problem, we propose a novel Target-perceived
Dual-branch Distillation (TDD) framework. By integrating
detection branches of both source and target domains in
a unified teacher-student learning scheme, it can reduce
domain shift and generate reliable supervision effectively.
In particular, we first introduce a distinct Target Proposal
Perceiver between two domains. It can adaptively enhance
source detector to perceive objects in a target image, by
leveraging target proposal contexts from iterative crossattention. Afterwards, we design a concise Dual Branch
Self Distillation strategy for model training, which can
progressively integrate complementary object knowledge
from different domains via self-distillation in two branches.
Finally, we conduct extensive experiments on a number of
widely-used scenarios in cross domain object detection.
The results show that our TDD significantly outperforms
the state-of-the-art methods on all the benchmarks. The
codes and models will be released afterwards.

1. Introduction
Object detection has achieved remarkable success with
the help of advanced deep neural networks [2, 12–14, 26,
28–31,36]. However, it still faces challenges in realistic applications such as autonomous driving and mobile robots,
where data variance is often large due to various conditions
of weather, illumination, object appearance, etc. Hence,
∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

UBT [29]

GPA [51]

Ours

Figure 1. Two typical examples of detection results on the adverse
weather conditions adaptation experiments with different methods.
Semi-supervised method UBT [27] lacks awareness of objects in
the fog. Adversarial based GPA [49] attempts to exploit the objects
in the fog but gives some wrong predictions, such as the motorcycle in the first row and the person in the second row. Our methods
can predict the boxes and categories more accurately.

cross-domain object detection has attracted lots of attention
in recent years. In general, there are two difficulties in this
problem. First, object detection is more vulnerable to domain shift. The main reason is that, object detection focuses
on instance-level prediction, which is more sensitive to object variance in various image styles and contents. Second,
object annotations are more expensive and labor-intensive
to get, causing the scarcity of discriminative object supervision in a new domain. Both of them inevitably deteriorate
the detection performance in target domain.
Recently, several approaches have been proposed for
cross-domain object detection [5, 24, 32, 34, 49]. Unfortunately, most of them focus on either domain shift or label
deficiency, which limits their power in cross domain object detection. For example, domain adaption approaches
[5, 34, 49] propose to reduce domain shift via adversarial
training. Besides of unstable model optimization, the discrimination ability of the network is limited in such adversarial design. As shown in Figure 1, adversarial based
GPA [49] tends to produce wrong predictions on the regions

9570

