Rethinking Controllable Variational Autoencoders
Huajie Shao1 *†, Yifei Yang2†, Haohong Lin3†, Longzhong Lin2 ,
Yizhuo Chen2 , Qinmin Yang2 , Han Zhao4
1
College of Willam and Mary, 2 Zhejiang University
3
Carnegie Mellon University, 4 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Abstract
The Controllable Variational Autoencoder (ControlVAE)
combines automatic control theory with the basic VAE
model to manipulate the KL-divergence for overcoming
posterior collapse and learning disentangled representations. It has shown success in a variety of applications, such
as image generation, disentangled representation learning,
and language modeling. However, when it comes to disentangled representation learning, ControlVAE does not delve
into the rationale behind it. The goal of this paper is to develop a deeper understanding of ControlVAE in learning
disentangled representations, including the choice of a desired KL-divergence (i.e, set point), and its stability during
training. We first fundamentally explain its ability to disentangle latent variables from an information bottleneck perspective. We show that KL-divergence is an upper bound
of the variational information bottleneck. By controlling
the KL-divergence gradually from a small value to a target
value, ControlVAE can disentangle the latent factors one by
one. Based on this finding, we propose a new DynamicVAE
that leverages a modified incremental PI (proportionalintegral) controller, a variant of the proportional-integralderivative (PID) algorithm, and employs a moving average
as well as a hybrid annealing method to evolve the value
of KL-divergence smoothly in a tightly controlled fashion.
In addition, we analytically derive a lower bound of the
set point for disentangling. We then theoretically prove
the stability of the proposed approach. Evaluation results
on multiple benchmark datasets demonstrate that DynamicVAE achieves a good trade-off between the disentanglement and reconstruction quality. We also discover that it
can separate disentangled representation learning and reconstruction via manipulating the desired KL-divergence.

* Corresponding author: Huajie Shao
† Authors contribute equally

1. Introduction
Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) have been widely used
in various applications, such as language modeling, image generation, and representation learning. In particular, many variants of VAEs, such as β-VAE [11], FactorVAE [17] and β-TCVAE [6], have been recently proposed
to learn the disentangled representations from the observations. Disentangled representation learning aims to encode
input data into a low-dimensional space that preserves information about the salient factors of variation, so that each dimension of the representation corresponds to a distinct and
explanatory factor in the data [3, 26, 45, 46]. Learning disentangled representations benefits a variety of downstream
tasks [8, 11, 21, 24, 27, 28], including abstract visual reasoning [45], zero-shot transfer learning [5] and image generation [30, 48].
One major challenge of disentanglement learning is
that there exists a trade-off between reconstruction quality of the input signal and the degree of disentanglement
in the latent representations. To address this issue, researchers have developed a controllable variational antoencoder (ControlVAE) [39, 40] that combines control theory
and the basic VAE to control the output KL via dynamically tuning the weight on the KL term in the VAE objective. While ControlVAE shows its good ability to disentangle latent variables, it still remains to explain the rationale
behind it. The question is, why does it perform well on disentanglement learning via controlling the KL-divergence?
In addition, the core component of ControlVAE is
the designed non-linear PI controller, a variant of the
proportional-integral-derivative (PID) algorithm [1, 43].
The PI controller is able to stabilize the output KLdivergence to a specified value via dynamically adjusting
the weight on the KL term. It thus can achieve a good tradeoff between disentanglement and reconstruction. Since
deep VAE model is complicated, its training may become
unstable after incorporating the PI controller. In automatic
control, tuning the hyperparameters of a PI/PID controller
is regarded as the most challenging task [31]. Hence, obtaining a feasible region of the hyperparameters to ensure

19250

