OSOP: A Multi-Stage One Shot Object Pose Estimation Framework
Ivan Shugurov1,3 , Fu Li1,2 , Benjamin Busam1 , Slobodan Ilic1,3
1

TU Munich 2 NUDT 3 Siemens AG
{ivan.shugurov, fu.li, b.busam, slobodan.ilic}@tum.de

Abstract
We present a novel one-shot method for object detection
and 6 DoF pose estimation, that does not require training
on target objects. At test time, it takes as input a target image and a textured 3D query model. The core idea is to
represent a 3D model with a number of 2D templates rendered from different viewpoints. This enables CNN-based
direct dense feature extraction and matching. The object is
first localized in 2D, then its approximate viewpoint is estimated, followed by dense 2D-3D correspondence prediction. The final pose is computed with PnP. We evaluate the
method on LineMOD, Occlusion, Homebrewed, YCB-V and
TLESS datasets and report very competitive performance in
comparison to the state-of-the-art methods trained on synthetic data, even though our method is not trained on the
object models used for testing.

1. Introduction
The rapid development of high quality 6 DoF pose estimation methods is underway. According to the BOP
challenge [14], which combines publicly available 6 DoF
pose estimation datasets and offers standardized evaluation
and comparison procedures, the field is dominated by deep
learning methods [2, 12, 16, 19, 21, 22, 22, 24–27, 36, 37, 47,
49–52, 59]. The methods’ performance is, however, limited by the availability of labeled training data. Accurate
6 DoF pose annotation of real data is a complicated and
time-consuming process [20], that must be repeated manually for each new object. This severely limits the practical applicability of 6 DoF pose estimation methods. Additionally, labels can exhibit imperfection [4]. As synthetic
data preparation tools improved, more methods shifted to
training on synthetically rendered images. This greatly
simplifies the preparation of data for new objects. These
time-consuming and computationally-intensive data rendering and model training steps, on the other hand, must be
repeated for each new target object of interest.
While one-shot object detection, i.e., detection of novel

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Figure 1. Qualitative evaluation of the proposed method on an
object from the Homebrewed dataset [20]. a) an input image,
cropped only for visualization purposes, with a comparison of the
ground truth (green cuboid) and estimated (blue cuboid) poses;
b) predicted one-shot segmentation ; c) a matched template; and
d) predicted correspondences as color-coded NOCS correspondences.

objects not seen during training, appears to yield promising
results for conventional 2D detection, its extensions to pose
estimation were very limited. There are very few related
works that attempt to generalize to new objects. They primarily focus on objects from the same category [6, 31, 55],
objects with very similar geometry [38,39], rely on partially
training on target objects [52], or limit the task to viewpoint
estimation [57]. We extend the one-shot object detection
ideas to estimate the full 6 DoF pose. Our method is trained
only once and then automatically generalizes to new objects
without training on them, obviating the need for synthetic or
real data preparation and training for new objects.
The 4-stage pipeline of the proposed approach is visualized in Figure 2. The input to the method is a test image

6835

