Cross-domain Few-shot Learning with Task-specific Adapters
Wei-Hong Li, Xialei Liu*, and Hakan Bilen
VICO Group, University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom
github.com/VICO-UoE/URL

Abstract

One/Multiple domains

Few-shot learning task
from unseen domain
Support Set

1. Introduction
Deep learning methods have seen remarkable progress
in various fields where large quantities of data and compute
power are available. However, the ability of deep networks
to learn new concepts from small data remains limited. Fewshot classification [18,25] is inspired from this limitation and
aims at learning a model that can be efficiently adapted to
recognize unseen classes from few samples. In particular, the
standard setting for learning few-shot classifiers involves two
stages: (i) learning a model, typically from a large training
set, (ii) adapting this model to learn new classes from a given
small support set. These two stages are called meta-training
and meta-testing respectively. The adapted model is finally
evaluated on a query set where the task is to assign each
query sample to one of the classes in the support set.
Early methods [14, 26, 28, 33, 35, 39] pose the few-shot
classification problem in a learning-to-learn formulation by
training a deep network over a distribution of related tasks,
* Xialei Liu is the corresponding author.

Query Set

...

In this paper, we look at the problem of cross-domain
few-shot classification that aims to learn a classifier from
previously unseen classes and domains with few labeled samples. Recent approaches broadly solve this problem by parameterizing their few-shot classifiers with task-agnostic and
task-specific weights where the former is typically learned
on a large training set and the latter is dynamically predicted
through an auxiliary network conditioned on a small support
set. In this work, we focus on the estimation of the latter, and
propose to learn task-specific weights from scratch directly
on a small support set, in contrast to dynamically estimating
them. In particular, through systematic analysis, we show
that task-specific weights through parametric adapters in matrix form with residual connections to multiple intermediate
layers of a backbone network significantly improves the performance of the state-of-the-art models in the Meta-Dataset
benchmark with minor additional cost.

+
(a) task-agnostic network +
auxiliary network

(b) Task adaptation with adapters estimated
by the auxiliary network on support set

(c) task-agnostic network

(d) Task adaptation with attached
adapters learned from support set

Learn task-agnostic parameters
in meta-training

Adapt with task-specific
parameters in meta-testing

Figure 1. Cross-domain Few-shot Learning considers to learn
a model from one or multiple domains to generalize to unseen
domains with few samples. Prior works often learn a task-agnostic
model with an auxiliary network during meta-training (a) and a
set of adapters are generated by the auxiliary network to adapt
to the given support set (b). While in this work, we propose to
attach adapters directly to a pretrained task-agnostic model (c),
which can be estimated from scratch during meta-testing (d). We
also propose different architecture topologies of adapters and their
efficient approximations.

which are sampled from the training set, and transfer this experience to improve its performance for learning new classes.
Concretely, Vinyals et al. [39] learn a feature encoder that
is conditioned on the support set in meta-training and does
not require any further training in meta-test thanks to its nonparametric classifier. Ravi and Larochelle [28] take the idea
of learning a feature encoder in meta-train further by also
learning an update rule through an LSTM that produces the
updates for a classifier in meta-test. Finn et al. [14] pose the
task as a meta-learning problem and learn the parameters of
a deep network in meta-training such that a network initialized with the learned parameters can be efficiently finetuned
on a new task. We refer to [16, 40] for comprehensive review
of early works.

7161

