Unifying Motion Deblurring and Frame Interpolation with Events
Xiang Zhang, Lei Yu†
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
{xiangz, ly.wd}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Slow shutter speed and long exposure time of framebased cameras often cause visual blur and loss of interframe information, degenerating the overall quality of captured videos. To this end, we present a unified framework of
event-based motion deblurring and frame interpolation for
blurry video enhancement, where the extremely low latency
of events is leveraged to alleviate motion blur and facilitate
intermediate frame prediction. Specifically, the mapping relation between blurry frames and sharp latent images is first
predicted by a learnable double integral network, and a fusion network is then proposed to refine the coarse results via
utilizing the information from consecutive blurry inputs and
the concurrent events. By exploring the mutual constraints
among blurry frames, latent images, and event streams,
we further propose a self-supervised learning framework
to enable network training with real-world blurry videos
and events. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
method compares favorably against the state-of-the-art approaches and achieves remarkable performance on both
synthetic and real-world datasets. Codes are available at
https://github.com/XiangZ-0/EVDI.

1. Introduction
Highly dynamic scenes, e.g., fast-moving targets or nonlinear motions, pose challenges for high-quality video generation as the captured frame is often blurred and target information is missing between consecutive frames [29]. Existing frame-based methods attempt to tackle these problems by developing motion deblurring [11], frame interpolation [1] or blurry video enhancement techniques [10, 25].
However, it is difficult for frame-based deblurring methods
to predict sharp latent frames from severely blurred videos
† Corresponding author

The research was partially supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grants 61871297, the Natural Science Foundation of Hubei Province, China under Grant 2021CFB467, the Fundamental
Research Funds for the Central University under Grant 2042020kf0019,
and the National Natural Science Foundation of China Enterprise Innovation Development Key Project under Grant U19B2004.

Figure 1. Illustrative examples of video deblurring and interpolation via the state-of-the-art deblurring approach LEVS [11], interpolation approach Time Lens [30] and our EVDI method.

because of motion ambiguities and the erasure of intensity
textures [11]. Besides, current frame-based interpolation
approaches generally assume the motion between neighboring frames to be linear [1], which is not always valid
in real-world scenarios especially when encountering nonlinear motions, thus often leading to incorrect predictions.
Recent works have revealed the advantages of event
cameras [5] in motion deblurring and frame interpolation.
On one hand, the output of event camera inherently embeds
precise motions and sharp edges [2] since it reports asynchronous event data with extremely low latency (in the order of µs) [5, 13], which is effective in alleviating motion
blur [14, 21, 22, 31, 34]. On the other hand, event camera
is able to record almost continuous brightness changes to
compensate the missing information between consecutive
frames, making it feasible to recover accurate intermediate frames even under non-linear motions [14, 30]. However, existing works generally treat motion deblurring and
frame interpolation as separate tasks, while the problems of

17765

