Rep-Net: Efficient On-Device Learning via Feature Reprogramming
Li Yang, Adnan Siraj Rakin and Deliang Fan
School of Electrical, Computer and Energy Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287
lyang166@asu.edu, asrakin@asu.edu, dfan@asu.edu

Adv Rep. params

Abstract
Transfer learning, where the goal is to transfer the welltrained deep learning models from a primary source task
to a new task, is a crucial learning scheme for on-device
machine learning, due to the fact that IoT/edge devices collect and then process massive data in our daily life. However, due to the tiny memory constraint in IoT/edge devices,
such on-device learning requires ultra-small training memory footprint, bringing new challenges for memory-efficient
learning. Many existing works solve this problem by reducing the number of trainable parameters. However, this
doesn’t directly translate to memory saving since the major bottleneck is the activations, not parameters. To develop memory-efficient on-device transfer learning, in this
work, we are the first to approach the concept of transfer
learning from a new perspective of intermediate feature reprogramming of a pre-trained model (i.e., backbone). To
perform this lightweight and memory-efficient reprogramming, we propose to train a tiny Reprogramming Network
(Rep-Net) directly from the new task input data, while freezing the backbone model. The proposed Rep-Net model interchanges the features with the backbone model using an
activation connector at regular intervals to mutually benefit both the backbone model and Rep-Net model features.
Through extensive experiments, we validate each design
specs of the proposed Rep-Net model in achieving highly
memory-efficient on-device reprogramming. Our experiments establish the superior performance (i.e., low training
memory and high accuracy) of Rep-Net compared to SOTA
on-device transfer learning schemes across multiple benchmarks. Code is available at https://github.com/ASU-ESICFAN-Lab/RepNet.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, the utilization of IoT devices is significantly
increased (e.g., 250 billion microcontrollers in the world
today1 ), which collect and then process massive new data
1 https://venturebeat.com/2020/01/11/why-tinyml-is-a-giantopportunity/

Learnable

Fixed

Pre-trained backbone
model
Input

Classifier

(a)
Pooling

Rep-Net

Input

Activation
Connector

Pre-trained backbone
model
(b)

Classifier

Figure 1. The workflow of adversarial reprogramming (a) and the
Rep-Net (b). Adversarial reprogramming reprograms the input by
introducing an additive learnable parameter. Differently, Rep-Net
takes the input data directly and learns to reprogram the intermediate activation features.

crossing various domains/tasks in our daily life. This fact
arouses researchers great interest in on-device AI that expect not only inference but also the training or transferring of pre-trained models to new data on the device. Such
learning scheme is strongly associated with the concept of
transfer learning [5], where the goal is to transfer the welltrained deep learning models from a primary source task to
a new task, leading to a recently rising research direction
about on-device transfer learning. Compared with conventional scheme that learns the deep learning models on could
and then performs inference on device, on-device transfer learning eliminates the communication issue between
cloud and edge devices, as well as data-privacy concern.
Although the benefits of learning on-device are clear, the
memory-hungry training process is a extremely challenge
for memory-constrained IoT/edge devices. Recently, the
studies on memory-efficient learning [3, 6, 37] reveal that
the bottleneck of training memory consumption is the storage of intermediate activations, not parameters. Thus, re-

12277

