Neural Head Avatars from Monocular RGB Videos
Philip-William Grassal1∗

Malte Prinzler1∗

Titus Leistner1

Matthias Nießner2
1

Heidelberg University

2

Carsten Rother1

Justus Thies3

Technical University of Munich

3

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems

Neural Head Avatar with Articulated Geometry & Photorealistic Texture

Monocular RGB Video

Figure 1. Given a monocular portrait video of a person, we reconstruct a Neural Head Avatar. Such a 4D avatar will be the foundation of
applications like teleconferencing in VR/AR, since it enables novel-view synthesis and control over pose and expression.

1. Introduction
Abstract
We present Neural Head Avatars, a novel neural representation that explicitly models the surface geometry and
appearance of an animatable human avatar that can be
used for teleconferencing in AR/VR or other applications in
the movie or games industry that rely on a digital human.1
Our representation can be learned from a monocular RGB
portrait video that features a range of different expressions
and views. Speciﬁcally, we propose a hybrid representation consisting of a morphable model for the coarse shape
and expressions of the face, and two feed-forward networks,
predicting vertex offsets of the underlying mesh as well as
a view- and expression-dependent texture. We demonstrate
that this representation is able to accurately extrapolate to
unseen poses and view points, and generates natural expressions while providing sharp texture details. Compared
to previous works on head avatars, our method provides a
disentangled shape and appearance model of the complete
human head (including hair) that is compatible with the
standard graphics pipeline. Moreover, it quantitatively and
qualitatively outperforms current state of the art in terms of
reconstruction quality and novel-view synthesis.

* Both authors contributed equally to the paper
1 philgras.github.io/neural_head_avatars/neural_head_avatars.html

Reconstructing and reenacting human heads has been a
long studied research problem and will be a key driver for
future applications in VR/AR, teleconferencing, games and
the movie industry. For those applications, it is of particular
interest to get an accurate 3D shape and appearance model
that provides 3D consistency and strong identity preservation under novel view points, poses and expressions. Reconstructing such a model, especially from monocular input
data (e.g., from a webcam), is difﬁcult due to the complex
geometry of facial dynamics and the missing 3D information [86]. Indeed, several state-of-the-art methods for talking head synthesis avoid explicit geometry reconstruction
and rely on image or feature-based warping for motion control and generative networks for image synthesis [64,74,82].
These methods are generalized and deliver impressive reenactment results even with only a single input image of the
subject. However, the quality of the approaches drops signiﬁcantly for larger changes in pose or view point as no 3Dconsistent geometry representation is used. Shape proxies
such as a 3D morphable model [9, 26] can be utilized to improve the 3D consistency of synthetic faces [15, 40, 69, 71]
since the facial information is embedded on the proxy surface. Besides image- or surface-based representations, volumetric representations are used [29, 46]. While they show
promising results without an explicit surface prior, these
methods still lack a consistent full head shape reconstruc-

18653

