ISDNet: Integrating Shallow and Deep Networks for
Efficient Ultra-high Resolution Segmentation
Shaohua Guo1∗ , Liang Liu2 *, Zhenye Gan2 , Yabiao Wang2 , Wuhao Zhang2 ,
Chengjie Wang2 , Guannan Jiang 5 , Wei Zhang5 , Ran Yi1† , Lizhuang Ma1,3† , Ke Xu 4
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Youtu Lab, Tencent
3
East China Normal University 4 City University of Hong Kong 5 CATL
{guoshaohua, ranyi}@sjtu.edu.cn;{jianggn,zhangwei}@catl.com; ma-lz@cs.sjtu.edu.cn;
{leoneliu, winggzygan,caseywang, wuhaozhang,jasoncjwang}@tencent.com; kkangwing@gmail.com;

Abstract
The huge burden of computation and memory are two
obstacles in ultra-high resolution image segmentation. To
tackle these issues, most of the previous works follow the
global-local refinement pipeline, which pays more attention to the memory consumption but neglects the inference
speed. In comparison to the pipeline that partitions the
large image into small local regions, we focus on inferring the whole image directly. In this paper, we propose
ISDNet, a novel ultra-high resolution segmentation framework that integrates the shallow and deep networks in a
new manner, which significantly accelerates the inference
speed while achieving accurate segmentation. To further
exploit the relationship between the shallow and deep features, we propose a novel Relational-Aware feature Fusion module, which ensures high performance and robustness of our framework. Extensive experiments on Deepglobe, Inria Aerial, and Cityscapes datasets demonstrate
our performance is consistently superior to state-of-thearts. Specifically, it achieves 73.30 mIoU with a speed
of 27.70 FPS on Deepglobe, which is more accurate and
172 × faster than the recent competitor. Code available at
https://github.com/cedricgsh/ISDNet.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a basic task that has been studied for decades. Unlike other vision tasks, such as image
classification, segmentation needs to deal with small objects and fine boundaries that heavily rely on large-scale input images [1, 9, 16, 17, 24, 30, 40]. Especially, ultra-high
resolution image with millions or even billions of pixels
plays a vital role in the fields of remote sensing [34, 41, 42],
* This work was done when S. Guo was an intern in Tencent Youtu Lab.
S. Guo and L. Liu have equal contribution. † Corresponding Authors.

(a) Image

(b) Ground Truth

(c) Ours

(d) Deep Network [1]

(e) Shallow Network [11]

(f) FCtL [22]

Figure 1. Comparison of different model predictions on the ultrahigh resolution image. (a) Input image. (b) The corresponding
ground truth. (c) Prediction of our efficient segmentation method.
(d) Prediction of a deep network input with the downsampled image. (e) Prediction of a shallow network input with the full-scale
input. (f)Prediction of the latest ultra-high resolution segmentation method. Our method outperforms them in both speed and
accuracy.

autonomous driving [13, 25, 27], medical imagery applications [15, 19, 28].
However, due to memory and computational limitations,
general segmentation methods cannot well handle ultrahigh resolution images input. Existing segmentation methods mainly focus on designing a neural network architecture for regular resolution images, but overlook the feasibility of larger scale input. As shown in Figure 1 (d), a
deep and complicated model [1] needs to downsample the
input image to meet the memory and speed requirements,
but some detailed information is discarded during downsampling, resulting in poor performance. Although a shallow and lightweight model [11] can be adapted to process

4361

