Differentiable Stereopsis: Meshes from multiple views
using differentiable rendering
Shubham Goel
UC Berkeley

Georgia Gkioxari
Meta AI

Jitendra Malik
UC Berkeley

shubham-goel@berkeley.edu

gkioxari@fb.com

malik@eecs.berkeley.edu

1. Introduction
Binocular stereopsis [47], and its multi-view cousin,
Structure from Motion [14, 44], has traditionally been formulated as a two stage process:
1. Find corresponding 2D points across views, which are
the 2D projections of the same 3D scene point.
2. Recover relative orientations of cameras, and the depths
of these points by triangulation.

Figure 1. Reconstructions with Differentiable Stereopsis (DS) from
few input views and noisy cameras. We show input views (top) and
novel views of reconstructions (bottom).

Abstract
We propose Differentiable Stereopsis, a multi-view stereo
approach that reconstructs shape and texture from few input
views and noisy cameras. We pair traditional stereopsis
and modern differentiable rendering to build an end-to-end
model which predicts textured 3D meshes of objects with
varying topologies and shape. We frame stereopsis as an
optimization problem and simultaneously update shape and
cameras via simple gradient descent. We run an extensive
quantitative analysis and compare to traditional multi-view
stereo techniques and state-of-the-art learning based methods. We show compelling reconstructions on challenging
real-world scenes and for an abundance of object types with
complex shape, topology and texture. 1
1 Project webpage: https://shubham-goel.github.io/ds/

In this work, we bypass the first stage of finding point correspondences across images and directly estimate 3D shape
and cameras given multiple 2D views with noisy cameras.
We formulate this as an optimization problem that we solve
using newly developed differentiable rendering tools. We
name our approach Differentiable Stereopsis.
Our approach is linked to old work in multi-view geometry, and in particular model-based stereopsis which was
explored by Debevec et al. [6] and related ideas in plane
plus parallax by Irani et al. [17]. The key observation in
model-based stereo is simple: two images of the same scene
which appear different become similar after projection onto
an approximate 3D model of the scene. Projecting the texture from one image onto the 3D model produces a warped
version of that view which when transformed from a second
view is directly comparable to the second image. Initially,
the 3D model and the estimated relative camera orientation
are inaccurate. But as shape and camera predictions improve,
the two images will start to look more similar and will eventually become identical – in the idealized case of Lambertian
surfaces and no imaging noise. Upon convergence, the shape
is expected to be an accurate representation of the scene.
An important step in traditional stereopsis is finding 2D
correspondences across views. We bypass this and directly
recover shape and cameras using modern optimization techniques. We frame stereopsis as an optimization problem by
minimizing a differentiable objective with respect to shape
and cameras. To this end, we exploit advances in differentiable rendering [4, 21, 30, 32, 40] to project shape and
texture onto image planes which we compare to scene views.

8635

