Hybrid Relation Guided Set Matching for Few-shot Action Recognition
Xiang Wang1

Shiwei Zhang2∗ Zhiwu Qing1 Mingqian Tang2 Zhengrong Zuo1
Changxin Gao1 Rong Jin2 Nong Sang1∗
1
Key Laboratory of Image Processing and Intelligent Control,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Alibaba Group
{wxiang,qzw,zhrzuo,cgao,nsang}@hust.edu.cn, {zhangjin.zsw,mingqian.tmq,jinrong.jr}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

Support set

Hybrid relation module
CNN

∗ Corresponding authors.

...

Action recognition has been witnessing remarkable
progress with the evolution of large-scale datasets [5, 9, 18]
and video models [14, 32, 52]. However, this success heavily relies on a large amount of manually labeled examples,
which are labor-intensive and time-consuming to collect. It
actually limits further applications of this task. Few-shot
action recognition is promising in reducing manual annota-

0.8

...

1. Introduction

...

Current few-shot action recognition methods reach impressive performance by learning discriminative features
for each video via episodic training and designing various
temporal alignment strategies. Nevertheless, they are limited in that (a) learning individual features without considering the entire task may lose the most relevant information in the current episode, and (b) these alignment strategies may fail in misaligned instances. To overcome the
two limitations, we propose a novel Hybrid Relation guided
Set Matching (HyRSM) approach that incorporates two key
components: hybrid relation module and set matching metric. The purpose of the hybrid relation module is to learn
task-specific embeddings by fully exploiting associated relations within and cross videos in an episode. Built upon the
task-specific features, we reformulate distance measure between query and support videos as a set matching problem
and further design a bidirectional Mean Hausdorff Metric
to improve the resilience to misaligned instances. By this
means, the proposed HyRSM can be highly informative and
flexible to predict query categories under the few-shot settings. We evaluate HyRSM on six challenging benchmarks,
and the experimental results show its superiority over the
state-of-the-art methods by a convincing margin. Project
page: https://hyrsm-cvpr2022.github.io/.

CNN
0.1

Query video
CNN

(a)
Support: make coffee

Support: make coffee

Metric space
(support)

Metric space
(quey)

22

33

Query: make coffee

Query: make coffee

Temporal alignment strategy

Set matching metric

”pour water”
”pour coffee powder”
Time line
Matching line

(b)

Figure 1. (a) The proposed hybrid relation module. We enhance
video representations by extracting relevant discriminative patterns cross videos in an episode, which can adaptively learn taskspecific embeddings. (b) Example of make coffee, the current temporal alignment metrics tend to be strict, resulting in an incorrect
match on misaligned videos. In contrast, the proposed set matching metric is more flexible in finding the best correspondences.

tions and thus has attracted much attention recently [58,63].
It aims at learning to classify unseen action classes with extremely few annotated examples.
To address the few-shot action recognition problem, current attempts [4, 40, 59, 63] mainly adopt a metric-based
meta-learning framework [45] for its simplicity and effectiveness. It first learns a deep embedding space and then
designs an explicit or implicit alignment metric to calculate the distances between the query (test) videos and
support (reference) videos for classification in an episodic
task. For instance, Ordered Temporal Alignment Module
(OTAM) [4] extracts features for each video independently
and tries to find potential query-support frame pairs only
along the ordered temporal alignment path in this feature
space. Despite remarkable performance has been reached,

19948

