AdaInt: Learning Adaptive Intervals for 3D Lookup Tables
on Real-time Image Enhancement

1

Canqian Yang1,4 *, Meiguang Jin2 *, Xu Jia3 , Yi Xu1,4†, Ying Chen2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Alibaba Group
3
Dalian University of Technology 4 Chongqing Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{charles.young, xuyi}@sjtu.edu.cn
xjia@dlut.edu.cn

{meiguang.jmg, chenying.ailab}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

Original 1D Function Curve
Sampling Impluses

The 3D Lookup Table (3D LUT) is a highly-efficient
tool for real-time image enhancement tasks, which models a non-linear 3D color transform by sparsely sampling
it into a discretized 3D lattice. Previous works have made
efforts to learn image-adaptive output color values of LUTs
for flexible enhancement but neglect the importance of sampling strategy. They adopt a sub-optimal uniform sampling
point allocation, limiting the expressiveness of the learned
LUTs since the (tri-)linear interpolation between uniform
sampling points in the LUT transform might fail to model
local non-linearities of the color transform. Focusing on
this problem, we present AdaInt (Adaptive Intervals Learning), a novel mechanism to achieve a more flexible sampling
point allocation by adaptively learning the non-uniform
sampling intervals in the 3D color space. In this way, a
3D LUT can increase its capability by conducting dense
sampling in color ranges requiring highly non-linear transforms and sparse sampling for near-linear transforms. The
proposed AdaInt could be implemented as a compact and
efficient plug-and-play module for a 3D LUT-based method.
To enable the end-to-end learning of AdaInt, we design
a novel differentiable operator called AiLUT-Transform
(Adaptive Interval LUT Transform) to locate input colors
in the non-uniform 3D LUT and provide gradients to the
sampling intervals. Experiments demonstrate that methods equipped with AdaInt can achieve state-of-the-art performance on two public benchmark datasets with a negligible overhead increase. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/ImCharlesY/AdaInt.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in machine learning techniques remarkably boosted the performance of automatic photo enhance† Corresponding Author
Work partially done during an internship of C. Yang at Alibaba Group.

* Equal Contribution

Sampled Points

Curve Approximation

Input Intensity Histogram
Approximated Curves

Input Space Partitioning

û Uniform Interval Sampling
v

No Pixel

RMSE: 0.0120

ü Adaptive Interval Sampling
v

RMSE: 0.0045

Figure 1. Comparison between uniform and non-uniform sampling on curve approximation and space partitioning. The illustration is given in 1D but can be easily extended to 3D.

ment methods [5, 6, 9, 19, 21, 48], aiming to replace a
sequence of meticulously-designed operations [2, 24, 25,
33, 43, 50] in the camera imaging pipeline [20] for enhanced visual quality. However, these methods suffer from
heavy computational burdens due to complicated optimization processes [10, 13, 19, 21, 49] or neural architecture designs [5, 6, 9, 47]. In fact, most of the commonly-used
enhancement operations are pixel-independent, as revisited
in [17]. Their total effect is approximately equivalent to a
3D color transform function (R3 → R3 ) that maps an input
color point to another one in or across the color spaces. One
can adopt a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) to design such a
transform [17] but requires a cascade of several linear and
nonlinear sub-operations to increase the model capability.
To overcome the computational complexity of a series of
sub-operations in the transform, the 3D lookup table (LUT)
is a promising data structure to conduct efficient mapping

17522

