End-to-End Reconstruction-Classification Learning for Face Forgery Detection
Junyi Cao1 Chao Ma1 * Taiping Yao2 Shen Chen2 Shouhong Ding2 Xiaokang Yang1
1
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Youtu Lab, Tencent
{junyicao, chaoma, xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn

{taipingyao, kobeschen, ericshding}@tencent.com

Abstract
Existing face forgery detectors mainly focus on specific
forgery patterns like noise characteristics, local textures, or
frequency statistics for forgery detection. This causes specialization of learned representations to known forgery patterns presented in the training set, and makes it difficult to
detect forgeries with unknown patterns. In this paper, from
a new perspective, we propose a forgery detection framework emphasizing the common compact representations of
genuine faces based on reconstruction-classification learning. Reconstruction learning over real images enhances the
learned representations to be aware of forgery patterns that
are even unknown, while classification learning takes the
charge of mining the essential discrepancy between real and
fake images, facilitating the understanding of forgeries. To
achieve better representations, instead of only using the encoder in reconstruction learning, we build bipartite graphs
over the encoder and decoder features in a multi-scale fashion. We further exploit the reconstruction difference as
guidance of forgery traces on the graph output as the final
representation, which is fed into the classifier for forgery
detection. The reconstruction and classification learning is
optimized end-to-end. Extensive experiments on large-scale
benchmark datasets demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method over state of the arts.

1. Introduction
The recent years have witnessed the considerable
progress of face forgery generation methods [2,4,11,18,20,
41, 42, 50, 53]. Owing to the success of deep learning, generating ultra-realistic fake facial images or videos is really
easy. An attacker can take advantage of these techniques
to make fake news, defame celebrities, or break authentication, leading to serious political, social, and security consequences [27]. To mitigate malicious abuse of face forgery,
it is urgent to develop effective detection methods.
* Corresponding author.

Real Face

Reconstructed Face

Real
Fake

Figure 1. We perform reconstruction learning over only genuine
samples to learn the common compact representations of real facial images (left). With the learned representations, the reconstruction difference of real and fake faces significantly differs in
distribution (right), which facilitates forgery detection.

Early face forgery detection methods [1, 8, 23, 31, 35, 60]
typically follow the classic pipeline of learning convolutional neural networks (CNN) for image classification. With
off-the-shelf CNN backbones, these methods directly take a
facial image as input and then classify it as real or fake.
However, these vanilla CNNs tend to seek forgeries on a
limited region of faces, indicating that the detectors are
short of the understanding of forgery [45]. Recent works
resort to specific forgery patterns such as noise characteristics [12, 58], local textures [6, 14, 55], and frequency information [22, 33] to better detect forgery artifacts that resided
in fake faces. Despite the demonstrated promising results,
they always rely on forgery patterns that are possessed by a
certain manipulation technique presented in the training set.
Thus, in the real-world scenario, due to the emergence of
new manipulation techniques and various types of perturbations, forgeries with unknown patterns easily cause existing
methods to fail.
To address the above issues, we have two major considerations to enhance the learned representations for face
forgery detection. First, for learning representations that
can generalize to unknown forgery patterns, exploring the
common characteristics of genuine faces is more suitable
than overfitting to specific forgery patterns presented in
the training set. As previous studies [5, 36] indicate that
real samples possess a relatively compact distribution, the

4113

