Semantic-aligned Fusion Transformer for One-shot Object Detection
Yizhou Zhao*1
Xun Guo2
Yan Lu2
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
Microsoft Research Asia
yizhouz@andrew.cmu.edu

{xunguo, yanlu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
One-shot object detection aims at detecting novel objects according to merely one given instance. With extreme
data scarcity, current approaches explore various feature
fusions to obtain directly transferable meta-knowledge. Yet,
their performances are often unsatisfactory. In this paper,
we attribute this to inappropriate correlation methods that
misalign query-support semantics by overlooking spatial
structures and scale variances. Upon analysis, we leverage the attention mechanism and propose a simple but effective architecture named Semantic-aligned Fusion Transformer (SaFT) to resolve these issues. Specifically, we
equip SaFT with a vertical fusion module (VFM) for crossscale semantic enhancement and a horizontal fusion module (HFM) for cross-sample feature fusion. Together, they
broaden the vision for each feature point from the support
to a whole augmented feature pyramid from the query, facilitating semantic-aligned associations. Extensive experiments on multiple benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of our framework. Without fine-tuning on novel classes,
it brings significant performance gains to one-stage baselines, lifting state-of-the-art results to a higher level.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the flourish of large-scale
perception systems like [3, 23]. Yet it has a long way
to go towards real human-like intelligence. Being one of
the underlying problems, few-shot learning received more
and more interest from language [1, 17, 46, 58] to vision
[15, 24, 37, 47, 49, 52, 54] related tasks. This scenario aims
at learning a well-generalized model with scarcely labeled
data, which challenges conventional learning paradigms.
To bridge the aforementioned gap in few-shot object
detection (FSD), existing literature suggests drawing support from transfer-learning [7, 16, 48, 54, 55, 65] or metalearning [15, 24, 27, 28, 56, 57, 61]. Although the former
is simple to conduct through pretraining on massive base
classes and fine-tuning on scant novel ones, it suffers from
the two-stage redundant procedures. The network should
* The work was done when the author was with MSRA as an intern.

Semantic‐aligned Fusion

Query
Support

Conventional Fusion

Figure 1. Comparison of semantic-aligned fusion and conventional fusion. Heatmaps and detection results of these two are
based on our SaFT and a baseline with original cross-sample attention accordingly. Comparing the two schemes, semantic-aligned
fusion activates more concentrated heatmaps on various feature
levels and produces better OSD results.

always utilize new-coming few-shot data to optimize parameters before it can well recognize these novel classes,
thereby limiting its application. In contrast, the latter trend
considers meta-knowledge extraction from sampled metatasks. This line of frameworks is expected to adapt directly
to similarly organized tasks even without online fine-tuning,
though it usually helps in performance. At present, this offline meta-learning paradigm is preferred by one-shot object
detection (OSD) specific pipelines, with an out-of-the-box
availability.
In such a setting, the model should be well constructed to
learn the relatedness between a given scene, i.e., the query,
and an example patch, i.e., the support. To facilitate this,
a series of works [15, 21, 24, 28, 38, 40, 57, 61] investigate
cross-sample feature fusion, which augments query features
with support representations via sample or ROI level correlation. However, neglecting semantic mismatches in space
and scale limits their performances in one-shot scenarios.
Concretely, the traditional paradigm suggests generating
a prototype [15, 24] or a kernel [61] from the support to associate with query features. With most spatial information
compressed, the long-range structure-dependent relation in
between remains hardly mined. Although pooled prototypes in Fig. 2(b) and learned kernels in Fig. 2(c) are effec-

7601

