Photorealistic Monocular 3D Reconstruction of Humans Wearing Clothing
Thiemo Alldieck

Mihai Zanfir

Cristian Sminchisescu

Google Research
{alldieck,mihaiz,sminchisescu}@google.com

Abstract
We present PHORHUM, a novel, end-to-end trainable,
deep neural network methodology for photorealistic 3D human reconstruction given just a monocular RGB image.
Our pixel-aligned method estimates detailed 3D geometry
and, for the first time, the unshaded surface color together
with the scene illumination. Observing that 3D supervision
alone is not sufficient for high fidelity color reconstruction,
we introduce patch-based rendering losses that enable reliable color reconstruction on visible parts of the human, and
detailed and plausible color estimation for the non-visible
parts. Moreover, our method specifically addresses methodological and practical limitations of prior work in terms of
representing geometry, albedo, and illumination effects, in
an end-to-end model where factors can be effectively disentangled. In extensive experiments, we demonstrate the
versatility and robustness of our approach. Our state-ofthe-art results validate the method qualitatively and for different metrics, for both geometric and color reconstruction.

1. Introduction
We present PHORHUM, a method to photorealistically
reconstruct the 3D geometry and appearance of a dressed
person as photographed in a single RGB image. The produced 3D scan of the subject not only accurately resembles the visible body parts but also includes plausible geometry and appearance of the non-visible parts, see fig. 1.
3D scans of people wearing clothing have many use cases
and demand is currently rising. Applications like immersive AR and VR, games, telepresence, virtual try-on, freeviewpoint photo-realistic visualization, or creative image
editing would all benefit from accurate 3D people models.
The classical way to obtain models of people is to automatically scan using multi-camera set-ups, manual creation by
an artist, or a combination of both as often artists are employed to ‘clean up’ scanning artifacts. Such approaches are
difficult to scale, hence we aim for alternative, automatic
solutions that would be cheaper and easier to deploy.
Prior to us, many researchers have focused on the problem of human digitization from a single image [5,15,16,18,

Figure 1. Given a single image, we reconstruct the full 3D geometry – including self-occluded (or unseen) regions – of the photographed person, together with albedo and shaded surface color.
Our end-to-end trainable pipeline requires no image matting and
reconstructs all outputs in a single step.

35, 36, 41]. While these methods sometimes produce astonishingly good results, they have several shortcomings. First,
the techniques often produce appearance estimates where
shading effects are baked-in, and some methods do not produce color information at all. This limits the usefulness of
the resulting scans as they cannot be realistically placed into
a virtual scene. Moreover, many methods rely on multi-step
pipelines that first compute some intermediate representation, or perceptually refine the geometry using estimated
normal maps. While the former is at the same time impractical (since compute and memory requirements grow), and
potentially sub-optimal (as often the entire system cannot
be trained end-to-end to remove bias), the latter may not
be useful for certain applications where the true geometry
is needed, as in the case of body measurements for virtual
try-on or fitness assessment, among others. In most existing methods color is exclusively estimated as a secondary
step. However, from a methodological point of view, we
argue that geometry and surface color should be computed
simultaneously, since shading is a strong cue for surface geometry [17] and cannot be disentangled.
Our PHORHUM model specifically aims to address the
above-mentioned state of the art shortcomings, as summarised in table 1. In contrast to prior work, we present
an end-to-end solution that predicts geometry and appear-

1506

