Contour-Hugging Heatmaps for Landmark Detection
James McCouat
Irina Voiculescu
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
name.surname@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose an effective and easy-to-implement method
for simultaneously performing landmark detection in images and obtaining an ingenious uncertainty measurement
for each landmark. Uncertainty measurements for landmarks are particularly useful in medical imaging applications: rather than giving an erroneous reading, a landmark
detection system is more useful when it flags its level of
confidence in its prediction. When an automated system
is unsure of its predictions, the accuracy of the results can
be further improved manually by a human. In the medical domain, being able to review an automated system’s
level of certainty significantly improves a clinician’s trust
in it. This paper obtains landmark predictions with uncertainty measurements using a three stage method: 1) We
train our network on one-hot heatmap images, 2) We calibrate the uncertainty of the network using temperature scaling, 3) We calculate a novel statistic called ‘Expected Radial Error’ to obtain uncertainty measurements. We find
that this method not only achieves localization results on
par with other state-of-the-art methods but also an uncertainty score which correlates with the true error for each
landmark thereby bringing an overall step change in what
a generic computer vision method for landmark detection
should be capable of. In addition we show that our uncertainty measurement can be used to classify, with good accuracy, what landmark predictions are likely to be inaccurate.
Code available at: https://github.com/jfm15/
ContourHuggingHeatmaps.git

(a) Gaussian distributions output by Kumar et al. [1] - LUVLi Landmarks.

(c) Contours of the heatmaps output by our method. The dark blue
dots are the predicted landmark points and the bright green dots are
the ground truth. We call our heatmaps contour hugging because of
the way they bend around the edges (in this case of the head). Our
probability distributions are not restricted to being symmetrical and
uni-modal.

1. Introduction
Automatic landmark detection from images is an important task in a number of applications from monitoring a
driver’s vital signs [3] to medical imaging applications on
numerous body parts including the knee, spine and lungs
[4–6]. Most modern approaches to landmark detection use
a deep learning pipeline and obtain impressive localization
results. However these deep learning methods always detect
some landmarks erroneously during testing. Take, for ex-

(b) Gaussian distributions output by LEE et al. [2] which
uses a Bayesian CNN.

Figure 1. Images demonstrating the difference in how our method
quantifies the uncertainty of its landmark positions compared to
previous approaches.

20597

