One Loss for Quantization:
Deep Hashing with Discrete Wasserstein Distributional Matching
Khoa D. Doan, Peng Yang, Ping Li
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research
10900 NE 8th St. Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
{khoadoan106, pengyang01, pingli98}@gmail.com

Abstract
Image hashing is a principled approximate nearest
neighbor approach to find similar items to a query in a large
collection of images. Hashing aims to learn a binary-output
function that maps an image to a binary vector. For optimal
retrieval performance, producing balanced hash codes with
low-quantization error to bridge the gap between the learning stage’s continuous relaxation and the inference stage’s
discrete quantization is important. However, in the existing deep supervised hashing methods, coding balance and
low-quantization error are difficult to achieve and involve
several losses. We argue that this is because the existing
quantization approaches in these methods are heuristically
constructed and not effective to achieve these objectives.
This paper considers an alternative approach to learning
the quantization constraints. The task of learning balanced codes with low quantization error is re-formulated as
matching the learned distribution of the continuous codes to
a pre-defined discrete, uniform distribution. This is equivalent to minimizing the distance between two distributions.
We then propose a computationally efficient distributional
distance by leveraging the discrete property of the hash
functions. This distributional distance is a valid distance
and enjoys lower time and sample complexities. The proposed single-loss quantization objective can be integrated
into any existing supervised hashing method to improve
code balance and quantization error. Experiments confirm
that the proposed approach substantially improves the performance of several representative hashing methods.

1. Introduction
An important challenge associated with massive image datasets is to efficiently and effectively search for
images containing semantically similar content in these
datasets. Hashing is a principled approximate nearest
neighbor search approach with applications in many domains, ranging from text or image retrieval [21, 46] to spam

or duplicate-scene detection [8, 37]. Hashing approaches
learn binary encoding of the original images so that the
“candidate” subset of images can be efficiently discovered
from the binary-coding space. Binary codes are efficient
to store and the high cost of pairwise distance calculations in the high-dimensional space is reduced to the significantly lower cost of discrete Hamming distance calculations. A Hamming-distance calculation only requires a
bit-wise XOR and a bit-count operation, which can be efficiently computed in most conventional systems.
To ensure that the retrieved images are relevant, hashing methods learn hash functions that preserve the pairwise similarity of the images in the discrete space. Supervised hashing methods additionally leverage the annotated similarity to learn the hash functions and achieve superior retrieval performance compared to unsupervised hashing methods [4, 5, 18, 39, 47, 49, 53, 56, 59]. Since discrete
optimization is intractable, these methods solve a relaxed
problem that replaces the discrete constraint with a continuous output. The continuous output is “quantized” to obtain
the binary during inference. Such a relaxation results in a
discrepancy between the discrete and continuous optimizations that must be compensated for in the learning process.
Two important criteria to consider are quantization error and
coding balance [21, 51, 52]. Quantization error is the information loss when the discrete function is represented by a
continuous function. Quantization error penalizes the cases
of assigning “very” similar data points to binary codes with
large distances [52]. Coding balance, on the other hand,
encourages a uniform distribution of the images into the binary codes, which helps reduce the time complexity of the
retrieval operations in the worst and average scenarios [23].
Existing supervised hashing methods, especially those
that are based on neural networks, include one or more
penalty terms, besides the similarity-preserving loss, to
force the continuous output as discrete as possible. However, these relaxation schemes still introduce non-trivial

9447

