Toward Practical Monocular Indoor Depth Estimation
Cho-Ying Wu2 , Jialiang Wang1 , Michael Hall1 , Ulrich Neumann2 and Shuochen Su1
1

Meta Reality Labs, 2 University of Southern California

{jialiangw,michaelhall,shuochsu}@fb.com, {choyingw, uneumann}@usc.edu

Figure 1. Advantages of our framework. (A) We attain zero-shot cross-dataset inference. (B) Our framework trained on simulation data
produces on-par results with the one trained on real data.

Abstract

The majority of prior monocular depth estimation methods without groundtruth depth guidance focus on driving
scenarios. We show that such methods generalize poorly to
unseen complex indoor scenes, where objects are cluttered
and arbitrarily arranged in the near field. To obtain more
robustness, we propose a structure distillation approach to
learn knacks from an off-the-shelf relative depth estimator that produces structured but metric-agnostic depth. By
combining structure distillation with a branch that learns
metrics from left-right consistency, we attain structured and
metric depth for generic indoor scenes and make inferences
in real-time. To facilitate learning and evaluation, we collect SimSIN, a dataset from simulation with thousands of
environments, and UniSIN, a dataset that contains about
500 real scan sequences of generic indoor environments.
We experiment in both sim-to-real and real-to-real settings,
and show improvements, as well as in downstream applications using our depth maps. This work provides a full study,
covering methods, data, and applications aspects.

1. Introduction
This work proposes a practical indoor depth estimation
framework that has the following features: learning from
off-the-shelf estimators and left-right image pairs without
their depth annotations, efficient training data collection,
high generalizability to cross-dataset inference, and accurate and real-time depth sensing. Our work applies to
consumer-level AR/VR, such as 3D indoor scene reconstruction and virtual object insertion and interaction with
environment [32]
Although self-supervised depth estimation, especially
using left-right consistency, has attracted much research interest recently, popular works, such as MonoDepth [23],
MonoDepth2 [24], DepthHints [74], and ManyDepth [75],
mainly focus on driving scenes and are trained on largescale driving datasets like KITTI [22] and Cityscapes [13],
and it is unclear how these methods apply on indoor environments. Learning indoor depth via self-supervision is arguably more challenging for a number of reasons: (1) structure priors: depth estimation for driving scenes imposes a
strong scene structure prior to the learning paradigm. The
upper parts of images, commonly occupied by the sky or
buildings, are typically farther away; on the other hand, the
13814

