Full-Range Virtual Try-On with Recurrent Tri-Level Transform
Han Yang1,2

Xinrui Yu3
Ziwei Liu4
1
ZMO.AI 2 ETH Zurich
3
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 4 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
hanyang@ethz.ch, stuyxr@stu.hit.edu.cn, ziwei.liu@ntu.edu.sg

Figure 1. Standard clothes such as T-shirts and long-sleeve jackets are well-analyzed in virtual try-on methods, while non-standard clothes
with irregular design and patterns are scarcely reported. Given a target clothing image and the reference person, our method can synthesize
photo-realistic results with accurate clothing shape, regardless of the clothing type. Hard samples including off-shoulder clothes and the
word-shoulder clothes are covered in our framework, while the baseline methods fail to generalize.

Abstract
Virtual try-on aims to transfer a target clothing image
onto a reference person. Though great progress has been
achieved, the functioning zone of existing works is still limited to standard clothes (e.g., plain shirt without complex
laces or ripped effect), while the vast complexity and variety of non-standard clothes (e.g., off-shoulder shirt, wordshoulder dress) are largely ignored.
In this work, we propose a principled framework, Recurrent Tri-Level Transform (RT-VTON), that performs
full-range virtual try-on on both standard and non-standard
clothes. We have two key insights towards the framework
design: 1) Semantics transfer requires a gradual feature
transform on three different levels of clothing representations, namely clothes code, pose code and parsing code. 2)
Corresponding author

Geometry transfer requires a regularized image deformation between rigidity and flexibility. Firstly, we predict the
semantics of the “after-try-on” person by recurrently refining the tri-level feature codes using local gated attention
and non-local correspondence learning. Next, we design a
semi-rigid deformation to align the clothing image and the
predicted semantics, which preserves local warping similarity. Finally, a canonical try-on synthesizer fuses all the
processed information to generate the clothed person image. Extensive experiments on conventional benchmarks
along with user studies demonstrate that our framework
achieves state-of-the-art performance both quantitatively
and qualitatively. Notably, RT-VTON shows compelling results on a wide range of non-standard clothes. Project page:
https://lzqhardworker.github.io/RT-VTON/.

1. Introduction
Virtual try-on is a rapidly advancing topic in both
academia and industry with the increasing power of gener-

3460

