Learning Soft Estimator of Keypoint Scale and Orientation with
Probabilistic Covariant Loss
Pei Yan1 , Yihua Tan1∗ , Shengzhou Xiong1 , Yuan Tai1 , and Yansheng Li2∗
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Multi-spectral Information Processing,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
2
School of Remote Sensing and Information Engineering, Wuhan University, China
1

{yanpei, yhtan}@hust.edu.cn, xiongshengzhou@126.com, t y @hust.edu.cn, yansheng.li@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Estimating keypoint scale and orientation is crucial to
extracting invariant features under significant geometric
changes. Recently, the estimators based on self-supervised
learning have been designed to adapt to complex imaging
conditions. Such learning-based estimators generally predict a single scalar for the keypoint scale or orientation,
called hard estimators. However, hard estimators are difficult to handle the local patches containing structures of
different objects or multiple edges. In this paper, a Soft SelfSupervised Estimator (S3Esti) is proposed to overcome this
problem by learning to predict multiple scales and orientations. S3Esti involves three core factors. First, the estimator is constructed to predict the discrete distributions of
scales and orientations. The elements with high confidence
will be kept as the final scales and orientations. Second, a
probabilistic covariant loss is proposed to improve the consistency of the scale and orientation distributions under different transformations. Third, an optimization algorithm is
designed to minimize the loss function, whose convergence
is proved in theory. When combined with different keypoint
extraction models, S3Esti generally improves over 50% accuracy in image matching tasks under significant viewpoint
changes. In the 3D reconstruction task, S3Esti decreases
more than 10% reprojection error and improves the number
of registered images. [code release]

1. Introduction
Keypoint-based image matching is one of the fundamental problems in many applications such as image mosaic
[13], camera pose estimation [6], 3D reconstruction [15]
and visual localization [14]. High matching accuracy requires the keypoint feature invariant to different imaging

conditions [24]. However, it is challenging to maintain the
invariance under significant geometric changes [21, 35].
An intuitive solution is to estimate the geometric change
parameters and rectify the local image patches. Many existing works [3, 30, 41] demonstrate that keypoint scale
and orientation can effectively represent the local geometric changes because the scaling and rotation transformations
generally dominate the geometric changes in a local region.
Moreover, more accurate scales and orientations generally
induce higher keypoint matching accuracy [28, 38]1 . The
hand-crafted methods typically estimate the scale and orientation with the analyses of gradients in the local region [5].
Some predict only one scale/orientation for a patch [32],
termed as hard estimators in this paper.
The existing works [8, 22] demonstrate that predicting a
single scale/orientation is not robust for some patches. Such
patches generally contain structures of different objects or
multiple edges, termed as composite-pattern patches in this
paper. Fig. 1 shows the example patches containing different objects (a solar panel and a wall), involving at least two
significant edges. A hard estimator is difficult to provide
robust results for the composite-pattern patch because the
most significant orientation (or scale) may be switched after
an image transformation. Concerning this problem, some
hand-crafted models [1, 3, 22] are constructed to predict
multiple scales or orientations, which are termed as soft estimators. For example, SIFT first measures the confidences
of different orientations based on the histogram of oriented
gradients, and then keeps at most two orientations with high
confidences. Experiments demonstrate that soft estimators
can generally provide more robust predictions [4, 22].
However, the existing hand-crafted estimators are not robust to the complex scenes involving illumination changes
or inessential patterns because the image gradients are sensitive to these interferences [41]. A failed result is shown
in Fig. 1 (a). Recently, some learning-based models have

*Yihua Tan and Yansheng Li are corresponding authors.
The code is available at https://github.com/elvintanhust/S3Esti.

1 The experimental evidence is shown in Supplementary Section 8.

19406

