Optimal Correction Cost for Object Detection Evaluation
Mayu Otani
CyberAgent, Inc.

Riku Togashi
CyberAgent, Inc.

Yuta Nakashima
Osaka University

Janne Heikkilä
University of Oulu

Shin’ichi Satoh
CyberAgent, Inc.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Evaluation measure is an important factor determining
the direction of the algorithm development. Most object
detection benchmarks adopt the mean average precision
(mAP) as their primary evaluation metric, and, therefore,
great efforts are made to achieve higher mAP scores. While
much research relies on mAP, we may not be completely
aware of the consequences of optimising mAP.
Mean average precision is a ranking measure used in the

↑

 ↓







 
 

 



 

 







 
  

 





 

 



Mean Average Precision (mAP) is the primary evaluation measure for object detection. Although object detection has a broad range of applications, mAP evaluates detectors in terms of the performance of ranked instance retrieval. Such the assumption for the evaluation task does not
suit some downstream tasks. To alleviate the gap between
downstream tasks and the evaluation scenario, we propose
Optimal Correction Cost (OC-cost), which assesses detection accuracy at image level. OC-cost computes the cost
of correcting detections to ground truths as a measure of
accuracy. The cost is obtained by solving an optimal transportation problem between the detections and the ground
truths. Unlike mAP, OC-cost is designed to penalize false
positive and false negative detections properly, and every
image in a dataset is treated equally. Our experimental result validates that OC-cost has better agreement with human preference than a ranking-based measure, i.e., mAP
for a single image. We also show that detectors’ rankings
by OC-cost are more consistent on different data splits than
mAP. Our goal is not to replace mAP with OC-cost but provide an additional tool to evaluate detectors from another
aspect. To help future researchers and developers choose a
target measure, we provide a series of experiments to clarify
how mAP and OC-cost differ.

Esa Rahtu
Tampere University

 






 










Figure 1. Toy example of three detectors and corresponding mAP
and OC-cost. Higher is better in mAP, and lower is better in OCcost. Top and middle: mAP does not treat each image equally.
Detector A and B get the same mAP even though detector B does
not produces any detections in the two images. Bottom: mAP does
not penalizes incorrect detections ranked lower than correct ones.

information retrieval community [20]. Originally, the VOC
challenge adopted mAP and included it into the evaluation
protocol for object detection [7]. In this evaluation protocol,
all detected instances are ranked in the order of their confidence scores. Then, the average precision (AP) for each
object category is calculated from the precision/recall curve
of the ranked instances. Mean average precision summarizes the individual APs by averaging them across all categories. Evaluation using mAPs views object detection as a
task to rank detected instances for each category. However,
the range of real-world applications of detection algorithms
is broad, and the ranking measures may not always be the
appropriate objective to be optimized.
Figure 1 illustrates the characteristic behaviors of the
mAP measure. Suppose we have three detectors A, B, and
C. Each detector attempts to find ducks and donkeys from
a database consisting of three images. Detectors A and

21107

