Coarse-to-Fine Q-attention: Efficient Learning for
Visual Robotic Manipulation via Discretisation
Stephen James, Kentaro Wada, Tristan Laidlow, Andrew J. Davison
Dyson Robotics Lab
Imperial College London
{slj12, k.wada18, t.laidlow15, a.davison}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
We present a coarse-to-fine discretisation method that enables the use of discrete reinforcement learning approaches
in place of unstable and data-inefficient actor-critic methods in continuous robotics domains. This approach builds
on the recently released ARM algorithm, which replaces
the continuous next-best pose agent with a discrete one,
with coarse-to-fine Q-attention. Given a voxelised scene,
coarse-to-fine Q-attention learns what part of the scene to
‘zoom’ into. When this ‘zooming’ behaviour is applied iteratively, it results in a near-lossless discretisation of the
translation space, and allows the use of a discrete action,
deep Q-learning method. We show that our new coarseto-fine algorithm achieves state-of-the-art performance on
several difficult sparsely rewarded RLBench vision-based
robotics tasks, and can train real-world policies, tabula rasa,
in a matter of minutes, with as little as 3 demonstrations.

Figure 1. C2F-ARM learns sparsely-rewarded tasks with only
3 demonstrations. Real-world tasks include: turning on a light,
pulling cloth from shelf, pulling a toy car, taking a lid off a saucepan,
and folding a towel.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we are interested in a general real-world manipulation algorithm that can use a small number of demonstrations, along with a small amount of sparsely-rewarded
exploration data, to accomplish a diverse set of tasks, both in
simulation and the real world. To develop such an approach,
two paradigms come to mind: imitation learning (IL) and reinforcement learning (RL). Imitation learning methods, such
as behaviour cloning, suffer from compounding error due
to covariate shift, while reinforcement learning suffers from
long training times that often require millions of environment
interactions. Recently however, Q-attention and the ARM
system [14] has been shown to bypass many flaws that come
with reinforcement learning, most notably the large training
burden and exploration difficulty with sparsely-rewarded and
long-horizon tasks.
Unfortunately, like many modern continuous control RL
algorithms, ARM’s next-best pose agent follows an actorcritic paradigm, which can be particularly unstable when

learning from sparsely-rewarded and image-based tasks [14]:
two properties that are particularly important for robot manipulation tasks. In this paper, we re-examine how best to
represent the continuous control actions needed for robot manipulation, abandoning the standard actor-critic approach, in
favour of a more stable discrete action Q-learning approach.
The challenge therefore becomes how to effectively discretise 6D poses. Discretisation of rotation and gripper action
is trivial given its bounded nature, but translation remains
challenging given that is usually a much larger space. We
solve this problem via a coarse-to-fine Q-attention, where we
start with a coarse voxelisation of the translation space, use
3D Q-attention to identify the next most interesting point,
and gradually make the resolution higher at each point.
With this new coarse-to-fine Q-attention, we present our
Coarse-to-Fine Attention-driven Robotic Manipulation (C2FARM) system. We benchmark the system in simulation
against other robot learning algorithms from both the re-

13739

