MSTR: Multi-Scale Transformer for End-to-End
Human-Object Interaction Detection
Bumsoo Kim*
LG AI Research

Jonghwan Mun
Kakao Brain

Kyoung-Woon On
Kakao Brain

Minchul Shin
Kakao Brain

bumsoo.kim@lgresearch.ai

Junhyun Lee
Korea University

Eun-Sol Kim
Department of Computer Science
Hanyang University

Abstract
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection is the task
of identifying a set of ⟨human, object, interaction⟩ triplets
from an image. Recent work proposed transformer encoderdecoder architectures that successfully eliminated the need
for many hand-designed components in HOI detection
through end-to-end training. However, they are limited to
single-scale feature resolution, providing suboptimal performance in scenes containing humans, objects, and their
interactions with vastly different scales and distances. To
tackle this problem, we propose a Multi-Scale TRansformer
(MSTR) for HOI detection powered by two novel HOIaware deformable attention modules called Dual-Entity attention and Entity-conditioned Context attention. While existing deformable attention comes at a huge cost in HOI
detection performance, our proposed attention modules of
MSTR learn to effectively attend to sampling points that
are essential to identify interactions. In experiments, we
achieve the new state-of-the-art performance on two HOI
detection benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection is a task to
predict a set of ⟨human, object, interaction⟩ triplets in an
image [9]. Previous methods have indirectly addressed
this task by detecting human and object instances and individually inferring interaction labels for every pair of the
detected instances with either neural networks (i.e., twostage HOI detectors [1, 6–8, 10, 16, 18, 19, 21–24, 26, 28–
30, 32, 33, 35]) or triplet matching (i.e., one-stage HOI detectors [12, 20, 31]). The additional complexity caused by
this indirect inference structure and post-processing (e.g.,
* this work was done in Kakao Brain

Figure 1. Multi-scale attention of MSTR on interactions including:
(a) large human with small object, (b) distant human and object,
and (c) small human and a large object. The top row (high resolution) and the bottom row (low resolution) captures the context of
the interaction in various scales. Best viewed in color.

NMS) stage behaved as a major bottleneck in inference time
in HOI detection. To deal with this bottleneck, transformerbased HOI detectors [4, 13, 25, 37] have been proposed to
achieve end-to-end HOI detection without the need for the
post-processing stage mentioned above. These works have
shown competitive performance in both accuracy and inference time with direct set-level prediction and transformer
attentions that can exploit the contextual information between humans, objects, and their interactions.
However, due to the huge computational costs raised
when processing multi-scale feature maps (with about 20×
more image tokens) with transformer attention, current
transformer-based HOI detectors are limited to using only
single-scale feature maps. Due to this limitation, previous
transformer-based approaches demonstrate suboptimal per-

19578

