Neural 3D Video Synthesis from Multi-view Video
Tianye Li1,2,∗
Mira Slavcheva2,∗
Michael Zollhoefer2
Simon Green2
Christoph Lassner2
Changil Kim3
Tanner Schmidt2
2
2
2
Steven Lovegrove
Michael Goesele
Richard Newcombe
Zhaoyang Lv2
1
2
3
University of Southern California
Reality Labs Research
Meta

Figure 1. We propose a novel method for representing and rendering high quality 3D video. Our method trains a novel and compact
dynamic neural radiance field (DyNeRF) in an efficient way. Our method demonstrates near photorealistic dynamic novel view synthesis
for complex scenes including challenging scene motions and strong view-dependent effects. We demonstrate three synthesized 3D video,
and show the associated high quality geometry in the heatmap visualization in each top right corner. Please see the supplemental materials
for the high-quality video and additional information.

Abstract
We propose a novel approach for 3D video synthesis that
is able to represent multi-view video recordings of a dynamic real-world scene in a compact, yet expressive representation that enables high-quality view synthesis and motion interpolation. Our approach takes the high quality and
compactness of static neural radiance fields in a new direction: to a model-free, dynamic setting. At the core of our
approach is a novel time-conditioned neural radiance field
that represents scene dynamics using a set of compact latent codes. We are able to significantly boost the training
speed and perceptual quality of the generated imagery by a
novel hierarchical training scheme in combination with ray
importance sampling. Our learned representation is highly
compact and able to represent a 10 second 30 FPS multiview video recording by 18 cameras with a model size of
only 28MB. We demonstrate that our method can render
high-fidelity wide-angle novel views at over 1K resolution,
even for complex and dynamic scenes. We perform an extensive qualitative and quantitative evaluation that shows that
our approach outperforms the state of the art. Project website: https://neural-3d-video.github.io/.

∗ Equal contribution. TL’s work was done during an internship at
Reality Labs Research.

1. Introduction
Photorealistic representation and rendering of dynamic
real-world scenes are highly challenging research topics,
yet with many important applications that range from movie
production to virtual and augmented reality. Dynamic realworld scenes are notoriously hard to model using classical
mesh-based representations, since they often contain thin
structures, semi-transparent objects, specular surfaces, and
topology that constantly evolves over time due to the often
complex scene motion of multiple objects and people.
In theory, the 6D plenoptic function P (x, d, t) is a suitable representation for this rendering problem, as it completely explains our visual reality and enables rendering
every possible view at every moment in time [1]. Here,
x ∈ R3 is the camera position in 3D space, d = (θ, ϕ) is
the viewing direction, and t is time. Thus, fully measuring
the plenoptic function requires placing an omnidirectional
camera at every position in space at every possible time.
Neural radiance fields (NeRF) [38] offer a way to circumvent this problem: instead of directly encoding the
plenoptic function, they encode the radiance field of the
scene in an implicit, coordinate-based function, which can
be sampled through ray casting to approximate the plenoptic function. However, the ray casting, which is required
to train and to render a neural radiance field, involves hun-

5521

