LaTr: Layout-Aware Transformer for Scene-Text VQA
Ali Furkan Biten1 *†

Ron Litman2 *
Yusheng Xie2
Srikar Appalaraju2
1
2
Computer Vision Center, UAB, Spain,
AWS AI Labs

abiten@cvc.uab.es

R. Manmatha2

{litmanr, yushx, srikara, manmatha}@amazon.com

Abstract
We propose a novel multimodal architecture for Scene
Text Visual Question Answering (STVQA), named LayoutAware Transformer (LaTr). The task of STVQA requires
models to reason over different modalities. Thus, we first
investigate the impact of each modality, and reveal the importance of the language module, especially when enriched
with layout information. Accounting for this, we propose a
single objective pre-training scheme that requires only text
and spatial cues. We show that applying this pre-training
scheme on scanned documents has certain advantages over
using natural images, despite the domain gap. Scanned
documents are easy to procure, text-dense and have a variety of layouts, helping the model learn various spatial cues
(e.g. left-of, below etc.) by tying together language and
layout information. Compared to existing approaches, our
method performs vocabulary-free decoding and, as shown,
generalizes well beyond the training vocabulary. We further
demonstrate that LaTr improves robustness towards OCR
errors, a common reason for failure cases in STVQA. In
addition, by leveraging a vision transformer, we eliminate
the need for an external object detector. LaTr outperforms
state-of-the-art STVQA methods on multiple datasets. In
particular, +7.6% on TextVQA, +10.8% on ST-VQA and
+4.0% on OCR-VQA (all absolute accuracy numbers).

1. Introduction
Scene-Text VQA (STVQA) aims to answer questions by
utilizing the scene text in the image. It requires reasoning
over rich semantic information conveyed by various modalities – vision, language and scene text. Fig. 1 (a) depicts representative samples in STVQA, showcasing a model’s desired abilities, including; (1) a-priori information and world
knowledge such as knowing what a website looks like (left
image); and (2) the capability to use language, layout, and
visual information (middle and right images).
In this work, we introduce Layout-Aware Transformer
* Authors contribute equally.
† Work done during an internship at Amazon.

Figure 1. The Role of Language and Layout in STVQA. (a)
Representative samples from TextVQA. (b) We visualize the information extracted by the OCR system, showing that some questions only require text features, some require both text and layout
information and only some need beyond that. Accounting for this,
we propose a layout-aware pre-training and architecture.

(LaTr), a multimodal encoder-decoder transformer based
model for STVQA. We begin by exploring how far language and layout information can take us in STVQA . In
Fig. 1 (b) we visualize the information extracted by the optical character recognition (OCR) system [1, 6, 14, 38], exhibiting three question categories: the first type can be answered with just the text tokens; the second type can be
answered with text and layout information (right vs left);
the third can only be answered by utilizing text, spatial and
visual features all together. We quantitatively show that in
the current datasets, most questions fall under the first two
categories. To methodologically show this, we first evaluate a zero-shot language model on STVQA benchmarks,
and then show that LaTr can already correctly answer over
50% of the questions with only text tokens. Next, we show
the performance gain achieved by enriching the language
modality with layout information via our propose layoutaware pre-training and architecture.
Recently, Yang et al. [74] demonstrated the advantages in
pre-training STVQA models on natural images, proposing
text-aware pre-training (TAP) scheme, which is designed
to foster multi-modal collaboration. Acquiring large quantities of natural images with text is challenging and hard
to scale, as most natural images do not contain scene text.

16548

