ZeroCap: Zero-Shot Image-to-Text Generation for Visual-Semantic Arithmetic
Yoad Tewel
Yoav Shalev
Idan Schwartz
Lior Wolf
School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University

Abstract
Recent text-to-image matching models apply contrastive
learning to large corpora of uncurated pairs of images
and sentences. While such models can provide a powerful score for matching and subsequent zero-shot tasks, they
are not capable of generating caption given an image. In
this work, we repurpose such models to generate a descriptive text given an image at inference time, without any further training or tuning step. This is done by combining the
visual-semantic model with a large language model, benefiting from the knowledge in both web-scale models. The
resulting captions are much less restrictive than those obtained by supervised captioning methods. Moreover, as a
zero-shot learning method, it is extremely flexible and we
demonstrate its ability to perform image arithmetic in which
the inputs can be either images or text and the output is
a sentence. This enables novel high-level vision capabilities such as comparing two images or solving visual analogy tests. Our code is available at: https://github.
com/YoadTew/zero-shot-image-to-text.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has led to at least three major revolutions
in computer vision: (i) machines that achieve, in multiple
domains, what is considered a human level of performance
earlier than anticipated [39, 64], (ii) effective transfer learning, which supports rapid modeling of new domains [74],
and (iii) a leap in unsupervised learning through the use of
adversarial and self-supervised learning [9, 23].
A fourth revolution that is currently taking place is that
of zero-shot learning. A seminal work by OpenAI presented
the transformer-based [65] GPT-3 model [6]. This model is
trained on extremely large text corpora and can then generate text given a prompt. If the prompt contains an instruction, GTP-3 can often carry it out. For example, given the
prompt “Translate English to French: typical → typique,
house → . . . ” would generate the word “maison.”
Impressive zero-shot capability was later on demonstrated, also by OpenAI, in computer vision. While stateof-the-art computer vision models are often trained as task-

specific models that infer a fixed number of labels, Radford et al. [55] have presented the CLIP image-text transformer model, which can perform tens of downstream tasks,
without further training, with an accuracy comparable to the
state of the art. This is done by selecting, given an image,
the best match out of sentences of the form “This is an image of X.” Subsequently, Ramesh et al. [57] presented a bimodal Transformer termed DALL-E, which generates images that match a given description in unseen domains with
unprecedented performance.
In this work, we employ CLIP to perform the inverse task
of DALL-E, namely zero-shot image captioning. Given an
image, we employ CLIP together with the GPT-2 language
model [56] (we do not have access to GPT-3) to generate
a textual description of the input image. This adds a new
image-analysis capability to CLIP, beyond the fixed-prompt
zero-shot learning demonstrated by Radford et al.
As a zero-shot method, our approach does not involve
any training. One can argue that the underlying CLIP model
is trained with exactly the same type of supervision that image captioning methods [62, 76] are trained on, i.e., pairs
of matching images and captions. However, image captioning methods are trained from curated sources, such as MSCOCO [43] or Visual Genome [38], while CLIP is trained
on WebImageText (WIT), which is an automatically collected web-scale dataset. Previous attempts to train a captioning model on WIT have led to poor performance in recognizing the objects in the image, see Sec. 2.
As a result of the difference in both methodology and underlying data, the captions produced by our method are very
different from those obtained by the supervised captioning methods. While supervised methods can mimic human
annotators and provide similar sentences, in terms of conventional NLP metrics (such as BLEU [53]) to the ground
truth sentences, our results exhibit much more freedom and
match the image better in the visual-semantic CLIP embedding space (ours is optimized for this). Moreover, the
semantic knowledge incorporated into CLIP and GPT-2 is
manifested in the resulting caption, see Fig. 1.
In addition to the different nature of the obtained captions, our method is also more flexible, since all the computing occurs at inference time. Specifically, we show the

17918

