GIRAFFE HD: A High-Resolution 3D-aware Generative Model
Yang Xue1 Yuheng Li2 Krishna Kumar Singh3 Yong Jae Lee2
1
UC Davis 2 UW–Madison 3 Adobe Research

GIRAFFE

GIRAFFE HD
(Ours)

Figure 1. Our model, GIRAFFE HD, inherits all of GIRAFFE’s [38] 3D controllability—change in camera viewpoint, object translation,
scale, rotation, appearance, shape, and background—while generating higher quality, higher resolution images. Moreover, it achieves
better foreground-background disentanglement; e.g., when changing the car’s shape (fourth and fifth columns), notice how parts of the
road and building in the background change in the GIRAFFE images, whereas they remain constant in ours.

Abstract
3D-aware generative models have shown that the introduction of 3D information can lead to more controllable
image generation. In particular, the current state-of-the-art
model GIRAFFE [38] can control each object’s rotation,
translation, scale, and scene camera pose without corresponding supervision. However, GIRAFFE only operates
well when the image resolution is low. We propose GIRAFFE HD, a high-resolution 3D-aware generative model
that inherits all of GIRAFFE’s controllable features while
generating high-quality, high-resolution images (5122 resolution and above). The key idea is to leverage a stylebased neural renderer, and to independently generate the
foreground and background to force their disentanglement
while imposing consistency constraints to stitch them together to composite a coherent final image. We demonstrate
state-of-the-art 3D controllable high-resolution image generation on multiple natural image datasets.

1. Introduction
In image generation, two of the most important objectives are image realism and controllability. Style-based
GANs (i.e., StyleGAN [25] and its variants [24, 27]) can
generate high-resolution, photorealistic images. However,
while their latent style code design provides a level of dis-

entanglement and controllability in 2D space (e.g., color
and shape changes), their lack of explicit 3D information
makes it difficult to impose 3D-level control over the generated image content. Meanwhile, the recent NeRF [35]
based GANs [5, 38, 43] have shown that explicit modeling
of the scene in 3D space conditioned on camera pose can
enable effective 3D-level control. However, the computationally expensive nature of 3D representations has limited
current 3D-aware generative models from directly learning
and rendering images in high resolutions.
GIRAFFE [38] is the current state-of-the-art 3D-aware
generative model for both image realism and controllability.
It models the foreground and background as two separate
3D objects, uses volume rendering to render the combined
3D features into low-resolution 2D feature maps, and finally
uses a neural renderer to further render the feature maps
into higher resolution images. These design choices enable
GIRAFFE to change the background’s appearance independent of the foreground, translate or rotate the foreground
object in 3D, and change the foreground object’s shape and
color. However, the neural renderer is specifically designed
to provide only spatially small refinements in order to avoid
entangling global scene properties and losing controllability. Thus, it is significantly less powerful than style-based
renderers, and hence the highest image resolution that GIRAFFE can generate is 2562 .

18440

