Bridged Transformer for Vision and Point Cloud 3D Object Detection
Yikai Wang1
TengQi Ye2
Lele Cao1
Wenbing Huang3
Fuchun Sun1B
Fengxiang He4
Dacheng Tao4
1
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist),
State Key Lab on Intelligent Technology and Systems,
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University 2 ByteDance Inc.
3
Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University 4 JD Explore Academy, JD.com
wangyk17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, yetengqi@gmail.com, caolele@gmail.com, hwenbing@126.com,
fuchuns@tsinghua.edu.cn, fengxiang.f.he@gmail.com, dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract
3D object detection is a crucial research topic in computer vision, which usually uses 3D point clouds as input in
conventional setups. Recently, there is a trend of leveraging multiple sources of input data, such as complementing
the 3D point cloud with 2D images that often have richer
color and fewer noises. However, due to the heterogeneous
geometrics of the 2D and 3D representations, it prevents
us from applying off-the-shelf neural networks to achieve
multimodal fusion. To that end, we propose Bridged Transformer (BrT), an end-to-end architecture for 3D object detection. BrT is simple and effective, which learns to identify
3D and 2D object bounding boxes from both points and image patches. A key element of BrT lies in the utilization
of object queries for bridging 3D and 2D spaces, which
unifies different sources of data representations in Transformer. We adopt a form of feature aggregation realized by
point-to-patch projections which further strengthen the interaction between images and points. Moreover, BrT works
seamlessly for fusing the point cloud with multi-view images. We experimentally show that BrT surpasses state-ofthe-art methods on SUN RGB-D and ScanNetV2 datasets.

1. Introduction
3D object detection, which aims at identifying or locating objects in 3D scenes, is drawing increasing attention
and is acting as a fundamental task towards scene understanding. Many successful attempts [3,15,21,25] have been
made using point cloud data as input. These attempts include converting the points to regular format (e.g., 3D voxel
grids [32], polygon meshes [11], multi-views [29]), or using

3D specific operators (e.g., symmetric functions [23], voting [21]) to design grouping strategies for points. In addition, since Transformers could be naturally permutation invariant and capable of capturing large-scale data interaction,
they are lately applied to 3D object detection and demonstrate superior performance [15,19]. Besides handling point
cloud learning tasks, Transformers have swept across various 2D tasks, e.g., image classification [6,14], object detection [2, 8, 39], and semantic segmentation [33, 37].
Deep multimodal learning by leveraging the advantage
of multiple modalities has shown its superiority on various
applications [1, 31]. Despite the success of Transformers in
2D or 3D single-modal object detection tasks, the attempt
of combining advantages from both point clouds and images remains scarce. For 3D learning tasks, the point cloud
provides essential geometrical cues, while the information
in rich color images can complement the point cloud by fulfilling the missing color information and correcting noise
errors. As a result, the performance of 3D object detection
could be potentially improved by the involvement of 2D images. One intuitive method is to lift 3-dimensional RGB
vectors from images to extend the point features. A CNNbased 3D detection model, imVoteNet [20], points out the
difficulty in migrating 2D/3D discrepancies by this intuitive
method, and instead, imVoteNet substitutes the RGB vectors with image features extracted by a pre-trained 2D detector. However, simultaneously relying on both the image
voting and point cloud voting assumptions in [20] could accumulate the intrinsic grouping errors as mentioned by [15].
To avoid the learning process of point clouds being impacted by middle-level 2D/3D feature interaction, [20] combines multimodal features over the first layer, which potentially prevents the network from fully exploiting their semantic interaction or migrating multimodal discrepancies.

B Corresponding author: Fuchun Sun.

In this work, we propose Bridged Transformer (BrT) – a

12114

