Learning sRGB-to-Raw-RGB De-rendering with Content-Aware Metadata
Seonghyeon Nam1 *

Abhijith Punnappurath2
Marcus A. Brubaker1,2
Michael S. Brown2
1
2
York University
Samsung AI Center – Toronto

{shnnam,mab}@eecs.yorku.ca, {abhijith.p,michael.b1}@samsung.com

Abstract

PSNR: 49.43dB

1%

Most camera images are rendered and saved in the standard RGB (sRGB) format by the camera’s hardware. Due
to the in- camera photo- finishing routines, nonlinear sRGB
images are undesirable for computer vision tasks that assume a direct relationship between pixel values and scene
radiance. For such applications, linear raw- RGB sensor
images are preferred. Saving images in their raw- RGB format is still uncommon due to the large storage requirement
and lack of support by many imaging applications. Several
“raw reconstruction” methods have been proposed that utilize specialized metadata sampled from the raw- RGB image
at capture time and embedded in the sRGB image. This
metadata is used to parameterize a mapping function to derender the sRGB image back to its original raw- RGB format
when needed. Existing raw reconstruction methods rely on
simple sampling strategies and global mapping to perform
the de- rendering. This paper shows how to improve the derendering results by jointly learning sampling and reconstruction. Our experiments show that our learned sampling
can adapt to the image content to produce better raw reconstructions than existing methods. We also describe an
online fine- tuning strategy for the reconstruction network
to improve results further.

sRGB (input)

Raw-RGB (GT)
PSNR: 57.45dB

SAM [31]
PSNR: 57.89dB

1%

Sampling mask

Ours

Ours + fine-tuning

Figure 1. Overview of our paper. We address the problem of derendering an sRGB image to a raw-RGB image using a metadata
saved along with the sRGB image. At capture time, we sample
the raw-RGB values at the locations in a sampling mask, and save
them as a metadata. When the raw-RGB image is needed, we
reconstruct the full raw-RGB image from the sRGB image with
the metadata. We propose an end-to-end deep learning framework
to achieve it. With our approach, the reconstruction can be further
improved by online fine-tuning.

1. Introduction
For many low-level computer vision tasks, it is desirable to have access to the camera’s raw-RGB sensor image whose pixel values have a linear relationship with scene
radiance [9, 29, 39]. In addition, photo-editing operations,
such as white-balance adjustment or color manipulation,
are more accurate when applied on raw-RGB images [19].
However, most images are still saved in the standard RGB
(sRGB) format. sRGB images are raw-RGB images that
have been rendered by the camera’s image signal processor
(ISP). The nonlinear photo-finishing routines applied by the
ISP break the well-behaved relationship to scene radiance
* Work done while an intern at the Samsung AI Center – Toronto.

present in the original raw-RGB image. A solution to recover the raw-RGB values is to “de-render” the sRGB image back to its raw-RGB format [4]. Among the various
methods to de-render an image, the most accurate are those
that collect samples from the original raw-RGB image at
capture time and embed these samples inside the sRGB image as specialized metadata [28, 31]. These prior methods
rely on uniform sampling of the raw-RGB image and simple
mapping functions to de-render from sRGB to raw-RGB.
Contribution. We propose a deep-learning framework to
address the sRGB de-rendering task using metadata sampled from the raw-RGB at capture time. In particular, we

17704

