What Matters For Meta-Learning Vision Regression Tasks?
Ning Gao1,2 Hanna Ziesche1 Ngo Anh Vien1 Michael Volpp2 Gerhard Neumann2
1
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence 2 Autonomous Learning Robots, KIT
{ning.gao, hanna.ziesche}@de.bosch.com

anhvien.ngo@bosch.com

{michael.volpp, gerhard.neumann}@kit.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Humans are able to rapidly learn the fundamentals of
new tasks within minutes of experience based on prior
knowledge. For instance, humans can classify novel objects by capturing the distinguishable properties (e.g., textures, shapes and scales) from only a few examples. Metalearning is proposed to learn relevant knowledge from various tasks and generalize to unseen tasks with only a few

ShapeNet1D

Distractor

Target

ShapeNet2D

Meta-learning is widely used in few-shot classification
and function regression due to its ability to quickly adapt
to unseen tasks. However, it has not yet been well explored on regression tasks with high dimensional inputs
such as images. This paper makes two main contributions
that help understand this barely explored area. First, we
design two new types of cross-category level vision regression tasks, namely object discovery and pose estimation of
unprecedented complexity in the meta-learning domain for
computer vision. To this end, we (i) exhaustively evaluate
common meta-learning techniques on these tasks, and (ii)
quantitatively analyze the effect of various deep learning
techniques commonly used in recent meta-learning algorithms in order to strengthen the generalization capability:
data augmentation, domain randomization, task augmentation and meta-regularization. Finally, we (iii) provide some
insights and practical recommendations for training metalearning algorithms on vision regression tasks. Second,
we propose the addition of functional contrastive learning
(FCL) over the task representations in Conditional Neural
Processes (CNPs) and train in an end-to-end fashion. The
experimental results show that the results of prior work are
misleading as a consequence of a poor choice of the loss
function as well as too small meta-training sets. Specifically, we find that CNPs outperform MAML on most tasks
without fine-tuning. Furthermore, we observe that naive
task augmentation without a tailored design results in underfitting.

Context

Figure 1. Meta-learning vision regression tasks are designed to i)
identify the queried object from context and predict its position for
target images (Distractor), ii) identify the object’s canonical pose
from context and predict the 1D rotation relative to the canonical
pose for target images (ShapeNet1D), iii) predict the 2D rotation
w.r.t. the canonical pose with random background (ShapeNet2D).
Predictions are performed on unseen objects.

samples. Of the various meta-learning algorithms, MAMLbased models [1–4] and Neural Processes (NPs) [5–8] are
two variants which are receiving increasing attention in the
recent years. Both algorithms try to learn good prior knowledge from related tasks without expanding the learned parameters or sacrificing efficiency at inference. While these
methods have shown promising results in many domains,
such as few-shot classification [2, 9–12] and hyperparameter optimization [13–15], an extensive study on metalearning vision regression tasks has not yet been conducted.
This is in particular true for NPs which have mostly been
investigated on tasks with low-dimensional input such as
function regression or pixel-wise completion [16–19].
In this paper, we make two major contributions to
the largely unexplored area of meta-learning on highdimensional input tasks. On the algorithmic level, in-

14776

