Few-Shot Head Swapping in the Wild
Changyong Shu1 Hemao Wu2 Hang Zhou1 * Jiaming Liu1 * Zhibin Hong1
Changxing Ding2 Junyu Han1 Jingtuo Liu1 Errui Ding1 Jingdong Wang1
1
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc., 2 South China University of Technology
{zhouhang09,liujiaming03,hongzhibin,hanjunyu,liujingtuo,dingerrui,wangjingdong}@baidu.com,

Head Swapping

Target Image

Source Image

changyong.shu89@gmail.com, {201830252427@mail.,chxding@}scut.edu.cn.

Figure 1. Head swapping results generated by HeadSwapper. The first line is the source image. The second line is the target image.
The head swapping results are shown in the third line, where the source head is seamlessly transferred to the target in the wild.

Abstract
The head swapping task aims at flawlessly placing a
source head onto a target body, which is of great importance to various entertainment scenarios. While face swapping has drawn much attention, the task of head swapping
has rarely been explored, particularly under the few-shot
setting. It is inherently challenging due to its unique needs
in head modeling and background blending. In this paper,
we present the Head Swapper (HeSer), which achieves fewshot head swapping in the wild through two delicately designed modules. Firstly, a Head2Head Aligner is devised to
holistically migrate pose and expression information from
the target to the source head by examining multi-scale information. Secondly, to tackle the challenges of skin color
variations and head-background mismatches in the swapping procedure, a Head2Scene Blender is introduced to simultaneously modify facial skin color and fill mismatched
gaps on the background around the head. Particularly,
seamless blending is achieved with the help of a SemanticGuided Color Reference Creation procedure and a Blending UNet. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the pro* Corresponding authors.

posed method produces superior head swapping results on
a variety of scenes.

1. Introduction
Human cognition of identity appearance is profoundly
affected by not only facial structures but also head shapes
and hairstyles. Head swapping, the ability to seamlessly
replace the head in a target image with a source one (as
shown in Fig. 1) would be of great importance to a variety
of scenarios such as movie and advertisement composition,
virtual humans creation, and deepfake video detection, etc.
While face swapping has long been a topic of interest [3,17,21,23], only a few studies have been carried out on
the task of head swapping. DeepFaceLab [23] requires large
manual intervention to generate head swapping results, and
they are totally incapable of handling mismatched regions.
StylePoseGAN [24] tends to change the color of body skin
and background in the target image in an undesired manner. Moreover, both methods fail to address few-shot head
swapping, particualrly for in-the-wild scenes.
We identify several properties that make few-shot head
swapping more challenging than face swapping: 1) Head

10789

