PINA: Learning a Personalized Implicit Neural Avatar
from a Single RGB-D Video Sequence
Zijian Dong∗1 Chen Guo∗1 Jie Song†1 Xu Chen1,2 Andreas Geiger2,3 Otmar Hilliges1
1
ETH Zürich 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
3
University of Tübingen

Figure 1. We propose PINA, a method to acquire personalized and animatable neural avatars from RGB-D videos. Left: our method
uses only a single sequence, captured via a commodity depth sensor. The depth frames are noisy and contain only partial views of the
body. Middle: Using global optimization, we fuse these partial observations into an implicit surface representation that captures geometric
details, such as loose clothing. The shape is learned alongside a pose-independent skinning field, supervised only via depth observations.
Right: The learned avatar can be animated with realistic articulation-driven surface deformations and generalizes to novel unseen poses.

Abstract
We present a novel method to learn Personalized Implicit
Neural Avatars (PINA) from a short RGB-D sequence. This
allows non-expert users to create a detailed and personalized virtual copy of themselves, which can be animated with
realistic clothing deformations. PINA does not require complete scans, nor does it require a prior learned from large
datasets of clothed humans. Learning a complete avatar
in this setting is challenging, since only few depth observations are available, which are noisy and incomplete (i.e.
only partial visibility of the body per frame). We propose a
method to learn the shape and non-rigid deformations via
a pose-conditioned implicit surface and a deformation field,
defined in canonical space. This allows us to fuse all partial
observations into a single consistent canonical representation. Fusion is formulated as a global optimization problem
over the pose, shape and skinning parameters. The method
can learn neural avatars from real noisy RGB-D sequences
for a diverse set of people and clothing styles and these
avatars can be animated given unseen motion sequences.
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

1. Introduction
Making immersive AR/VR a reality requires methods to
effortlessly create personalized avatars. Consider telepresence as an example: the remote participant requires means
to simply create a detailed scan of themselves and the system must then be able to re-target the avatar in a realistic
fashion to a new environment and to new poses. Such applications impose several challenging constraints: i) to generalize to unseen users and clothing, no specific prior knowledge such as template meshes should be required ii) the acquired 3D surface must be animatable with realistic surface
deformations driven by complex body poses iii) the capture
setup must be unobtrusive, ideally consisting of a single
consumer-grade sensor (e.g. Kinect) iv) the process must
be automatic and may not require technical expertise, rendering traditional skinning and animation pipelines unsuitable. To address these requirements, we introduce a novel
method for learning Personalized Implicit Neural Avatars
(PINA) from only a sequence of monocular RGB-D video.
Existing methods do not fully meet these criteria. Most
state-of-the-art dynamic human models [7, 11, 33, 34] represent humans as a parametric mesh and deform it via linear blend skinning (LBS) and pose correctives. Sometimes

20470

