AP-BSN: Self-Supervised Denoising for Real-World Images
via Asymmetric PD and Blind-Spot Network
Wooseok Lee1
Sanghyun Son1
Kyoung Mu Lee1,2
1
2
Dept. of ECE & ASRI, IPAI, Seoul National University
adntjr4@gmail.com, {thstkdgus35, kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Blind-spot network (BSN) and its variants have made
significant advances in self-supervised denoising. Nevertheless, they are still bound to synthetic noisy inputs due
to less practical assumptions like pixel-wise independent
noise. Hence, it is challenging to deal with spatially correlated real-world noise using self-supervised BSN. Recently,
pixel-shuffle downsampling (PD) has been proposed to remove the spatial correlation of real-world noise. However,
it is not trivial to integrate PD and BSN directly, which
prevents the fully self-supervised denoising model on realworld images. We propose an Asymmetric PD (AP) to address this issue, which introduces different PD stride factors
for training and inference. We systematically demonstrate
that the proposed AP can resolve inherent trade-offs caused
by specific PD stride factors and make BSN applicable to
practical scenarios. To this end, we develop AP-BSN, a
state-of-the-art self-supervised denoising method for realworld sRGB images. We further propose random-replacing
refinement, which significantly improves the performance of
our AP-BSN without any additional parameters. Extensive
studies demonstrate that our method outperforms the other
self-supervised and even unpaired denoising methods by a
large margin, without using any additional knowledge, e.g.,
noise level, regarding the underlying unknown noise.

1. Introduction
Image denoising is one of the essential topics in the
computer vision area, which aims to recover a clean image
from the noisy signal. Due to its practical usage in several
vision-related applications, several learning-based denoising algorithms [28, 36, 43, 44] have been proposed with the
advent of convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Conventional methods usually adopt additive white Gaussian noise
(AWGN) to acquire large-scale training data by synthesizing clean-noisy image pairs for supervised learning. NeverCode is available at: https://github.com/wooseoklee4/AP-BSN

(a) DnCNN [43]
( Supervised )

(b) C2N [19] + DIDN [40]
( Unpaired )

(c) NAC [39]
( Self-supervised )

(d) AP-BSN + R3 (Ours)
( Self-supervised )

Figure 1. Visual comparison between different denoising methods on the DND benchmark [34]. (a) DnCNN is trained on realworld noisy-clean pairs from the SIDD [1] dataset. (b) C2N uses
clean SIDD [1] and noisy DND [34] samples to simulate realworld noise distribution in an unsupervised manner. (c–d) Selfsupervised methods can be trained on the DND [34] noisy images directly. We mark PSNR(dB) and SSIM with respect to the
ground-truth clean image for the quantitative comparison.

theless, models learned on the synthetic noise do not generalize well in practice since the characteristics of real-world
noise differ much from AWGN. To overcome the limitation, several attempts have been made to construct pairs of
real-world datasets like SIDD [1] and NIND [4]. Using
the real-world training pairs, supervised denoising methods [8, 16, 21, 41, 42] can be trained to restore clean images
from the noisy real-world input. However, constructing the
real-world dataset requires massive human labor, strictly
controlled environments, and complicated post-processing.
In addition, it is difficult to generalize the learned model
toward diverse practical scenarios as the characteristic of
noise varies much for the different capturing devices.

17725

