Deep Spectral Methods: A Surprisingly Strong Baseline for Unsupervised
Semantic Segmentation and Localization
Luke Melas-Kyriazi

Christian Rupprecht

Iro Laina

Andrea Vedaldi

University of Oxford
{lukemk,chrisr,iro,vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Input Image

Abstract
Unsupervised localization and segmentation are longstanding computer vision challenges that involve decomposing an image into semantically meaningful segments
without any labeled data. These tasks are particularly interesting in an unsupervised setting due to the difficulty and
cost of obtaining dense image annotations, but existing unsupervised approaches struggle with complex scenes containing multiple objects. Differently from existing methods,
which are purely based on deep learning, we take inspiration from traditional spectral segmentation methods by reframing image decomposition as a graph partitioning problem. Specifically, we examine the eigenvectors of the Laplacian of a feature affinity matrix from self-supervised networks. We find that these eigenvectors already decompose
an image into meaningful segments, and can be readily
used to localize objects in a scene. Furthermore, by clustering the features associated with these segments across
a dataset, we can obtain well-delineated, nameable regions, i.e. semantic segmentations. Experiments on complex
datasets (PASCAL VOC, MS-COCO) demonstrate that our
simple spectral method outperforms the state-of-the-art in
unsupervised localization and segmentation by a significant
margin. Furthermore, our method can be readily used for a
variety of complex image editing tasks, such as background
removal and compositing. 1

1. Introduction
Well-established computer vision tasks such as localization and segmentation are aimed at understanding the structure of images at a fine level of detail. The modern approach
to these tasks, which consists of training deep neural networks in an end-to-end fashion, has shown strong performance given large quantities of human-labeled data. How1 Project Page: https://lukemelas.github.io/deep-spectral-segmentation/

1st Eigenvector 2nd Eigenvector 3rd Eigenvector 4th Eigenvector Obj. Localization Sem. Segment.

Figure 1. Deep Spectral Methods. We present a simple approach
based on spectral methods that decomposes an image using the
eigenvectors of a Laplacian matrix constructed from a combination
of color information and unsupervised deep features. The method
surpasses the state of the art in unsupervised image segmentation
and object localization while also being significantly simpler.

ever, obtaining labeled data for these dense tasks can be
difficult and expensive. Whereas vast quantities of (weak)
image labels and descriptions may be obtained from the Internet [43, 55, 63], dense image annotations cannot be easily sourced from it, and creating them manually is a laborintensive process. Moreover, in many specialized fields
such as medical imaging, where detection and segmentation
tasks are particularly important, data labeling must be manually performed by a domain expert. As a result, performing
dense vision tasks without labeled data is an important open
problem.
Numerous existing methods perform dense visual tasks
with weak annotations, such as image-level labels, captions,
spoken narratives, scribbles, and points [9,36,46,47]. However, fully-unsupervised dense image understanding remains challenging and under-explored. Current approaches
involve clustering dense features (e.g., IIC [41]), contrastive
learning with saliency masks (e.g., MaskContrast [74]), and

8364

