Dimension Embeddings for Monocular 3D Object Detection
Yunpeng Zhang1,2 , Wenzhao Zheng1,2 , Zheng Zhu3 , Guan Huang3 ,
Dalong Du3 , Jie Zhou1,2 , Jiwen Lu1,2 *
1
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
3
PhiGent Robotics
{zhang-yp19, zhengwz18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; zhengzhu@ieee.org;
{guan.huang, dalong.du}@phigent.ai; {jzhou, lujiwen}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Most existing deep learning-based approaches for monocular 3D object detection directly regress the dimensions of
objects and overlook their importance in solving the illposed problem. In this paper, we propose a general method
to learn appropriate embeddings for dimension estimation
in monocular 3D object detection. Specifically, we consider
two intuitive clues in learning the dimension-aware embeddings with deep neural networks. First, we constrain the
pair-wise distance on the embedding space to reflect the
similarity of corresponding dimensions so that the model
can take advantage of inter-object information to learn more
discriminative embeddings for dimension estimation. Second, we propose to learn representative shape templates on
the dimension-aware embedding space. Through the attention mechanism, each object can interact with the learnable
templates and obtain the attentive dimensions as the initial
estimation, which is further refined by the combined features
from both the object and the attentive templates. Experimental results on the well-established KITTI dataset demonstrate
the proposed method of dimension embeddings can bring
consistent improvements with negligible computation cost
overhead. We achieve new state-of-the-art performance on
the KITTI 3D object detection benchmark.

1. Introduction
3D object detection aims to estimate the 3D locations,
poses, and sizes of surrounding objects and serves as one
fundamental task in sensing the 3D environment. It has been
widely used in fields including autonomous driving and robot
navigation. Most existing methods rely on point clouds from
LiDAR devices [18, 40, 41, 51] or binocular images from
stereo cameras [7, 20, 37, 45] for accurate 3D object detec* Corresponding author.

MLP
similar
pull
push

Object features

push
divergent

divergent

MLP
Dimension-aware embedding space
MLP

Dimensions

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed dimension embeddings for
monocular 3D object detection. We first project the features of
objects onto the dimension-aware embedding space, where objects
with similar dimensions are pulled together and objects with divergent dimensions are pushed away. Compared with the direct
method in the dotted line, our method based on dimension embeddings can utilize inter-object similarities as useful information to
learn more discriminative features for dimension estimation.

tion. Though these methods can benefit from direct distance
information and achieve impressive performance, the LiDAR sensors are still expensive for large-scale applications
and stereo cameras can suffer from inaccurate calibrations.
In comparison, monocular methods, which only utilize one
color camera and reason about appearance information, have
been a promising alternative and receiving increasingly more
attention [1, 6, 8, 16, 23, 27, 32, 36, 50, 52, 55].
Considering the ill-posed nature of monocular 3D object
detection, the 3D dimension and the distance of objects are
fundamentally entangled. Existing methods [3, 21, 26–28, 31,

1589

