FineDiving: A Fine-grained Dataset for Procedure-aware
Action Quality Assessment
Jinglin Xu*, Yongming Rao*, Xumin Yu, Guangyi Chen, Jie Zhou, Jiwen Lu†
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
{xujinglinlove, raoyongming95}@gmail.com; yuxm20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn;
guangyichen1994@gmail.com; {jzhou, lujiwen}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Figure 1. An overview of the FineDiving dataset and procedure-aware action quality assessment approach. FineDiving is a fine-grained
sports video dataset with detailed annotations on action procedures. It provides a potential for proposing an action quality assessment approach with better interpretability via constructing a new Temporal Segmentation Attention module between query and exemplar instances.

Abstract
Most existing action quality assessment methods rely on
the deep features of an entire video to predict the score,
which is less reliable due to the non-transparent inference
process and poor interpretability. We argue that understanding both high-level semantics and internal temporal
structures of actions in competitive sports videos is the key
to making predictions accurate and interpretable. Towards
this goal, we construct a new fine-grained dataset, called
FineDiving, developed on diverse diving events with detailed annotations on action procedures. We also propose
a procedure-aware approach for action quality assessment,
learned by a new Temporal Segmentation Attention module.
Specifically, we propose to parse pairwise query and exemplar action instances into consecutive steps with diverse
semantic and temporal correspondences. The procedureaware cross-attention is proposed to learn embeddings be* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

tween query and exemplar steps to discover their semantic,
spatial, and temporal correspondences, and further serve
for fine-grained contrastive regression to derive a reliable
scoring mechanism. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our approach achieves substantial improvements over
the state-of-the-art methods with better interpretability. The
dataset and code are available at https://github.
com/xujinglin/FineDiving.

1. Introduction
Competitive sports video understanding has become a
hot research topic in the computer vision community. As
one of the key techniques of understanding sports action,
Action Quality Assessment (AQA) has attracted growing attention in recent years. In the 2020 Tokyo Olympic Games,
the AI scoring system in gymnastics acted as a judge for assessing the athlete’s score performance and providing feedback for improving the athlete’s competitive skill, which reduces the controversies in many subjective scoring events,

2949

