Investigating Tradeoffs in Real-World Video Super-Resolution
Kelvin C.K. Chan

Shangchen Zhou
Xiangyu Xu
Chen Change Loy
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

{chan0899, s200094, xiangyu.xu, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg

Input
RealBasicVSR

Input

Input

RealVSR

BSRGAN

Real-ESRGAN

RealBasicVSR

Figure 1. Results on a Real-World Video. In this work, we investigate various tradeoffs caused by the complex and diverse degradations
in real-world VSR. Such tradeoffs are largely neglected in the literature. We propose simple yet effective solutions to the tradeoffs, and the
resulting model RealBasicVSR acts as a strong baseline for real-world VSR. (Zoom-in for best view)

Abstract
The diversity and complexity of degradations in realworld video super-resolution (VSR) pose non-trivial challenges in inference and training. First, while long-term
propagation leads to improved performance in cases of mild
degradations, severe in-the-wild degradations could be exaggerated through propagation, impairing output quality.
To balance the tradeoff between detail synthesis and artifact suppression, we found an image pre-cleaning stage indispensable to reduce noises and artifacts prior to propagation. Equipped with a carefully designed cleaning module, our RealBasicVSR outperforms existing methods in
both quality and efficiency (Fig. 1). Second, real-world
VSR models are often trained with diverse degradations to
improve generalizability, requiring increased batch size to
produce a stable gradient. Inevitably, the increased com-

putational burden results in various problems, including
1) speed-performance tradeoff and 2) batch-length tradeoff. To alleviate the first tradeoff, we propose a stochastic degradation scheme that reduces up to 40% of training
time without sacrificing performance. We then analyze different training settings and suggest that employing longer
sequences rather than larger batches during training allows more effective uses of temporal information, leading to
more stable performance during inference. To facilitate fair
comparisons, we propose the new VideoLQ dataset, which
contains a large variety of real-world low-quality video sequences containing rich textures and patterns. Our dataset
can serve as a common ground for benchmarking. Code,
models, and the dataset are publicly available at https:
//github.com/ckkelvinchan/RealBasicVSR.

15962

