PatchFormer: An Efficient Point Transformer with Patch Attention
Cheng Zhang1 ,* Haocheng Wan1∗ , Xinyi Shen2 , Zizhao Wu1†
1
Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou China
2
University College London, London UK
{zhangcheng828,wuzizhao}@hdu.edu.cn {wanhaocheng2022,xinyishen2018}@163.com

Abstract
The point cloud learning community witnesses a modeling shift from CNNs to Transformers, where pure Transformer architectures have achieved top accuracy on the major learning benchmarks. However, existing point Transformers are computationally expensive since they need to
generate a large attention map, which has quadratic complexity (both in space and time) with respect to input size. To
solve this shortcoming, we introduce Patch ATtention (PAT)
to adaptively learn a much smaller set of bases upon which
the attention maps are computed. By a weighted summation
upon these bases, PAT not only captures the global shape
context but also achieves linear complexity to input size. In
addition, we propose a lightweight Multi-Scale aTtention
(MST) block to build attentions among features of different scales, providing the model with multi-scale features.
Equipped with the PAT and MST, we construct our neural
architecture called PatchFormer that integrates both modules into a joint framework for point cloud learning. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our network achieves
comparable accuracy on general point cloud learning tasks
with 9.2× speed-up than previous point Transformers.

1. Introduction
Transformer has recently drawn great attention in natural
language processing [7, 34] and 2D vision [8, 21, 33, 38] because of its superior capability in capturing long-range dependencies. Self-Attention (SA), the core of Transformer,
obtains an attention map by computing the affinities between self queries and self keys, generating a new feature map by weighting the self values with this attention
map. Benefitting from SA module, Transformer is capable of modeling the relationship of tokens in a sequence,
which is also important to many point cloud learning tasks.
Hence, plenty of researches have been done to explore
* These authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author: wuzizhao@hdu.edu.cn.

Figure 1. A large indoor scene often consists of small instances
(e.g., chair and typewriter) and large objects (e.g., table and blackboard), building the relationships among them requires a multiscale attention mechanism.

Transformer-based point cloud learning architectures.
Recently, Nico et al. proposed PT1 [9] to extract global
features by introducing the standard SA mechanism, which
aims to capture spatial point relations and shape information. Guo et al. proposed offset-attention (PCT [10]) to calculate the offset difference between the SA features and the
input features by element-wise subtraction. Lately, more
and more researchers have applied SA module to various
point cloud learning tasks and achieved significant performance such as [24,56]. However, existing point Transformers are computationally expensive because the original SA
module needs to generate a large attention map, which has
high computational complexity and occupies a huge number of GPU memory. This bottleneck lies in that both the
generation of attention map and its usage require the computation with respect to all points.
Towards this issue, we propose a novel lightweight attention mechanism, namely PAT which calculates the attention
map via low-rank approximation [17, 52]. Our key observation is that a 3D shape is composed of its local parts and
thus the features of points in the same part should have similar semantics. Based on this observation, we first exploit
the intrinsic geometry similarity, cluster local points on a
3D shape as one patch and estimate a base by aggregating
the features of all points in the same patch. Then we use a
product of self queries and self bases to approximate the

11799

