Simple Multi-dataset Detection
Xingyi Zhou1 Vladlen Koltun2 Philipp Krähenbühl1
1
2
The University of Texas at Austin
Apple

Abstract
How do we build a general and broad object detection system? We use all labels of all concepts ever annotated. These labels span diverse datasets with potentially inconsistent taxonomies. In this paper, we present
a simple method for training a unified detector on multiple large-scale datasets. We use dataset-specific training
protocols and losses, but share a common detection architecture with dataset-specific outputs. We show how to automatically integrate these dataset-specific outputs into a
common semantic taxonomy. In contrast to prior work,
our approach does not require manual taxonomy reconciliation. Experiments show our learned taxonomy outperforms
a expert-designed taxonomy in all datasets. Our multidataset detector performs as well as dataset-specific models
on each training domain, and can generalize to new unseen
dataset without fine-tuning on them. Code is available at
https://github.com/xingyizhou/UniDet.

1. Introduction
Computer vision aims to produce broad, general-purpose
perception systems that work in the wild. Yet object detection is fragmented into datasets [18, 22, 24, 33] and
our models are locked into the corresponding domains.
This fragmentation brought rapid progress in object detection [5, 10, 20, 31, 39, 45] and instance segmentation [14],
but comes with a drawback. Single datasets are limited
in both image domains and label vocabularies and do not
yield general-purpose recognition systems. Can we alleviate these limitations by unifying diverse detection datasets?
In this paper, we first make training an object detector on
a collection of disparate datasets as straightforward as training on a single one. Different datasets are usually trained
under different training losses, data sampling strategies, and
schedules. We show that we can train a single detector with
separate outputs for each dataset, and apply dataset-specific
supervision to each. Our training mimics training parallel
dataset-specific models with a common network. As a result, our single detector takes full advantages of all training
data, performs well on training domains, and generalizes

bear
COCO

tree
OpenImages

fish
OpenImages

car
car
Mapillary Mapillary
car
Mapillary
bear
COCO

chair
COCO

trash bin
Obj365

sausage
OpenImages

fork
COCO

carrot
COCO

1

Figure 1. Different datasets span diverse semantic and visual domains. We learn to unify the label spaces of multiple datasets and
train a single object detector that generalizes across datasets.

better to new unseen domains. However, this detector produces duplicate outputs for classes that occur in multiple
datasets.
A core challenge is integrating different datasets into
a common taxonomy, and training a detector that reasons
about general objects instead of dataset-specific classes.
Traditional approaches create this taxonomy by hand [19,
47], which is both time-consuming and error-prone. We
present a fully automatic way to unify the output space of
a multi-dataset detection system using visual data only. We
use the fact that object detectors for similar concepts from
different datasets fire on similar novel objects. This allows
us to define the cost of merging concepts across datasets,
and optimize for a common taxonomy fully automatically.
Our optimization jointly finds a unified taxonomy, a mapping from this taxonomy to each dataset, and a detector
over the unified taxonomy using a novel 0-1 integer programming formulation. An object detector trained on this
unified taxonomy has a large, automatically constructed vocabulary of concepts from all training datasets.
We evaluate our unified object detector at an unprecedented scale. We train a unified detector on 3 large and diverse datasets: COCO [22], Objects365 [33], and OpenImages [18]. For the first time, we show that a single detector
performs as well as dataset-specific models on each indi-

7571

