Matching Feature Sets for Few-Shot Image Classification
Arman Afrasiyabi⋆• , Hugo Larochelle⋄†• , Jean-FrancËois Lalonde⋆ , Christian GagnÂe⋆†•
⋆
UniversitÂe Laval, ⋄ Google Brain, † Canada CIFAR AI Chair, • Mila
https://lvsn.github.io/SetFeat/

Abstract
In image classification, it is common practice to train
deep networks to extract a single feature vector per input
image. Few-shot classification methods also mostly follow
this trend. In this work, we depart from this established direction and instead propose to extract sets of feature vectors
for each image. We argue that a set-based representation
intrinsically builds a richer representation of images from
the base classes, which can subsequently better transfer to
the few-shot classes. To do so, we propose to adapt existing
feature extractors to instead produce sets of feature vectors from images. Our approach, dubbed SetFeat, embeds
shallow self-attention mechanisms inside existing encoder
architectures. The attention modules are lightweight, and as
such our method results in encoders that have approximately
the same number of parameters as their original versions.
During training and inference, a set-to-set matching metric
is used to perform image classification. The effectiveness
of our proposed architecture and metrics is demonstrated
via thorough experiments on standard few-shot datasetsÐ
namely miniImageNet, tieredImageNet, and CUBÐin both
the 1- and 5-shot scenarios. In all cases but one, our method
outperforms the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
The task of few-shot image classification is to transfer
knowledge gained on a set of ªbaseº categories, assumed
to be available in large quantities, to another set of ªnovelº
classes of which we are given only very few examples. To
solve this problem, a popular strategy is to employ a deep
feature extractor which learns to convert an input image into
a feature vector that is both discriminative and transferable
to the novel classes. In this context, the common practice is
to train a model to extract, for a given input, a single feature
vector from which classification decisions are made.
In this paper, we depart from this established strategy
by proposing instead to represent images as sets of feature
vectors. With this, we aim at learning a richer feature space
that is both more discriminative and easier to transfer to the

novel domain, by allowing the network to focus on different
characteristics of the image and at different scales. The
intuition motivating that approach is that decomposing the
representation into independent components should allow
the capture of several distinctive aspects of images that can
then be used efficiently to represent images of novel classes.
To do so, we take inspiration from Feature Pyramid Networks [34] which proposes to concatenate multi-scale feature
maps from convolutional backbones. In contrast, however,
we do not just poll the features themselves but rather embed
shallow self-attention modules (called ªmappersº) at various
scales in the network. This adapted network therefore learns
to represent an image via a set of attention-based latent representations. The network is first pre-trained by injecting
the signal of a classification loss at every mapper. Then, it
is fine-tuned in a meta-training stage, which performs classification by computing the distance between a query (test)
and a set of support (training) samples in a manner similar to
Prototypical Networks [49]. Here, the main difference is that
the distance between samples is computed using set-to-set
metrics rather than traditional distance functions. To this end,
we propose and experiment with three set-to-set metrics.
This paper presents the following contributions. First, it
presents the idea of reasoning on sets and a set-based inference of feature vectors extracted from images. It shows that
set representation yields improved performance on few-shot
image classification without increasing the total number of
network parameters. Second, it presents a straightforward
way to adapt existing backbones to make them extract sets of
features rather than single ones, and processing them in order
to achieve decisions. To do so, it proposed to embed simple self-attention modules in between convolutional blocks,
with examples of adapted three popular backbones, namely
Conv4-64, Conv4-256, and ResNet12. It also proposes setto-set metrics for evaluation of differences between query
and support set. Third, it presents extensive experiments
on three few-shot datasets, namely miniImageNet, tieredImageNet and CUB. In almost all cases, our method outperforms the state-of-the-art. Notably, our method gains 1.83%,
1.42%, and 1.83% accuracy in 1-shot over the baselines in
miniImageNet, tieredImageNet and CUB, respectively.

9014

