SNUG: Self-Supervised Neural Dynamic Garments
Igor Santesteban1
1

Miguel A. Otaduy1

Dan Casas1

Universidad Rey Juan Carlos, Spain
first.last@{urjc.es}
SNUG (OURS)

STATE OF THE ART
Data generation ~180h

Supervised training ~17h

Inference 2.5ms

Self-supervised training ~2h

Lreconstruction
Input

Inference 2.2ms

Lphysics

Neural
Network

Input

Neural
Network

Figure 1. Existing learning-based methods for garment deformations (left) use supervised training schemes that require the expensive
computation of large datasets. In contrast, our approach SNUG (right) is a learning-based method that enables the self-supervised training
of dynamic neural 3D garments, without requiring any ground-truth data.

Abstract
We present a self-supervised method to learn dynamic
3D deformations of garments worn by parametric human bodies. State-of-the-art data-driven approaches to
model 3D garment deformations are trained using supervised strategies that require large datasets, usually obtained
by expensive physics-based simulation methods or professional multi-camera capture setups. In contrast, we propose
a new training scheme that removes the need for groundtruth samples, enabling self-supervised training of dynamic
3D garment deformations. Our key contribution is to realize
that physics-based deformation models, traditionally solved
in a frame-by-frame basis by implicit integrators, can be
recasted as an optimization problem. We leverage such
optimization-based scheme to formulate a set of physicsbased loss terms that can be used to train neural networks
without precomputing ground-truth data. This allows us to
learn models for interactive garments, including dynamic
deformations and fine wrinkles, with a two orders of magnitude speed up in training time compared to state-of-the-art
supervised methods.

1. Introduction
The efficient modeling of digital garments is an active
area of research due to the large number of applications,
including fashion design, e-commerce, virtual try-on, and
video games. The traditional approach to this problem is

through physics-based simulation [38], but the high computational cost required at run time hinders the deployment of these techniques to real-world applications. Recently, learning-based methods [17,31, 39,45,46,50,53, 55]
have demonstrated that it is possible to closely approximate
the accuracy of physics-based solutions. These methods
use supervised learning strategies to find a function that
outputs a deformed garment given an input body descriptor. During the training phase, the supervision is enforced
by directly minimizing at a vertex level the difference between the predicted garment and ground-truth 3D meshes.
Despite requiring hours of training, learning-based methods are highly-efficient to evaluate at run time, therefore
they potentially offer an attractive alternative to traditional
physics-based solutions.
However, the need for large datasets in current supervised methods is far from ideal. Ground-truth meshes
must be obtained –for each combination of garment, body
shape, and pose– via computationally-expensive simulations [37] or complex 3D scanning setups [40], which heavily hinders the scalability of current learning-based methods. We observe that for similar image-based problems,
self-supervised strategies have shown that it is possible to
learn complex tasks without requiring ground-truth data
[41, 57]. Unfortunately, self-supervision for dynamic 3D
clothing has not been explored.
In this work, we present a self-supervised method to
learn dynamic deformations of 3D garments worn by parametric human bodies. The key to our success is realizing
that the solution to the equations of motion used in cur-

8140

