Decoupled Multi-task Learning with Cyclical Self-Regulation for Face Parsing
Qingping Zheng1 , Jiankang Deng2 , Zheng Zhu3 , Ying Li1 , Stefanos Zafeiriou2,4
1

Northwestern Polytechnical University, 2 Huawei, 3 Tsinghua University, 4 Imperial College London

zhengqingping2018@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, jiankangdeng@gmail.com, zhengzhu@ieee.org
lybyp@nwpu.edu.cn, s.zafeiriou@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper probes intrinsic factors behind typical failure
cases (e.g. spatial inconsistency and boundary confusion)
produced by the existing state-of-the-art method in face
parsing. To tackle these problems, we propose a novel Decoupled Multi-task Learning with Cyclical Self-Regulation
(DML-CSR) for face parsing. Specifically, DML-CSR designs a multi-task model which comprises face parsing, binary edge, and category edge detection. These tasks only
share low-level encoder weights without high-level interactions between each other, enabling to decouple auxiliary
modules from the whole network at the inference stage. To
address spatial inconsistency, we develop a dynamic dual
graph convolutional network to capture global contextual
information without using any extra pooling operation. To
handle boundary confusion in both single and multiple face
scenarios, we exploit binary and category edge detection to
jointly obtain generic geometric structure and fine-grained
semantic clues of human faces. Besides, to prevent noisy labels from degrading model generalization during training,
cyclical self-regulation is proposed to self-ensemble several
model instances to get a new model and the resulting model
then is used to self-distill subsequent models, through alternating iterations.
Experiments show that our method
achieves the new state-of-the-art performance on the Helen,
CelebAMask-HQ, and Lapa datasets. The source code is
available at https://github.com/deepinsight/
insightface/tree/master/parsing/dml_csr.

1. Introduction
Face parsing, as a fine-grained semantic segmentation
task, intends to assign a pixel-wise label for each facial
component, e.g., eyes, nose, and mouth. The detailed analysis of semantic facial parts is essential in many high-level
applications, such as face swapping [28], face editing [15],
This work is done when Qingping Zheng is an intern at Huawei.

Image

GT

EAGRNet

Ours

Image

GT

Image

GT

Figure 1. The first three rows show typical failure cases of spatial
inconsistency and boundary confusion when applying EARGNet
[36] to face parsing. The last row displays noisy labels on the
training datasets.

and facial makeup [29]. Benefit from the learning capacity of deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and
the labor effort put in pixel-level annotations [15, 21, 35],
methods based on Fully Convolutional Networks (FCNs)
[7, 10, 18–20, 23, 36, 47, 48] have achieved a promising performance on the fully supervised face parsing. Nevertheless, the local characteristic of the convolutional kernel prevents FCNs from capturing global contextual information
[25], which is crucial for semantically parsing facial components in an image.
To address this issue, most of the region-based face parsing methods [10,20,47] integrate CNN features into variant
CRFs to learn global information. However, these methods
do not consider the correlation among various objects. To
this end, Te et al. [36] proposes the EAGRNet method to
model a region-level graph representation over a face image
by propagating information across all vertices on the graph.
Even though EAGRNet enables reasoning over non-local
regions to get global dependencies between distant facial

4156

