FaceFormer: Speech-Driven 3D Facial Animation with Transformers
Yingruo Fan1 Zhaojiang Lin2† Jun Saito3 Wenping Wang1,4 Taku Komura1∗
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
Adobe Research 4 Texas A&M University

Abstract
Speech-driven 3D facial animation is challenging due
to the complex geometry of human faces and the limited
availability of 3D audio-visual data. Prior works typically focus on learning phoneme-level features of short audio windows with limited context, occasionally resulting
in inaccurate lip movements. To tackle this limitation, we
propose a Transformer-based autoregressive model, FaceFormer, which encodes the long-term audio context and
autoregressively predicts a sequence of animated 3D face
meshes. To cope with the data scarcity issue, we integrate the self-supervised pre-trained speech representations. Also, we devise two biased attention mechanisms
well suited to this specific task, including the biased crossmodal multi-head (MH) attention and the biased causal MH
self-attention with a periodic positional encoding strategy.
The former effectively aligns the audio-motion modalities,
whereas the latter offers abilities to generalize to longer
audio sequences. Extensive experiments and a perceptual
user study show that our approach outperforms the existing
state-of-the-arts. The code and the video are available at:
https://evelynfan.github.io/audio2face/.

1. Introduction
Speech-driven 3D facial animation has become an increasingly attractive research area in both academia and industry. It is potentially beneficial to a broad range of applications such as virtual reality, film production, games
and education. Realistic speech-driven 3D facial animation
aims to automatically animate vivid facial expressions of
the 3D avatar from an arbitrary speech signal.
We focus on animating the 3D geometry rather than
the 2D pixel values, e.g. photorealistic talking-head animation [12, 15, 42, 52, 63, 67, 69]. The majority of existing
works aim to produce 2D videos of talking heads, given
the availability of massive 2D video datasets. However, the
∗ Corresponding author
† Work done at HKUST

…
…

FaceFormer
Raw Audio

…

Figure 1. Concept diagram of FaceFormer. Given the raw audio input and a neutral 3D face mesh, our proposed end-to-end
Transformer-based architecture, dubbed FaceFormer, can autoregressively synthesize a sequence of realistic 3D facial motions
with accurate lip movements.

generated 2D videos are not directly applicable to applications like 3D games and VR, which need to animate 3D
models in a 3D environment. Several methods [27, 47, 60]
harness 2D monocular videos to obtain 3D facial parameters, which might lead to unreliable results. This is because
the quality of the synthetic 3D data is bounded by the accuracy of 3D reconstruction techniques, which cannot capture
the subtle changes in 3D. In speech-driven 3D facial animation, some 3D mesh-based works [8, 17, 39] formulate the
input as short audio windows, which might result in ambiguities in variations of facial expressions. As pointed out
by Karras et al. [31], the emotional state can be deduced
from a longer-term audio context. While MeshTalk [51] has
considered a longer audio context by modeling the audio
sequence, training the model with Mel spectral audio features fails to synthesize accurate lip motions in data-scarce
settings. Collecting lots of pairs of speech and 3D motion capture data is also considerably expensive and timeconsuming.
To address the issues about long-term context and lack of
3D audio-visual data, we propose a transformer-based autoregressive model (Fig. 1) which (1) captures longer-term
audio context to enable highly realistic animation of the en-

18770

