CAPRI-Net: Learning Compact CAD Shapes with Adaptive Primitive Assembly
Fenggen Yu1

Zhiqin Chen1
Manyi Li1,3
Aditya Sanghi2
Hooman Shayani2
Ali Mahdavi-Amiri1
Hao Zhang1
1
2
3
Simon Fraser University
Autodesk AI Lab
Shandong University

Abstract
We introduce CAPRI-Net, a self-supervised neural network for learning compact and interpretable implicit representations of 3D computer-aided design (CAD) models, in
the form of adaptive primitive assemblies. Given an input
3D shape, our network reconstructs it by an assembly of
quadric surface primitives via constructive solid geometry
(CSG) operations. Without any ground-truth shape assemblies, our self-supervised network is trained with a reconstruction loss, leading to faithful 3D reconstructions with
sharp edges and plausible CSG trees. While the parametric
nature of CAD models does make them more predictable
locally, at the shape level, there is much structural and
topological variation, which presents a significant generalizability challenge to state-of-the-art neural models for 3D
shapes. Our network addresses this challenge by adaptive
training with respect to each test shape, with which we finetune the network that was pre-trained on a model collection.
We evaluate our learning framework on both ShapeNet and
ABC, the largest and most diverse CAD dataset to date, in
terms of reconstruction quality, sharp edges, compactness,
and interpretability, to demonstrate superiority over current
alternatives for neural CAD reconstruction.

1. Introduction
Computer-Aided Design (CAD) models are ubiquitous
in engineering and manufacturing to drive decision making and product evolution related to 3D shapes and geometry. With the rapid advances in AI-powered solutions
across all relevant fields, several CAD datasets [29, 50, 57]
have emerged to support research in geometric deep learning. A common characteristic of CAD models is that they
are composed of well-defined parametric surfaces meeting
along sharp edges. While the parametric nature of the CAD
shapes do make them more predictable locally and at the
primitive level, at the shape level, there is a great deal of
structural and topological variations, which presents a significant generalizability challenge to current neural models for 3D shapes [8, 10, 21, 30, 35, 37, 40, 59, 63]. On the

Figure 1. Our network learns compact and interpretable implicit
representations of 3D CAD shapes in the form of primitive assemblies via CSG operations, without any assembly supervision.

other hand, existing networks for primitive fitting typically
focus on abstractions with simple, hence limited, primitives [39, 42, 54, 64], hindering reconstruction quality.
In this paper, we develop a learning framework for 3D
CAD shapes to address these very challenges. Our goal is
to design a neural network that can learn a compact and
interpretable representation for CAD models, leading to
high-quality 3D reconstruction, while the network generalizes well over ABC [29], the largest and most diverse CAD
dataset to date. This dataset is a collection of one million
CAD models covering a wide range of structural, topological, and geometric variations, without any category labels,
in contrast to other prominent repositories of man-made
shapes such as ShapeNet [4] and ModelNet [60] which have
only limited1 number of object categories. Hence, targeting
the ABC dataset poses a real generalizability challenge.
Our network takes an input 3D shape as a point cloud or
1 While the full ShapeNet dataset has 270 object categories, to the best
of our knowledge, most learning methods only work with up to 13.

11768

