Mixed Differential Privacy in Computer Vision
Aditya Golatkar⇤,2 Alessandro Achille1 Yu-Xiang Wang1,3
Aaron Roth1,4 Michael Kearns1,4 Stefano Soatto1,2
1
AWS AI Labs 2 UCLA 3 UCSB 4 Penn
*adityagolatkar@ucla.edu aachille@amazon.com yuxiangw@cs.ucsb.edu
aaroth@cis.upenn.edu mkearns@cis.upenn.edu soattos@amazon.com
Abstract
We introduce AdaMix, an adaptive differentially private
algorithm for training deep neural network classifiers using
both private and public image data. While pre-training language models on large public datasets has enabled strong
differential privacy (DP) guarantees with minor loss of accuracy, a similar practice yields punishing trade-offs in vision tasks. A few-shot or even zero-shot learning baseline
that ignores private data can outperform fine-tuning on a
large private dataset. AdaMix incorporates few-shot training, or cross-modal zero-shot learning, on public data prior
to private fine-tuning, to improve the trade-off. AdaMix reduces the error increase from the non-private upper bound
from the 167-311% of the baseline, on average across 6
datasets, to 68-92% depending on the desired privacy level
selected by the user. AdaMix tackles the trade-off arising in visual classification, whereby the most privacy sensitive data, corresponding to isolated points in representation space, are also critical for high classification accuracy.
In addition, AdaMix comes with strong theoretical privacy
guarantees and convergence analysis.

1. Introduction
When training a deep neural network for visual classification, it is critical to protect privacy by limiting the amount
of information that could be gleaned about any individual
training sample. Differential Privacy (DP) [15] is a theoretical framework to provide strong guarantees on the maximum amount of information that any attacker can extract
about an individual training sample. In particular, DP allows users to select the desired trade-off between privacy
and accuracy, mediated by a privacy parameter ✏, which
typically depends on the application scenario.
Training large machine learning models while guaranteeing strong privacy for each sample is challenging. In
* work done during an Amazon internship

practice, however, one often has a pool of data available
for which there are no privacy concerns. This could be a
synthetic datasets or datasets designed to be available for
public use. Such public data are distinct from the private
ones, for which we seek strong privacy guarantees.1 In
particular, using large amounts of generic public data for
pre-training has recently enabled the creation of language
models that achieve DP on the target task while remaining close to state-of-the-art performance [34, 57]. The same
strategy in vision [49], however, still yields punishing error
increases (Tab. 1) ranging from 311% to 167% on average
across datasets, depending on the desired level of privacy.
Can we, then, make use of public data that is better
suited for vision, so we can retain close-to-paragon performance while ensuring privacy?
One sure way of preserving privacy is not to use private data altogether, and recent literature has given us multiple ways to do so. For example, using zero-shot learning [19, 29, 30, 33, 46] one can leverage public data from a
different modality (e.g., text) to train a visual model without
ever seeing the private data. More generally, one can source
or synthesize a few samples of labeled public data from
the task distribution, and train using few-shot learning [54],
still without using private data. Surprisingly, simple fewshot techniques outperform private training on much larger
dataset (Fig. 2, left).
Of course, there may be subtle domain shifts between
the public and private data, so ignoring the latter is not a
desirable strategy to maintain privacy. The question, then,
is how to use even small amounts of public data, in addition
to the private data, to break the trade-off between privacy
and accuracy. To do so, we change the setting from most
work on DP to include labeled public data sourced with the
same labels as the target task. We call this setting mixed
differential privacy, or MixDP.
To address MixDP, we propose to use the public data not
just for pre-training the backbone, but for few-shot or zero1 Note that here public data is not the same as data from public sources,
as the latter may still require privacy guarantees.

8376

