HyperDet3D: Learning a Scene-conditioned 3D Object Detector
Yu Zheng1,3 Yueqi Duan2† Jiwen Lu1,3 Jie Zhou1,3 Qi Tian 4
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
3
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology
4
Huawei Cloud & AI, China
zhengyu19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {duanyueqi,lujiwen,jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn, tian.qi1@huawei.com

Figure 1. Exemplified predictions that highlight the importance of scene-conditioned knowledge. In the upper example, by observing the
detection candidate in the object level, we can easily recognize it as cabinet by comparing it with groundtruth cabinets, or relating it with
other surrounding cabinets. However, conditioned on the prior knowledge that the object candidate lies in a kitchen-like scene, we may
infer that it is a fridge. We also illustrated 5 wrong detections which go against the scene-conditioned knowledge in the lower half, which
are bathtub in a library, sink in an office, cabinet or bed in a laundry room, and chair embedded in the wall of a meeting room. Note that
point clouds are all colored only for easy illustration and not utilized in our method. (Best viewed in color.)

Abstract
A bathtub in a library, a sink in an office, a bed in a
laundry room – the counter-intuition suggests that scene
provides important prior knowledge for 3D object detection, which instructs to eliminate the ambiguous detection
of similar objects. In this paper, we propose HyperDet3D
to explore scene-conditioned prior knowledge for 3D object detection. Existing methods strive for better representation of local elements and their relations without sceneconditioned knowledge, which may cause ambiguity merely
based on the understanding of individual points and object
candidates. Instead, HyperDet3D simultaneously learns
scene-agnostic embeddings and scene-specific knowledge
through scene-conditioned hypernetworks. More specifically, our HyperDet3D not only explores the sharable ab† Corresponding author

stracts from various 3D scenes, but also adapts the detector
to the given scene at test time. We propose a discriminative
Multi-head Scene-specific Attention (MSA) module to dynamically control the layer parameters of the detector conditioned on the fusion of scene-conditioned knowledge. Our
HyperDet3D achieves state-of-the-art results on the 3D object detection benchmark of the ScanNet and SUN RGB-D
datasets. Moreover, through cross-dataset evaluation, we
show the acquired scene-conditioned prior knowledge still
takes effect when facing 3D scenes with domain gap.

1. Introduction
3D object detection has gained much attention in recent
years, which is fundamental for applications such as autonomous driving, robotic navigation and augmented reality. Early works adopt sliding window [42] or 2D prior [16]

5585

