Complex Video Action Reasoning via Learnable Markov Logic Network
Yang Jin1,2 , Linchao Zhu3 , Yadong Mu1*
1
Peking University, 2 Baidu Research,3 ReLER Lab, AAII, University of Technology Sydney
jiny@stu.pku.edu.cn, linchao.zhu@uts.edu.au, myd@pku.edu.cn

Profiting from the advance of deep convolutional networks, current state-of-the-art video action recognition
models have achieved remarkable progress. Nevertheless, most of existing models suffer from low interpretability of the predicted actions. Inspired by the observation
that temporally-configured human-object interactions often
serve as a key indicator of many actions, this work crafts
an action reasoning framework that performs Markov Logic
Network (MLN) based probabilistic logical inference. Crucially, we propose to encode an action by first-order logical
rules that correspond to the temporal changes of visual relationships in videos. The main contributions of this work
are two-fold: 1) Different from existing black-box models,
the proposed model simultaneously implements the localization of temporal boundaries and the recognition of action categories by grounding the logical rules of MLN in
videos. The weight associated with each such rule further
provides an estimate of confidence. These collectively make
our model more explainable and robust. 2) Instead of using hand-crafted logical rules in conventional MLN, we develop a data-driven instantiation of the MLN. In specific,
a hybrid learning scheme is proposed. It combines MLN’s
weight learning and reinforcement learning, using the former’s results as a self-critic for guiding the latter’s training. Additionally, by treating actions as logical predicates,
the proposed framework can also be integrated with deep
models for further performance boost. Comprehensive experiments on two complex video action datasets (Charades
& CAD-120) clearly demonstrate the effectiveness and explainability of our proposed method.

1. Introduction
Action recognition is a fundamental task in video understanding and has garnered significant attention in the last
few years. Recently, in virtue of the drastic development
of deep learning, 3D convolutional networks (3D CNNs)
* Yadong Mu is the corresponding author. Part of the work was performed when Yang Jin was an intern at Baidu Research.

Time

Action: “Someone is awakening in bed”

Abstract

person
lying on
bed

above
beneath

person
below

picture

siting on

bed

above
beneath

below

picture

person
standing beside

on the side of

bed

Figure 1. An illustration example from Action Genome [22]. It
demonstrates that actions can usually be decomposed into evolving spatio-temporal scene graphs (i.e., how a person interacts
with surrounding objects over time such as person-lying-on-bed to
person-siting-on-bed). Inspired by this, we propose to use a datadriven Markov Logic Network to model this evolving pattern.

have revolutionized this research field [4, 7, 8, 10, 23]. With
various elaborately-designed neural architectures and endto-end learning algorithms, it has emerged as a prominent
paradigm for video action recognition. Compared to early
works [21, 33, 55, 56] based on low-level features (e.g., trajectories, key points), the powerful representation capability
of 3D CNNs enables them to better capture complex longrange semantic dependencies across video frames.
Though extensively adopted in modern video action understanding tasks, these deep neural networks still suffer
from some inherent deficiencies. Typically, 3D CNNs are
fed a video clip and output a score that indicates the confidence for each action category through multi-layer calculations. Such a black-box predicting mechanism does not explicitly provide compelling evidence regarding the actions,
such as when / where / why the action occurred. The lack of
interpretability also makes deep neural networks vulnerable
to adversarial attacks [16, 36], which limits its applications
in many real-world scenarios [2] with strict security requirements. Therefore, in recent years, an increasing research effort has been devoted to explainable deep learning [45, 62].
All afore-mentioned facts strongly spur us to pursue an action reasoning framework with both accurate performance
and convincing interpretability.

3242

