Estimating Fine-Grained Noise Model via Contrastive Learning
Yunhao Zou
Ying Fu∗
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology

Abstract
Image denoising has achieved unprecedented progress
as great efforts have been made to exploit effective deep
denoisers. To improve the denoising performance in realworld, two typical solutions are used in recent trends: devising better noise models for the synthesis of more realistic
training data, and estimating noise level function to guide
non-blind denoisers. In this work, we combine both noise
modeling and estimation, and propose an innovative noise
model estimation and noise synthesis pipeline for realistic
noisy image generation. Specifically, our model learns a
noise estimation model with fine-grained statistical noise
model in a contrastive manner. Then, we use the estimated
noise parameters to model camera-specific noise distribution, and synthesize realistic noisy training data. The most
striking thing for our work is that by calibrating noise models of several sensors, our model can be extended to predict
other cameras. In other words, we can estimate cameraspecific noise models for unknown sensors with only testing images, without laborious calibration frames or paired
noisy/clean data. The proposed pipeline endows deep denoisers with competitive performances with state-of-the-art
real noise modeling methods.

1. Introduction
Image denoising is a fundamental and significant problem in the community of low-level vision.
Taking
the advantage of powerful deep learning tools, previous
works [40, 48, 49] have achieved nearly perfect performances removing noise under Additive White Gaussian
Noise (AWGN) assumption. However, the denoising results
on real photographs from consumer-level cameras and mobile devices are less satisfying [2,10,37]. This phenomenon
is mainly due to the distribution discrepancy between the
noise assumption and real sensor noise distribution, which
brings large domain gap between training and testing data.
To this end, more researchers are dedicated to real noise removal [1, 5, 12, 18, 46, 51]. There are mainly two significant
issues to be solved for real image denoising.
∗ Corresponding Author: fuying@bit.edu.cn

A straightforward way is to model real sensor noise distributions and generate more realistic data [1,9,12,22,42,45,
50]. Some methods present statistical models to mimic real
noise formation, they generally calibrate camera-specific
noise parameters (e.g., noise variance) from specially captured frames and then generate training data. In this way,
deep networks benefit from more realistic training data. Statistical noise models, including AWGN, Poisson-Guassian
(P-G, [15]) model, Poisson Mixture model [47], etc., are
commonly used in the early exploration of noise models.
Recently, some noise modeling literatures based on deep
generative models like GAN [9, 12, 22, 45] and Normalizing Flow [1] have emerged, but fail in the competition with
more fine-grained statistical noise model [42, 50] with carefully calibrated noise parameters. A limitation for noise
modeling methods is that they depend on real calibration
frames or noisy/clean pairs of certain camera, which is laborious or unreachable in some scenarios.
Another important issue is noise estimation. Noise level
functions are usually served as guidance for both filter based
denoising approaches [6, 14] and deep learning based denoising networks [49]. Recently, there are several attempts
to estimate noise level functions, based on both computation [11, 16, 28–31, 38, 52] or deep learning [7, 8, 18, 43, 49].
Nevertheless, these methods are built upon inferior noise
models like AWGN, and cannot be used for the estimation
of more complex sensor noise corrupted by circuit readout
pattern or source follower. Moreover, existing noise estimation methods basically serve the estimated parameters as
an inference input value and feed them into denoising filters [14] or end-to-end deep neural networks [18]. They
have not ever tried to exploit more intrinsic attributes of the
camera sensor through these parameters.
In this paper, we propose a novel noise model estimation and noise synthesis pipeline to estimate parameters for
fine-grained noise models using only testing data, liberating
us from the laborious or unreachable calibration for image
sensor. To achieve this, we present a contrastive noise estimation model to estimate noise parameters from a single
image under fine-grained noise model. Our contrastive estimation framework separates each noise component, and
well approximates noise parameters of a single image, even

12682

