Neural Mean Discrepancy for Efficient Out-of-Distribution Detection
Xin Dong1 , Junfeng Guo2 , Ang Li23 , Wei-Te Ting1 , Cong Liu2 , H.T. Kung1
1

Harvard University,

2

UT Dallas,

3

Google DeepMind

xindong@g.harvard.edu

Abstract
Various approaches have been proposed for out-ofdistribution (OOD) detection by augmenting models, input
examples, training sets, and optimization objectives. Deviating from existing work, we have a simple hypothesis that
standard off-the-shelf models may already contain sufficient
information about the training set distribution which can be
leveraged for reliable OOD detection. Our empirical study
on validating this hypothesis, which measures the model
activation’s mean for OOD and in-distribution (ID) minibatches, surprisingly finds that activation means of OOD
mini-batches consistently deviate more from those of the
training data. In addition, training data’s activation means
can be computed offline efficiently or retrieved from batch
normalization layers as a ‘free lunch’. Based upon this observation, we propose a novel metric called Neural Mean
Discrepancy (NMD), which compares neural means of the
input examples and training data. Leveraging the simplicity
of NMD, we propose an efficient OOD detector that computes neural means by a standard forward pass followed
by a lightweight classifier. Extensive experiments show that
NMD outperforms state-of-the-art OOD approaches across
multiple datasets and model architectures in terms of both
detection accuracy and computational cost.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved successes
on many computer vision tasks [28, 49]. However, most of
the deep learning methods are based on an assumption that
the data is independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.),
i.e., training and testing data come from the same underlying distributions. While it is almost impossible to curate
a dataset that covers all different kinds of scenarios in the
real world, the i.i.d. assumption is untrue in practice and
out-of-distribution (OOD) examples are likely to occur in
the testing data. So the ability to detect OOD examples becomes essential when deploying deep neural networks in
real-world applications [76, 86].
Many approaches have been developed to address OOD

Ours

Energy-FT
ACET
OE

GOOD

G-ODIN

GRAM
Maha
ODIN

Need fine-tune
Inference latency
7.5ms

Ours

25.7ms

Maha

Figure 1. Training and inference time comparison with CIFAR-10
against CIFAR-100 (OOD) detection on ResNet-34. Our NMDMLP achieves superior performance in terms of both AUROC and
training time. See Secs. 3.3 and 5.6 and Fig. 4 for more details.

examples including enhancing standard DNN architectures [14, 17, 26, 33, 48, 73, 83] and DNN fine-tuning using the augmented training set [15, 45, 50, 58, 61]. Unfortunately, these methods often incur significant overhead
w.r.t. both computation and data processing. Recent studies
perform kernel density estimation on standard training sets,
interpreting the negative of incoming example’s density as
the outlier score [22, 31, 44, 63]. Both non-parametric and
parametric kernels have been studied in the literature. However, they suffer from limited performance, heavy reliance
on large batch size, and low computational efficiency.
Deviating from most previous works, we believe the offthe-shelf model itself should contain sufficient information
about the training data distribution. So we proposed a simple study (Figure 3) by looking at the model activation’s
mean for OOD and ID input batches. The result reveals
that the activation means of OOD mini-batches consistently
and clearly deviate more from those of the training data.
Inspired by this observation, we raised the question: Can
OOD detection be as simple and efficient as computing activation’s arithmetic mean without fine-tuning?
We propose a novel metric called Neural Mean Discrepancy (NMD), which compares neural means of the input examples and training data. The proposed NMD metric can be

19217

