A Probabilistic Graphical Model Based on Neural-symbolic Reasoning for Visual
Relationship Detection

1

Dongran Yu1, 2 , Bo Yang1, 3‡, Qianhao Wei1, 3 and Anchen Li1, 3 , Shirui Pan4 ,
Key Laboratory of Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education, China
2
College of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin university, China
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin university, China
4
Department of Data Science and AI, Faculty of IT, Monash University, Australia

yudran@foxmail.com, ybo@jlu.edu.cn, {weiqh20,liac20}@mails.jlu.edu.cn, shirui.pan@monash.edu

person

Abstract

has

hat
horse
hold

This paper aims to leverage symbolic knowledge to improve the performance and interpretability of the Visual Relationship Detection (VRD) models. Existing VRD methods based on deep learning suffer from the problems of
poor performance on insufficient labeled examples and lack
of interpretability. To overcome the aforementioned weaknesses, we integrate symbolic knowledge into deep learning models and propose a bi-level probabilistic graphical
reasoning framework called BPGR. Specifically, in the highlevel structure, we take the objects and relationships detected by the VRD model as hidden variables (reasoning
results); In the low-level structure of BPGR, we use Markov
Logic Networks (MLNs) to project First-Order Logic (FOL)
as observed variables (symbolic knowledge) to correct error reasoning results. We adopt a variational EM algorithm
for optimization. Experiments results show that our BPGR
improves the performance of the VRD models. In particular, BPGR can also provide easy-to-understand insights for
reasoning results to show interpretability.

1. Introduction
The goal of Visual Relationship Detection(VRD) is to
detect objects as well as their relationships with each other,
representing as (subject, predicate, object) triplet. As
shown Fig. 1 (a), a triplet is (person, hold, horse). As
a foundation visual recognition task, VRD can benefit a
wide range of high level image understanding tasks, such as
scene graph generation [38, 43], image captioning [15, 17],
and visual question answering [3, 4], etc. Consequently,
VRD has emerged as an important research topic in the
past few years. Most recent methods based on deep learn‡ Corresponding author.

shirt

wear

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. An example for visual relationship detection and statistic of datasets. (a) Different colored blocks with a line connecting
subject and object mean different relationships. It is detected three
triples (person, has, hat), (person, wear, shirt), and (person,
hold, horse) in the image. (b)VRD and VG200 are long-tail distribution. The horizontal axis represents the number of relationships, and the vertical axis represents the number of instances of
the relationship.

ing have been proposed, including LS-VRU [46] and GPSNet [21], UVTransE [13], etc. However, these methods
mainly rely on language prior (semantic information) of entities to help relationship detection, which suffers several
limitations. First, these approaches need a lot of labeled examples to get decent performance, which goes against the
characteristics of the dataset in Fig. 1 (b). Second, they are
black boxes, lacking interpretability which is very important for many applications. An expected solution is neuralsymbolic systems, which combines the excellent perceptual
ability of neural networks and the cognitive ability of symbolic systems [41].
Recently some studies attempted to explore combining
symbolic knowledge with the VRD models to enforce the
performance of detection. LENSR [37] uses Conjunctive
Normal Form (CNF) [8] or decision-Deterministic Decomposable Negation Normal Form (d-DNNF) [9] formulae to
construct a graph for each propositional logic and adopts

10609

