Few-Shot Font Generation by Learning Fine-Grained Local Styles
Licheng Tang1 * Yiyang Cai2∗ Jiaming Liu1†, Zhibin Hong1 Mingming Gong3
Minhu Fan1 Junyu Han1 Jingtuo Liu1 Errui Ding1 Jingdong Wang1
1
Baidu Inc. 2 University of California, Berkeley 3 University of Melbourne
{tanglicheng,liujiaming03,hongzhibin,fanminhu,liujingtuo,dingerrui,wangjingdong}@baidu.com
frank cai@berkeley.edu, mingming.gong@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
Few-shot font generation (FFG), which aims to generate
a new font with a few examples, is gaining increasing attention due to the significant reduction in labor cost. A typical FFG pipeline considers characters in a standard font
library as content glyphs and transfers them to a new target font by extracting style information from the reference
glyphs. Most existing solutions explicitly disentangle content and style of reference glyphs globally or componentwisely. However, the style of glyphs mainly lies in the local
details, i.e. the styles of radicals, components, and strokes
together depict the style of a glyph. Therefore, even a single character can contain different styles distributed over
spatial locations. In this paper, we propose a new font generation approach by learning 1) the fine-grained local styles
from references, and 2) the spatial correspondence between
the content and reference glyphs. Therefore, each spatial
location in the content glyph can be assigned with the right
fine-grained style. To this end, we adopt cross-attention
over the representation of the content glyphs as the queries
and the representations of the reference glyphs as the keys
and values. Instead of explicitly disentangling global or
component-wise modeling, the cross-attention mechanism
can attend to the right local styles in the reference glyphs
and aggregate the reference styles into a fine-grained style
representation for the given content glyphs. The experiments show that the proposed method outperforms the stateof-the-art methods in FFG. In particular, the user studies
also demonstrate the style consistency of our approach significantly outperforms previous methods.

1. Introduction
In the modern era, both computer systems and humans
process huge amounts of text information. Fonts, the representations of text, have thus played critical roles in many
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Our proposed fine-grained local style extraction and
style aggregation process. Our proposed module enables finegrained style extraction from references and learns the correspondence between content and reference, thus aggregate corresponding local styles into correct locations in content with high-fidelity.

applications. Therefore, the stylish font generation has its
unique commercial and artistic values. However, building
commercial font libraries is costly and labor-intensive. The
cost is even higher for those languages with a huge amount
of characters (Chinese, Japanese Kanji, Korean, Thai, etc.).
Due to the expert’s high cost of building fonts, automatic
font generation with deep learning has drawn rising attention. It aims at generating a brand new font library with
only a few characters as a reference. With the development
of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [10, 20], there
have been many classic works of font generation. Early attempts, such as zi2zi [26], use Pix2Pix [14] like networks
with a plug-in font category embedding conditions to learn
multiple font styles with a single model. However, these
methods require a large number of glyphs to train each unseen font.
In recent years, some works tried to tackle few-shot font
generation (FFG) with a few-shot Image-to-Image translation (I2I) scheme [4,8,22,23,31]. Unlike zi2zi, the font style
representation is learned from a few reference exemplars,
rather than learning embeddings from different font labels.
One popular strategy of these works is to explicitly disentangle the content and style representations from given content images and reference exemplars, and two representations are then combined and decoded into the target glyphs.
With the advance of these works, the generated glyphs’

7895

