Rethinking Deep Face Restoration
Yang Zhao∗
University at Buffalo

Yu-Chuan Su, Chun-Te Chu, Yandong Li, Marius Renn, Yukun Zhu
Google Research

yzhao63@buffalo.edu

{ycsu, ctchu, yandongli, renn, yukun}@google.com

Changyou Chen
University at Buffalo

Xuhui Jia
Google Research

changyou@buffalo.edu

xhjia@google.com

Abstract
A model that can authentically restore a low-quality face
image to a high-quality one can benefit many applications.
While existing approaches for face restoration make significant progress in generating high-quality faces, they often fail to preserve facial features that compromise the authenticity of reconstructed faces. Because the human visual system is very sensitive to faces, even minor changes
may significantly degrade the perceptual quality. In this
work, we argue that the problems of existing models can
be traced down to the two sub-tasks of the face restoration
problem, i.e. face generation and face reconstruction, and
the fragile balance between them. Based on the observation, we propose a new face restoration model that improves
both generation and reconstruction. Besides the model
improvement, we also introduce a new evaluation metric
for measuring models’ ability to preserve the identity in
the restored faces. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our model achieves state-of-the-art performance on multiple face restoration benchmarks, and the proposed metric
has a higher correlation with user preference. The user
study shows that our model produces higher quality faces
while better preserving the identity 86.4% of the time compared with state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Face images play a critical role in our daily life and are
at the very center of success for many applications such as
portrait taking, face identification, etc. While these applications usually rely on having decent quality faces as inputs,
low-quality face images are inevitable in the real world due
to various reasons, e.g. low image resolution, motion blur,
defocus blur, sensor noises, encoding artifacts, etc. Therefore, a method that can faithfully restore a degraded face
∗ Work done during an internship at Google Research.

into a high-fidelity one regardless of the type of degradation is highly desired.
Much progress has been made in face restoration in
the past few years, thanks to the rapid development of
deep generative adversarial networks (GANs) [8]. Existing works treat face restoration as a conditional image generation problem, and they learn a U-Net model that predicts a high-quality face image given a low-qualiy one as
input [3, 20, 21, 23, 35, 36, 40]. Despite being able to generate realistic faces, they still suffer from unique challenges
introduced by face restoration. Specifically, they often fail
to preserve delicate facial features in the input but instead
hallucinate a high-quality face that does not resemble the
original subject. The model may change the subject’s eye
color, skin texture, shape of face components, etc, as shown
in Figure 1. While these changes may be negligible in pixel
space and are irrelevant to the realisticness, they are essential for authenticity and can significantly impact downstream applications. For example, they may break a face
identification system because the biometric characteristics
deviate from the original subject, and they may degrade the
perceptual quality of a photo because the subject looks like
a different person.
We argue that the above issues are caused by the fragile
balance between face generation and face reconstruction.
As we will show later, the face restoration problem can be
interpreted as a combination of two sub-tasks, i.e. generation and reconstruction, where face generation aims to
learn the distribution of high quality faces and face reconstruction aims to capture the face characteristic (e.g. shape
and texture) from an image regardless of its quality [5, 36].
A model that overemphasizes generation and fails in reconstruction may hallucinate a face that does not belong to the
subject. In contrast, a model that fails in generation leads
to unsatisfactory restoration quality. Therefore, a successful face restoration model has to address the two sub-tasks
simultaneously, which remains to be realized.
Based on the observation, we propose a new model that
aims to improve both generation and reconstruction. To

7652

