Shapley-NAS: Discovering Operation Contribution for Neural
Architecture Search
Han Xiao1,2 , Ziwei Wang1,2 , Zheng Zhu1,2 , Jie Zhou1,2 , Jiwen Lu1,2∗,
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
{h-xiao20,wang-zw18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; zhengzhu@ieee.org; {jzhou,lujiwen}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a Shapley value based method
to evaluate operation contribution (Shapley-NAS) for neural architecture search. Differentiable architecture search
(DARTS) acquires the optimal architectures by optimizing
the architecture parameters with gradient descent, which
significantly reduces the search cost. However, the magnitude of architecture parameters updated by gradient descent fails to reveal the actual operation importance to the
task performance and therefore harms the effectiveness of
obtained architectures. By contrast, we propose to evaluate
the direct influence of operations on validation accuracy.
To deal with the complex relationships between supernet
components, we leverage Shapley value to quantify their
marginal contributions by considering all possible combinations. Specifically, we iteratively optimize the supernet
weights and update the architecture parameters by evaluating operation contributions via Shapley value, so that
the optimal architectures are derived by selecting the operations that contribute significantly to the tasks. Since the
exact computation of Shapley value is NP-hard, the MonteCarlo sampling based algorithm with early truncation is
employed for efficient approximation, and the momentum
update mechanism is adopted to alleviate fluctuation of
the sampling process. Extensive experiments on various
datasets and various search spaces show that our ShapleyNAS outperforms the state-of-the-art methods by a considerable margin with light search cost. The code is available
at https://github.com/Euphoria16/Shapley-NAS.git.

1. Introduction
Neural architecture search (NAS) has attracted great interest in deep learning since it discovers the optimal architecture from a large search space of network components according to task performance and hardware config∗ Corresponding author

urations. Pioneering works applied reinforcement learning [48], evolutionary algorithms [30, 38], and Bayesian
optimization [22] for the architecture search, but the large
computational overhead prohibits practical deployment of
NAS algorithms. Therefore, it is desirable to design highly
efficient search strategies without performance degradation.
To reduce the search cost of architecture search, several efficient search strategies have been presented including one-shot NAS [29], network transformation [3], and
architecture optimization [26]. Among these approaches,
one-shot NAS preserves the optimal sub-networks from the
over-parameterized supernet with weight sharing, which
prevents the time-consuming exhaustive training for model
evaluation. In particular, DARTS [23] converted the discrete operation selection into continuous mixing weights
learning and iteratively optimized the architecture parameters and supernet weights by gradient descent with significantly reduced search cost. However, the magnitude of architecture parameters in DARTS cannot reflect the actual
operation importance in general [36, 42, 47]. That is, the
operation with the largest parameter magnitude does not
necessarily result in the highest validation accuracy, which
degrades the performance of derived architectures.
In this paper, we present a Shapley-NAS method to evaluate the operation contribution via the Shapley value of supernet components for neural architecture search. Instead
of relying on the magnitude of architecture parameters updated by gradient descent, we consider their practical influences on task performance and propose to directly evaluate their contributions to the validation accuracy. Moreover,
we observe that the operations in the supernet are related to
each other: combinations of operations might have different
joint influences on performance compared with their separate ones. In order to deal with such complex relationships,
we leverage Shapley value [31,32], an important solution to
attribute contributions to players in cooperative game theory. Fig. 1 shows the differences between our Shapley-NAS
and existing DARTS methods. Shapley value directly measures the contributions of operations according to the vali-

11892

