EPro-PnP: Generalized End-to-End Probabilistic Perspective-n-Points
for Monocular Object Pose Estimation
Hansheng Chen,1,2,* Pichao Wang,2,† Fan Wang,2 Wei Tian,1,† Lu Xiong,1 Hao Li2
1
2
School of Automotive Studies, Tongji University
Alibaba Group
hanshengchen97@gmail.com {tian wei, xiong lu}@tongji.edu.cn
{pichao.wang, fan.w, lihao.lh}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract

network
RGB image

Locating 3D objects from a single RGB image via
Perspective-n-Points (PnP) is a long-standing problem in
computer vision. Driven by end-to-end deep learning, recent studies suggest interpreting PnP as a differentiable
layer, so that 2D-3D point correspondences can be partly
learned by backpropagating the gradient w.r.t. object pose.
Yet, learning the entire set of unrestricted 2D-3D points
from scratch fails to converge with existing approaches,
since the deterministic pose is inherently non-differentiable.
In this paper, we propose the EPro-PnP, a probabilistic PnP
layer for general end-to-end pose estimation, which outputs a distribution of pose on the SE(3) manifold, essentially bringing categorical Softmax to the continuous domain. The 2D-3D coordinates and corresponding weights
are treated as intermediate variables learned by minimizing the KL divergence between the predicted and target
pose distribution. The underlying principle unifies the existing approaches and resembles the attention mechanism.
EPro-PnP significantly outperforms competitive baselines,
closing the gap between PnP-based method and the taskspecific leaders on the LineMOD 6DoF pose estimation and
nuScenes 3D object detection benchmarks.3

1. Introduction
Estimating the pose (i.e., position and orientation) of 3D
objects from a single RGB image is an important task in
computer vision. This field is often subdivided into specific tasks, e.g., 6DoF pose estimation for robot manipulation and 3D object detection for autonomous driving. Although they share the same fundamentals of pose estimation, the different nature of the data leads to biased choice
of methods. Top performers [29, 42, 44] on the 3D object
* Part of work done during an internship at Alibaba Group.
† Corresponding authors: Pichao Wang, Wei Tian.
3 Code: https://github.com/tjiiv-cprg/EPro-PnP

weighted 2D-3D
correspondences

EPro-PnP

probabilis!c
object pose

Dense Correspondences (learnable 3D coordinates & weights)
forward

forward

backward

backward

Deformable Correspondences (learnable 2D-3D coordinates & weights)
forward

forward

backward

backward

Figure 1. EPro-PnP is a general solution to end-to-end 2D-3D
correspondence learning. In this paper, we present two distinct
networks trained with EPro-PnP: (a) an off-the-shelf dense correspondence network whose potential is unleashed by end-to-end
training, (b) a novel deformable correspondence network that explores new possibilities of fully learnable 2D-3D points.

detection benchmarks [6, 14] fall into the category of direct
4DoF pose prediction, leveraging the advances in end-toend deep learning. On the other hand, the 6DoF pose estimation benchmark [19] is largely dominated by geometrybased methods [20, 46], which exploit the provided 3D
object models and achieve a stable generalization performance. However, it is quite challenging to bring together
the best of both worlds, i.e., training a geometric model to
learn the object pose in an end-to-end manner.
There has been recent proposals for an end-to-end framework based on the Perspective-n-Points (PnP) approach [2,
4, 7, 10]. The PnP algorithm itself solves the pose from a
set of 3D points in object space and their corresponding
2D projections in image space, leaving the problem of constructing these correspondences. Vanilla correspondence
learning [9, 23, 24, 30, 30–32, 35, 40, 46] leverages the geometric prior to build surrogate loss functions, forcing the
network to learn a set of pre-defined correspondences. Endto-end correspondence learning [2, 4, 7, 10] interprets the

2781

