Towards Robust Adaptive Object Detection under Noisy Annotations
Xinyu Liu1

Wuyang Li1
Qiushi Yang1
1
City University of Hong Kong

Baopu Li2
Yixuan Yuan1, *
2
Baidu USA LLC

{xliu423-c, wuyangli2-c, qsyang2-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk, baopuli@baidu.com
yxyuan.ee@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Domain Adaptive Object Detection (DAOD) models a
joint distribution of images and labels from an annotated
source domain and learns a domain-invariant transformation to estimate the target labels with the given target domain images. Existing methods assume that the source domain labels are completely clean, yet large-scale datasets
often contain error-prone annotations due to instance ambiguity, which may lead to a biased source distribution and
severely degrade the performance of the domain adaptive
detector de facto. In this paper, we represent the first effort to formulate noisy DAOD and propose a Noise Latent
Transferability Exploration (NLTE) framework to address
this issue. It is featured with 1) Potential Instance Mining (PIM), which leverages eligible proposals to recapture
the miss-annotated instances from the background; 2) Morphable Graph Relation Module (MGRM), which models the
adaptation feasibility and transition probability of noisy
samples with relation matrices; 3) Entropy-Aware Gradient Reconcilement (EAGR), which incorporates the semantic information into the discrimination process and enforces
the gradients provided by noisy and clean samples to be
consistent towards learning domain-invariant representations. A thorough evaluation on benchmark DAOD datasets
with noisy source annotations validates the effectiveness of
NLTE. In particular, NLTE improves the mAP by 8.4% under 60% corrupted annotations and even approaches the
ideal upper bound of training on a clean source dataset. 1

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed great progress in domain
adaptive object detection (DAOD) [6, 17, 19, 23, 38, 47, 49,
57, 58]. It alleviates the performance drop of the detectors
when applied to unseen domains due to the domain shift.
* Corresponding author. This work was supported by Hong Kong Research Grants Council (RGC) General Research Fund 11211221 (CityU
9043152).
1 Code is available at https://github.com/CityU-AIM-Group/NLTE.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Examples of noisy annotations in Cityscapes dataset.
Miss-annotated samples: The bicycle in (a); the rider and car in
(c). Class-corrupted samples: The rider and bicycle are labeled
as person in (a); the motorcycle is labeled as bicycle in (b).

Most DAOD methods are constructed with domain adversarial training [10], in which a domain classifier is proposed
to train the feature extractor to perform a domain-invariant
transformation of images from different domains. However,
existing methods are all built with an ideal condition that
a clean source domain is accessible, which is impractical
in many real-world applications [22, 26]. The annotations
can be noisy due to various reasons, including ambiguous
objects caused by occlusion or obscureness, limited crowdsourcing or labeling time, low quality labeled web-crawled
images, etc. [8,30] Frustratingly, the noisy class annotations
occur frequently, even in benchmark DAOD source datasets
such as Cityscapes, as shown in Fig. 1. The noisy annotations can be categorized into two groups: miss-annotated
instances (Fig. 1 (a), (c)) and class-corrupted instances
(Fig. 1 (a), (b)). More specifically, it has been studied that
addressing the classification error is critical to the detector [2, 53], thus the noisy class labels in the source dataset
could severely damage the domain adaptive detectors.
The intuitive solution for solving the noisy DAOD problem is to combine approaches in learning with noisy labels for classification and domain adaptive object detection. However, this direct combination may encounter several challenges. Firstly, existing methods in learning with
noisy labels for image classification [13, 35, 45] minimize
or totally filter out the impact of noisy annotated samples
during training the network. While in DAOD, the source
images with noisy labels are still useful for aligning with
target domain as the domain discriminator is class-agnostic,
and the target images could benefit source dataset denoising in reverse. If source samples with rich domain-specific

14207

