Long-Tailed Recognition via Weight Balancing
Shaden Alshammari∗
Yu-Xiong Wang
Deva Ramanan,†
∗

†

MIT
UIUC
Argo AI
CMU
shaden@mit.edu

Shu Kong

{deva, shuk}@andrew.cmu.edu

yxw@illinois.edu

https://github.com/ShadeAlsha/LTR-weight-balancing
(a) per-class classiﬁcation accuracy vs. class cardinality on CIFAR100-LT (imalance factor 100)

(b) norms of per-class weights from the learned classiﬁer vs. class cardinality

Figure 1. Long-tailed recognition (LTR) requires training on long-tailed class distributed data (black curve in (a)). (a) Networks naively
trained on such data are biased toward common classes in terms of higher accuracy (orange bars). (b)-left plots the L2 norms of perclass weights in the naive classiﬁer. Clearly, classiﬁers of common classes have “artiﬁcially” larger norms than rare ones, because they
are trained with more data. This can result in over-predictions of common classes, or alternatively, under-predictions of rare classes.
This observation motivates us to balance norms via parameter regularization. To do so, we explore simple weight balancing techniques
including L2-normalization, weight decay, and the MaxNorm constraint. We ﬁnd that applying the latter two results in class weights to be
far more balanced ((b)-right), allowing rare classes to have a “ﬁghting chance” when competing with common classes. Our model boosts
overall accuracy to 53.35% (blue bars in (a)), signiﬁcantly higher than the naive model (38.38%) and prior art, e.g., RIDE (49.1%) [73],
ACE (49.6%) [10], and PaCo (52.0%) [17]. Results are from experiments (Table 1) on CIFAR100-LT with an imbalance factor 100 [12].

Abstract
In the real open world, data tends to follow long-tailed
class distributions, motivating the well-studied long-tailed
recognition (LTR) problem. Naive training produces models
that are biased toward common classes in terms of higher
accuracy. The key to addressing LTR is to balance various aspects including data distribution, training losses, and
gradients in learning. We explore an orthogonal direction,
weight balancing, motivated by the empirical observation
that the naively trained classiﬁer has “artiﬁcially” larger
weights in norm for common classes (because there exists abundant data to train them, unlike the rare classes).
We investigate three techniques to balance weights, L2normalization, weight decay, and MaxNorm. We ﬁrst point
out that L2-normalization “perfectly” balances per-class
weights to be unit norm, but such a hard constraint might

prevent classes from learning better classiﬁers. In contrast,
weight decay penalizes larger weights more heavily and so
learns small balanced weights; the MaxNorm constraint encourages growing small weights within a norm ball but caps
all the weights by the radius. Our extensive study shows
that both help learn balanced weights and greatly improve
the LTR accuracy. Surprisingly, weight decay, although underexplored in LTR, signiﬁcantly improves over prior work.
Therefore, we adopt a two-stage training paradigm and propose a simple approach to LTR: (1) learning features using
the cross-entropy loss by tuning weight decay, and (2) learning classiﬁers using class-balanced loss by tuning weight
decay and MaxNorm. Our approach achieves the state-ofthe-art accuracy on ﬁve standard benchmarks, serving as a
future baseline for long-tailed recognition.

16897

