Salient-to-Broad Transition for Video Person Re-identification
Shutao Bai1,2 , Bingpeng Ma2 , Hong Chang1,2 , Rui Huang3 , Xilin Chen1,2
1
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 518172, China
shutao.bai@vipl.ict.ac.cn,bpma@ucas.ac.cn,ruihuang@cuhk.edu.cn, {changhong,xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Due to the limited utilization of temporal relations in
video re-id, the frame-level attention regions of mainstream
methods are partial and highly similar. To address this
problem, we propose a Salient-to-Broad Module (SBM)
to enlarge the attention regions gradually. Specifically,
in SBM, while the previous frames have focused on the
most salient regions, the later frames tend to focus on
broader regions. In this way, the additional information
in broad regions can supplement salient regions, incurring
more powerful video-level representations. To further improve SBM, an Integration-and-Distribution Module (IDM)
is introduced to enhance frame-level representations. IDM
first integrates features from the entire feature space and
then distributes the integrated features to each spatial location. SBM and IDM are mutually beneficial since they
enhance the representations from video-level and framelevel, respectively. Extensive experiments on four prevalent benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of our method. The source code is available at
https://github.com/baist/SINet.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, video person re-identification (reid) has achieved favorable progress [33,39] with the help of
CNNs [11, 19]. However, further development of video reid remains hindered because it is challenging to effectively
utilize the rich temporal information among video frames,
as pointed out in [26].
Recently, some approaches [41, 42, 44] try to exploit
the temporal relations for a mutual enhancement between
frames. To realize such enhancement, these methods mainly
adopt self-attention mechanism [38] or Graph Convolution
Networks (GCNs) [5, 8] to encourage the information flow
among video frames. In this way, the final frame-level fea-

(a).
Video sequences

(b).
Existing methods

(c).
Our method
Salient to Broad

Figure 1. Comparison of existing methods and our method (SBM)
with respect to Class Activation Maps (CAM) [32]. There is a
clear salient-to-broad transition of activation maps (attention regions) in our method. Warmer color represents a higher value.

tures will be more rich and recognizable. Although these
methods have achieved encouraging performances in video
re-id, they still have several intrinsic drawbacks.
First, for each frame, the concentration of these methods is usually confined in a salient but partial region. In
fact, when a model has focused on a partial region that can
recognize a pedestrian, it will not pay attention to other regions, which results in representations with limited power.
Obviously, this property should be avoided for a robust reid model since it is desirable to use the complete characteristics of a given pedestrian. As shown in Figure 1(b),
these methods pay almost all the attention to the upper
clothes while ignoring the A-line skirt and other human
parts. Maybe the black skirt is not as discriminative as the
upper clothes in this particular example, but it is still a vital
clue, especially when other pedestrians, if any, wear similar
upper clothes. Therefore, enlarging the attention regions is
of central importance to further enhance the robustness and
discriminative ability of video embeddings.
Second, the utilization of temporal relations, i.e., mutual enhancement between frames, is limited. Specifically,
these methods regard the temporal relations as mutual enhancement or homogeneous information flow across all

7339

