AKB-48: A Real-World Articulated Object Knowledge Base
Liu Liu

Wenqiang Xu

Haoyuan Fu Sucheng Qian Qiaojun Yu
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Yang Han

Cewu Lu†

{liuliu1993, vinjohn, simon-fuhaoyuan, qiansucheng, yqjllxs, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn
tycoer@outlook.com

Figure 1. AKB-48 consists of 2,037 articulated object models of 48 categories scanned from the real world. The objects are annotated with
ArtiKG, and can support a full task spectrum from computer vision to robotics manipulation.

Abstract
Human life is populated with articulated objects. A comprehensive understanding of articulated objects, namely
appearance, structure, physical property, and semantics,
will benefit many research communities. As current articulated object understanding solutions are usually based on
synthetic object dataset with CAD models without physics
properties, which prevent satisfied generalization from simulation to real-world applications in visual and robotics
tasks. To bridge the gap, we present AKB-48: a largescale Articulated object Knowledge Base which consists of
2,037 real-world 3D articulated object models of 48 categories. Each object is described by a knowledge graph
ArtiKG. To build the AKB-48, we present a fast articulation knowledge modeling (FArM) pipeline, which can fulfill
the ArtiKG for an articulated object within 10-15 minutes,
and largely reduce the cost for object modeling in the real
† Cewu Lu is the corresponding author. He is the member of Qing Yuan
Research Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, and Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute, China.

world. Using our dataset, we propose AKBNet, an integral
pipeline for Category-level Visual Articulation Manipulation (C-VAM) task, in which we benchmark three sub-tasks,
namely pose estimation, object reconstruction and manipulation. Dataset, codes, and models are publicly available at
https://liuliu66.github.io/AKB-48.

1. Introduction
Articulated objects, composed of more than one rigid
part connected by joints allowing rotational or translational
movements in 3D space, are pervasive in our daily life.
Knowledge about the articulated objects can be beneficial
to many research communities, such as computer vision,
robotics and embodied AI. Thus, many articulated object
datasets have been proposed to facilitate the research, such
as PartNet-Mobility [31], ReArt-48 [17], RBO [20]. However, these datasets generally focus more on the structural
information (e.g. part segmentation, kinematic structure),
but pay less attention to the appearance (e.g. texture, fine
geometry), the physics properties (e.g. per-part mass, iner-

14809

