Pointly-Supervised Instance Segmentation
Omkar Parkhi2

Bowen Cheng1 *
1

UIUC

Abstract
We propose an embarrassingly simple point annotation
scheme to collect weak supervision for instance segmentation. In addition to bounding boxes, we collect binary labels
for a set of points uniformly sampled inside each bounding box. We show that the existing instance segmentation
models developed for full mask supervision can be seamlessly trained with point-based supervision collected via
our scheme. Remarkably, Mask R-CNN trained on COCO,
PASCAL VOC, Cityscapes, and LVIS with only 10 annotated random points per object achieves 94%–98% of its
fully-supervised performance, setting a strong baseline for
weakly-supervised instance segmentation. The new point
annotation scheme is approximately 5 times faster than annotating full object masks, making high-quality instance
segmentation more accessible in practice.
Inspired by the point-based annotation form, we propose
a modification to PointRend instance segmentation module. For each object, the new architecture, called Implicit
PointRend, generates parameters for a function that makes
the final point-level mask prediction. Implicit PointRend
is more straightforward and uses a single point-level mask
loss. Our experiments show that the new module is more
suitable for the point-based supervision. 1

1. Introduction
The task of instance segmentation requires an algorithm to locate objects and delineate them with pixel-level
binary masks. Manual annotation of object masks for
training is significantly more complex and time-consuming
than other forms of image annotation like image-level categories [1, 9, 13, 15, 34, 60, 61] or per-object bounding
boxes [2, 21, 23, 52]. For example, it takes on average 79.2
seconds per instance to create a polygon-based object mask
in COCO [33], whereas a bounding box for an object can
be annotated ∼11 times faster in only 7 seconds [41].
Weakly-supervised methods, that use easier to acquire
ground truth annotation forms, make instance segmentation
more accessible for new categories or scene types, as the
* Work done during an internship at Facebook AI Research.
1 Project page: https://bowenc0221.github.io/point-sup

2

Alexander Kirillov2

Facebook AI
zebra

Figure 1. Our point-based instance annotation scheme. We collect object bounding boxes with points randomly sampled inside
each box and annotated as the object (red) or background (blue).
Our experiments show that a bounding box and 10 annotated
points per instance are approximately 5 times faster to collect than
the standard object mask annotation and such ground truth is sufficient to train a standard model like Mask R-CNN [19] to achieve
94%–98% of its fully-supervised performance on various datasets.

efforts required to collect the data are lower. Such models
showed a great progress on smaller datasets under a fixed
annotation time budget [4,28], however, they are still far behind fully-supervised methods for large-scale datasets like
COCO. The recent BoxInst model [52] outperforms previous weakly-supervised approaches with box supervision
but achieves only 85% of its fully-supervised counterpart
performance on COCO. A natural question emerges: Is object mask training data necessary to get closer to the fullysupervised performance? And is there an easier to collect
annotation form for the instance segmentation task?
Beyond bounding boxes and image-level categories,
point clicks and squiggles are the other time-efficient annotation forms most commonly used in interactive segmentation scenarios [5, 29, 30, 35, 58]. Several semantic and instance segmentation methods directly use them for training [4,31]. In our paper, we present a new instance segmentation annotation scheme that collects both bounding boxes
and point-based annotation (see Figure 1). Unlike previous
works where points are clicked by annotators, we follow a
different process where points are sampled randomly inside
an object bounding box and an annotator is asked to classify
each point as the object or background. This point-based
annotation scheme is simple and we empirically find such
annotation to perform well on large-scale datasets.

2617

