Surface Reconstruction from Point Clouds by Learning Predictive Context
Priors
Baorui Ma1 , Yu-Shen Liu1∗, Matthias Zwicker2 , Zhizhong Han3
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, USA
3
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA
1

mbr18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn, zwicker@cs.umd.edu, h312h@wayne.edu

Abstract
Surface reconstruction from point clouds is vital for 3D
computer vision. State-of-the-art methods leverage large
datasets to first learn local context priors that are represented as neural network-based signed distance functions
(SDFs) with some parameters encoding the local contexts.
To reconstruct a surface at a specific query location at inference time, these methods then match the local reconstruction target by searching for the best match in the local prior space (by optimizing the parameters encoding the
local context) at the given query location. However, this requires the local context prior to generalize to a wide variety
of unseen target regions, which is hard to achieve. To resolve this issue, we introduce Predictive Context Priors by
learning Predictive Queries for each specific point cloud at
inference time. Specifically, we first train a local context
prior using a large point cloud dataset similar to previous
techniques. For surface reconstruction at inference time,
however, we specialize the local context prior into our Predictive Context Prior by learning Predictive Queries, which
predict adjusted spatial query locations as displacements
of the original locations. This leads to a global SDF that
fits the specific point cloud the best. Intuitively, the query
prediction enables us to flexibly search the learned local
context prior over the entire prior space, rather than being
restricted to the fixed query locations, and this improves the
generalizability. Our method does not require ground truth
signed distances, normals, or any additional procedure of
signed distance fusion across overlapping regions. Our
experimental results in surface reconstruction for single
shapes or complex scenes show significant improvements
over the state-of-the-art under widely used benchmark∗ The corresponding author is Yu-Shen Liu. This work was supported by National Key R&D Program of China (2018YFB0505400,
2020YFF0304100), the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(62072268), the National Natural Science Foundation (1813583) and in
part by Tsinghua-Kuaishou Institute of Future Media Data.

s. Code and data are available at https://github.
com/mabaorui/PredictableContextPrior.

1. Introduction
Surface reconstruction from 3D point clouds estimates
continuous surfaces from 3D point clouds that can be captured by various 3D sensors. This is still a challenge even
with the help of state-of-the-art deep learning models. A standard strategy [1,14,19] is to first learn a Signed Distance
Function (SDF) from a point cloud [1, 19] or from ground
truth signed distances [14] using a neural network, and then
reconstruct a surface based on the learned SDF via marching cubes [47]. If the SDF is trained to capture a global
shape prior from a global 3D shape, however, it is hard to
capture local geometry details.
As a remedy, state-of-the-art methods learn local SDFs
from local regions [7, 37, 73]. The global shape is usually
split into overlapping [37, 73] or non-overlapping [7] parts, and the local region prior is learned as a local SDF that
is represented by a neural network with some parameters
encoding the geometry of local regions. The intuition behind this idea is that the local region prior will generalize
to various unseen local reconstruction targets, and for surface reconstruction at inference time, its parameters can be
optimized to match the reconstruction target at specific locations. However, the matching requires the learned local
region prior to cover as many specific locations on target
regions as possible, which dramatically limits the generalization ability of the learned local prior.
To resolve this issue, we propose to learn SDFs as a Predictive Context Prior for highly accurate surface reconstruction from point clouds, as shown in Fig. 1. Specifically, we
first train a neural network to represent local SDFs of local
regions across a large dataset of point clouds. This aims
to capture a local context prior in a local coordinate system, similar as in previous work. Our main contribution is
that during surface reconstruction at inference time, we specialize the pre-trained local context prior into a Predictive

6326

