CO-SNE: Dimensionality Reduction and Visualization for Hyperbolic Data
Yunhui Guo

Haoran Guo
UC Berkeley / ICSI

Stella X. Yu

Abstract
Hyperbolic space can naturally embed hierarchies that
often exist in real-world data and semantics. While highdimensional hyperbolic embeddings lead to better representations, most hyperbolic models utilize low-dimensional
embeddings, due to non-trivial optimization and visualization of high-dimensional hyperbolic data.
We propose CO-SNE, which extends the Euclidean space
visualization tool, t-SNE, to hyperbolic space. Like t-SNE,
it converts distances between data points to joint probabilities and tries to minimize the Kullback-Leibler divergence
between the joint probabilities of high-dimensional data X
and low-dimensional embedding Y . However, unlike Euclidean space, hyperbolic space is inhomogeneous: A volume could contain a lot more points at a location far from
the origin. CO-SNE thus uses hyperbolic normal distributions for X and hyperbolic Cauchy instead of t-SNE’s Student’s t-distribution for Y , and it additionally seeks to preserve X’s individual distances to the Origin in Y .
We apply CO-SNE to naturally hyperbolic data and supervisedly learned hyperbolic features. Our results demonstrate that CO-SNE deflates high-dimensional hyperbolic
data into a low-dimensional space without losing their hyperbolic characteristics, significantly outperforming popular visualization tools such as PCA, t-SNE, UMAP, and
HoroPCA which is also designed for hyperbolic data.

1. Introduction
Datasets with hierarchical structures are ubiquitous. Social networks [9] and complex networks [1] are representative examples of hierarchical data. Euclidean space cannot
embed entities in such hierarchical datasets without distortion. Hyperbolic space, a non-Euclidean space with constant negative curvature, has been widely used for embedding hierarchical data since hyperbolic metric can closely
approximate the tree metric. Hyperbolic space has thus
been used in the representation learning of word embeddings [22] (Figure 1) and visual inputs [12, 17]. Several algorithms also directly operate on hyperbolic space [5,6,31].
Higher embedding dimension can generally lead to bet-

Figure 1. Our CO-SNE method deflates a high-dimensional hyperbolic representation while preserving their global hierarchy and local similarities. We generate the Poincaré embeddings [22] of the
mammal subtree from WordNet in a five-dimensional hyperbolic
space. We apply the standard t-SNE [30], the recently proposed
HoroPCA [4] and our proposed CO-SNE method to visualize the
embeddings in a two-dimensional Euclidean (in t-SNE) or hyperbolic space (in HoroPCA and CO-SNE). CO-SNE preserves the
global hierarchy (root node is in the center and leaf nodes are close
to boundary) and the local similarity (sibling nodes are close) in
the two-dimensional embeddings.

ter hyperbolic representation quality [10, 22]. However,
learning with two-dimensional hyperbolic space is prevalent [10, 22]. One of the reasons is the ease of visualization. There are several isometrically equivalent models for
representing hyperbolic space. The Poincaré ball model is
arguably the most widely used model in hyperbolic representation learning [8, 10, 22]. With the Poincaré ball model,
we can easily visualize two-dimensional hyperbolic embeddings within a unit Euclidean circle. However, to visualize
high-dimensional hyperbolic data is not easy, as most visualization methods assume the data exist in Euclidean space.
Embeddings in Poincaré ball have two notable properties: 1) The embeddings have a global hierarchical structure. Root nodes are in the center of the ball and leaf nodes
are close to the boundary of the ball. 2) The embeddings
possess a local similarity structure. Sibling nodes should be
close in the embedding space.
t-SNE [30] is a popular visualization tool for visualiz-

21

