Class Similarity Weighted Knowledge Distillation for
Continual Semantic Segmentation
Minh Hieu Phan1 , The-Anh Ta2 , Son Lam Phung1,3 , Long Tran-Thanh4 , Abdesselam Bouzerdoum1,5 ,
1
University of Wollongong, 2 FPT Software, AIC, 3 VinAI Research,
4
University of Warwick, 5 Hamad Bin Khalifa University,
vmhp806@uowmail.edu.au, anhtt71@fsoft.com.vn,
{phung, a.bouzerdoum}@uow.edu.au, long.tran-thanh@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract
Deep learning models are known to suffer from the
problem of catastrophic forgetting when they incrementally
learn new classes. Continual learning for semantic segmentation (CSS) is an emerging field in computer vision.
We identify a problem in CSS: A model tends to be confused between old and new classes that are visually similar,
which makes it forget the old ones. To address this gap, we
propose REMINDER - a new CSS framework and a novel
class similarity knowledge distillation (CSW-KD) method.
Our CSW-KD method distills the knowledge of a previous model on old classes that are similar to the new one.
This provides two main benefits: (i) selectively revising old
classes that are more likely to be forgotten, and (ii) better
learning new classes by relating them with the previously
seen classes. Extensive experiments on Pascal-VOC 2012
and ADE20k datasets show that our approach outperforms
state-of-the-art methods on standard CSS settings by up to
7.07% and 8.49%, respectively.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, which aims to assign each pixel
of an image to its semantic class, is a fundamental task in
computer vision. Segmentation models are critical to many
real-world applications, such as self-driving cars [1,17] and
medical image diagnostics [14, 40]. In most practical cases,
the model needs to continuously learn new data and adapt to
the changes in the operating environment. However, continually learning new classes leads to catastrophic forgetting of
old knowledge [12, 34]. In other words, the performance of
newly retrained models degrades significantly on old tasks.
Research on continual learning for semantic segmentation (CSS) only emerged recently in medical imaging [27,
28] and general scene understanding [2, 9]. Besides forgetting, CSS also faces the background shift problem, where

(a) Animal group

(b) Vehicle group

Figure 1. Performance drop (degree of forgetting) on old classes
in the (a) animal and (b) vehicle group as a model learns a new
class. Our method forgets less when learning a new similar class.

object classes from previous steps are shifted to the background at the current step [2].
There are two main problems causing catastrophic forgetting in continual learning (CL). First, the model has a
strong bias toward new classes [36]. In other words, objects of old classes are mispredicted as new ones. Second,
the model tends to forget old classes that are visually similar to newly added classes. To investigate this problem,
we divide classes in the Pascal-VOC 2012 dataset into two
groups: animal and vehicle, and evaluate the degree of forgetting in each group. Fig. 1 shows the performance drop1
in each group as the model learns a new class. The performance on the animal group drops the most when the model
learns sheep. Similarly, the result on the vehicle group reduces the most when it learns train.
Recent CSS methods [2, 9, 23, 24] distill the knowledge
of a previous model on old classes to a current model.
Knowledge distillation prevents the model from diverging
from what it previously learned. This continual learning
paradigm gains high research interests because of its computational efficiency. They do not require storing exemplars
of old classes to re-learn old knowledge. Despite the recent
1 The performance drop measures how much mIoU a model drops in
percentage point(%) when it learns a new class.

16866

