The Probabilistic Normal Epipolar Constraint for Frame-To-Frame Rotation
Optimization under Uncertain Feature Positions
Dominik Muhle*† , Lukas Koestler*† , Nikolaus Demmel† , Florian Bernard‡ and Daniel Cremers†
†
‡
Technical University of Munich
University of Bonn

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed method. The feature correspondences (left: lines) exhibit different position error distributions (left:
ellipses). In contrast to the normal epipolar constraint (NEC) [34], our probabilistic normal epipolar constraint (PNEC) correctly accounts
for the uncertainty and the geometry of the problem (middle) through a weighted (NEC) vs. unweighted (PNEC) averaging scheme (right).
The NEC weighs all residuals equally (right: dash-dotted blue line), so that valuable information is lost. In contrast, our PNEC takes into
account a proper weighting of individual residuals (right: dashed green line). Relative pose estimation with the PNEC instead of the NEC
reduces the rotational-only versions of the RPE1 and the RPEn error by up to 42% and 55% on the KITTI dataset [20], respectively.

Abstract
The estimation of the relative pose of two camera views
is a fundamental problem in computer vision. Kneip et al.
proposed to solve this problem by introducing the normal
epipolar constraint (NEC). However, their approach does
not take into account uncertainties, so that the accuracy
of the estimated relative pose is highly dependent on accurate feature positions in the target frame. In this work,
we introduce the probabilistic normal epipolar constraint
(PNEC) that overcomes this limitation by accounting for
anisotropic and inhomogeneous uncertainties in the feature
positions. To this end, we propose a novel objective function, along with an efficient optimization scheme that effectively minimizes our objective while maintaining real-time
performance. In experiments on synthetic data, we demonstrate that the novel PNEC yields more accurate rotation
estimates than the original NEC and several popular relative rotation estimation algorithms. Furthermore, we integrate the proposed method into a state-of-the-art monocular rotation-only odometry system and achieve consistently
improved results for the real-world KITTI dataset.

* equal contribution. Project page: https://go.vision.in.tum.de/pnec

1. Introduction
Extracting the 3D geometry of a scene from images is a
long-standing problem in computer vision and has numerous applications, including augmented and virtual reality,
autonomous driving, or robots that can help with everyday
life. One key component of many such approaches is the
estimation of the relative pose between two viewpoints of a
scene. For example, relative pose estimation is the foundation of geometric vision algorithms like structure from motion (SfM) or visual odometry (VO). Global SfM pipelines
rely on accurate pairwise relative poses for use as fixed measurements in global motion averaging [23, 48]. In VO, relative pose estimation is used to construct a trajectory from
a stream of images. Like for all odometry systems, small
errors in the relative pose estimation lead to a drift in VO.
The most widely used concept for relative pose estimation is the essential matrix [43] in the calibrated case, or
the fundamental matrix [25] in the general case. Respective approaches rely on correspondences between feature
points, and are generally known to provide fast and accurate results [24]. However, approaches based on the essential matrix suffer from fundamental problems, with the most
prominent being solution multiplicity [17, 25] and planar
degeneracy [33]. To address such issues, often it is necessary to consider more involved solution strategies, which
also lead to even more accurate relative poses as shown by

1819

