Co-domain Symmetry for Complex-Valued Deep Learning
Utkarsh Singhal

Yifei Xing
UC Berkeley / ICSI

Stella X. Yu

Abstract
We study complex-valued scaling as a type of symmetry
natural and unique to complex-valued measurements and
representations. Deep Complex Networks (DCN) extend realvalued algebra to the complex domain without addressing
complex-valued scaling. SurReal extends manifold learning
to the complex plane, achieving scaling invariance with
manifold distances that discard phase information.
Treating complex-valued scaling as a co-domain transformation, we design novel equivariant/invariant layer functions and architectures that exploit co-domain symmetry. We
also propose novel complex-valued representations of RGB
images, where complex-valued scaling indicates hue shift or
correlated changes across color channels.
Benchmarked on MSTAR, CIFAR10, CIFAR100, and
SVHN, our co-domain symmetric (CDS) classifiers deliver
higher accuracy, better generalization, more robustness to
co-domain transformations, and lower model bias and variance than DCN and SurReal with far fewer parameters.

1. Introduction
Symmetry is one of the most powerful tools in the deep
learning repertoire. Naturally occurring symmetries lead to
structured variation in natural data. Modeling these symmetries thus greatly simplifies learning [1], e.g., Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) [2] capture the translational symmetry of image data, and PointNet [3] captures the permutation symmetry of 3D point clouds. These symmetries are
formalized as invariance or equivariance to a group of transformations [4]. However, this line of research has primarily
focused on transformations defined on the domain of an image (such as scaling and rotations [5–7]), while co-domain
transformations (Fig. 1) such as color shift and complexvalued range scaling remain under-explored. Additionally,
this research has primarily focused on real-valued data.
We explore complex-valued data which arise naturally
in 1) remote sensing such as synthetic aperture radar (SAR)
imaging, medical imaging such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and radio frequency communications; 2) spectral
representations of real-valued data such as Fourier Trans-

Figure 1. We study principled deep learning designs that exploit codomain symmetry in the range of an image. An image is a function
from pixel coordinates in the domain RD to pixel values in the
co-domain CK (e.g., (D, K) = (2, 3) for RGB images). Spatial
transformations such as scaling and rotations act on the domain,
mapping points in RD to other points, while leaving the underlying
function values intact. Co-domain transformations such as color
distortion or complex-valued scaling, on the other hand, act on the
function values only. Rows 2-3 in Column 4 are complex-valued
scaled SAR images with magnitudes and phases visualized in the
color intensity and hue respectively.

form [8, 9]; and 3) physics and engineering applications [10].
In deep learning, complex-valued models have shown several
benefits over their real-valued counterparts: larger representational capacity [11], more robust embedding [12] and associative memory [13], more efficient multi-task learning [14],
and higher quality MRI image reconstruction [15]. We approach complex-valued deep learning from a symmetry perspective: Which symmetries are inherent in complex-valued
data, and how do we exploit them in modeling?
One type of symmetry inherent to complex-valued data is
complex-valued scaling ambiguity [18]. For example, consider a complex-valued MRI or SAR signal z. Due to the
nature of signal acquisition, z could be subject to global magnitude scaling and phase offset represented by a complexvalued scalar s, thus becoming s·z.
A complex-valued classifier takes input z and ideally

681

