Meta-attention for ViT-backed Continual Learning
Mengqi Xue1 , Haofei Zhang1 , Jie Song1, † , Mingli Song1, 2
1
Zhejiang University
2
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Research Institute of Frontier Technologies, Zhejiang University
{mqxue,haofeizhang,sjie,brooksong}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

Being capable of tackling everchanging tasks is a favorable merit in open-world scenarios. Humans excel at solving
constantly emerging tasks by associating them with previously learned knowledge. Deep neural networks (DNNs),
however, usually suffer from catastrophic forgetting [33] if
simply adapted to new tasks due to the differences between
tasks in data biases.
† Corresponding author

MEAT

1. Introduction

Task 1

Task 2

Task 3

Tasks

Continual learning is a longstanding research topic due
to its crucial role in tackling continually arriving tasks. Up
to now, the study of continual learning in computer vision is
mainly restricted to convolutional neural networks (CNNs).
However, recently there is a tendency that the newly emerging vision transformers (ViTs) are gradually dominating
the field of computer vision, which leaves CNN-based continual learning lagging behind as they can suffer from severe performance degradation if straightforwardly applied
to ViTs. In this paper, we study ViT-backed continual learning to strive for higher performance riding on recent advances of ViTs. Inspired by mask-based continual learning methods in CNNs, where a mask is learned per task
to adapt the pre-trained ViT to the new task, we propose
MEta-ATtention (MEAT), i.e., attention to self-attention,
to adapt a pre-trained ViT to new tasks without sacrificing performance on already learned tasks. Unlike prior
mask-based methods like Piggyback, where all parameters
are associated with corresponding masks, MEAT leverages
the characteristics of ViTs and only masks a portion of its
parameters. It renders MEAT more efficient and effective
with less overhead and higher accuracy. Extensive experiments demonstrate that MEAT exhibits significant superiority to its state-of-the-art CNN counterparts, with 4.0 ∼ 6.0%
absolute boosts in accuracy. Our code has been released
at https://github.com/zju-vipa/MEAT-TIL.

Initial Task

Fixed

Adapted

Adapted

Adapted

Figure 1. The proposed MEAT for task continual learning in the
MHSA block with vision transformers. With the increase of new
tasks, MEAT dynamically assigns attention masks to generate taskspecific self-attention patterns per task.

Over the past years, large pieces of literature have
been devoted to addressing the catastrophic forgetting problem to enable DNNs to master new-arrived tasks in a sequence [23,27,30,36,38,41,43]. Existing continual learning
methods can be broadly categorized into three schools: replay methods [3,6,19,36,37], regularization methods [21,23,
26, 27, 34, 50, 52] and mask methods [18, 30–32, 41]. Replay
methods replay previous task samples, which are stored in
raw format or generated with a generative model, to alleviate
forgetting while learning a new task. To avoid storing raw
inputs, prioritize privacy and alleviate memory requirements,
regularization methods introduce a regularization term to
consolidate previous knowledge while learning the new task.
Mask methods learn a mask per task to adapt the pre-trained
model to the new task for preventing any possible forgetting.
Albeit remarkable progress made in computer vision,
most of the aforementioned methods are tailored for CNNs
for their dominant performance in the field over the past
decade. However, the primacy of CNNs in computer vision is

150

