Learning from Untrimmed Videos:
Self-Supervised Video Representation Learning with Hierarchical Consistency
Zhiwu Qing1 Shiwei Zhang2∗ Ziyuan Huang3 Yi Xu4 Xiang Wang1
Mingqian Tang2 Changxin Gao1∗ Rong Jin2 Nong Sang1
1
Key Laboratory of Image Processing and Intelligent Control
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Alibaba Group 3 ARC, National University of Singapore 4 Dalian Unversity of Technology
{qzw, wxiang, cgao, nsang}@hust.edu.cn
{zhangjin.zsw, mingqian.tmq, jinrong.jr}@alibaba-inc.com
ziyuan.huang@u.nus.edu

yxu@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Natural videos provide rich visual contents for selfsupervised learning. Yet most existing approaches for
learning spatio-temporal representations rely on manually
trimmed videos, leading to limited diversity in visual patterns and limited performance gain. In this work, we aim
to learn representations by leveraging more abundant information in untrimmed videos. To this end, we propose
to learn a hierarchy of consistencies in videos, i.e., visual
consistency and topical consistency, corresponding respectively to clip pairs that tend to be visually similar when
separated by a short time span and share similar topics
when separated by a long time span. Specifically, a hierarchical consistency learning framework HiCo is presented, where the visually consistent pairs are encouraged
to have the same representation through contrastive learning, while the topically consistent pairs are coupled through
a topical classifier that distinguishes whether they are topicrelated. Further, we impose a gradual sampling algorithm
for proposed hierarchical consistency learning, and demonstrate its theoretical superiority. Empirically, we show that
not only HiCo can generate stronger representations on
untrimmed videos, it also improves the representation quality when applied to trimmed videos. This is in contrast to
standard contrastive learning that fails to learn appropriate representations from untrimmed videos.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning is of crucial importance in computer vision, and has shown remarkable potential in learning
powerful spatio-temporal representations using unlabelled
∗ Corresponding authors.

Project page: https://hico-cvpr2022.github.io/.

Figure 1. (a) An example of untrimmed video with the interview,
competition and the stadium of Sumo Wrestling. It shows the hierarchical consistency present in untrimmed videos. As can be seen,
clips with short temporal distance share similar visual elements,
while clips with long temporal distance, despite their dissimilar
visual contents, share a same topic. (b, c) Linear evaluation of conventional contrastive learning (CL), i.e., SimCLR [7], and HiCo on
HMDB51 [27] and UCF101 [49], with pretraining respectively on
the original (trimmed) and untrimmed version of Kinetics-400 [5].

videos. Current state-of-the-art approaches on unsupervised
video representation learning are typically based on the contrastive learning framework [13, 44, 45], which encourages
the representations of the clips from the same video to be
close and those from different videos to be as far away from
each other as possible [7, 21]. In most approaches, they
are trained on manually trimmed videos such as Kinetics400 [5]. However, it is labor-intensive and time-consuming
to collect such a large-scale trimmed video dataset, and the

13821

