Unsupervised Action Segmentation by Joint Representation Learning and
Online Clustering
Sateesh Kumar†

Sanjay Haresh†
M. Zeeshan Zia

Awais Ahmed
Quoc-Huy Tran

Andrey Konin

Retrocausal, Inc.
Seattle, WA
www.retrocausal.ai

1. Introduction
With the advent of deep learning, significant progress
has been made in understanding human activities in videos.
However, most of the research efforts so far have been invested in action recognition [11, 76, 77, 82], where the task
is to classify simple actions in short videos. Recently, a
few approaches have been proposed for dealing with complex activities in long videos, e.g., temporal action localization [13, 68, 69, 88], which aims to detect video seg† indicates joint first author.
{sateesh,sanjay,awais,andrey,zeeshan,huy}@retrocausal.ai.

Prior Works

We present a novel approach for unsupervised activity
segmentation which uses video frame clustering as a pretext
task and simultaneously performs representation learning
and online clustering. This is in contrast with prior works
where representation learning and clustering are often performed sequentially. We leverage temporal information in
videos by employing temporal optimal transport. In particular, we incorporate a temporal regularization term which
preserves the temporal order of the activity into the standard optimal transport module for computing pseudo-label
cluster assignments. The temporal optimal transport module enables our approach to learn effective representations
for unsupervised activity segmentation. Furthermore, previous methods require storing learned features for the entire
dataset before clustering them in an offline manner, whereas
our approach processes one mini-batch at a time in an online manner. Extensive evaluations on three public datasets,
i.e. 50-Salads, YouTube Instructions, and Breakfast, and
our dataset, i.e., Desktop Assembly, show that our approach
performs on par with or better than previous methods, despite having significantly less memory constraints.

Sequential Learning and Clustering
Entire
Dataset

Our Method

Abstract

MiniBatches

Representation
Learning

Offline
Clustering

(a)
Joint Learning and Clustering
Representation
Learning

Online
Clustering

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Previous approaches [43, 52, 65, 78] often perform
representation learning and clustering sequentially, while storing
embedded features for the entire dataset before clustering them.
(b) We unify representation learning and clustering into a single
joint framework, which processes one mini-batch at a time. Our
method explicitly optimizes for unsupervised activity segmentation and is much more memory efficient.

ments containing the actions of interest, and anomaly detection [27, 32, 74], whose goal is to localize video frames
containing anomalous events in an untrimmed video.
In this paper, we are interested in the problem of temporal activity segmentation, where our goal is to assign each
frame of a long video capturing a complex activity to one of
the action/sub-activity classes. One popular group of methods [14, 40, 41, 46, 53] on this topic require per-frame action labels for fully-supervised training. However, framelevel annotations for all training videos are generally difficult and prohibitively costly to acquire. Weakly-supervised
approaches which need weak labels, e.g., the ordered action
list or transcript for each video [12,18,35,42,50,61,62,64],
have also been proposed. Unfortunately, these weak labels
are not always available a priori and can be time consuming
to obtain, especially for large datasets.
To avoid the above annotation requirements, unsupervised methods [3, 43, 52, 57, 65, 66, 78] have been introduced recently. Given a collection of unlabeled videos,

20174

