Perception Prioritized Training of Diffusion Models
Jooyoung Choi1

Jungbeom Lee1
Chaehun Shin1
Sungwon Kim1
Hyunwoo Kim3
Sungroh Yoon1,2,∗
1
Data Science and AI Laboratory, Seoul National University
2
AIIS, ASRI, INMC, ISRC, and Interdisciplinary Program in AI, Seoul National University
3
LG AI Research

Abstract
Diffusion models learn to restore noisy data, which is
corrupted with different levels of noise, by optimizing the
weighted sum of the corresponding loss terms, i.e., denoising score matching loss. In this paper, we show that restoring data corrupted with certain noise levels offers a proper
pretext task for the model to learn rich visual concepts. We
propose to prioritize such noise levels over other levels during training, by redesigning the weighting scheme of the objective function. We show that our simple redesign of the
weighting scheme significantly improves the performance
of diffusion models regardless of the datasets, architectures,
and sampling strategies.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [14, 36], a recent family of generative
models, have achieved remarkable image generation performance. Diffusion models have been rapidly studied, as they
offer several desirable properties for image synthesis, including stable training, easy model scaling, and good distribution coverage [27]. Starting from Ho et al. [14], recent
works [8, 27, 40] have shown that the diffusion models can
render high-fidelity images comparable to those generated
by generative adversarial networks (GANs) [12], especially
in class-conditional settings, by relying on additional efforts
such as classifier guidance [8] and cascaded models [32].
However, the unconditional generation of single models still
has considerable room for improvement, and performance
has not been explored for various high-resolution datasets
(e.g., FFHQ [20], MetFaces [18]) where other families of
generative models [3, 11, 20, 22, 41] mainly compete.
Starting from tractable noise distribution, a diffusion
model generates images by progressively removing noise.
To achieve this, a model learns the reverse of the predefined diffusion process, which sequentially corrupts the con∗Correspondence to: Sungroh Yoon (sryoon@snu.ac.kr)

tents of an image with various levels of noise. A model is
trained by optimizing the sum of denoising score matching losses [43] for various noise levels [39], which aims
to learn the recovery of clean images from corrupted images. Instead of using a simple sum of losses, Ho et
al. [14] observed that their empirically obtained weighted
sum of losses was more beneficial to sample quality. Their
weighted objective is the current de facto standard objective for training diffusion models [8, 25, 27, 32, 40]. However, surprisingly, it remains unknown why this performs
well or whether it is optimal for sample quality. To the best
of our knowledge, the design of a better weighting scheme
to achieve better sample quality has not yet been explored.
Given the success of diffusion models with the standard
weighted objective, we aim to amplify this benefit by exploring a more appropriate weighting scheme for the objective function. However, designing a weighting scheme is
difficult owing to two factors. First, there are thousands of
noise levels; therefore, an exhaustive grid search is impossible. Second, it is not clear what information the model
learns at each noise level during training, therefore hard to
determine the priority of each level.
In this paper, we first investigate what a diffusion model
learns at each noise level. Our key intuition is that the diffusion model learns rich visual concepts by solving pretext
tasks for each level, which is to recover the image from
corrupted images. At the noise level where the images are
slightly corrupted, images are already available for perceptually rich content and thus, recovering images does not
require prior knowledge of image contexts. For example,
the model can recover noisy pixels from neighboring clean
pixels. Therefore, the model learns imperceptible details,
rather than high-level contexts. In contrast, when images
are highly corrupted so that the contents are unrecognizable, the model learns perceptually recognizable contents to
solve the given pretext task. Our observations motivate us to
propose P2 (perception prioritized) weighting, which aims
to prioritize solving the pretext task of more important noise
levels. We assign higher weights to the loss at levels where

11472

