Fine-tuning Global Model via Data-Free Knowledge Distillation
for Non-IID Federated Learning
Lin Zhang1,4 * Li Shen2 Liang Ding3 Dacheng Tao2,3 Ling-Yu Duan1,4†
1
Peking University, Beijing, China 2 JD Explore Academy, Beijing, China
3
The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{zhanglin.imre, lingyu}@pku.edu.cn, {mathshenli, dacheng.tao}@gmail.com
ldin3097@sydney.edu.au

* Part of this work was done during Ling Zhang’s internship at JD Explore Academy.
† Corresponding author.

aggregate

pseudo data

…

With the explosive growth of data and the strict privacyprotection policy, reckless data transmission and aggregation gradually become unacceptable due to the high bandwidth cost and risk of privacy leakage. Recently, Federated
Learning (FL) [30, 31] has been proposed to replace the traditional heavily centralized learning paradigm and protect
data privacy. It has been successfully applied in real-world

local model
global model
real data
hard samples
boundary of
global model

aggregate

…

1. Introduction

(a) FedFTG

Federated Learning (FL) is an emerging distributed
learning paradigm under privacy constraint. Data heterogeneity is one of the main challenges in FL, which results
in slow convergence and degraded performance. Most existing approaches only tackle the heterogeneity challenge
by restricting the local model update in client, ignoring
the performance drop caused by direct global model aggregation. Instead, we propose a data-free knowledge distillation method to fine-tune the global model in the server
(FedFTG), which relieves the issue of direct model aggregation. Concretely, FedFTG explores the input space of
local models through a generator, and uses it to transfer
the knowledge from local models to the global model. Besides, we propose a hard sample mining scheme to achieve
effective knowledge distillation throughout the training. In
addition, we develop customized label sampling and classlevel ensemble to derive maximum utilization of knowledge, which implicitly mitigates the distribution discrepancy across clients. Extensive experiments show that
our FedFTG significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art
(SOTA) FL algorithms and can serve as a strong plugin for
enhancing FedAvg, FedProx, FedDyn, and SCAFFOLD.

(a) FedAvg

Abstract

find-tune using hard samples

Figure 1. Comparison between FedAvg [30] and FedFTG. By finetuning the global model using generated hard samples, FedFTG
alleviates the performance decrease after model aggregation.

tasks, such as smart city [16, 34, 42], health care [8, 26, 27],
and recommender system [9, 10], etc.
One of the main challenges in FL is the data heterogeneity, i.e., the data in clients are non-identically and independently distributed (Non-IID). It has been verified that the
vanilla FL algorithm, FedAvg [30], leads to drifted local
models and forgets the global knowledge catastrophically in
this scenario, which further induces degraded performance
and slow convergence [14, 19, 21]. This is because the local model is updated merely with local data, i.e., minimizing the local empirical loss. However, minimizing the local
empirical loss is fundamentally inconsistent with minimizing the global empirical loss [1, 24, 29] in Non-IID FL.
To tackle the data heterogeneity challenge, most existing
methods, e.g., FedProx [23], SCAFFOLD [18], FedDyn [1],
MOON [22] constrain the direction of local model update
to align the local and global optimization objectives. Recently, FedGen [43] learns a lightweight generator to generate pseudo feature and broadcasts it to clients to regulate
local training. However, all these methods merely conduct
simple model aggregation to get the global model in server,
which ignores local knowledge incompatibility and induces
knowledge forgetting in the global model. In addition, [36]

10174

