Self-Supervised Learning of Object Parts for Semantic Segmentation
Adrian Ziegler
Technical University of Munich

Yuki M. Asano
QUVA Lab
University of Amsterdam

adrian.ziegler@tum.de

y.m.asano@uva.nl

Abstract
Progress in self-supervised learning has brought strong
image representation learning methods. Yet so far, it has
mostly focused on image-level learning. In turn, tasks
such as unsupervised image segmentation have not benefited from this trend as they require spatially-diverse representations. However, learning dense representations is
challenging, as in the unsupervised context it is not clear
how to guide the model to learn representations that correspond to various potential object categories. In this paper, we argue that self-supervised learning of object parts
is a solution to this issue. Object parts are generalizable:
they are a priori independent of an object definition, but
can be grouped to form objects a posteriori. To this end, we
leverage the recently proposed Vision Transformer’s capability of attending to objects and combine it with a spatially
dense clustering task for fine-tuning the spatial tokens. Our
method surpasses the state-of-the-art on three semantic segmentation benchmarks by 17%-3%, showing that our representations are versatile under various object definitions.
Finally, we extend this to fully unsupervised segmentation
– which refrains completely from using label information
even at test-time – and demonstrate that a simple method
for automatically merging discovered object parts based on
community detection yields substantial gains. .

1. Introduction
Defining what makes an object an object is hard. In
philosophy, Peirce defines an object as anything we can
think and talk about [40]. In computer vision, object definitions for semantic segmentation are more pragmatic and
feature various notions of objectness as well as different levels of granularity. For instance, the COCO-Stuff benchmark
distinguishes between stuff (objects without a clear shape)
and things (objects with a “well-defined” shape) [3, 35]
and features coarse and fine object categories. Others, like
Code: https://github.com/MkuuWaUjinga/leopart

Figure 1. ViTs and Resnets compared under foreground extraction and semantic segmentation. We use Jaccard distance as
a measure for foreground extraction. Starting from a DINO initialization, our method, Leopart, closes the performance gap between self-supervised ViTs and their supervised counterparts as
well as Resnets. Leopart (CBFE+CD) further improves a ViT’s
object extraction capabilities and sets new state-of-the-art for fully
unsupervised semantic segmentation.

Cityscapes [12], choose a segmentation that is most informative for a specific application like autonomous driving
and therefore also include sky and road as object classes.
This variedness of object definitions is challenging for
self-supervised or unsupervised semantic segmentation as
human annotations that carry the object definitions are, at
most, used at test time. However, the ability to learn selfsupervised dense representations is desirable as this would
allow scaling beyond object-centric images and allow effective learning on billions more generic images. Furthermore, unsupervised segmentation can be highly useful as a
starting point for more efficient data labeling, as segmen-

14502

