Abandoning the Bayer-Filter to See in the Dark
Xingbo Dong1,3*† Wanyan Xu1,2*† Zhihui Miao1,2† Lan Ma1
Chao Zhang1 Jiewen Yang1 Zhe Jin4 Andrew Beng Jin Teoh3 Jiajun Shen1
1
TCL AI Lab 2 Fuzhou University 3 Yonsei University 4 Anhui University
{xingbo.dong,bjteoh}@yonsei.ac.kr,{208527051,208527090}@fzu.edu.cn,{sjj,rubyma}@tcl.com

1. Introduction
For a digitalized image, the quality of the image could
be severely degraded due to the color distortions and noise
under poor illumination conditions such as indoors, at night,
or under improper camera exposure parameters.
Long exposure time and high ISO (sensitivity to light)
are often leveraged in low-light environments to preserve
visual quality. However, overwhelming exposure leads to
motion blur and unbalanced overexposing, and high ISO

HxWx3
De-BayerFilter Module

Bayer-color filter Cam.

Low-light image enhancement, a pervasive but challenging problem, plays a central role in enhancing the visibility of an image captured in a poor illumination environment. Due to the fact that not all photons can pass
the Bayer-Filter on the sensor of the color camera, in this
work, we first present a De-Bayer-Filter simulator based
on deep neural networks to generate a monochrome raw
image from the colored raw image. Next, a fully convolutional network is proposed to achieve the low-light image
enhancement by fusing colored raw data with synthesized
monochrome data. Channel-wise attention is also introduced to the fusion process to establish a complementary
interaction between features from colored and monochrome
raw images. To train the convolutional networks, we propose a dataset with monochrome and color raw pairs named
Mono-Colored Raw paired dataset (MCR) collected by using a monochrome camera without Bayer-Filter and a color
camera with Bayer-Filter. The proposed pipeline takes advantages of the fusion of the virtual monochrome and the
color raw images, and our extensive experiments indicate
that significant improvement can be achieved by leveraging raw sensor data and data-driven learning. The project
is available at https://github.com/TCL-AILab/
Abandon_Bayer-Filter_See_in_the_Dark

HxWx1
Monochrome Cam.

Abstract

Dual Branch Low-light
Enhancement Module

HxWx1

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed pipeline. We propose to generate monochrome raw data by a learned De-Bayer-Filter module. Then, a dual branch neural network is designed to bridge
monochrome and colored raw to achieve the low-light image enhancement task.

amplifies the noise. Though the camera’s flash provides
exposure compensation for the insufficient light, it is not
suitable for long-distance shots, and also introduces color
distortions and artifacts. On the other hand, various algorithms have been reported to enhance the low-light image.
Recently, deep neural network models have been utilized
to solve the low-light image restoration problem, such as
DeepISP [22] and Seeing In the Dark (SID) [3].
However, those algorithms are restricted in the image
processing pipeline, as the photons capture rate and quantum efficiency are usually overlooked. In general, high photons capture rate can improve the image’s visual quality significantly. One of the typical examples is the RYYB-based
color filter, which can capture 40% more photons than the
Bayer-RGGB-based color filter1 . Hence, the RYYB-based
color filter can achieve better performance naturally.
Bayer filter removal is another plausible way to improve
the photons capture rate. The Bayer filter is an array of

* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Work done while interning at TCL AI Lab.

1 Bayer filter, Bayer-array, Bayer-array filter are used interchangeably.

17431

