Attributable Visual Similarity Learning
Borui Zhang, Wenzhao Zheng, Jie Zhou, Jiwen Lu∗
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
{zhang-br21, zhengwz18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; {jzhou, lujiwen}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper proposes an attributable visual similarity
learning (AVSL) framework for a more accurate and explainable similarity measure between images. Most existing similarity learning methods exacerbate the unexplainability by mapping each sample to a single point in the embedding space with a distance metric (e.g., Mahalanobis
distance, Euclidean distance). Motivated by the human semantic similarity cognition, we propose a generalized similarity learning paradigm to represent the similarity between
two images with a graph and then infer the overall similarity accordingly. Furthermore, we establish a bottom-up
similarity construction and top-down similarity inference
framework to infer the similarity based on semantic hierarchy consistency. We first identify unreliable higher-level
similarity nodes and then correct them using the most coherent adjacent lower-level similarity nodes, which simultaneously preserve traces for similarity attribution. Extensive
experiments on the CUB-200-2011, Cars196, and Stanford
Online Products datasets demonstrate significant improvements over existing deep similarity learning methods and
verify the interpretability of our framework. 1

1. Introduction
Similarity learning is a fundamental task in the field of
computer vision, where most prevalent works (i.e., metric learning methods) employ a distance metric to measure
the similarities between samples. They transform features
into an embedding space and define the dissimilarity as
the Euclidean distance in this space, where the objective
is to cluster similar samples together and separate dissimilar ones apart from each other. While conventional methods use hand-crafted features like SIFT [21] and LBP [1],
deep metric learning methods employ convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [16] to extract more representative
features and demonstrate superior performance. In recent
years, similarity learning has been widely applied to various
∗ Corresponding author.
1 Code: https://github.com/zbr17/AVSL.

Similar
Dissimilar
Unreliable
Attribution

Two UAZ Hunter Cars

Attribution

Body (Similar)

Roof (Dissimilar)

Front (Unreliable)

Decompose

Bumper (Dissimilar)

Wheel (Similar)

Engine Hood (Similar)

Figure 1. The motivation of the proposed AVSL framework. Humans recognize each image as a complex set of concepts and compare two images hierarchically [17]. For example, when inferring the similarity between two cars, humans usually first compare
high-level features such as shapes or colors and then turn to finer
features such as wheel structures when a coarse observation does
not distinctly distinguish them. Motivated by this, we propose to
employ a graph structure to decompose sample pairs into discriminative concept nodes, which is more consistent with how humans
perceive the cognitive distance and is beneficial to the attribution
of the similarity measurement.

vision tasks such as face recognition [11, 30, 35], person reidentification [4,10,18,47], and image classification [2,22].
The essential goal of visual similarity learning is to obtain a similarity measure that generalizes well to unseen
data. It has been shown that the good generalization of the
human visual system comes from the ability to parse objects into parts and relations and learn the underlying concepts [17]. Humans also infer the similarity between two
images hierarchically by first comparing high-level features
and then delving into lower-level features, as illustrated in
Figure 1. However, most existing similarity learning methods simply project each sample to one single vector and employ the Mahalanobis distance or Euclidean distance as the
similarity function. They only use the top-level feature to

7532

