IFOR: Iterative Flow Minimization for Robotic Object Rearrangement
Ankit Goyal1,2 ,* Arsalan Mousavian1 , Chris Paxton1 , Yu-Wei Chao1 , Brian Okorn1,3∗
Jia Deng2 , Dieter Fox1
1
2
NVIDIA, Princeton University, 3 Carnegie Mellon University

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Initial Scene

Goal Scene

Figure 1. An example of IFOR being applied to real data. The initial and goal scenes are shown on the left. Our approach allows the
robot to repeatedly identify transformations that will minimize the flow for various objects between the current and goal scenes. It can
then repeatedly grasp, move, and place objects, rotating as necessary, in order to achieve the configuration in the goal scene. The system is
trained completely on synthetic data and transfers to the real world in zero-shot manner.

Abstract
Accurate object rearrangement from vision is a crucial
problem for a wide variety of real-world robotics applications in unstructured environments. We propose IFOR, Iterative Flow Minimization for Robotic Object Rearrangement, an end-to-end method for the challenging problem of
object rearrangement for unknown objects given an RGBD
image of the original and final scenes. First, we learn
an optical flow model based on RAFT to estimate the relative transformation of the objects purely from synthetic
data. This flow is then used in an iterative minimization
algorithm to achieve accurate positioning of previously unseen objects. Crucially, we show that our method applies
to cluttered scenes, and in the real world, while training
only on synthetic data. Videos are available at https:
//imankgoyal.github.io/ifor.html.

1. Introduction
Object rearrangement is the capability of an embodied
agent to physically re-configure the objects in a scene into a
* Work done while authors were interns at NVIDIA

desired goal configuration [2]. It is an essential skill in dayto-day activities like setting a dining table, putting away
groceries, and organizing a desk. Endowing robots with this
capability is crucial for deploying them to assist people with
everyday tasks [2].
With varying task setups, the desired goal state can
be provided in different forms, for instance, a compact
state representation [32, 67] or natural language descriptions [36, 55]. In this work, we address the rearrangement
task where the goal state is specified by an RGB-D image [34, 51], as shown in Fig. 1. This setup lends itself
well to many scenarios where the goal state can be snapped
once, either in the first place or from a one-time demonstration. For instance, a user can set the dining table once to
their preference and take a photo, and a robot assistant can
restore the table back to the desired state from any configuration.
Traditionally, object rearrangement problems have been
studied in the robotics community, often in the context of
Task and Motion Planning (TAMP) [15]. Despite much recent progress [10, 16, 26], most TAMP approaches still rely
on a strict set of assumptions on the perception front. First,

14787

