Contrastive Regression for Domain Adaptation on Gaze Estimation
Yaoming Wang1,2† , Yangzhou Jiang1,2† , Jin Li1 , Bingbing Ni1 , Wenrui Dai1 ,
Chenglin Li1 , Hongkai Xiong1 , and Teng Li2,3 *
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Huawei Inc 3 Anhui University
{wang yaoming, jiangyangzhou, deserve lj, nibingbing,
daiwenrui, lcl1985, xionghongkai}@sjtu.edu.cn; tenglwy@gmail.com

Abstract
Appearance-based Gaze Estimation leverages deep neural networks to regress the gaze direction from monocular
images and achieve impressive performance. However, its
success depends on expensive and cumbersome annotation
capture. When lacking precise annotation, the large domain
gap hinders the performance of trained models on new domains. In this paper, we propose a novel gaze adaptation
approach, namely Contrastive Regression Gaze Adaptation
(CRGA), for generalizing gaze estimation on the target domain in an unsupervised manner. CRGA leverages the Contrastive Domain Generalization (CDG) module to learn the
stable representation from the source domain and leverages
the Contrastive Self-training Adaptation (CSA) module to
learn from the pseudo labels on the target domain. The
core of both CDG and CSA is the Contrastive Regression
(CR) loss, a novel contrastive loss for regression by pulling
features with closer gaze directions closer together while
pushing features with farther gaze directions farther apart.
Experimentally, we choose ETH-XGAZE and Gaze-360 as
the source domain and test the domain generalization and
adaptation performance on MPIIGAZE, RT-GENE, GazeCapture, EyeDiap respectively. The results demonstrate
that our CRGA achieves remarkable performance improvement compared with the baseline models and also outperforms the state-of-the-art domain adaptation approaches on
gaze adaptation tasks.

1. Introduction
With the development of deep learning, gaze estimation techniques have been widely applied in humancomputer interaction systems, such as intelligent cockpits [11], VR/AR games [2, 21, 38], medical analysis [4],
etc. Recently, appearance-based approaches [23, 37] are attracting more and more attention, as they regress gaze di* Corresponding author: Teng Li. † : Equal contribution.

Figure 1. Illustration of the feature distribution learned from domain adaptation task DG → DD (with close gaze directions share
similar colors) indicates that the original contrastive classification
loss function exhibits no effect on regression problem, while our
derived contrastive regression loss pulls features with close gaze
labels together and pushes features with remote gaze labels apart.

rection from monocular images alone and get rid of expensive and limited eye model devices. Despite the success of appearance-based gaze estimation, expensive and
cumbersome annotation capture constrains its application
in daily life. Large-scale gaze datasets [9, 10, 19, 23, 35, 39]
along with related gaze estimation approaches have been
proposed to alleviate this problem. These approaches yield
promising performance in the within-dataset test (training
and test data are from a same dataset) but are degraded dramatically in the cross-dataset test (training and test data are
from different datasets), due to the gap between different
domains, such as the differences of subjects, background
environments, and illuminations.
Recently, collaborative model ensembles [25] and additional annotations [22] are leveraged to narrow the crossdataset gap. They require additional models or annotations
for domain adaptation and lead to extra complexity of the

19376

