Dynamic Sparse R-CNN
Qinghang Hong,* Fengming Liu,* Dong Li, Ji Liu, Lu Tian, Yi Shan
Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., Beijing, China
{d.li, lu.tian, yi.shan}@amd.com

Abstract
Sparse R-CNN is a recent strong object detection baseline by set prediction on sparse, learnable proposal boxes
and proposal features. In this work, we propose to improve
Sparse R-CNN with two dynamic designs. First, Sparse RCNN adopts a one-to-one label assignment scheme, where
the Hungarian algorithm is applied to match only one positive sample for each ground truth. Such one-to-one assignment may not be optimal for the matching between
the learned proposal boxes and ground truths. To address this problem, we propose dynamic label assignment
(DLA) based on the optimal transport algorithm to assign
increasing positive samples in the iterative training stages
of Sparse R-CNN. We constrain the matching to be gradually looser in the sequential stages as the later stage produces the refined proposals with improved precision. Second, the learned proposal boxes and features remain fixed
for different images in the inference process of Sparse RCNN. Motivated by dynamic convolution, we propose dynamic proposal generation (DPG) to assemble multiple proposal experts dynamically for providing better initial proposal boxes and features for the consecutive training stages.
DPG thereby can derive sample-dependent proposal boxes
and features for inference. Experiments demonstrate that
our method, named Dynamic Sparse R-CNN, can boost
the strong Sparse R-CNN baseline with different backbones
for object detection. Particularly, Dynamic Sparse R-CNN
reaches the state-of-the-art 47.2% AP on the COCO 2017
validation set, surpassing Sparse R-CNN by 2.2% AP with
the same ResNet-50 backbone.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental task in computer vision which aims at predicting a set of objects with locations and corresponding pre-defined categories in a given
image. It has been widely applied in multiple fields including intelligent surveillance and autonomous driving. Ob* Equal contribution.

Figure 1. Performance vs. training epochs on the COCO 2017
validation set. All results are reported with single-scale inference using the ResNet-50 backbone. Our Dynamic Sparse R-CNN
achieves the state-of-the-art 47.2% AP with the same 36 training
epochs as Sparse R-CNN. Circles: Transformer-based methods.
Triangles: CNN-based methods.

ject detection has witnessed a rapid development in the
recent years, with varying feature extraction backbones
from convolutional neural network (CNN) [7, 11, 24, 27] to
Transformer [6, 18] and varying detection pipeline designs
[2, 17, 22, 23, 25, 28]. The detectors can mainly be divided
into one-stage, two-stage and multi-stage methods according to the regression times. One-stage detectors [17, 28] directly predict the regression targets and categories of objects
in a given image without the refinement step. Two-stage detectors [4,9,14,23] first generate a limited number of candidate proposals for foreground (e.g., region proposal network
(RPN)) and then pass the proposals to the detection network
to refine the location and category. Multi-stage detectors [1]
would refine the location and category multiple times with
improved performance but often require large computation
overhead. One-stage methods generally can be divided into
anchor-based and anchor-free detectors. Anchor-based detectors [15, 17, 22] design dense pre-defined anchors, tile
anchors across the image, and then directly predict category
and refine the coordinates of anchors. However, manual anchor configurations could be sub-optimal for the final performance. Anchor-free detectors [13, 28] are proposed to
overcome this issue by removing the anchor design. They

4723

