MM-TTA: Multi-Modal Test-Time Adaptation for 3D Semantic Segmentation
Inkyu Shin1 Yi-Hsuan Tsai2 Bingbing Zhuang3 Samuel Schulter3
Buyu Liu3 Sparsh Garg3 In So Kweon1 Kuk-Jin Yoon1
1
KAIST 2 Phiar Technologies 3 NEC Laboratories America

Abstract
Test-time adaptation approaches have recently emerged
as a practical solution for handling domain shift without
access to the source domain data. In this paper, we propose and explore a new multi-modal extension of test-time
adaptation for 3D semantic segmentation. We find that, directly applying existing methods usually results in performance instability at test time, because multi-modal input
is not considered jointly. To design a framework that can
take full advantage of multi-modality, where each modality provides regularized self-supervisory signals to other
modalities, we propose two complementary modules within
and across the modalities. First, Intra-modal Pseudolabel Generation (Intra-PG) is introduced to obtain reliable pseudo labels within each modality by aggregating
information from two models that are both pre-trained on
source data but updated with target data at different paces.
Second, Inter-modal Pseudo-label Refinement (Inter-PR)
adaptively selects more reliable pseudo labels from different
modalities based on a proposed consistency scheme. Experiments demonstrate that our regularized pseudo labels produce stable self-learning signals in numerous multi-modal
test-time adaptation scenarios for 3D semantic segmentation. Visit our project website at https://www.neclabs.com/˜mas/MM-TTA

1. Introduction
3D semantic segmentation is a challenging task that requires both geometric and semantic reasoning about the input scene, but it can provide rich insights that enable applications like autonomous driving [32, 34], virtual reality and
robotics [5, 27]. With the advancement of sensor technology, multi-modal sensors are considered as the key to effectively tackle this task [6, 16, 17]. In particular, to obtain
more accurate 3D point-level semantic understanding, contextual information in 2D RGB images can be reinforced by
the geometric property of 3D points from LiDAR sensors,
and vice versa. Therefore, it is of great interest to develop
multi-modal approaches for 3D semantic segmentation.

Figure 1. We propose a Multi-Modal Test-Time Adaptation (MMTTA) framework that enables a model to be quickly adapted to
multi-modal test data without access to the source domain training data. We introduce two modules: 1) Intra-PG to produce reliable pseudo labels within each modality via updating two models
(batch norm statistics) in different paces, i.e., slow and fast updating schemes with a momentum, and 2) Inter-PR to adaptively
select pseudo-labels from the two modalities. These two modules
seamlessly collaborate with each other and co-produce final crossmodal pseudo labels to help test-time adaptation.

However, multi-modal data is sensitive to a distribution
shift at test time when a domain gap exists to the training
data [1]. Therefore, it is critical for a model to quickly
adapt to the new multi-modal data during testing for obtaining better performance, i.e., through test-time adaptation (TTA) [19, 30]. This is different from the usual domain
adaptive semantic segmentation setting [13, 28, 35] that can
access both source and target data during training. In TTA,
we only have access to model parameters pre-trained on the
source data and the unlabeled test data for quick adaptation,
which typically (and also in this work) refers to one epoch
of training. This is practical for real-world scenarios, but it
is also challenging because only the target data is available
with a limited budget for adaptation.

16928

