Weakly Supervised Object Localization as Domain Adaption
Lei Zhu1,3,5 Qi She2 Qian Chen1,3,5 Yunfei You1,3,5 Boyu Wang4 Yanye Lu∗,1,5
zhulei@stu.pku.edu.cn, yanye.lu@pku.edu.cn
1

3

2
Institute of Medical Technology, Peking University
Bytedance AI Lab
4
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Peking University
University of Western Ontario
5
Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School

Abstract

A Our DA-WSOL Mechanism

Weakly supervised object localization (WSOL) focuses
on localizing objects only with the supervision of imagelevel classification masks. Most previous WSOL methods
follow the classification activation map (CAM) that localizes objects based on the classification structure with the
multi-instance learning (MIL) mechanism. However, the
MIL mechanism makes CAM only activate discriminative
object parts rather than the whole object, weakening its
performance for localizing objects. To avoid this problem,
this work provides a novel perspective that models WSOL
as a domain adaption (DA) task, where the score estimator
trained on the source/image domain is tested on the target/pixel domain to locate objects. Under this perspective,
a DA-WSOL pipeline is designed to better engage DA approaches into WSOL to enhance localization performance.
It utilizes a proposed target sampling strategy to select different types of target samples. Based on these types of target samples, domain adaption localization (DAL) loss is
elaborated. It aligns the feature distribution between the
two domains by DA and makes the estimator perceive target domain cues by Universum regularization. Experiments
show that our pipeline outperforms SOTA methods on multi
benchmarks. Code are released at https://github.
com/zh460045050/DA-WSOL_CVPR2022.

Extractor

Domain Adaption

1. Introduction
Weakly supervised object localization (WSOL), learning
the location of objects in images using only the image-level
classification mask to supervise, relaxes the requirement
for the dense annotation such as pixel-level segmentation
masks or bounding boxes for the training process, which
saves much manual labor for annotation and attract extensive attention in recent years [33, 4, 28, 1, 31, 2, 13].
The most well-known WSOL method is the classification activation map (CAM) [33], which utilizes the classi-

Image label

Aggregator

Estimator
Source Features

Input Image

Shoes
Source Class

Estimator
Target Features

Target Class

B MIL-based WSOL Mechanism
Extractor
Input Image

Image label

Estimator
Instance Features

Aggregator
Instances Class

C Separated-structure based WSOL Mechanism

Pixel Features

Shoes
Image Class
Legend

Detector

Extractor

Estimator
Image Features

Pixel Features
Input Image

Image label

Aggregator

Extractor

Shoes
Bag Class

Class-agnostic
Localization

: forward
: copy
: share weight
: supervise

Figure 1. The comparison of DA-WSOL and other mechanisms.

fication structure to generate the localization score. As indicated in Fig. 1 B, it theoretically serves as classification
under multi-instance learning (MIL) [6], where each image
represents a bag whose label is determined by instances it
contains [29], i.e. the pixels/patches. However, MIL focuses more on the accuracy of bags (images) rather than the
instances (pixels), which makes CAM only discern the most
discriminative parts but not the whole object. For activating more objects parts, different technics are adopted to enhance CAM, e.g. data augmentations [27, 14, 29, 4], novel
network structures [4, 30, 1, 31], or post-processes [2, 13].
Though these methods somewhat alleviate this problem,
they still follow MIL that basically causes the incomplete
activation of objects and weakens the performance.
From another perspective, CAM is also the same as training an estimator to classify the image-level feature under
the supervision of image-level masks. This well-trained estimator is then projected onto the pixel-level feature to generate the pixel-level localization scores in the test processing [33]. By viewing image-level and pixel-level features
14637

