Failure Modes of Domain Generalization Algorithms
Tigran Galstyan1,3 , Hrayr Harutyunyan2 , Hrant Khachatrian1,4 , Greg Ver Steeg2 , Aram Galstyan2
1

YerevaNN,

2

USC Information Sciences Institute, 3 Russian-Armenian University, 4 Yerevan State University

Abstract
Domain generalization algorithms use training data from
multiple domains to learn models that generalize well to unseen domains. While recently proposed benchmarks demonstrate that most of the existing algorithms do not outperform
simple baselines, the established evaluation methods fail to
expose the impact of various factors that contribute to the
poor performance. In this paper we propose an evaluation
framework for domain generalization algorithms that allows
decomposition of the error into components capturing distinct aspects of generalization. Inspired by the prevalence of
algorithms based on the idea of domain-invariant representation learning, we extend the evaluation framework to capture
various types of failures in achieving invariance. We show
that the largest contributor to the generalization error varies
across methods, datasets, regularization strengths and even
training lengths. We observe two problems associated with
the strategy of learning domain-invariant representations.
On Colored MNIST, most domain generalization algorithms
fail because they reach domain-invariance only on the training domains. On Camelyon-17, domain-invariance degrades
the quality of representations on unseen domains. We hypothesize that focusing instead on tuning the classifier on
top of a rich representation can be a promising direction.

1. Introduction
Over the past decade machine learning research was predominantly focused on settings where the learner observes
training data from an unknown distribution and is evaluated
on testing data, sampled from the same distribution. While
modern deep learning approaches excel in such settings, they
do significantly worse when the test data comes from a different distribution [32, 41]. These methods might rely on
dataset biases to perform well, and fail when those biases
are eliminated [4, 10].
The goal of generalizing beyond training distribution is
formulated in the domain generalization (DG) task, where
the learner observes training data from multiple domains
and is evaluated on unseen domains. Naturally, it is assumed that training and testing domains have some invariant

properties or mechanisms, which allow generalization from
one to another. At a high level, all domain generalization
approaches seek to capture those invariances, but do that
differently. A few of the possible directions of achieving domain generalization are: learning domain-invariant representations [9, 24], learning class-conditioned domain-invariant
representations [8, 21, 45], using robust loss functions [36],
learning invariant causal predictors [3], and using metalearning [20]. Most of the methods listed above outperform
the straightforward empirical risk minimization (ERM) approach on toy domain generalization instances (e.g., colored
MNIST). However, Gulrajani and Lopez-Paz [14] demonstrate that when evaluated on realistic DG instances, these
methods are unable to outperform ERM significantly. To improve domain generalization methods or propose new ones,
we need to understand why and how do domain generalization methods fail. This is the main goal of this paper.

Our contributions are threefold. First, we characterize
the general failure modes of domain generalization methods:
training set underfitting, test set inseparability, training-test
misalignment and classifier non-invariance. We develop
tools that measure the contribution of each of these failures
in the total error of a given model. Inspired by the popularity
of the methods based on invariant representation learning, we
also characterize failure modes related to achieving domain
invariance. Second, we identify two common patterns of
generalization failures. In the first pattern, many algorithms
achieve domain-invariant representations across the training
domains, but not on unseen domains, while the generalization error is negatively correlated with the representation
invariance on unseen domains. The second pattern is when
domain invariance is increased across all domains, but the
increase coincides with a degradation of the representations
of unseen domains, thus limiting the accuracy of the models. Third, we show that by fixing the representations it is
possible to isolate the classifier non-invariance failure, and
significantly improve the generalization even with the most
basic algorithms. These findings additionally confirm that
domain-invariant representations are neither necessary nor
sufficient for successful domain generalization.

19077

