Improving neural implicit surfaces geometry with patch warping
François Darmon12
1

Bénédicte Bascle1

Thales LAS France

2

Jean-Clément Devaux1

Pascal Monasse2

Mathieu Aubry2

LIGM (UMR 8049), École des Ponts, Univ. Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, Marne-la-Vallée, France
http://imagine.enpc.fr/˜darmonf/NeuralWarp/

Abstract
Neural implicit surfaces have become an important technique for multi-view 3D reconstruction but their accuracy
remains limited. In this paper, we argue that this comes from
the difficulty to learn and render high frequency textures with
neural networks. We thus propose to add to the standard
neural rendering optimization a direct photo-consistency
term across the different views. Intuitively, we optimize the
implicit geometry so that it warps views on each other in
a consistent way. We demonstrate that two elements are
key to the success of such an approach: (i) warping entire patches, using the predicted occupancy and normals
of the 3D points along each ray, and measuring their similarity with a robust structural similarity (SSIM); (ii) handling visibility and occlusion in such a way that incorrect
warps are not given too much importance while encouraging a reconstruction as complete as possible. We evaluate our approach, dubbed NeuralWarp, on the standard
DTU and EPFL benchmarks and show it outperforms state
of the art unsupervised implicit surfaces reconstructions
by over 20% on both datasets. Our code is available at
https://github.com/fdarmon/NeuralWarp

1. Introduction
Multi-view 3D reconstruction is the task of recovering the geometry of objects by looking at their projected
views. Multi-View Stereo (MVS) methods rely on the photoconsistency of multiple views and typically provide the best
results [29, 44]. However, they require a cumbersome multistep procedure, first estimating then merging depth maps.
Recent 3D optimization methods [22,24,25,34,41,42] avoid
this issue by representing the surface implicitly and jointly
optimizing neural networks encoding occupancy and color
for all images, but their accuracy remains limited. In this
work, we bridge these two types of approaches by optimizing
multi-view photo-consistency for a geometry represented by
implicit functions. We show that this enables our method to
leverage high-frequency textures present in the input images
that existing implicit methods struggle to represent, resulting

(a) Volumetric rendering (left) and geometric error map (right).

(b) Our method’s image warping (left) and geometric error map (right)

Figure 1. Standard neural implicit surface approaches jointly optimize a geometry and color network, but struggle to represent high
frequency textures and therefore lack accuracy (top). We propose to
additionally warp image patches with the implicit geometry, which
allows to directly optimize photo-consistency between images and
significantly improves the reconstruction accuracy (bottom).

in significant accuracy gains.
The idea behind our approach is visualized on Figure 1.
The top row shows a rendering and the geometric error
map (1a) for a state of the art implicit method [41]. The
rendering fails at producing high frequency textures, resulting in low 3D accuracy. To overcome this limitation we use
the original images, reprojecting them using the geometry
described by the implicit occupancy function. This is shown
on the bottom row (1b) where our warped patch includes
high frequency texture. Consequently, we can optimize the
geometry much more accurately, resulting in smaller geometric errors in the reconstruction.
Optimizing the implicit geometry for photo-consistency
poses two main challenges. First, since we do not have
perfectly Lambertian materials, directly minimizing the difference between colors is not meaningful and would lead to
artefacts. We thus compare entire patches using a robust similarity (SSIM [36]) which requires performing patch warping
using the implicit geometry. Building on the volumetric neu-

6260

