Day-to-Night Image Synthesis for Training Nighttime Neural ISPs
Abdelrahman Abdelhamed1
Abhijith Punnappurath1
Abdullah Abuolaim2 *
Alex Levinshtein1
Michael S. Brown1
1
2
Samsung AI Center – Toronto
York University
{abhijith.p,a.abdelhamed,alex.lev,michael.b1}@samsung.com, abuolaim@eecs.yorku.ca

Abstract
Many flagship smartphone cameras now use a dedicated
neural image signal processor (ISP) to render noisy raw
sensor images to the final processed output. Training nightmode ISP networks relies on large-scale datasets of image
pairs with: (1) a noisy raw image captured with a short
exposure and a high ISO gain; and (2) a ground truth lownoise raw image captured with a long exposure and low ISO
that has been rendered through the ISP. Capturing such image pairs is tedious and time-consuming, requiring careful
setup to ensure alignment between the image pairs. In addition, ground truth images are often prone to motion blur
due to the long exposure. To address this problem, we propose a method that synthesizes nighttime images from daytime images. Daytime images are easy to capture, exhibit
low-noise (even on smartphone cameras) and rarely suffer
from motion blur. We outline a processing framework to
convert daytime raw images to have the appearance of realistic nighttime raw images with different levels of noise.
Our procedure allows us to easily produce aligned noisy
and clean nighttime image pairs. We show the effectiveness of our synthesis framework by training neural ISPs for
nightmode rendering. Furthermore, we demonstrate that
using our synthetic nighttime images together with small
amounts of real data (e.g., 5% to 10%) yields performance
almost on par with training exclusively on real nighttime
images. Our dataset and code are available at https:
//github.com/SamsungLabs/day-to-night.

1. Introduction
Capturing images at night and in low-light environments
is challenging due to the low photon count hitting the camera sensor. Because of the weak signal, the image must be
gained (i.e., high ISO), which further amplifies the sensor
noise. This is particularly troublesome for smartphone cameras, where the sensor’s small form factor limits the amount
* Work done while an intern at the Samsung AI Center – Toronto.

Real daytime image

High-quality input

Real nighttime image
Noisy input

Real nighttime image
Clean ground truth

Synthesizing a nighttime image from an input daytime image

Dimmed day image (baseline)

CycleGAN day-to-night

Our day-to-night synthesis

Outputs of a neural nightmode ISP trained on synthetic data

38.19 dB

36.64 dB

39.63 dB

Figure 1. Top row: A high-quality daytime image and a
noisy/clean nighttime image pair. While high-quality day images
are easy to capture, paired nighttime data, needed for training
nightmode neural ISPs, is challenging to acquire. We propose a
day-to-night image synthesis framework that converts the daytime
images to appear as noisy/clean paired nighttime images suitable
for training DNNs. Middle row: Different day-to-night image synthesis methods. Bottom row: A neural nightmode ISP trained by
our synthetic night images produces more accurate results compared to models trained on dimmed day images, or night images
synthesized by CycleGAN [37]. Inset shows PSNR in dB.

of light per pixel photosite, resulting in significant noise levels in low-light and night environments. When noisy sensor
images are processed by the camera’s image signal processor (ISP), the noise is often amplified, resulting in noisy
and aesthetically unappealing final standard RGB (sRGB)
output images. One solution is to capture the scene using a long exposure (e.g., several seconds), but this often
is not viable as it requires the camera to be placed on a tripod to avoid camera shake and the scene needs to remain
static to avoid motion blur. Recent advancements in deep

10769

