Causal Transportability for Visual Recognition
Hao Wang2
Chengzhi Mao1 * Kevin Xia1 * James Wang1
Junfeng Yang1
Elias Bareinboim1 Carl Vondrick1
1
Columbia University 2 Rutgers University
{mcz,kevinmxia,jlw2247,junfeng,eb,vondrick}@cs.columbia.edu, hoguewang@gmail.com

Abstract
Visual representations underlie object recognition tasks,
but they often contain both robust and non-robust features.
Our main observation is that image classifiers may perform
poorly on out-of-distribution samples because spurious correlations between non-robust features and labels can be
changed in a new environment. By analyzing procedures for
out-of-distribution generalization with a causal graph, we
show that standard classifiers fail because the association
between images and labels is not transportable across settings. However, we then show that the causal effect, which
severs all sources of confounding, remains invariant across
domains. This motivates us to develop an algorithm to estimate the causal effect for image classification, which is
transportable (i.e., invariant) across source and target environments. Without observing additional variables, we show
that we can derive an estimand for the causal effect under
empirical assumptions using representations in deep models as proxies. Theoretical analysis, empirical results, and
visualizations show that our approach captures causal invariances and improves overall generalization.

1. Introduction
Visual representations underlie most object recognition
systems today [17,18,31,46]. By learning from large image
datasets, convolutional networks have been able to create
excellent visual representations that improve many downstream image classification tasks [17,18,33]. However, central to this framework is the need to generalize to new visual
distributions at inference time [2, 3, 6, 12, 22, 26, 44, 47, 61].
The most popular technique to use representations is to
fine-tune the backbone model or fit a linear model on the target classification task [31]. Although this approach is effective on in-distribution benchmarks, the resulting classifier
also inherits the biases from the target dataset. Given the
nature of how data is collected, essentially every realistic
* Equal Contribution.

image dataset will have spurious features, which will impact
the generalization of computer vision systems. Specifically,
the learned representation will encode features that correspond to spurious correlations found in the training data.
In this paper, we investigate visual representations for
object recognition through the lenses of causality [7,42,43].
Specifically, we will revisit the out-of-distribution image
classification task through causal-transportability language
[9, 11, 19], which will allow us to formally model both confounding and structural invariances shared across disparate
environments. In our context, we will show how different
environments select a distinct set of robust and non-robust
features in constructing the input dataset. The training environment may tend to select specific nuisances with the
given category, creating spurious correlations between the
nuisances and the predicted class. In fact, standard classifiers will tend to use those spurious correlations, which
analytically explains why they result in poor generalization
performance to novel target distributions [25, 49, 55].
First, we will show that the association between image
and label is not in generalizable (in causal language, transportable) across domains. We then note that the causal effect from the input to the output, which severs any spurious correlations, is invariant when the environment changes
with respect to the features’ distributions. This motivates
us to pursue to an image classification strategy that will
leverage causal effects, instead of merely the association,
and will act as an anchor, providing stability across changing conditions and allowing extrapolation to more likely
succeed. Getting the causal effect for natural images is
challenging because there are innumerable unobserved confounding factors within realistic data. Under some relatively mild assumptions, we will be able to extract the robust
features from observational data through both causal and
deep representations [8, 14, 20, 34–36, 48], and then use the
representations as proxies for identifying the causal effect
without requiring observations of the confounding factors.
For both supervised and self-supervised representations,
our experimental results show that incorporating the causal
structure improves performance when generalizing to new

7521

