BACON: Band-limited Coordinate Networks
for Multiscale Scene Representation
David B. Lindell

Dave Van Veen
Jeong Joon Park
Stanford University

Gordon Wetzstein

http://computationalimaging.org/publications/bacon

Abstract
Coordinate-based networks have emerged as a powerful
tool for 3D representation and scene reconstruction. These
networks are trained to map continuous input coordinates
to the value of a signal at each point. Still, current architectures are black boxes: their spectral characteristics
cannot be easily analyzed, and their behavior at unsupervised points is difficult to predict. Moreover, these networks
are typically trained to represent a signal at a single scale,
so naive downsampling or upsampling results in artifacts.
We introduce band-limited coordinate networks (BACON),
a network architecture with an analytical Fourier spectrum.
BACON has constrained behavior at unsupervised points,
can be designed based on the spectral characteristics of the
represented signal, and can represent signals at multiple
scales without per-scale supervision. We demonstrate BA CON for multiscale neural representation of images, radiance fields, and 3D scenes using signed distance functions
and show that it outperforms conventional single-scale coordinate networks in terms of interpretability and quality.

1. Introduction
Coordinate networks are an emerging class of neural networks that can be used to represent or optimize a broad format of signals including images, video, 3D models, audio
waveforms, and more [41, 44, 52, 64, 66]. As opposed to
storing discrete samples of signals in conventional arrayor grid-based formats, neural representations approximate
signals using a continuous function that is embedded in the
learned weights of a fully-connected neural network. Given
an input coordinate, these networks are trained to output
the value of a signal at that point. Since even complex or
high-dimensional signals can be flexibly optimized using a
coordinate network, they have become popular for applications including view synthesis [44], image processing [60],
3D reconstruction [52], and neural rendering [70].
Yet, current coordinate networks are black box models
that are designed to represent signals at a single scale. As a

a

Increasing Spectral Bandwidth

x
b

c

F

F
Figure 1.
Overview of band-limited coordinate networks
(BACON). (a) The proposed architecture produces intermediate
outputs with an analytical spectral bandwidth that can be specified
at initialization. When supervised on a high-resolution signal, the
network learns a multi-resolution decomposition of the output, as
shown for fitting 3D shapes via a signed distance function (b) and
radiance fields (c). The network is characterized entirely by its
Fourier spectrum (see insets) so its behavior is constrained, even
at unsupervised locations.

result, the behavior of the network at unsupervised coordinates is difficult to predict, with complex dependencies on
hyperparameters such as hidden layer size, network depth,
or input coordinate encoding. The black box nature of the
architecture similarly inhibits multiscale signal representation, since we cannot readily filter or anti-alias these models, and the frequency spectrum of a coordinate network is

16252

