Exploring Effective Data for Surrogate Training Towards Black-box Attack
Xuxiang Sun Gong Cheng∗ Hongda Li Lei Pei Junwei Han
School of Automation, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
{xuxiangsun,hongda,peilei}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract

{gcheng,jhan}@nwpu.edu.cn

ℜ

ℋ

Without access to the training data where a black-box
victim model is deployed, training a surrogate model for
black-box adversarial attack is still a struggle. In terms of
data, we mainly identify three key measures for effective surrogate training in this paper. First, we show that leveraging
the loss introduced in this paper to enlarge the inter-class
similarity makes more sense than enlarging the inter-class
diversity like existing methods. Next, unlike the approaches
that expand the intra-class diversity in an implicit modelagnostic fashion, we propose a loss function speciﬁc to the
surrogate model for our generator to enhance the intraclass diversity. Finally, in accordance with the in-depth observations for the methods based on proxy data, we argue
that leveraging the proxy data is still an effective way for
surrogate training. To this end, we propose a triple-player
framework by introducing a discriminator into the traditional data-free framework. In this way, our method can be
competitive when there are few semantic overlaps between
the scarce proxy data (with the size between 1k and 5k) and
the training data. We evaluate our method on a range of victim models and datasets. The extensive results witness the
effectiveness of our method. Our source code is available at
https://github.com/xuxiangsun/ST-Data.

1. Introduction
Over the last decades, we have witnessed the blowout
success of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) in computer vision tasks. Yet they also show pervasive brittleness when
they are exposed to adversarial examples [14, 43]. This
leaves great safety hazards for the practical deployment of
DNNs. Hence, more threatening adversarial examples had
been crafted to push for further research [3, 14, 23, 26,
31]. Most of them assume that the prior information of a
victim model (denoted by V) can be accessed, e.g., its internal architecture or training data. Albeit this lenient attack scenario (i.e., the white-box setting) can help us to explore the robustness of DNNs, their performance will get
∗ Corresponding author.

15355

ℜ
(a) Samples with insufﬁcient
imitation ability

ℋ
(b) Samples with sufﬁcient
imitation ability

Figure 1. Illustration of the location relationship in feature
space between (a) Samples with insufﬁcient imitation ability,
and (b) Samples with sufﬁcient imitation ability. Here, H denotes the decision boundary of a model,  represents the imitation
margin of the synthesized samples.

hurt drastically no prior knowledge (i.e., the black-box setting) can be accessed. In this case, how to attack DNN has
stirred great interest in scholars.
Under the black-box setting, only the input-output feedback of the victim model V can be accessed. According
to the output, the solutions to black-box attack can either
be decision-based (only the ﬁnal label can be accessed)
or score-based (the output logits can be obtained). Among
them, a feasible way is to design effective searching algorithms [1, 2, 4–6, 9, 15, 27, 32, 36, 37]. However, with a low
query budget, their efﬁciency may be limited exceedingly.
While another intuitive idea is training a local surrogate
model (denoted by S) to imitate the remote victim model V,
and then craft adversarial examples on the trained model S
via existing white-box attacks. However, without the training data of model V, training the model S is still strenuous.
Recent advances [46, 58] pointed out that leveraging
the synthesized data is more effective than the real proxy
data [33, 34]. Speciﬁcally, [46] mentioned that this may be
attribute to the poor diversity of the proxy data with limited
size. In a way, it encounters the underﬁtting problem. From
this perspective of view, the synthesized data can be served
as the proxy data with inﬁnite size and relatively large diversity. In this case, an important question is: what kind of
synthesized data are effective to train the model S?
To deal with this question, the most advanced meth-

