SphereSR: 360◦ Image Super-Resolution with Arbitrary Projection via
Continuous Spherical Image Representation
Youngho Yoon, Inchul Chung, Lin Wang*, and Kuk-Jin Yoon
Visual Intelligence Lab., KAIST, Korea
{dudgh1732,inchul1221,wanglin,kjyoon}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
The 360◦ imaging has recently gained much attention;
however, its angular resolution is relatively lower than that
of a narrow field-of-view (FOV) perspective image as it is
captured using a fisheye lens with the same sensor size.
Therefore, it is beneficial to super-resolve a 360◦ image.
Several attempts have been made, but mostly considered
equirectangular projection (ERP) as one of the ways for
360◦ image representation despite the latitude-dependent
distortions. In that case, as the output high-resolution
(HR) image is always in the same ERP format as the lowresolution (LR) input, additional information loss may occur when transforming the HR image to other projection
types. In this paper, we propose SphereSR, a novel framework to generate a continuous spherical image representation from an LR 360◦ image, with the goal of predicting
the RGB values at given spherical coordinates for superresolution with an arbitrary 360◦ image projection. Specifically, first we propose a feature extraction module that represents the spherical data based on an icosahedron and
that efficiently extracts features on the spherical surface.
We then propose a spherical local implicit image function (SLIIF) to predict RGB values at the spherical coordinates. As such, SphereSR flexibly reconstructs an HR image
given an arbitrary projection type. Experiments on various
benchmark datasets show that the proposed method significantly surpasses existing methods in terms of performance.

1. Introduction
The 360◦ imaging has recently gained much attention
in many fields, including the AR/VR field. In general,
raw 360◦ images are transformed into 2D planar representations while preserving the omnidirectional information,
e.g., equirectangular projection (ERP) and cube map projection (CP) to ensure compatibility with imaging pipelines.
Omnidirectional images (ODIs)1 are sometimes projected
* Lin Wang is currently with HKUST.
1 Throughout the paper, we use omnidirectional images and 360◦ im-

ages interchangeably.

Figure 1. Learning continuous spherical image representation.
SphereSR leverages SLIIF to predict RGB values at given spherical coordinates for SR with arbitrary image projection.

back onto a sphere or transformed with different types of
projection and rendered for display in certain applications.
However, the angular resolution of a 360◦ image tends
to be lower than that of a narrow field-of-view (FOV) perspective image, as it is captured using a fisheye lens with
an identical sensor size. Moreover, the 360◦ image quality
can be degraded during a transformation between different
image projection types. Therefore, it is imperative to superresolve the low-resolution (LR) 360◦ image by considering
various projections to provide high-level visual quality under diverse conditions. Early studies attempted to reconstruct high-resolution (HR) ODIs by interpolating the missing data between the LR image pixels [3, 5, 25].
Recently, deep learning (DL) has brought a significant
performance boost to 2D single image super-resolution
(SISR) [17, 37, 44]. These methods mostly explore superresolving 2D LR image using high-capacity convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) via, e.g., residual connections [21],
and learning algorithms including generative adversarial
networks (GANs) [18, 40, 41]. However, directly using
these methods for 360◦ images represented in 2D planar
representations is less applicable as the pixel density and
texture complexity vary across different positions in 2D planar representations of 360◦ images, as pointed in [10].

5677

