Reflash Dropout in Image Super-Resolution
Xiangtao Kong1,2,4∗ Xina Liu1,2 * Jinjin Gu3,1,4 Yu Qiao1,4 Chao Dong1,4 †
1
ShenZhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, SIAT-SenseTime Joint Lab,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
The University of Sydney 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai, China
{xt.kong, xn.liu, yu.qiao, chao.dong}@siat.ac.cn, jinjin.gu@sydney.edu.au

Dropout is designed to relieve the overfitting problem in
high-level vision tasks but is rarely applied in low-level vision tasks, like image super-resolution (SR). As a classic
regression problem, SR exhibits a different behaviour as
high-level tasks and is sensitive to the dropout operation.
However, in this paper, we show that appropriate usage of
dropout benefits SR networks and improves the generalization ability. Specifically, dropout is better embedded at the
end of the network and is significantly helpful for the multidegradation settings. This discovery breaks our common
sense and inspires us to explore its working mechanism. We
further use two analysis tools – one is from a recent network
interpretation work, and the other is specially designed for
this task. The analysis results provide side proofs to our
experimental findings and show us a new perspective to understand SR networks.

1. Introduction
Image super-resolution (SR) is a classic low-level vision
task aiming at restoring a high-resolution image from a lowresolution input. Benefiting from the powerful convolutional neural networks (CNNs), deep SR networks [6–8, 23,
25,27,29,57–59] can easily fit the training data and achieve
impressive results in a synthetic environment. To further
extend their success to real-world images, researchers begin to design blind SR methods [30], which can deal with
unknown downsampling kernels or degradations. Recent
advances have made significant progress by enriching the
data diversity [9, 49, 54, 55] and enlarging the model capacity [33, 48], but none of them has tried to improve the training strategy. The overfitting problem will become prominent when the network scale increases significantly, result* Equal contributions
† Corresponding author (e-mail: chao.dong@siat.ac.cn)

PSNR

Abstract

26.5
26.0
25.5
25.0
24.5
24.0
23.5
23.0
22.5
clean

blur

noise

jpeg

Figure 1. Dropout can significantly improve the performance of
the models under the multi-degradation setting. It can even help
SRResNet outperform RRDB, while the latter has ten times more
parameters. There are the PSNR (dB) results of ×4 SR models
on Set5 with different degradations. For example, clean means
input LR images without any degradations, noise means input LR
images with noise.

ing in a weak generalization ability. Then what kind of
training strategy is suitable for the blind SR task? A simple
yet surprising answer comes to our mind. It is dropout [20],
which is originally designed to avoid overfitting and has
been proved effective in high-level vision tasks. In this
work, we will dive into the usage of dropout and reflash
it in super-resolution.
Dropout seems to be in conflict with SR in nature.
Specifically, the mechanism of dropout is to disable some
units and produce a number of sub-networks randomly.
Each sub-network is able to give an acceptable result. However, SR is a standard regression problem, where network
features and channels all have contributions to the final output. If we randomly discard some features or pixels, the
output performance will drop severely. That is why we cannot see the application of dropout in SR, as well as other
low-level vision tasks. From another perspective, overfitting is not a severe problem in conventional SR tasks; thus,
SR does not need dropout as well. However, this situation
changes nowadays. First, overfitting has become a dominant problem for blind SR [30]. Simply increasing the data
and network scale cannot continuously improve the gener-

6002

