Learning Structured Gaussians to Approximate Deep Ensembles
Ivor J.A. Simpson
University of Sussex, UK

Sara Vicente
Niantic, UK

Neill D.F. Campbell
University of Bath, UK

i.simpson@sussex.ac.uk

svicente@nianticlabs.com

n.campbell@bath.ac.uk

Abstract

Ensemble
CNN

This paper proposes using a sparse-structured multivariate Gaussian to provide a closed-form approximator for the
output of probabilistic ensemble models used for dense image prediction tasks. This is achieved through a convolutional neural network that predicts the mean and covariance of the distribution, where the inverse covariance is
parameterised by a sparsely structured Cholesky matrix.
Similarly to distillation approaches, our single network is
trained to maximise the probability of samples from pretrained probabilistic models, in this work we use a fixed ensemble of networks. Once trained, our compact representation can be used to efficiently draw spatially correlated
samples from the approximated output distribution. Importantly, this approach captures the uncertainty and structured correlations in the predictions explicitly in a formal
distribution, rather than implicitly through sampling alone.
This allows direct introspection of the model, enabling visualisation of the learned structure. Moreover, this formulation provides two further benefits: estimation of a sample
probability, and the introduction of arbitrary spatial conditioning at test time. We demonstrate the merits of our approach on monocular depth estimation and show that the
advantages of our approach are obtained with comparable
quantitative performance.

1. Introduction
Single prediction neural networks are ubiquitous in computer vision and have demonstrated extensive capability for
a variety of tasks. However, researchers are increasingly
interested in capturing the uncertainty in estimation tasks
to combat over-confidence and ambiguity; such concerns
are important when building robust systems that connect
computer vision approaches to down-stream applications.
The deployment of neural networks for safety-critical tasks,
such as autonomous driving, requires an accurate measure
of uncertainty. While Bayesian Neural Networks [17] are
often a model of choice for uncertainty estimation, ensembles [14] have been proposed as a simple alternative. Em-

Sample 1

CNN
Sample 2
Input image

...
CNN
Sample N

Ours
Mean

SUPN
Input image
Covariance

Unlimited structured
samples

Model
introspection

Conditioning

Figure 1. Our method is trained to approximate the output of
an ensemble, by using structured uncertainty prediction networks
(SUPN) to predict a mean and covariance for a multivariate Gaussian distribution. This explicit distribution enables a variety of
tasks including: sampling, conditioning and model introspection.

pirically, ensembles have been shown to produce good measures of uncertainty for vision tasks [15,19] and allow practitioners to exploit associated application-specific inductive
biases, for example established architectures, directly.
Limitations of implicit approaches Despite their popularity, ensembles have a number of drawbacks that we
group into three themes. Firstly, they come at an increased
cost compared with deterministic networks. At training
time, they require training multiple deep models, while
at test time, multiple inference passes are required. MCdropout [5] saves computation at training time, but it still
requires multiple passes at inference time. Secondly, these
approaches only provide an implicit distribution over probable model outputs. Any uncertainty captured is only accessible through ancestral sampling. Accordingly, one cannot

366

