Text2Mesh: Text-Driven Neural Stylization for Meshes
Oscar Michel1 * Roi Bar-On1,2 * Richard Liu1 * Sagie Benaim2
1

Iron Man

University of Chicago

Brick Lamp

2

Rana Hanocka1

Tel Aviv University

Colorful Crochet Candle

Astronaut Horse

Figure 1. Text2Mesh produces color and geometric details over a variety of source meshes, driven by a target text prompt. Our stylization
results coherently blend unique and ostensibly unrelated combinations of text, capturing both global semantics and part-aware attributes.
Abstract
In this work, we develop intuitive controls for editing the style of 3D objects. Our framework, Text2Mesh,
stylizes a 3D mesh by predicting color and local geometric details which conform to a target text prompt.
We consider a disentangled representation of a 3D object using a fixed mesh input (content) coupled with a
learned neural network, which we term a neural style
field network (NSF). In order to modify style, we obtain a similarity score between a text prompt (describing style) and a stylized mesh by harnessing the representational power of CLIP. Text2Mesh requires neither a pre-trained generative model nor a specialized
3D mesh dataset. It can handle low-quality meshes
(non-manifold, boundaries, etc.) with arbitrary genus,
and does not require UV parameterization. We demonstrate the ability of our technique to synthesize a myriad of styles over a wide variety of 3D meshes. Our
code and results are available in our project webpage:
https://threedle.github.io/text2mesh/.

1. Introduction
Editing visual data to conform to a desired style, while
preserving the underlying content, is a longstanding objective in computer graphics and vision [14,21,23,24,30]. Key
challenges include proper formulation of content, style, and
the constituents for representing and modifying them.
To edit the style of a 3D object, we adapt a formulation of
geometric content and stylistic appearance commonly used
in computer graphics pipelines [2]. We consider content as
the global structure prescribed by a 3D mesh, which defines

the overall shape surface and topology. We consider style as
the object’s particular appearance or affect, as determined
by its color and fine-grained (local) geometric details. We
propose expressing the desired style through natural language (a text prompt), similar to how a commissioned artist
is provided a verbal or textual description of the desired
work. This is facilitated by recent developments in joint
embeddings of text and images with CLIP [44]. A natural
cue for modifying the appearance of 3D shapes is through
2D projections, as they correspond with how humans and
machines perceive 3D geometry. We use a neural network
to synthesize color and local geometric details over the 3D
input shape, which we refer to as a neural style field (NSF).
The weights of the NSF network are optimized such that the
resulting 3D stylized mesh adheres to the style described
by text. In particular, our neural optimization is guided by
multiple 2D (CLIP-embedded) views of the stylized mesh
matching our target text. Results of our technique, called
Text2Mesh, are shown in Fig. 1. Our method produces different colors and local deformations for the same 3D mesh
content to match the specified text. Moreover, Text2Mesh
produces structured textures that are aligned with salient
features (e.g. bricks in Fig. 2), without needing to estimate sharp 3D curves or a mesh parameterization [33, 52].
Our method also demonstrates global understanding; e.g.
in Fig. 3 human body parts are stylized in accordance with
their semantic role. We use the weights of the NSF network to encode a stylization (e.g. color and displacements)
over the explicit mesh surface. Meshes faithfully portray 3D
shapes and can accurately represent sharp, extrinsic features

13492

