DPGEN: Differentially Private Generative Energy-Guided Network
for Natural Image Synthesis

1

Jia-Wei Chen1,2 Chia-Mu Yu3 Ching-Chia Kao1,2 Tzai-Wei Pang1 Chun-Shien Lu1,2
IIS, Academia Sinica 2 CITI, Academia Sinica 3 National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University
sk413025@gmail.com

chiamuyu@gmail.com

{cck123, cegg12345678}@iis.sinica.edu.tw

Abstract
Despite an increased demand for valuable data, the privacy concerns associated with sensitive datasets present a
barrier to data sharing. One may use differentially private
generative models to generate synthetic data. Unfortunately,
generators are typically restricted to generating images of
low-resolutions due to the limitation of noisy gradients. Here,
we propose DPGEN, a network model designed to synthesize high-resolution natural images while satisfying differential privacy. In particular, we propose an energy-guided
network trained on sanitized data to indicate the direction of
the true data distribution via Langevin Markov chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) sampling method. In contrast to the state-ofthe-art methods that can process only low-resolution images
(e.g., MNIST and Fashion-MNIST), DPGEN can generate
differentially private synthetic images with resolutions up to
128 × 128 with superior visual quality and data utility. Our
code is available at https://github.com/chiamuyu/DPGEN

1. Introduction
Image synthesis (e.g., through generative adversarial networks (GANs) [16]) with differential privacy (DP) [12] can
be a solution to enable data release without compromising privacy. For example, differentially private GANs (DPGANs) [6, 47] are generally trained using differentially private stochastic gradient descent (DPSGD) [1] that perturbs
the gradients in each iteration and provides an alternative to
direct data release. In particular, generators from DPGANs
can be made public; users can then generate synthetic data
for their downstream tasks. Nevertheless, GANs have been
known to be considerably difficult to train [18, 37, 44]. The
situation becomes even worse when noise is introduced in
DPSGD. Hence, generators are typically restricted to generating images of resolutions as low as 32 × 32, and are
unsuitable for practical applications of image synthesis.
Difficulty in Generating High-Resolution Images
from DPGAN. The gradient instability caused by interactive training from the minimax optimization of GANs
is a major concern in the synthesis of high-resolution im-

lcs@iis.sinica.edu.tw

ages [14, 24, 25, 26]. Nonetheless, despite various difficulties in the training of GANs, currently GANs can generate
photo-realistic image of resolutions up to 1024×1024. Thus,
a straightforward design of DPGANs would be applying DP
to the state-of-the-art (SOTA) GANs. However, because of
the increased batch size and model complexity, such a naïve
combination and therefore the use of DPSGD lead to four serious problems. 1) Training Inefficiency: Although larger
batch sizes improve training stability, they also lead to a significant degradation in training efficiency (10× slower) [7]
due to the per-sample gradient modification, which requires
backpropagation be performed on each example in a training
batch. 2) Difficulty in Tuning Hyperparameters: Due to
the complexity of neural network (NN) architectures (e.g.,
skip connection and attention layers), accurate estimation of
global sensitivity is infeasible. This implies the occurrence
of either information loss or an excessive noise scale during
gradient clipping in DPSGD. 3) Large Noise Magnitude:
The increased number of dimensions required by layers in
NNs to accommodate high-resolution data leads to a catastrophic amount of noise. 4) The Damage of Visual Quality
from Direction of Noisy Gradient: Despite the perceptual
loss used in the backpropagation, the noisy gradient affected
by the DP noise may dramatically deviate from the direction supposed to move forward, resulting in a synthesis of
perceptually awful images.
In summary, when DPSGD is applied to train GANs,
the techniques used by GANs for high-resolution image
synthesis instead amplify the drawbacks of DPSGD.
Key Insights. The synthesis of perceptually realistic
images in a DP manner is very challenging. Notably, our
result is in possession of the following novelty.
From the perspective of gradient updates in the parameter space, DP noise in DPSGD completely destroys the
gradients; this severely degrades the training stability. To
tackle the aforementioned problems 1)∼4) simultaneously,
we abandon DPSGD and take a fundamentally different approach. We instead use a sampling method on the training
data. More specifically, we discretize the movement directions (in terms of MCMC described later) and randomize the

8387

