PatchNet: A Simple Face Anti-Spoofing Framework
via Fine-Grained Patch Recognition
Chien-Yi Wang1
1

Yu-Ding Lu2
Shang-Ta Yang1
Shang-Hong Lai1
2
Microsoft AI R&D Center, Taiwan
HTC

{chiwa, shanya, shlai}@microsoft.com

jonlu.citi@gmail.com

Abstract
Face anti-spoofing (FAS) plays a critical role in securing
face recognition systems from different presentation attacks.
Previous works leverage auxiliary pixel-level supervision
and domain generalization approaches to address unseen
spoof types. However, the local characteristics of image
captures, i.e., capturing devices and presenting materials,
are ignored in existing works and we argue that such information is required for networks to discriminate between live
and spoof images. In this work, we propose PatchNet which
reformulates face anti-spoofing as a fine-grained patch-type
recognition problem. To be specific, our framework recognizes the combination of capturing devices and presenting
materials based on the patches cropped from non-distorted
face images. This reformulation can largely improve the
data variation and enforce the network to learn discriminative feature from local capture patterns. In addition,
to further improve the generalization ability of the spoof
feature, we propose the novel Asymmetric Margin-based
Classification Loss and Self-supervised Similarity Loss to
regularize the patch embedding space. Our experimental results verify our assumption and show that the model
is capable of recognizing unseen spoof types robustly by
only looking at local regions. Moreover, the fine-grained
and patch-level reformulation of FAS outperforms the existing approaches on intra-dataset, cross-dataset, and domain generalization benchmarks. Furthermore, our PatchNet framework can enable practical applications like FewShot Reference-based FAS and facilitate future exploration
of spoof-related intrinsic cues.

1. Introduction
Face anti-spoofing (FAS) is a crucial technique to prevent face recognition systems from security attacks. With
the advance of deep neural network, several learning-based
approaches were proposed to discriminate live faces from
physical presentation attacks.

Figure 1. The face recognition model learns a face embedding
space to discriminate between identities. Our fine-grained patchtype recognition model learns a patch embedding space to discriminate between patches with different capture characteristics.

Previous face anti-spoofing methods are highly limited
by the scale and variation of the datasets. Commonly
used datasets [1, 5, 18, 27, 34] contain less than 100 identities during training, and the spoof images are captured
under limited variation. Based on our observation, training on such datasets with a binary classification model is
prone to overfit to the biases introduced by the data collection, and the learned features are vulnerable in the unseen
testing scenarios. Therefore, previous face anti-spoofing
works [14, 15, 18, 21, 29, 30] leverage auxiliary pixel-wise
supervision (e.g., the facial depth map and reflection map)
as a strong prior knowledge to achieve better generalization
ability under testing scenarios with unseen illumination or
spoof types. The other FAS works [19,33] propose to adopt
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) to disentangle the
feature maps of live faces and spoof images by reconstructing new live and spoof facial images. Despite the effectiveness of these spoof-detecting techniques, it is still remained
as an open question to describe the intrinsic cues learned
from networks. Yu et al. [29] rephrase FAS as a structural
material recognition problem, which assumes that the discrimination of the structural materials between human facial skin and physical spoofing carriers is the essence for
FAS tasks. Following the similar motivation, we believe
that the capability of recognizing and comparing different

20281

