Learning to Listen: Modeling Non-Deterministic Dyadic Facial Motion
Evonne Ng1
1

Hanbyul Joo2
Liwen Hu3
Hao Li3
Angjoo Kanazawa1
Shiry Ginosar1

UC Berkeley

2

Seoul National University

Input: Speaker

3

Trevor Darrell1

Pinscreen

Output: Listener

Learning
to Listen

Speaker Motion & Audio

Generated Samples

Visualization

Figure 1. Synthesizing listeners. Given a speaker video, we extract the audio and motion of the speaker. From these multimodal speaker
inputs, our method synthesizes multiple realistic listener 3D motion sequences (top and bottom) in an autoregessive fashion. The output of
our approach can be optionally rendered as photorealistic video.

Abstract

1. Introduction
“Thus the body of the speaker dances in time with his
speech. Further, the body of the listener dances in
rhythm with that of the speaker!”
— C ONDON AND O GSTON , 1966

We present a framework for modeling interactional communication in dyadic conversations: given multimodal inputs
of a speaker, we autoregressively output multiple possibilities of corresponding listener motion. We combine the motion and speech audio of the speaker using a motion-audio
cross attention transformer. Furthermore, we enable nondeterministic prediction by learning a discrete latent representation of realistic listener motion with a novel motionencoding VQ-VAE. Our method organically captures the multimodal and non-deterministic nature of nonverbal dyadic
interactions. Moreover, it produces realistic 3D listener facial motion synchronous with the speaker (see video). We
demonstrate that our method outperforms baselines qualitatively and quantitatively via a rich suite of experiments.
To facilitate this line of research, we introduce a novel and
large in-the-wild dataset of dyadic conversations. Code, data,
and videos available at https://evonneng.github.io/
learning2listen/.

When we speak, it is rarely in a void — rather, there is
often a listener at the other end of the conversation. As a
speaker, we are acutely aware of what the listener is doing.
A slight off-sync motion or a diverted look may throw us
off, suggesting the listener is bored or otherwise preoccupied, leaving us feeling misunderstood [36]. Indeed, successful conversations rely on a coordinated dance between the
speaker and the listener in which the two signal to each other
that they are communicating with one another and not with
anyone else [36]. This chameleon effect [12] of nonverbal
mimicry during conversation results in smoother interactions,
increases the liking between interaction partners, establishes
rapport [38], and may even predict the long term outcome of
psychotherapy [49]. Interestingly, nonverbal feedback from
a listener, such as head movement is more central to keeping a conversation flowing than content-based replies [11].
In this work, we propose a computational framework that
can similarly provide nonverbal feedback in response to a
speaker in a contextual and timely manner. Such an ability

20395

