DINE: Domain Adaptation from Single and Multiple Black-box Predictors
Jian Liang 1
Dapeng Hu 2
1
CRIPAC & NLPR, CASIA 2 NUS
liangjian92@gmail.com

Jiashi Feng 3
Ran He 1,4,5
3
ByteDance 4 UCAS 5 CEBSIT, CAS

dapeng.hu@u.nus.edu

jshfeng@gmail.com

rhe@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Model

To ease the burden of labeling, unsupervised domain
adaptation (UDA) aims to transfer knowledge in previous
and related labeled datasets (sources) to a new unlabeled
dataset (target). Despite impressive progress, prior methods always need to access the raw source data and develop
data-dependent alignment approaches to recognize the target samples in a transductive learning manner, which may
raise privacy concerns from source individuals. Several recent studies resort to an alternative solution by exploiting
the well-trained white-box model from the source domain,
yet, it may still leak the raw data via generative adversarial learning. This paper studies a practical and interesting
setting for UDA, where only black-box source models (i.e.,
only network predictions are available) are provided during adaptation in the target domain. To solve this problem,
we propose a new two-step knowledge adaptation framework called DIstill and fine-tuNE (DINE). Taking into consideration the target data structure, DINE first distills the
knowledge from the source predictor to a customized target
model, then fine-tunes the distilled model to further fit the
target domain. Besides, neural networks are not required
to be identical across domains in DINE, even allowing effective adaptation on a low-resource device. Empirical results on three UDA scenarios (i.e., single-source, multisource, and partial-set) confirm that DINE achieves highly
competitive performance compared to state-of-the-art datadependent approaches. Code is available at https://
github.com/tim-learn/DINE/.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks achieve remarkable progress with
massive labeled data, but it is expensive and not efficient to
collect enough labeled data for each new task. To reduce the
burden of labeling, considerable attention has been devoted
to the transfer learning field [55,89], especially for unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) [3, 10], where one or many
related but different labeled datasets are collected as source
domain(s) to help recognize unlabeled instances in the new

source data

Open API
query

...

Model
source data

Open API

parital
predictions
knowledge
adaptation

"ball"
target data

low-resource user

Figure 1. A challenging but interesting domain adaptation problem
setting. One or many source agents only provide their black-box
predictors (e.g., via the cloud API service) to the target user with
certain unlabeled data, where neither the raw source data nor the
details about the source models is accessible during adaptation.

dataset (called target domain). Recently, UDA methods
have been widely applied in a variety of computer vision
problems, e.g., image classification [18, 50, 73], semantic
segmentation [25, 72, 87], and object detection [8, 33, 61].
Existing UDA methods always need to access the raw
source data and resort to domain adversarial training [18,
73] or maximum mean discrepancy minimization [49,74] to
align source features with target features. However, in many
situations like personal medical records, the raw source data
may be missing or must not be shared due to the privacy policy. To tackle this issue, several recent studies [36, 39, 44]
attempt to utilize the trained model instead of the raw data
from the source domain as supervision and obtain surprisingly good adaptation results. Even so, these methods always require source models to be elegantly trained and provided to the target domain with all the details, which raises
two important concerns. First, through generation techniques like generative adversarial learning [21], it is still
possible to recover the raw source data, leaking the individual information. Second, the target domain employs the
same neural network as the source domain, which is not
desirable for low-resource target users. Thus, this paper
focuses on a realistic and challenging scenario for UDA,
where the source model is trained without bells and whistles

8003

