VRDFormer: End-to-End Video Visual Relation Detection with Transformers
Sipeng Zheng
Renmin University of China

Shizhe Chen
Inria

Qin Jin*
Renmin University of China

zhengsipeng@ruc.edu.cn

shizhe.chen@inria.fr

qjin@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
Video

Visual relation understanding plays an essential role for
holistic video understanding. Most previous works adopt
a multi-stage framework for video visual relation detection (VidVRD), which cannot capture long-term spatiotemporal contexts in different stages and also suffers from
inefficiency. In this paper, we propose a transformerbased framework called VRDFormer to unify these decoupling stages. Our model exploits a query-based approach to autoregressively generate relation instances. We
specifically design static queries and recurrent queries to
enable efficient object pair tracking with spatio-temporal
contexts. The model is jointly trained with object pair
detection and relation classification. Extensive experiments
on two benchmark datasets, ImageNet-VidVRD and VidOR,
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed VRDFormer,
which achieves the state-of-the-art performance on both
relation detection and relation tagging tasks. The code is
released at https://github.com/zhengsipeng/
VRDFormer_VRD.

1. Introduction
Video visual relation detection (VidVRD) [32] aims to
detect all relation instances in the video. Each instance
contains a subject, an object and their relationship, as well
as the spatial and temporal locations of the subject and the
object. This task has attracted more and more attention in
recent years, as it serves as a bridge to connect basic vision
tasks (e.g. object detection [5, 12, 54] and tracking [11, 47])
with more complicated video semantic understanding tasks
(e.g. captioning [43] and VideoQA [25]).
One typical approach for VidVRD [30, 32, 36] is to
decompose the task in a multi-stage pipeline. These works,
as illustrated in Figure 1, firstly employ off-the-shelf object
detectors [27, 54] to detect and track objects in a video, and
then, enumerate every two object tracklets and use temporal
sliding window to obtain tracklet pairs. Finally, they filter
* Qin Jin is the corresponding author.

Object Detection
& Tracking

Tracklet Pair
Generation
Relation
Classification

⋯
⋯

dog-move_front-child child-watch-dog
dog-inside-pool
dog-next_to-pool

Figure 1. Existing VidVRD methods adopt a multi-stage pipeline.
They suffer from limited spatio-temporal contexts, overly sampled
tracklet pairs, and independently optimized modules.

out invalid tracklet pairs, then predict relation types for
the remained ones using region-of-interests (RoI) features
cropped from pre-computed CNN feature maps [3, 27].
We consider that there are three major limitations in such
multi-stage framework. First, spatio-temporal contexts are
not well exploited in tracklet pair generation. In fact, spatiotemporal contexts not only can enhance the model’s ability
to localize objects, but also provide valuable information to
infer the presence or absence of a relation. For example, the
detection of the subject/object when occlusion occurs can
get help from the temporal context. The relation reasoning
can benefit from the spatial context. Although context
has been widely adopted for the final relation classification
step [39, 44], it has not been well explored in the detection
of relation instances in video. Therefore, object detection
and tracking might not be very accurate in these methods,
resulting in accumulated errors to the following stages.
Second, in previous works, each module is independently
trained. However, object detection, tracking and relation
classification are highly correlated and could promote each
other through joint learning. Last but not least, since
tracklet pairs are exhaustively generated, many of them
do not have meaningful relations, which not only harms

18836

