PoseTriplet: Co-evolving 3D Human Pose Estimation, Imitation, and
Hallucination under Self-supervision
Bingbing Li2 *
Michael Bi Mi3

Kehong Gong1,3 *
Jing Huang3
1

National University of Singapore

2

Jianfeng Zhang1 *
Jiashi Feng1

Nanyang Technological University

3

Tao Wang1 *
Xinchao Wang1†

Huawei International Pte Ltd

https://github.com/Garfield-kh/PoseTriplet.

Abstract
Existing self-supervised 3D human pose estimation
schemes have largely relied on weak supervisions like consistency loss to guide the learning, which, inevitably, leads
to inferior results in real-world scenarios with unseen
poses. In this paper, we propose a novel self-supervised
approach that allows us to explicitly generate 2D-3D pose
pairs for augmenting supervision, through a self-enhancing
dual-loop learning framework. This is made possible via introducing a reinforcement-learning-based imitator, which is
learned jointly with a pose estimator alongside a pose hallucinator; the three components form two loops during the
training process, complementing and strengthening one another. Specifically, the pose estimator transforms an input
2D pose sequence to a low-fidelity 3D output, which is then
enhanced by the imitator that enforces physical constraints.
The refined 3D poses are subsequently fed to the hallucinator for producing even more diverse data, which are, in turn,
strengthened by the imitator and further utilized to train the
pose estimator. Such a co-evolution scheme, in practice,
enables training a pose estimator on self-generated motion
data without relying on any given 3D data. Extensive experiments across various benchmarks demonstrate that our approach yields encouraging results significantly outperforming the state of the art and, in some cases, even on par with
results of fully-supervised methods. Notably, it achieves
89.1% 3D PCK on MPI-INF-3DHP under self-supervised
cross-dataset evaluation setup, improving upon the previous best self-supervised method [16, 26] by 8.6%.

1. Introduction
Video-based 3D human pose estimation aims to infer 3D
pose sequences from videos, and therefore plays a crucial
role in many applications such as action recognition [47,
* Equal contribution. Email: {gongkehong, zhangjianfeng,
taowang}@u.nus.edu, l.libingbing@gmail.com
† Corresponding author. Email: xinchao@nus.edu.sg

Figure 1. Overview of our PoseTriplet framework. The pose
estimator, imitator, hallucinator are trained jointly in a dual-loop
strategy. In the first loop, the estimator provides physically implausible motion information, which is then enhanced by the imitator via enforcing physical constraints to generate physically
plausible motion. In the second loop, the hallucinator generates
more diverse motion patterns given motion sequence from previous loop, and sends them to the imitator again for further refinement. This dual-loop paradigm facilitates tight co-evolution of the
three components and enables iterative self-improving training of
the estimator with the generated diverse and plausible motion data.

58], virtual try-on [31], and mixed reality [5, 20, 34]. Existing methods [22, 33, 37, 38, 48] mainly rely on the fullysupervised paradigms, in which the ground truth 3D data
are given as input. However, capturing 3D pose data is
cost-intensive and time-consuming, as it typically requires
a multi-view setup or a motion capturing system [17, 34],
making it infeasible under in-the-wild scenarios.
To this end, two categories of methods have been introduced to alleviate the 3D data availability issue. The first
category explores the semi-supervised settings, in which
only a small amount of the 3D annotations are given [30,36,
68]. The second category, on the other hand, assumes no 3D
data are available at all and only 2D poses are provided. Under this setup, state-of-the-art methods have mainly focused
on imposing weak supervision signals to guide the training,
such as aligning the projection of an inferred 3D pose with
a 2D pose [4, 16, 61]. Due to the lack of 3D data and hence
the missing of 2D-3D pairs, these methods are, by nature,
brittle to the challenging scenarios such as unseen poses inherent to the in-the-wild tasks.

11017

