MixFormer: Mixing Features across Windows and Dimensions
Qiang Chen1 *, Qiman Wu1∗ , Jian Wang1∗ , Qinghao Hu2†, Tao Hu1
Errui Ding1 , Jian Cheng2 , Jingdong Wang1
1
Baidu VIS
2
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{chenqiang13,wuqiman,wangjian33,hutao06,dingerrui,wangjingdong}@baidu.com
huqinghao2014@ia.ac.cn, jcheng@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
While local-window self-attention performs notably in
vision tasks, it suffers from limited receptive field and weak
modeling capability issues. This is mainly because it performs self-attention within non-overlapped windows and
shares weights on the channel dimension. We propose MixFormer to find a solution. First, we combine local-window
self-attention with depth-wise convolution in a parallel design, modeling cross-window connections to enlarge the receptive fields. Second, we propose bi-directional interactions across branches to provide complementary clues in
the channel and spatial dimensions. These two designs are
integrated to achieve efficient feature mixing among windows and dimensions. Our MixFormer provides competitive results on image classification with EfficientNet and
shows better results than RegNet and Swin Transformer.
Performance in downstream tasks outperforms its alternatives by significant margins with less computational costs
in 5 dense prediction tasks on MS COCO, ADE20k, and
LVIS. Code is available at https://github.com/
PaddlePaddle/PaddleClas.

1. Introduction
The success of Vision Transformer (ViT) [10, 36] in image classification [8] validates the potential to apply Transformer [38] to vision tasks. Challenges remain for downstream tasks, especially the inefficiency in high-resolution
vision tasks and the ineffectiveness in capturing local relations. One possible solution is to use local-window selfattention. It performs self-attention within non-overlapped
windows and shares weights on the channel dimension. Although this process improves efficiency, it poses the issues
of limited receptive field and weak modeling capability.
* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Input Features

Local-window
Self-attention

Channel
Interaction
Spatial
Interaction

Depth-wise
Convolution

Concat

FFN

Output Features

Figure 1. The Mixing Block. We combine local-window selfattention with depth-wise convolution in a parallel design. The
captured relations within and across windows in parallel branches
are concatenated and sent to the Feed-Forward Network (FFN)
for output features. In the figure, the blue arrows marked with
Channel Interaction and Spatial Interaction are the proposed bidirectional interactions, which provide complementary clues for
better representation learning in both branches. Other details in
the block, such as module design, normalization layers, and shortcuts, are omitted for a neat presentation.

A common approach to expand receptive field is to create cross-window connections. Windows are connected by
shifting [30], expanding [37, 49], or shuffling [22] operations. Convolution layers are also employed as they capture
natural local relations. Researches [22, 53] combine localwindow self-attention with depth-wise convolution base on
this and provide promising results. Still, the operations capture intra-window and cross-window relations in successive
steps, leaving these two types of relations less interweaved.
Besides, neglect of modeling weakness in these attempts
hinders further advances in feature representation learning.

5249

