BodyMap: Learning Full-Body Dense Correspondence Map
Anastasia Ianina^{1*} , Nikolaos Sarafianos3 , Yuanlu Xu3 , Ignacio Rocco2 , Tony Tung3
1
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, 2 Meta AI, 3 Meta Reality Labs Research, Sausalito
1
yanina@phystech.edu, 2,3 {nsarafianos, yuanluxu, irocco, tonytung}@fb.com

Abstract
Dense correspondence between humans carries powerful
semantic information that can be utilized to solve fundamental problems for full-body understanding such as in-thewild surface matching, tracking and reconstruction. In this
paper we present BodyMap, a new framework for obtaining high-definition full-body and continuous dense correspondence between in-the-wild images of clothed humans
and the surface of a 3D template model. The correspondences cover fine details such as hands and hair, while
capturing regions far from the body surface, such as loose
clothing. Prior methods for estimating such dense surface
correspondence i) cut a 3D body into parts which are unwrapped to a 2D UV space, producing discontinuities along
part seams, or ii) use a single surface for representing the
whole body, but none handled body details. Here, we introduce a novel network architecture with Vision Transformers
that learn fine-level features on a continuous body surface.
BodyMap outperforms prior work on various metrics and
datasets, including DensePose-COCO by a large margin.
Furthermore, we show various applications ranging from
multi-layer dense cloth correspondence, neural rendering
with novel-view synthesis and appearance swapping.

1. Introduction
Several fundamental problems related to human understanding in images can be addressed by labeling every
pixel covering the human body with semantic information.
This enables numerous applications including video analysis, image editing, texture generation and style transfer.
From a single RGB image of a human, the literature has
proposed methods to extract sparse information such as 2D
body keypoints (e.g., face, hands, body joints), or 2D segmentation masks (e.g., for full body, clothes, hair or skin),
and also 3D body pose and shape parameters defined by
a template body model [6, 8, 13, 33, 35, 44], while work
on dense surface correspondence has further enabled pixellevel understanding by establishing unique correspondences
*This work was conducted during an internship at Meta RLR.

Figure 1. We introduce BodyMap — a method that establishes
accurate dense correspondences between a 2D image and the surface of a 3D clothed human with high precision. Our approach
handles loose clothes, different hairstyles and various accessories,
like hats and bags, providing crisp silhouettes, and works well in
multi-person cases with occlusions.

between 2D pixels covering the visible regions of the human
body and 3D points on the surface of a body template.
In the seminal work DensePose [26], correspondences
are estimated between image pixels belonging to the human body and points in disjoint parts of a human body template located using UV coordinates, similar to local texture
mapping. The method is trained on the large in-the-wild
dataset DensePose-COCO and is robust to human pose variability, image resolution, diversity in clothing, and occlusions. However, it has some inherent limitations that impact methods that rely on it (e.g., for clothed-human applications) [1, 21, 46]. First, the discretization generated by

13286

