AutoSDF: Shape Priors for 3D Completion, Reconstruction and Generation
Paritosh Mittal∗,1

Yen-Chi Cheng∗,1
Maneesh Singh2
Shubham Tulsiani1
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
Verisk Analytics

Input

Output

Missing

Input

Output

Output

Input

long back
chair

couch with
thin legs

a bar stool

Shape Completion

3D Reconstruction

Language-guided Generation

Figure 1. Our approach combines a novel, non-sequential autoregressive prior, capturing the distribution over 3D shapes, with taskspecific conditionals, to generate multiple plausible and high-quality shapes consistent with input conditioning. We show the efficacy of
our approach across diverse tasks such as shape completion, single-view reconstruction and language-guided generation.

Abstract
Powerful priors allow us to perform inference with insufficient information. In this paper, we propose an autoregressive prior for 3D shapes to solve multimodal 3D
tasks such as shape completion, reconstruction, and generation. We model the distribution over 3D shapes as a nonsequential autoregressive distribution over a discretized,
low-dimensional, symbolic grid-like latent representation of
3D shapes. This enables us to represent distributions over
3D shapes conditioned on information from an arbitrary
set of spatially anchored query locations and thus perform
shape completion in such arbitrary settings (e.g. generating

a complete chair given only a view of the back leg). We also
show that the learned autoregressive prior can be leveraged
for conditional tasks such as single-view reconstruction and
language-based generation. This is achieved by learning
task-specific ‘naive’ conditionals which can be approximated by light-weight models trained on minimal paired
data. We validate the effectiveness of the proposed method
using both quantitative and qualitative evaluation and show
that the proposed method outperforms the specialized stateof-the-art methods trained for individual tasks. The project
page with code and video visualizations can be found at
https://yccyenchicheng.github.io/AutoSDF/.

* indicates equal contribution

1306

