Improving Video Model Transfer with Dynamic Representation Learning
Yi Li
Nuno Vasconcelos
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, San Diego

Abstract
Temporal modeling is an essential element in video understanding. While deep convolution-based architectures
have been successful at solving large-scale video recognition datasets, recent work has pointed out that they are
biased towards modeling short-range relations, often failing to capture long-term temporal structures in the videos,
leading to poor transfer and generalization to new datasets.
In this work, the problem of dynamic representation learning (DRL) is studied. We propose dynamic score, a measure of video dynamic modeling that describes the additional amount of information learned by a video network
that cannot be captured by pure spatial student through
knowledge distillation. DRL is then formulated as an adversarial learning problem between the video and spatial
models, with the objective of maximizing the dynamic score
of learned spatiotemporal classifier. The quality of learned
video representations are evaluated on a diverse set of
transfer learning problems concerning many-shot and fewshot action classification. Experimental results show that
models learned with DRL outperform baselines in dynamic
modeling, demonstrating higher transferability and generalization capacity to novel domains and tasks.

1. Introduction
Following the success of deep learning for image recognition [38, 48, 71, 75], convolutional neural networks have
also gained popularity for video classification problems,
such as action recognition [13, 25, 55, 70, 79, 84, 88], where
they outperform other classification architectures, such as
recurrent networks [20, 41, 89]. However, current action
recognition performance is significantly below the levels of
image recognition. This is, in part, due to the difficulty of
learning video representations that generalize well. Part of
this difficulty stems from current data collection practices,
namely the use of action datasets collected from the web
(e.g. YouTube) [10, 35, 45, 46, 59]. While these datasets
have much larger size and diversity of action classes, performers and scenes than those collected in controlled set-

tings [6, 66, 86], they are also known to exhibit various
types of biases that hinder the generalization of trained
video models to unseen domains [17, 53, 54, 67]. One of the
most prevalent among these biases is the spatial bias due to
the spurious correlation between action labels and the spatial appearance of video frames, in the form of background
objects, scenes or human pose [53]. For example, the presence of a horse in the video is enough to infer the “horseback riding” action if that is the only action class in the
dataset that involves horses. Spatial bias creates shortcuts
that allow classifiers to infer action labels without modeling the temporal video component, known as video dynamics, leading to overoptimistic performance in popular action
recognition benchmarks [54].
One of the nefarious consequences of dataset bias is that
it favours certain representations over others [53]. In this
context, the spatial bias of most video datasets is likely responsible for the dominant performance of convolutional architectures, known to favor local over long-range dependencies, in the action recognition field. This type of “evolutionary adaptation” of networks to dataset bias has, in fact, been
documented in the object recognition literature, leading to
the prevalence of networks with a strong bias towards local
textures over global object shape [3, 8, 31]. We hypothesize
that, in video modeling, the same phenomenon justifies the
supremacy of 3D convolutional networks that implement localized spatio-temporal video representations, based on a
very small number of frames, basically ignoring long-range
video dynamics. This, we claim, hampers the generalization
of these networks to unseen domains. For example, a horse
representation is insufficient for transfer to a new domain
that requires discrimination between “riding a horse” and
“chasing a horse” or the classification of video into Olympic
equestrian event classes. However, this problem is hard
to diagnose in the predominant action recognition setting,
where training and test data come from the same domain.
If “horseback riding” is the only horse related class, detecting horses is enough for high performance on test data.
Diagnosing the problem requires deploying the action recognizer outside of the native test set, as is usually done for
tasks like few-shot learning [27, 64, 72, 74], domain adapta-

19280

