AutoRF: Learning 3D Object Radiance Fields from Single View Observations
Norman Müller1,3

Andrea Simonelli2,3 Lorenzo Porzi3 Samuel Rota Bulò3
Matthias Nießner1 Peter Kontschieder3

Technical University of Munich1

University of Trento2

Training

Meta Reality Labs Zurich3

Inference
Single input
image

3D detector,
Panoptic

Encoder

Shape code Neural RF
Decoder

3D detector,
Panoptic

Reﬁne

Synthetic
novel views

Appearance
code

Figure 1. Overview of AutoRF. Our model consists of an encoder that extracts a shape and an appearance code from an object’s image,
which can be decoded into an implicit radiance field operating in normalized object space and leveraged for novel view synthesis. Object
images are generated from real-world imagery by leveraging machine-generated 3D object detections and panoptic segmentation. At test
time, we fit objects to respective target instances using a photo-metric loss formulation.

Abstract
We introduce AutoRF – a new approach for learning
neural 3D object representations where each object in the
training set is observed by only a single view. This setting is in stark contrast to the majority of existing works
that leverage multiple views of the same object, employ explicit priors during training, or require pixel-perfect annotations. To address this challenging setting, we propose
to learn a normalized, object-centric representation whose
embedding describes and disentangles shape, appearance,
and pose. Each encoding provides well-generalizable, compact information about the object of interest, which is decoded in a single-shot into a new target view, thus enabling novel view synthesis. We further improve the reconstruction quality by optimizing shape and appearance
codes at test time by fitting the representation tightly to
the input image. In a series of experiments, we show
that our method generalizes well to unseen objects, even
across different datasets of challenging real-world street
scenes such as nuScenes, KITTI, and Mapillary Metropolis. Additional results can be found on our project page
https://sirwyver.github.io/AutoRF/.

1. Introduction
In this work, we address the challenging problem of inferring 3D object information from individual images taken
Work was done during Norman’s and Andrea’s internships at Meta
Reality Labs Zurich.

in the wild. Providing an objects’ 3D shape with 6DOF
pose and corresponding appearance from a single image
is key to enabling immersive experiences in AR/VR, or
in robotics to decompose a scene into relevant objects for
subsequent interaction. The underlying research problem
is related to novel view synthesis or inverse graphics, and
has recently gained a lot of attraction in our community
[10,12,17,21,34,39,42,43], leading to remarkable improvements in terms of monocular 3D reconstruction fidelity.
Many existing works [10, 17, 21, 34, 42, 43] are limited
in their applicability – in particular due to their imposed
data and supervision requirements: The majority of works
require multiple views and non-occluded visibility of the
same physical object, near-perfect camera pose information, and the object of interest being central, at high resolution, and thus the most prominent content of the image.
Due to a lack of real-world datasets providing such features
(with the notable, recently released exception of [33]), an
overwhelming number of methods have only shown experimental results on synthetic datasets, and thus under perfect
data conditions, or require large datasets of CAD models to
construct a shape prior. When applied to real data the existing domain gap becomes evident, typically leading to major
performance degradation.
Our work investigates the limits of novel view synthesis from monocular, single-image real-world data. We focus on street-level imagery where objects like cars have
high variability in scale and can be very small compared
to the full image resolution. Also, such objects are often

3971

