Spatial Commonsense Graph for Object Localisation in Partial Scenes
Francesco Giuliari1,2
1

Geri Skenderi3

Marco Cristani1,3

Yiming Wang1,4

Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (IIT) 2 University of Genoa
4
Fondazione Bruno Kessler (FBK)

3

Alessio Del Bue1

University of Verona

Abstract
We solve object localisation in partial scenes, a new problem of estimating the unknown position of an object (e.g.
where is the bag?) given a partial 3D scan of a scene. The
proposed solution is based on a novel scene graph model,
the Spatial Commonsense Graph (SCG), where objects are
the nodes and edges define pairwise distances between them,
enriched by concept nodes and relationships from a commonsense knowledge base. This allows SCG to better generalise
its spatial inference to unknown 3D scenes. The SCG is used
to estimate the unknown position of the target object in two
steps: first, we feed the SCG into a novel Proximity Prediction Network, a graph neural network that uses attention to
perform distance prediction between the node representing
the target object and the nodes representing the observed objects in the SCG; second, we propose a Localisation Module
based on circular intersection to estimate the object position
using all the predicted pairwise distances in order to be independent of any reference system. We create a new dataset of
partially reconstructed scenes to benchmark our method and
baselines for object localisation in partial scenes, where our
proposed method achieves the best localisation performance.
Code and Dataset are available here: https://github.
com/IIT-PAVIS/SpatialCommonsenseGraph

1. Introduction
The localisation of unobserved objects given a partial
observation of a scene is a fundamental task that humans
solve often in their everyday life as shown in Fig. 1. Such
a task is useful for many automation applications, including domotics for assisting visually impaired humans to find
everyday items [10], visual search for embodied agents [3],
and layout proposal for interior design [23]. Yet, object localisation in partial scenes has never been formally studied
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme “MEMEX” under grant
agreement No 870743, and the Italian Ministry of Education, Universities
and Research (MIUR) through PRIN 2017 - Project Grant 20172BH297:
I-MALL and “Dipartimenti di Eccellenza 2018-2022”.

Figure 1: Given a set of objects (indicated in the green circles) in a partially known scene, we aim at estimating the
position of a target object (indicated in the orange circle).
We treat this localisation problem as an edge prediction problem by constructing a novel scene graph representation, the
Spatial Commonsense Graph (SCG), that contains both the
spatial knowledge extracted from the reconstructed scene, i.e.
the proximity (black edges) and the commonsense knowledge represented by a set of relevant concepts (indicated in
the pink circles) connected by relationships, e.g. UsedFor
(orange edges) and AtLocation (blue edges).
in the literature. We formalise the problem as the inference
of the position of an arbitrary object in an unknown area of
a scene based only on a partial observation of the scene.
Humans perform this object localisation task not only by
using the partially observed environment, but also by relying
on the commonsense knowledge that is acquired during our
lifetime experience. For example, by knowing that pillows
are often close to beds (the spatial relationship), and that
chairs and beds are often used for resting (the affordance
relationship), one could infer the whereabouts of pillows
even if only a bed and a chair were observed. In this paper,
we question whether it is possible to computationally solve
this task by injecting the commonsense knowledge within
a scene graph representation [19, 12, 32], so that a machine
can also reasonably localise an object in the unseen part of
the scene, without the use of any visual/depth information.
In this work, we propose a new scene graph representa-

19518

