Audio-driven Neural Gesture Reenactment with Video Motion Graphs
Yang Zhou1,2

Jimei Yang2 Dingzeyu Li2 Jun Saito2
1
University of Massachusetts Amherst

Deepali Aneja2 Evangelos Kalogerakis1
2
Adobe Research

Original Speech Audio

Target Speech Audio

Reenact

Clip A

Clip B

Clip C

Clip D

Clip C

Clip A

Clip D

Clip B

Pose-aware Video Blending

Figure 1. Given an input reference video of a speaker (left), our method reenacts it with gestures matching a target speech audio (right). The
video is synthesized by re-assembling clips from the reference video and blending the inconsistent boundaries with a pose-aware neural
network such that the synthesized video is coherent visually and consistent with both the rhythm and content of the target audio.

Abstract
Human speech is often accompanied by body gestures
including arm and hand gestures. We present a method
that reenacts a high-quality video with gestures matching
a target speech audio. The key idea of our method is to
split and re-assemble clips from a reference video through
a novel video motion graph encoding valid transitions
between clips. To seamlessly connect different clips in the
reenactment, we propose a pose-aware video blending
network which synthesizes video frames around the stitched
frames between two clips. Moreover, we developed an
audio-based gesture searching algorithm to find the optimal
order of the reenacted frames. Our system generates reenactments that are consistent with both the audio rhythms
and the speech content. We evaluate our synthesized
video quality quantitatively, qualitatively, and with user
studies, demonstrating that our method produces videos of
much higher quality and consistency with the target audio
compared to previous work and baselines. Our project page
https://github.com/yzhou359/vid-reenact
includes code and data.

1. Introduction
Gesture is a key visual component for human speech
communication [31]. It enhances the expressiveness of human performance and helps the audience to better comprehend the speech content [19]. Given the progress in talking head generation [17, 65, 83, 85], synthesizing plausible

gesture videos becomes increasingly important for applications such as digital voice assistants [47] and photo-realistic
virtual avatars [24, 83]. In this paper, we propose an audiodriven gesture reenactment system that synthesizes speakerspecific human speech video from a target audio clip and a
single reference speech video (Figure 1).
Unlike lip motions with specific phoneme-to-viseme
mappings [20, 63, 86] or facial expressions mostly corresponding to low-frequency sentimental signals [67], gestures exhibit complex relationships with not only acoustics
but also semantics of the audio [45]. Therefore, it is nontrivial to find a direct cross-modal mapping from audio waveform to gesture videos, even for the same speaker. To bridge
the gap between audio and video, previous methods [24,40]
predict body pose (i.e., a jointed skeleton) as an intermediate low dimensional representation to drive the video synthesis. However, they dissect the problem into two independent modules (audio-to-pose, and pose-to-video) and produce results suffering from noticeable artifacts, e.g. distorted body parts and blurred appearance.
Our method introduces a video reenactment method that
is able to synthesize high-resolution, high-quality speech
gesture videos directly in the video domain by cutting, reassembling, and blending clips from a single input reference video. The process is driven by a novel video motion
graph, inspired by 3D motion graphs used in character animation [4, 34]. The graph nodes represent frames in the
reference video, and edges encode possible transitions between them. We discover possible valid transitions between

3418

