Harmony: A Generic Unsupervised Approach for Disentangling Semantic
Content from Parameterized Transformations
Mostofa Rafid Uddin1
Gregory Howe2
Xiangrui Zeng1
Min Xu1, *
1
2
Computational Biology Department, Machine Learning Department
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.
mru@andrew.cmu.edu

gregory.s.howe@gmail.com

Abstract
In many real-life image analysis applications, particularly in biomedical research domains, the objects of interest undergo multiple transformations that alters their visual
properties while keeping the semantic content unchanged.
Disentangling images into semantic content factors and
transformations can provide significant benefits into many
domain-specific image analysis tasks. To this end, we propose a generic unsupervised framework, Harmony, that
simultaneously and explicitly disentangles semantic content from multiple parameterized transformations. Harmony leverages a simple cross-contrastive learning framework with multiple explicitly parameterized latent representations to disentangle content from transformations. To
demonstrate the efficacy of Harmony, we apply it to disentangle image semantic content from several parameterized
transformations (rotation, translation, scaling, and contrast). Harmony achieves significantly improved disentanglement over the baseline models on several image datasets
of diverse domains. With such disentanglement, Harmony is
demonstrated to incentivize bioimage analysis research by
modeling structural heterogeneity of macromolecules from
cryo-ET images and learning transformation-invariant representations of protein particles from single-particle cryoEM images. Harmony also performs very well in disentangling content from 3D transformations and can perform
coarse and fast alignment of 3D cryo-ET subtomograms.
Therefore, Harmony is generalizable to many other imaging domains and can potentially be extended to domains
beyond imaging as well.

1. Introduction
In many real-life image analysis applications, particularly in biomedical research domains (e.g., electron mi* Corresponding author

xiangruz@andrew.cmu.edu

mxu1@cs.cmu.edu

croscopy, tomography, nanobody images, etc.), the appearance of the objects of interests are affected by a sequence
of transformations. For instance, in single-particle cryoelectron microscopy (cryo-EM) images, the shapes, translations, rotations, and projections of protein particles are
confounded [1]. In cryo-electron tomography (cryo-ET),
macromolecules are present in different orientations and
shifts in different subtomograms (3D cryo-ET subimages
each containing a macromolecule) [27,29]. A Magnetic resonance image (MRI) of brain can be differently scaled and
illuminated due to different imaging settings [23]. Consequently, in these image analysis domains, images can be
encoded into and generated from a semantic content factor
that is specific to the shape of the object of interest and a sequence of parameterized transformations that are unspecific
to the shape of the object. This is referred to as disentangling content and transformations in the highly non-linear
latent space of the images. Such content-transformation
disentangling can provide insights into the shape space
and transformation distributions inherent in the images [1]
and further facilitate several downstream analysis tasks like
image classification, image alignment, image translation,
and image extrapolation for the corresponding imaging domains.
Disentangling semantic content from parameterized
transformations has not been widely studied until very recently. Traditional disentangled representation learning
(DRL) methods [3,13,18] decompose data into various generative latent factors (e.g., face, color, hair, etc.), and do
not perform particularly well at content-transformation disentangling [1, 5]. To this end, some explicit DRL methods [1, 5, 8, 17] have been proposed with satisfactory performance. These explicit DRL methods constrain some latent factors explicitly to represent generative factors that are
known to be inherent in the data beforehand. In the aforementioned image analysis applications, the types of transformations are usually known beforehand and can be esti-

20646

