Show Me What and Tell Me How: Video Synthesis via Multimodal Conditioning
Ligong Han12 *
Kyle Olszewski1

Jian Ren1
Hsin-Ying Lee1
Francesco Barbieri1
Shervin Minaee1
Dimitris Metaxas2
Sergey Tulyakov1
1
2
Snap Inc.
Rutgers University

Abstract

specified by visual information or desired actions as specified by textual information.

Most methods for conditional video synthesis use a single modality as the condition. This comes with major limitations. For example, it is problematic for a model conditioned on an image to generate a specific motion trajectory desired by the user since there is no means to provide
motion information. Conversely, language information can
describe the desired motion, while not precisely defining
the content of the video. This work presents a multimodal
video generation framework that benefits from text and images provided jointly or separately. We leverage the recent
progress in quantized representations for videos and apply
a bidirectional transformer with multiple modalities as inputs to predict a discrete video representation. To improve
video quality and consistency, we propose a new video token
trained with self-learning and an improved mask-prediction
algorithm for sampling video tokens. We introduce text augmentation to improve the robustness of the textual representation and diversity of generated videos. Our framework
can incorporate various visual modalities, such as segmentation masks, drawings, and partially occluded images. It
can generate much longer sequences than the one used for
training. In addition, our model can extract visual information as suggested by the text prompt, e.g., “an object in
image one is moving northeast”, and generate corresponding videos. We run evaluations on three public datasets
and a newly collected dataset labeled with facial attributes,
achieving state-of-the-art generation results on all four1 .

Existing works on conditional video generation use only
one of the possible control signals as inputs [8, 30]. This
limits the flexibility and quality of the generative process.
For example, given a screenplay we could potentially generate several movies, depending on the decisions of the director, set designer, and visual effect artist. In a similar way,
a video generation model conditioned with a text prompt
should be primed with different visual inputs. Additionally, a generative video model conditioned on a given image should be able to learn to generate various plausible
videos, which can be defined from various natural language
instructions. For example, to generate object-centric videos
with objects moving [70], the motion can be easily defined
through a text prompt, e.g., “moving in a zig-zag way,”
while the objects can be defined by visual inputs. Thus, an
interesting yet challenging question arises: Can we learn a
video generation model that can support such behavior?

1. Introduction
Generic video synthesis methods generate videos by
sampling from a random distribution [56, 57]. To get more
control over the generated content, conditional video synthesis works utilize input signals, such as images [9, 19],
text or language [7, 30], and action classes [62]. This enables synthesized videos containing the desired objects as
* Work done during an internship at Snap Inc.
1 Code: https://github.com/snap-research/MMVID and Webpage.

We tackle the question in this work and propose a new
video synthesis model supporting diverse, multimodal conditioning signals. Our method consists of two phases. The
first phase obtains discrete representations from images. We
employ an autoencoder with a quantized bottleneck, inspired by the recent success of two-stage image generation
using quantized feature representations [21, 38, 47, 76]. The
second phase learns to generate video representations that
are conditioned on the input modalities, which can then be
decoded into videos using the decoder from the first stage.
We leverage a bidirectional transformer, i.e., BERT [17],
trained with a masked sequence modeling task, that uses tokens from multimodal samples and predicts the latent representation for videos. Building such a framework requires
solving several challenging problems. First, video consistency is a common problem among video generation methods. Second, it is necessary to ensure that the correct textual
information is learned. Third, training a transformer for image synthesis is computationally demanding [12], an issue
that is even more severe in the time domain, as a longer sequence of tokens needs to be learned. To solve these challenges, we propose the following contributions:
13615

