AR-NeRF: Unsupervised Learning of Depth and Defocus Effects
from Natural Images with Aperture Rendering Neural Radiance Fields
Takuhiro Kaneko
NTT Communication Science Laboratories, NTT Corporation
Unstructured
single images

Defocus strength
Weak

(a) Training images

Focus distance
Strong

Near

Depth
Far

(b) Generated images and depths

Figure 1. Unsupervised learning of depth and defocus effects from unstructured (and view-limited) natural images. (a) During
training, we used only a collection of unstructured single natural images and did not use any supervision (e.g., ground-truth depth, pairs
of multiview images, defocus supervision, or pretrained models). (b) After training, AR-NeRF can generate sets of images and depths.
In particular, in the generation of an image, AR-NeRF can adjust the defocus strength and focus distance intuitively and continuously
using photometric constraints. The project page is available at https://www.kecl.ntt.co.jp/people/kaneko.takuhiro/
projects/ar-nerf/.

Abstract
Fully unsupervised 3D representation learning has
gained attention owing to its advantages in data collection. A successful approach involves a viewpoint-aware approach that learns an image distribution based on generative models (e.g., generative adversarial networks (GANs))
while generating various view images based on 3D-aware
models (e.g., neural radiance fields (NeRFs)). However,
they require images with various views for training, and
consequently, their application to datasets with few or limited viewpoints remains a challenge. As a complementary
approach, an aperture rendering GAN (AR-GAN) that employs a defocus cue was proposed. However, an AR-GAN is
a CNN-based model and represents a defocus independently
from a viewpoint change despite its high correlation, which
is one of the reasons for its performance. As an alternative
to an AR-GAN, we propose an aperture rendering NeRF
(AR-NeRF), which can utilize viewpoint and defocus cues
in a unified manner by representing both factors in a common ray-tracing framework. Moreover, to learn defocusaware and defocus-independent representations in a disentangled manner, we propose aperture randomized training,
for which we learn to generate images while randomizing
the aperture size and latent codes independently. During

our experiments, we applied AR-NeRF to various natural
image datasets, including flower, bird, and face images, the
results of which demonstrate the utility of AR-NeRF for unsupervised learning of the depth and defocus effects.

1. Introduction
Natural images are 2D projections of the 3D world.
Solving the inverse problem, i.e., understanding the 3D
world from natural images, is a principal challenge in computer vision and graphics and has been actively studied in
various fields owing to its diverse applications, such as environmental understanding in robotics, content creation in
advertisements, and photo editing in the arts.
After collecting pairs of 2D and 3D data or sets of multiview images, a successful approach is to learn the 3D
predictor using direct or photometric-driven supervision.
This approach demonstrates promising results in terms of
fidelity. However, the collection of such data is often difficult or impractical. To reduce the collection costs, learning
from single images (i.e., from a dataset that includes a single image per training instance) has been actively studied.
To obtain clues under such setting, several studies [19,
32, 75, 77, 93] have introduced object-specific shape models, including 3DMM [5] and SMPL [51], and searched

18387

