Look for the Change: Learning Object States and
State-Modifying Actions from Untrimmed Web Videos
Tomáš Souček1

Jean-Baptiste Alayrac2
Ivan Laptev3
Josef Sivic1
1

CIIRC CTU

2

DeepMind

3

Antoine Miech2

ENS/Inria

tomas.soucek@cvut.cz
https://data.ciirc.cvut.cz/public/projects/2022LookForTheChange/

1. Introduction
Human actions often induce changes of the state of an
object, as illustrated in Figure 1. Examples include “cutting an apple”, “cleaning shoes”, “tying a tie” or “filling-up
a cup with coffee”. People can easily recognize such actions and the resulting changes of object states [12], for example, when watching instructional videos. Furthermore,
people can reproduce the actions in their environment, e.g.
1 Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics at the Czech
Technical University in Prague.
3 Département d’informatique de l’ENS, École normale supérieure,
CNRS, PSL Research University, 75005 Paris, France.

wood drilling

end state

0:00

1:27

2:23

2:33

2:49

3:27

5:00

action

initial state

6:22

8:37

8:53

end state

eggs peeling

Human actions often induce changes of object states
such as “cutting an apple”, “cleaning shoes” or “pouring
coffee”. In this paper, we seek to temporally localize object states (e.g. “empty” and “full” cup) together with the
corresponding state-modifying actions (“pouring coffee”)
in long uncurated videos with minimal supervision. The
contributions of this work are threefold. First, we develop
a self-supervised model for jointly learning state-modifying
actions together with the corresponding object states from
an uncurated set of videos from the Internet. The model is
self-supervised by the causal ordering signal, i.e. initial object state → manipulating action → end state. Second, to
cope with noisy uncurated training data, our model incorporates a noise adaptive weighting module supervised by a
small number of annotated still images, that allows to efficiently filter out irrelevant videos during training. Third,
we collect a new dataset with more than 2600 hours of video
and 34 thousand changes of object states, and manually annotate a part of this data to validate our approach. Our results demonstrate substantial improvements over prior work
in both action and object state-recognition in video.

action

initial state

Abstract

0:00

0:09

0:14

0:17

0:22

0:26

0:37

0:40

0:42

0:53

Figure 1. Examples of object states and state-modifying actions learnt by our model from a dataset of long uncurated web
videos. In each example the top row shows: the initial state in the
video (left), the state-modifying action (middle), and the end-state
(right). The bottom row shows video frames sampled from the entire video with their corresponding timestamps. It illustrates the
difficulty of finding the correct temporal localization of the object
states and the actions in the entire video.

when following a recipe from a cooking video. However,
artificial system with similar cognitive abilities is yet to be
developed. Existing methods for recognizing object states
and state-modifying actions address small-scale setups (5
objects and short manually curated videos) [3] or controlled
environments [18]. At the same time, progress on automatic understanding of causal relations between actions and
object states in the wild would be a major step in embodied video understanding and robotics. However, the task is
challenging given the large amount and variability of existing object-action pairs as well as the difficulty of manually
collecting and annotating video data for it.
In this paper, we investigate whether the learning of object states and corresponding state-modifying actions can
be scaled-up to noisy uncurated videos from the web while

13956

