Dreaming to Prune Image Deraining Networks
Yang Wang1, * Xueyang Fu1 Yang Cao1,2,†
Weiqi Zou1, *
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
artisan@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {ywang120, xyfu, forrest}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Convolutional image deraining networks have achieved
great success while suffering from tremendous computational and memory costs. Most model compression methods
require original data for iterative fine-tuning, which is limited in real-world applications due to storage, privacy, and
transmission constraints. We note that it is overstretched
to fine-tune the compressed model using self-collected data,
as it exhibits poor generalization over images with different
degradation characteristics. To address this problem, we
propose a novel data-free compression framework for deraining networks. It is based on our observation that deep
degradation representations can be clustered by degradation characteristics (types of rain) while independent of image content. Therefore, in our framework, we “dream” diverse in-distribution degraded images using a deep inversion paradigm, thus leveraging them to distill the pruned
model. Specifically, we preserve the performance of the
pruned model in a dual-branch way. In one branch, we
invert the pre-trained model (teacher) to reconstruct the degraded inputs that resemble the original distribution and
employ the orthogonal regularization for deep features to
yield degradation diversity. In the other branch, the pruned
model (student) is distilled to fit the teacher’s original statistical modeling on these dreamed inputs. Further, an
adaptive pruning scheme is proposed to determine the hierarchical sparsity, which alleviates the regression drift of
the initial pruned model. Experiments on various deraining datasets demonstrate that our method can reduce about
40% FLOPs of the state-of-the-art models while maintaining comparable performance without original data.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) based approaches have achieved remarkable progress on single image deraining [5, 10, 16, 28, 31]. However, due to the in* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

(a) Input (100H)

(b) Original output

(c) Pruned

(d) Fine-tuned (web)

(e) Fine-tuned (100L)

(f) Ours (data-free)

Figure 1. Pre-trained HINet [5] drops significantly after pruning
30% weights (1b → 1c). Fine-tuning the pruned model with images from website or Rain100L [29] exhibits poor generalization
to images in Rain100H [29]. We preserve the performance of the
pruned model without the original data.

herent properties of dense prediction tasks, coupled with
the requirements to handle various degradation characteristics, these CNN models typically suffer from tremendous
computational costs and bulky memory usage. This limits their applications in real scenarios, especially on devices
with constrained computing capacity.
In practice, various attempts have been made to compress the heavy CNN models, including quantization [11,
12, 23], pruning [8, 13, 15, 21], distillation [3, 7, 14], and so
on. These approaches require original data for interactive
training to preserve the performance of compressed models.
However, the original training data is often unaccessible due
to storage, privacy, or transmission constraints. To alleviate
this problem, one may naturally acquire paired data by collecting degraded (rainy) images and exporting their pseudo
labels output by the pre-trained model. However, our study
suggests this way exhibits poor generalization. For example, state-of-the-art deraining network HINet [5] gets a significant performance drop after pruning 30% weights, as
shown in Fig. 1c. Fine-tuning the pruned model with data
collected from the website or Rain100L [29] exhibits poor
generalization to images in Rain100H [29], as shown in

6023

