FERV39k: A Large-Scale Multi-Scene Dataset for Facial Expression
Recognition in Videos
Yan Wang1 , Yixuan Sun1 , Yiwen Huang2 , Zhongying Liu2 , Shuyong Gao2 ,
Wei Zhang2 , Weifeng Ge2,∗ and Wenqiang Zhang1,2,∗
1
Academy of Engineering & Technology, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
{wfge and wqzhang}@fudan.edu.cn

Figure 1. An overview of FERV39k composed of video frames of 7 basic expressions across 4 scenarios subdivided by 22 scenes.

Abstract
Current benchmarks for facial expression recognition
(FER) mainly focus on static images, while there are limited
datasets for FER in videos. It is still ambiguous to evaluate whether performances of existing methods remain satisfactory in real-world application-oriented scenes. For example, the “Happy” expression with high intensity in TalkShow is more discriminating than the same expression with
low intensity in Official-Event. To fill this gap, we build a
large-scale multi-scene dataset, coined as FERV39k. We
analyze the important ingredients of constructing such a
novel dataset in three aspects: (1) multi-scene hierarchy
and expression class, (2) generation of candidate video
clips, (3) trusted manual labelling process. Based on
these guidelines, we select 4 scenarios subdivided into 22
scenes, annotate 86k samples automatically obtained from
4k videos based on the well-designed workflow, and finally
build 38,935 video clips labeled with 7 classic expressions.
Experiment benchmarks on four kinds of baseline frameworks were also provided and further analysis on their
performance across different scenes and some challenges
for future research were given. Besides, we systematically
investigate key components of DFER by ablation studies.
∗ Corresponding author

The baseline framework and our project are available on
https://github.com/wangyanckxx/FERV39k.

1. Introduction
Facial expression recognition (FER) in static images [43]
or videos [29] is of great importance to many applications,
such as human-computer interaction (HCI) [2] and lie detection [3]. With millions of images uploaded every day by
users from different events and social gatherings, there are
various available large-scale datasets for static FER, such as
RAF-DB [27] and AffectNet [34]. On top of these datasets,
various methods [14, 15, 26, 44] are designed to understand
human emotion and recognize facial expressions. In contrast to static image FER, there are only a few video-based
facial expression datasets. In the early period, researchers
paid attention to in-the-lab datasets, such as CK+ [32] and
Oulu-CASIA [48], which are collected from lab environments and contain limited posed video clips with no more
than 30 frames. Recently, recognizing expressions from inthe-lab short video clips has achieved considerable progress
[29,45,49], but these models often fail to be directly applied
for in-the-wild scenes. Typically, limited samples without
complex and varied scene context might be impractical for
real-world applications.

20922

