DTA: Physical Camouflage Attacks
using Differentiable Transformation Network
Naufal Suryanto 1,‡ , Yongsu Kim 1,2,‡ , Hyoeun Kang 1 , Harashta Tatimma Larasati 1,4 , Youngyeo Yun 1
Thi-Thu-Huong Le 1,5 , Hunmin Yang 3 , Se-Yoon Oh 3 , Howon Kim 1,2,∗
1

Pusan National University, South Korea; 2 SmartM2M, South Korea; 3 Agency for Defense Development (ADD), South Korea;
4

Institut Teknologi Bandung, Indonesia; 5 Hung Yen University of Technology and Education, Vietnam
https://islab-ai.github.io/dta-cvpr2022/

Abstract
To perform adversarial attacks in the physical world,
many studies have proposed adversarial camouflage, a
method to hide a target object by applying camouflage patterns on 3D object surfaces. For obtaining optimal physical adversarial camouflage, previous studies have utilized
the so-called neural renderer, as it supports differentiability. However, existing neural renderers cannot fully represent various real-world transformations due to a lack of
control of scene parameters compared to the legacy photorealistic renderers. In this paper, we propose the Differentiable Transformation Attack (DTA), a framework for generating a robust physical adversarial pattern on a target object to camouflage it against object detection models with a
wide range of transformations. It utilizes our novel Differentiable Transformation Network (DTN), which learns
the expected transformation of a rendered object when the
texture is changed while preserving the original properties
of the target object. Using our attack framework, an adversary can gain both the advantages of the legacy photorealistic renderers including various physical-world transformations and the benefit of white-box access by offering
differentiability. Our experiments show that our camouflaged 3D vehicles can successfully evade state-of-the-art
object detection models in the photo-realistic environment
(i.e., CARLA on Unreal Engine). Furthermore, our demonstration on a scaled Tesla Model 3 proves the applicability
and transferability of our method to the real world.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs), despite their renowned
capability for solving computer vision tasks [10, 12, 19],
have been proven vulnerable to adversarial examples [28].
‡

Equal contribution

*

Corresponding author

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. (a) Neural renderer used in prior work (Dual Attention Suppression (DAS)) [32]. Although it is differentiable, it
possesses a limitation in physical properties representation (e.g.,
transparency for windshield) and lacks background blending (e.g.,
shadowing) because the object and the background scene are rendered separately. (b) Our Differential Transformation Network
(DTN). DTN considers both differentiability and photo-realistic
aspects by learning the correct transformation when the object’s
texture is changed. As shown, transparency for the windshield
and shadowing at the bottom and the top of the car are rendered
correctly. (c) Comparison of detection results using different
textures (normal, DAS, random, DTA) on photo-realistic environment. Unlike other examples, the adversarial camouflage generated by our DTA framework successfully evades detection.

That is, carefully crafted inputs may cause DNN models to
misrepresent a seemingly obvious image to the human eye,
giving incorrect prediction results. A deliberate act by an
adversary to take advantage of this weakness, namely the
adversarial attack, has captured the attention of many in the
past few years. Its potential applicability in not only the
digital domain but also the physical domain has drawn significant interest.

15305

