LiDAR Snowfall Simulation for Robust 3D Object Detection
Martin Hahner 1 Christos Sakaridis 1 Mario Bijelic 2
Felix Heide 2 Fisher Yu 1 Dengxin Dai 1,3 Luc Van Gool 1,4
1

ETH Zürich

2

Princeton University

3

MPI for Informatics

4

KU Leuven

Abstract
3D object detection is a central task for applications
such as autonomous driving, in which the system needs to
localize and classify surrounding traffic agents, even in the
presence of adverse weather. In this paper, we address the
problem of LiDAR-based 3D object detection under snowfall. Due to the difficulty of collecting and annotating training data in this setting, we propose a physically based
method to simulate the effect of snowfall on real clearweather LiDAR point clouds. Our method samples snow
particles in 2D space for each LiDAR line and uses the induced geometry to modify the measurement for each LiDAR
beam accordingly. Moreover, as snowfall often causes wetness on the ground, we also simulate ground wetness on
LiDAR point clouds. We use our simulation to generate partially synthetic snowy LiDAR data and leverage these data
for training 3D object detection models that are robust to
snowfall. We conduct an extensive evaluation using several
state-of-the-art 3D object detection methods and show that
our simulation consistently yields significant performance
gains on the real snowy STF dataset compared to clearweather baselines and competing simulation approaches,
while not sacrificing performance in clear weather. Our
code is available at github.com/SysCV/LiDAR snow sim.

1. Introduction
A light detection and ranging (LiDAR) sensor is an active range sensor useful for several applications [10, 27, 39,
61]. Its high-quality 3D output renders LiDAR the modality of choice for several tasks that require 3D reasoning,
such as 3D object detection [25, 59]. As LiDAR sensors are
becoming increasingly cheaper [53], their integration into
autonomous cars becomes increasingly feasible as well.
Nonetheless, previous sensor tests have revealed that
such active pulsed systems are vulnerable in scattering media, leading to decreases of perception distances in various
weather conditions such as rain [4, 14, 52], fog [2, 4, 18, 19,
52], and snow [19, 24, 28], as shown in Fig. 1. In these conditions, the optical medium contains particles of water or
snow which interact with the laser beam and absorb, reflect

Figure 1. 3D object detection results in heavy snowfall with prior
training on the proposed data augmentation scheme (top right) in
comparison to no augmentation (top left). The bottom row shows
the RGB image as reference.

or refract its photons. This results in two effects: (i) attenuation of the received power that corresponds to the target
at the line of sight, and (ii) backscattering from particles
leading to spurious maxima in the received power and thus
to spurious returns at ranges different from the true range
of the target. Consequently, there is a severe degradation
of measurement quality due to intense noise, a large domain shift relative to point clouds captured in clear weather,
and hence a detrimental effect on performance of high-level
tasks such as 3D object detection [1, 16]. Yet, achieving
robust perception in adverse weather is a desirable goal as
fatality rates for human drivers are notably higher in adverse
weather, as reported by the US Department of Transportation [49] and the European Commission [8].
Since adverse-weather data are hard to collect [1], previous works have investigated simulation methods to close
the domain gap for camera data in fog [36] and rain [48].

16364

