Lepard: Learning partial point cloud matching in rigid and deformable scenes
Yang Li1
1

Tatsuya Harada1,2

The University of Tokyo,

2

RIKEN

{liyang,harada}@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Figure 1. We propose a feature matching method for rigid (left) and deformable (right) point clouds that are captured by range sensors. Results shown are the initial alignment, the predicted matches (blue/red lines indicate inliers/outliers), and the registration results. Registration
is done by RANSAC for rigid and non-rigid ICP for deformable.

Abstract
We present Lepard, a Learning based approach for
partial point cloud matching in rigid and deformable
scenes. The key characteristics are the following techniques
that exploit 3D positional knowledge for point cloud matching: 1) An architecture that disentangles point cloud representation into feature space and 3D position space. 2) A
position encoding method that explicitly reveals 3D relative distance information through the dot product of vectors. 3) A repositioning technique that modifies the crosspoint-cloud relative positions. Ablation studies demonstrate the effectiveness of the above techniques. In rigid
cases, Lepard combined with RANSAC and ICP demonstrates state-of-the-art registration recall of 93.9% / 71.3%
on the 3DMatch / 3DLoMatch. In deformable cases, Lepard achieves +27.1% / +34.8% higher non-rigid feature
matching recall than the prior art on our newly constructed
4DMatch / 4DLoMatch benchmark. Code and data are
available at https://github.com/rabbityl/lepard.

1. Introduction
Matching partial point clouds from range sensors lies at
the core of many 3D computer vision applications including SLAM and dynamic tracking and reconstruction. The
former assumes rigid scenes, e.g. [28, 47], while the latter
focuses on scenes that are non-rigidly deforming, e.g. [46].
This work aims at developing a robust point clouds match-

ing method for both rigid and deformable scenes.
Point cloud matching methods often consist of two
phases: point cloud feature extraction followed by nearest
neighbor search in feature space. Recent learning-based
works have made substantial progress for representation
learning in 3D data. State-of-the-art point clouds matching approaches [6, 14, 26] employ the geometry features extracted by 3D convolutional networks, such as the KPConvbased [62] or the Minkowski Engine [13]. These 3D feature
extractors are strictly translation invariant, and, to a certain
extent, also invariant to rotation transformations given the
commonly adopted max-pooling layers in the networks and
random rotation-based data augmentation during training.
Transformation invariance is well suited for local geometry feature representation. However, it may cause ambiguity in scenes that have repetitive geometry patterns. For
instance, the same kind of chairs scattered in different locations of a floor, or left and right hands of a human could
yield similar geometry features. We argue that such ambiguity can be resolved by enhancing geometry features with
the 3D positional knowledge. Intuitively, humans associate
things across observations by referring to not only things’
appearance but also their relative locations.
Motivated by the above observations, we design Lepard,
a novel partial point clouds matching method that exploits
3D positional knowledge. We first build our baseline using the fully convolutional feature extractor KPFCN [62],
the concept of Transformer [64] with self and cross attention, and the idea of differentiable matching [55, 61]. Then,
to leverage 3D position information, we introduce the fol-

5554

