MonoGround: Detecting Monocular 3D Objects from the Ground
Zequn Qin1 , Xi Li1,2,3 *
1
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University
2
Shanghai Institute for Advanced Study of Zhejiang University; 3 Shanghai AI Lab
zequnqin@gmail.com, xilizju@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Monocular 3D object detection has attracted great attention for its advantages in simplicity and cost. Due to the illposed 2D to 3D mapping essence from the monocular imaging process, monocular 3D object detection suffers from inaccurate depth estimation and thus has poor 3D detection
results. To alleviate this problem, we propose to introduce
the ground plane as a prior in the monocular 3d object detection. The ground plane prior serves as an additional
geometric condition to the ill-posed mapping and an extra
source in depth estimation. In this way, we can get a more
accurate depth estimation from the ground. Meanwhile,
to take full advantage of the ground plane prior, we propose a depth-align training strategy and a precise two-stage
depth inference method tailored for the ground plane prior.
It is worth noting that the introduced ground plane prior
requires no extra data sources like LiDAR, stereo images,
and depth information. Extensive experiments on the KITTI
benchmark show that our method could achieve state-ofthe-art results compared with other methods while maintaining a very fast speed. Our code, models, and training
logs are available at https://github.com/cfzd/
MonoGround.

1. Introduction
3D object detection is a fundamental computer vision
task that aims to obtain the locations, sizes, and orientations of objects. To get the real-world 3D information,
many methods adopt modalities like point clouds from LiDAR, stereo images, and depth images, which require extra
sensors of data sources. Different from them, monocular
3D object detection, which only requires a single 2D image
and camera calibration information, increasingly draws the
community’s attention for its superiorities in simplicity and
cost, especially in the autonomous driving field.
Despite the superiorities of monocular 3D object detection, obtaining 3D information from a single 2D image is
* Corresponding author.

True center
Collinear center

Camera

(a) Multiple depth solutions with collinear points.
Image
Camera

Same Depth

(b) Two cars with the same depths and positions, but the projected centers are different
in the image space. Depth is correlated with other variables like heights.

Figure 1. Difficulties in the monocluar 3D object detection.

essentially hard for the following reasons: 1) the mapping
from 2D to 3D is an ill-posed problem since a location in
the 2D image plane corresponds to all collinear 3D positions, which are in the ray from the optical center to the
2D location. This one-to-many property makes predicting the depths of objects difficult, as shown in Fig. 1a. 2)
The expression of 3D object’s depth is correlated with the
height. For two objects with the same depths and positions,
if the heights are different, the projected center would differ, as shown in Fig. 1b. In this way, the learning of depths
has to overcome the interference with irrelevant attributes
of objects. 3) Mainstream monocular 3D object detection
methods [19, 22, 42, 44] are commonly based on the CenterNet [43]. Under this framework, all information of each
object is represented with a point, including the depth information. In this way, the supervision of depth is very sparse
during training (Suppose there are two cars in an image,
then only two points on the depth map would be trained, and
all other points on the depth map are ignored). Such sparse
supervision would lead to insufficient learning of depth estimation, which significantly differs from common monocular depth estimation tasks with dense depth supervision.

3793

