Counterfactual Cycle-Consistent Learning for Instruction Following and
Generation in Vision-Language Navigation
Hanqing Wang1,2 , Wei Liang1 , Jianbing Shen3 , Luc Van Gool2 , Wenguan Wang4∗
1

Beijing Institute of Technology 2 ETH Zurich 3 SKL-IOTSC, University of Macau 4 ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney
https://github.com/HanqingWangAI/CCC-VLN

Abstract
Since the rise of vision-language navigation (VLN), great
progress has been made in instruction following – building
a follower to navigate environments under the guidance of
instructions. However, far less attention has been paid to the
inverse task: instruction generation – learning a speaker to
generate grounded descriptions for navigation routes. Existing VLN methods train a speaker independently and often
treat it as a data augmentation tool to strengthen the follower, while ignoring rich cross-task relations. Here we describe an approach that learns the two tasks simultaneously
and exploits their intrinsic correlations to boost the training
of each: the follower judges whether the speaker-created
instruction explains the original navigation route correctly,
and vice versa. Without the need of aligned instruction-path
pairs, such cycle-consistent learning scheme is complementary to task-specific training targets defined on labeled data,
and can also be applied over unlabeled paths (sampled
without paired instructions). Another agent, called creator
is added to generate counterfactual environments. It greatly
changes current scenes yet leaves novel items – which are
vital for the execution of original instructions – unchanged.
Thus more informative training scenes are synthesized and
the three agents compose a powerful VLN learning system.
Extensive experiments on a standard benchmark show that
our approach improves the performance of various follower
models and produces accurate navigation instructions.

1. Introduction
Vision-language navigation (VLN) [7], i.e., enabling an
agent to navigate across realistic environments given human
instructions, has received great attention (Fig. 1(a)). Many
powerful wayfinding agents (i.e., follower) were developed
to perform such embodied instruction following task. Unfortunately, the inverse task – learning a speaker that vividly
explains navigation paths – has remained under-explored. In
fact, instruction generation is also a crucial ability of AI
∗ Corresponding author: Wenguan Wang.

Â

X

E
A

Ē
X̂

Figure 1: (a) VLN [7]. (b) Our counterfactual cycle-consistent
(CCC) learning system consists of three agents, i.e., speaker s ( )
for instruction generation, follower f ( ) for instruction following, and creator c ( ) for counterfactual environment creation.

agents. In many scenarios, AI agents should be able to communicate with humans for efficient collaboration, instead of
executing instructions only [76, 29]. For example, when a
human-robot team is doing search and rescue [68, 18, 75],
the human may first issue commands (e.g., “explore along
this direction until the end of the hallway”) that direct the
robot to navigate a building and search for survivors. In this
process, the robot is expected to report its progress (e.g., “I
have inspected three rooms”) and explain its plan (e.g., “I
will continue to navigate this direction and stop at the end
of the hallway”) [69]. Robot’s ability to generate linguistic
explanations can help human to resolve potential ambiguity
(e.g., identifying “this direction” and “hallway”) [18] and
establish trust [9, 20]. Hence, the robot can even in turn help
the human to navigate its explored area (which is unfamiliar to the human) [27], e.g., “go straight and you will pass
through four rooms before reaching the end of the hallway”.
In addition to emphasizing the importance of instruction generation, we explore the intrinsic correlation between
15471

