FastDOG: Fast Discrete Optimization on GPU
Ahmed Abbas

Paul Swoboda

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus

Abstract
We present a massively parallel Lagrange decomposition
method for solving 0–1 integer linear programs occurring
in structured prediction. We propose a new iterative update
scheme for solving the Lagrangean dual and a perturbation
technique for decoding primal solutions. For representing
subproblems we follow [40] and use binary decision diagrams (BDDs). Our primal and dual algorithms require
little synchronization between subproblems and optimization over BDDs needs only elementary operations without
complicated control flow. This allows us to exploit the parallelism offered by GPUs for all components of our method.
We present experimental results on combinatorial problems
from MAP inference for Markov Random Fields, quadratic
assignment and cell tracking for developmental biology. Our
highly parallel GPU implementation improves upon the running times of the algorithms from [40] by up to an order
of magnitude. In particular, we come close to or outperform some state-of-the-art specialized heuristics while being problem agnostic. Our implementation is available at
https://github.com/LPMP/BDD.

General
Purpose
FastDOG

CPU

GPU
several
hundred
works

[1, 48, 58, 65]

Specialized
Figure 1. Qualitative comparison of ILP solvers for structured
prediction. Our solver (FastDOG) is faster than Gurobi [23] and
comparable to specialized CPU solvers, but outperformed by specialized GPU solvers. FastDOG is applicable to a diverse set of
applications obviating the human effort for developing solvers for
new problem classes.

1. Introduction
Solving integer linear programs (ILP) efficiently on parallel computation devices is an open research question. Done
properly it would enable more practical usage of many ILP
problems from structured prediction in computer vision and
machine learning. Currently, state-of-the-art generally applicable ILP solvers tend not to benefit much from parallelism [45]. In particular, linear program (LP) solvers for
computing relaxations benefit modestly (interior point) or
not at all (simplex) from multi-core architectures. In particular generally applicable solvers are not amenable for
execution on GPUs. To our knowledge there exists no practical and general GPU-based optimization routine and only
a few solvers for narrow problem classes have been made
GPU-compatible e.g. [1,48,58,65]. This, and the superlinear
runtime complexity of general ILP solvers has hindered application of ILPs in large structured prediction problems, necessitating either restriction to at most medium problem sizes

or difficult and time-consuming development of specialized
solvers as observed for the special case of MAP-MRF [33].
We argue that work on speeding up general purpose ILP
solvers has had only limited success so far due to complicated control flow and computation interdependencies. We
pursue an overall different approach and do not base our
work on the typically used components of ILP solvers. Our
approach is designed from the outset to only use operations
that offer sufficient parallelism for implementation on GPUs.
We argue that our approach sits on a sweet spot between
general applicability and efficiency for problems in structured prediction as shown in Figure 1. Similar to general
purpose ILP solvers [15, 23], there is little or no effort to
adapt these problems for solving them with our approach. On
the other hand we outperform general purpose ILP solvers
in terms of execution speed for large problems from structured prediction and achieve runtimes comparable to hand-

439

