Glass Segmentation using Intensity and Spectral Polarization Cues
Haiyang Mei1 Bo Dong2,⋆ Wen Dong1 Jiaxi Yang1 Seung-Hwan Baek2,3 Felix Heide2
Pieter Peers4 Xiaopeng Wei1,⋆ Xin Yang1,⋆
1
Dalian University of Technology 2 Princeton University 3 POSTECH 4 College of William & Mary
https://mhaiyang.github.io/CVPR2022_PGSNet

π

AoLP_R

AoLP_G

AoLP_B

φ
0

Angle of Linear Polarization (AoLP)
1

DoLP_R

DoLP_G

P Mask R-CNN

GSD

PGSNet (Ours)

GT

DoLP_B

ρ
0
RGB Image

Degree of Linear Polarization (DoLP)

Figure 1. Glass segmentations obtained with the RGB-only method of Lin et al. [21] (GSD) and the monochromatic polarization method
of Kalra et al. [17] (P Mask R-CNN) compared to our glass segmentation network. The detected region is indicated by the orange masks.
Both prior methods fail to cleanly separate the non-glass regions with similar appearance. In contrast our method accurately segments the
glass region with the help of the spectral polarization cues.

1. Introduction
Abstract
Transparent and semi-transparent materials pose significant challenges for existing scene understanding and
segmentation algorithms due to their lack of RGB texture
which impedes the extraction of meaningful features. In
this work, we exploit that the light-matter interactions on
glass materials provide unique intensity-polarization cues
for each observed wavelength of light. We present a novel
learning-based glass segmentation network that leverages
both trichromatic (RGB) intensities as well as trichromatic
linear polarization cues from a single photograph captured
without making any assumption on the polarization state of
the illumination. Our novel network architecture dynamically fuses and weights both the trichromatic color and polarization cues using a novel global-guidance and multiscale self-attention module, and leverages global crossdomain contextual information to achieve robust segmentation. We train and extensively validate our segmentation method on a new large-scale RGB-Polarization dataset
(RGBP-Glass), and demonstrate that our method outperforms state-of-the-art segmentation approaches by a significant margin.
⋆ Xin Yang (xinyang@dlut.edu.cn) and Xiaopeng Wei are the corresponding authors. Xin Yang and Bo Dong lead this project.

Autonomous robots, aerial drones, and self-driving vehicles rely on an array of sophisticated sensors and algorithms that enable them to sense and understand their environment. However, objects with transparent or semitransparent materials remain an open challenge for existing scene understanding methods. In contrast to opaque
materials, transparent materials typically lack texture, and
their complex dynamic appearance depends over various local and global properties, ranging from light-matter interactions (i.e., reflection, refraction, and transmission), object
shape, and background, resulting in out-of-distribution observations that are difficult to model.
The majority of existing segmentation methods for transparent materials leverage either contextual information [27,
41] or rely on boundary detection [11, 40]. Both strategies
operate in the RGB domain where the interactions between
light waves and transparent materials only produce weak
cues. A few works have investigated leveraging richer representations of light-matter interactions for transparent material recognition, such as light fields [23, 34, 43] and polarization [17,19,20,37,39]. However, these method also rely
on strong assumption on the target size and reflectivity, or
assume restricted capture conditions.
In this work, based on that glass materials often provide a distinctive spectral-polarimetric response, we lever-

12622

