Global Tracking via Ensemble of Local Trackers
Zikun Zhou1,* , Jianqiu Chen1,* , Wenjie Pei1,† , Kaige Mao1 , Hongpeng Wang1,2 , and Zhenyu He1,†
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory

Abstract
The crux of long-term tracking lies in the difficulty of
tracking the target with discontinuous moving caused by
out-of-view or occlusion. Existing long-term tracking methods follow two typical strategies. The first strategy employs
a local tracker to perform smooth tracking and uses another
re-detector to detect the target when the target is lost. While
it can exploit the temporal context like historical appearances and locations of the target, a potential limitation of
such strategy is that the local tracker tends to misidentify
a nearby distractor as the target instead of activating the
re-detector when the real target is out of view. The other
long-term tracking strategy tracks the target in the entire
image globally instead of local tracking based on the previous tracking results. Unfortunately, such global tracking
strategy cannot leverage the temporal context effectively. In
this work, we combine the advantages of both strategies:
tracking the target in a global view while exploiting the temporal context. Specifically, we perform global tracking via
ensemble of local trackers spreading the full image. The
smooth moving of the target can be handled steadily by one
local tracker. When the local tracker accidentally loses the
target due to suddenly discontinuous moving, another local
tracker close to the target is then activated and can readily take over the tracking to locate the target. While the
activated local tracker performs tracking locally by leveraging the temporal context, the ensemble of local trackers
renders our model the global view for tracking. Extensive
experiments on six datasets demonstrate that our method
performs favorably against state-of-the-art algorithms.

1. Introduction
The long-term visual tracking task has attracted more attention from the visual tracking community in recent years.
Compared with short-term tracking, the long-term tracking
task is much closer to the real-world application, due to the
following two differences. First, the average duration of
the sequences in the long-term tracking benchmarks (such
as LaSOT [13], TLP [29], and OxUvA [33]) is hundreds of
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors: Wenjie Pei and
Zhenyu He (wenjiecoder@outlook.com and zhenyuhe@hit.edu.cn).

#621

#639

#655

#697

#769

#801

Activated LT

Unactivated LT

Sample positions of activated LT

Predicted box
Low

High

Figure 1. Illustration of the tracking process via ensemble of local
trackers for tracking a wingsuit flyer, which disappears from the
left-bottom corner of the view and then reappears from the rightbottom corner. The color of sample positions denotes the attention
weight. At first, the Local Tracker (LT) at the left-bottom corner is
activated and moves following the target to keep tracking it until
the target disappears. While the activated local tracker loses the
target, it moves back to where it starts moving, as shown in the
697th frame. When the target reappears, the local tracker at the
right-bottom corner is activated and keeps tracking the target. The
ensemble of local trackers collaborates to achieve global tracking.

seconds, which is much longer than that (tens of seconds) of
the short-term tracking benchmarks (OTB2015 [37], TrackingNet [30], and GOT-10k [18], to name a few). Second, the
long-term tracking task requires the algorithms to be able to
cope with the discontinuous moving of the target caused by
the disappearance and reappearance of the target.
Most existing trackers [1,2,8,22,46] search for the target
within a local image region, named local trackers, and thus
cannot handle the frequently discontinuous moving of the
target in the long-term tracking task. To handle this issue,
a typical strategy [5, 19, 26, 41] is to equip the local tracker
with a global re-detector to detect the target after the local
tracker fails. Such a strategy performs switching between
local tracking and global detection according to the previous tracking result, named local-global switching strategy.
A merit of this strategy is that the temporal context including historical appearances and locations of the target can be
exploited for local tracking. However, whether to switch to
global detection is totally decided by the local tracking result. It increases the risk that the algorithm misidentifies a

8761

