DirecFormer: A Directed Attention in Transformer Approach to
Robust Action Recognition
Thanh-Dat Truong1 , Quoc-Huy Bui2 , Chi Nhan Duong3 , Han-Seok Seo4
Son Lam Phung5 , Xin Li6 , Khoa Luu1
1
CVIU Lab, University of Arkansas 2 NextG, FPT Software
3
Concordia University 4 Dep. of Food Science, University of Arkansas
5
University of Wollongong 6 West Virginia University
{tt032, khoaluu, hanseok}@uark.edu, bqhuy@apcs.fitus.edu.vn
dcnhan@ieee.org, phung@uow.edu.au, Xin.Li@mail.wvu.edu

Abstract
Human action recognition has recently become one of
the popular research topics in the computer vision community. Various 3D-CNN based methods have been presented
to tackle both the spatial and temporal dimensions in the
task of video action recognition with competitive results.
However, these methods have suffered some fundamental
limitations such as lack of robustness and generalization,
e.g., how does the temporal ordering of video frames affect the recognition results? This work presents a novel
end-to-end Transformer-based Directed Attention (DirecFormer) framework1 for robust action recognition. The
method takes a simple but novel perspective of Transformerbased approach to understand the right order of sequence
actions. Therefore, the contributions of this work are threefold. Firstly, we introduce the problem of ordered temporal learning issues to the action recognition problem. Secondly, a new Directed Attention mechanism is introduced
to understand and provide attentions to human actions in
the right order. Thirdly, we introduce the conditional dependency in action sequence modeling that includes orders
and classes. The proposed approach consistently achieves
the state-of-the-art (SOTA) results compared with the recent
action recognition methods [4, 18, 72, 74], on three standard large-scale benchmarks, i.e. Jester, Kinetics-400 and
Something-Something-V2.

1. Introduction
Video understanding has recently become one of the
popular research topics in the computer vision community.
Video data has become ubiquitous and occurs in numerous
daily activities and applications, e.g., movies and camera
1 The implementation of DirecFormer is available at https : / /
github.com/uark-cviu/DirecFormer

Figure 1. Result Preview. Top 1 accuracy against GLOPS ×
Views of our DirecFormer compared to other methods. DirecFormer achieves SOTA performance while maintaining the low
computational cost.

surveillance [15, 38, 47, 61]. In the field of video understanding [60], action recognition has become a fundamental problem. In action recognition, there is a need to pay
more attention to the temporal structures of the video sequences. Indeed, emphasis on temporal modeling is a common strategy among most methods. It can be considered
as the main difference between video and images. These
works include long-short term dependencies [14, 16], temporal structure, low-level motion, and action modeling as a
sequence of events or states.
The current methods in video action recognition utilize
3D or pseudo 3D convolution to extract the spatio-temporal
features [7, 50, 57, 70]. However, these 3D CNN-based
methods suffer from intensive computation with many parameters to be learned. Others attempt to adopt two-stream
structures [19, 20, 22, 53] for accurate action recognition,
since information from one branch could be fused to the

20030

