Exploiting Pseudo Labels in a Self-Supervised Learning Framework for
Improved Monocular Depth Estimation
Andra Petrovai
Sergiu Nedevschi
Technical University of Cluj-Napoca, Romania
{andra.petrovai, sergiu.nedevschi}@cs.utcluj.ro

1. Introduction
One of the long-lasting research fields of computer vision is the accurate estimation of the 3D geometry of scenes.
This includes tasks such as depth and ego motion prediction, which have major importance in the perception system of real-world applications, such as robotics and automated driving. While precise depth measurements can be
directly obtained using specialized sensors such as LiDAR,
they have several disadvantages such as high cost and reduced output density. As an alternative, estimating depth
from images captured from a moving monocular or binocular system of cameras is attractive due to the lower cost
and generally simpler setup. The stereo setup exhibits some
limitations from a practical point of view as the stereo rig
has to be carefully calibrated and synchronized.
Monocular depth estimation is an inherently ill-posed
problem and initial results had lower performance com-

Ground Truth

Depth Prediction

Error Map

Pseudo Self

We present a novel self-distillation based self-supervised
monocular depth estimation (SD-SSMDE) learning framework. In the first step, our network is trained in a selfsupervised regime on high-resolution images with the photometric loss. The network is further used to generate
pseudo depth labels for all the images in the training set.
To improve the performance of our estimates, in the second step, we re-train the network with the scale invariant
logarithmic loss supervised by pseudo labels. We resolve
scale ambiguity and inter-frame scale consistency by introducing an automatically computed scale in our depth labels. To filter out noisy depth values, we devise a filtering
scheme based on the 3D consistency between consecutive
views. Extensive experiments demonstrate that each proposed component and the self-supervised learning framework improve the quality of the depth estimation over the
baseline and achieve state-of-the-art results on the KITTI
and Cityscapes datasets.

Image

[18]

Abstract

Figure 1. SD-SSMDE, our self-distillation framework for selfsupervised monocular depth estimation. The teacher network
(Self) trained in a self-supervised manner brings significant improvements over the baseline [18]. Our student model (Pseudo) is
trained with pseudo labels generated with the previous model. The
error is reduced, especially on the car on the right and on the entire
left-hand side area of the image. In the error maps, small error is
encoded with blue, while large error is encoded with red.

pared to aforementioned methods. With the recent advances
in deep learning, the performance gap has been reduced,
especially in a supervised setting. The prohibitively large
cost of collecting high-quality ground truth has led to the
emergence of self-supervised monocular depth estimation,
which unlocks the power of large-scale unlabeled datasets.
Such approaches learn both the depth and ego motion, and
embed 3D geometric constraints by using 3D reprojection
models to synthesize consecutive images. More specifically, points from the target frame are back-projected in the
camera coordinate system, displaced by the camera motion
and reprojected onto adjacent source frames. In this way,
the target image can be reconstructed from the source images, and the photometric difference between the target and
synthesized image will be minimized during training.
Self-supervised monocular depth estimation relies on
several assumptions that are not always true and hinder the

1578

