Towards Practical Deployment-Stage Backdoor Attack on Deep Neural Networks
Xiangyu Qi*,1 , Tinghao Xie*,2 , Ruizhe Pan2 , Jifeng Zhu3 , Yong Yang3 and Kai Bu2
1
Princeton University 2 Zhejiang University 3 Tencent
xiangyuqi@princeton.edu, {vtu,panrz,kaibu}@zju.edu.cn, {jifengzhu,coolcyang}@tencent.com
Abstract
One major goal of the AI security community is to securely
and reliably produce and deploy deep learning models for
real-world applications. To this end, data poisoning based
backdoor attacks on deep neural networks (DNNs) in the
production stage (or training stage) and corresponding
defenses are extensively explored in recent years. Ironically, backdoor attacks in the deployment stage, which can
often happen in unprofessional users’ devices and are thus
arguably far more threatening in real-world scenarios,
draw much less attention of the community. We attribute
this imbalance of vigilance to the weak practicality of
existing deployment-stage backdoor attack algorithms and
the insufficiency of real-world attack demonstrations. To
fill the blank, in this work, we study the realistic threat of
deployment-stage backdoor attacks on DNNs. We base
our study on a commonly used deployment-stage attack
paradigm — adversarial weight attack, where adversaries
selectively modify model weights to embed backdoor
into deployed DNNs. To approach realistic practicality,
we propose the first gray-box and physically realizable
weights attack algorithm for backdoor injection, namely
subnet replacement attack (SRA), which only requires
architecture information of the victim model and can
support physical triggers in the real world. Extensive
experimental simulations and system-level real-world
attack demonstrations are conducted. Our results not only
suggest the effectiveness and practicality of the proposed
attack algorithm, but also reveal the practical risk of
a novel type of computer virus that may widely spread
and stealthily inject backdoor into DNN models in user
devices. By our study, we call for more attention to the
vulnerability of DNNs in the deployment stage.

1. Introduction
While deep learning models are marching ambitiously
towards human-level performance and increasingly de* Equal Contribution

ployed in real-world applications [9, 20, 47, 54, 57], their
vulnerability issues [13,21,23,24,55,59,65,75] have raised
great concerns. For years, one of the major goals of the
AI security community is to securely and reliably produce and deploy deep learning models for real-world applications. To this end, data poisoning based backdoor attacks [13,23,55,75] on deep neural networks (DNNs) in the
production stage (or training stage) and corresponding defenses [12, 14, 77] are extensively explored in recent years.
Commonly studied backdoor attack methods rely on adversaries’ involvement in the model production stage (training stage) — attackers either inject multiple poisoned samples into the training set [13,25] or provide pre-trained models with backdoors for downstream applications [32, 60].
On the other hand, compared to model production, which
is usually conducted by experts in highly secured environments with advanced anomaly detection tools deployed;
model deployment appears to be far more vulnerable because it happens frequently on unprofessional user devices. Ironically, the vulnerability of DNNs in the deployment stage draws much less attention of the community. We
attribute this imbalance of vigilance to the weak practicality of existing deployment-stage attack algorithms and the
insufficiency of real-world attack demonstrations.
To be specific, we highlight the most commonly used
paradigm by existing deployment-stage backdoor attacks —
adversarial weight attack [7, 41], where adversaries selectively modify model parameters to embed backdoor into
deployed DNNs. Existing work under this paradigm [4,
7, 40, 41, 50–52, 80] heavily relies on gradient-based techniques (white-box settings) to identify a set of weights to
overwrite. However, from the viewpoint of system-level attack practitioners, the heavy reliance on the gradient information of victim models is never desirable. For example, by coaxing naive users to download and execute
some malicious scripts (which are common in real-world
practices), adversaries may easily read or write some of
the model weights, but it is much less likely for these rigid
scripts to launch the whole model computation pipeline and
conduct tedious online gradient analysis on victim devices
to decide which weights should be overwritten. Moreover,

13347

