Transforming Model Prediction for Tracking
Christoph Mayer

Martin Danelljan Goutam Bhat Matthieu Paul Danda Pani Paudel
Fisher Yu Luc Van Gool
Computer Vision Lab, D-ITET, ETH Zürich, Switzerland

Abstract

1. Introduction
Generic visual object tracking is one of the fundamental
problems in computer vision. The task involves estimating
the state of the target object in every frame of a video sequence, given only the initial target location. One of the
key problems in object tracking is learning to robustly detect the target object, given a scarce annotation. Among
existing methods, Discriminative Correlation Filters (DCF)
[1,4,9,10,18,20,29,35] have achieved much success. These
approaches learn a target model to localize the target in
each frame, by minimizing a discriminative objective function. The target model, often set to a convolutional kernel,
provides a compact and generalizable representation of the
tracked object, leading to the popularity of DCFs.
The objective function in DCF integrates both foreground and background knowledge over the previous

NFS

Optimization based tracking methods have been widely
successful by integrating a target model prediction module, providing effective global reasoning by minimizing an
objective function. While this inductive bias integrates
valuable domain knowledge, it limits the expressivity of
the tracking network. In this work, we therefore propose a tracker architecture employing a Transformer-based
model prediction module. Transformers capture global
relations with little inductive bias, allowing it to learn
the prediction of more powerful target models. We further extend the model predictor to estimate a second set
of weights that are applied for accurate bounding box
regression. The resulting tracker ToMP relies on training and on test frame information in order to predict all
weights transductively. We train the proposed tracker endto-end and validate its performance by conducting comprehensive experiments on multiple tracking datasets. ToMP
sets a new state of the art on three benchmarks, achieving an AUC of 68.5% on the challenging LaSOT [14]
dataset. The code and trained models are available at
https://github.com/visionml/pytracking

ToMP-50
ToMP-101

66.9
66.7
66.4
66.2

TrDiMP

KeepTrack
TransT

63.9

STARK-ST101
STARK-ST50

65.2
64.7

SuperDiMP

ToMP-50+
IoUNet

63.9

SiamRCNN
63.1

63.9

64.7

LaSOT

66.4

67.1

68.5

Figure 1. Performance improvements when transforming the
model optimizer based tracker SuperDiMP [8] ( ) step-by-step.
First, we replace the model optimizer by a Transformer based
model predictor ( ). Secondly, we replace the probabilistic
IoUNet by a new regressor and predict its weights with the same
model predictor ( ). The performance (success AUC) is reported
on NFS [17] and LaSOT [14] and compared with recent trackers ( ). ToMP-50 and ToMP-101 refer to the different employed
backbones ResNet-50 [19] and ResNet-101 [19].

frames, providing effective global reasoning when learning
the model. However, it also imposes severe inductive bias
on the predicted target model. Since the target model is obtained by solely minimizing an objective over the previous
frames, the model predictor has limited flexibility. For instance, it cannot integrate any learned priors in the predicted
target model. On the other hand, Transformers have also
been shown to provide strong global reasoning across multiple frames, thanks to the use of self and cross attention.
Consequently, Transformers have been applied to generic
object tracking [6, 40, 43, 45] with considerable success.
In this work, we propose a novel tracking framework that
aims at bridging the gap between DCF and Transformer
based trackers. Our approach employs a compact target
model for localizing the target, as in DCF. The weights of
this model are however obtained using a Transformer-based
model predictor, allowing us to learn more powerful target
models, compared to DCFs. This is achieved by introducing novel encodings of the target state, allowing the Transformer to effectively utilize this information. We further extend our model predictor to generate weights for a bounding

8731

