IRISformer: Dense Vision Transformers for Single-Image Inverse Rendering in
Indoor Scenes
Rui Zhu1

Zhengqin Li1
1

Janarbek Matai2

UC San Diego

2

Fatih Porikli2

Qualcomm AI Research

{rzhu,zhl378,mkchandraker}@eng.ucsd.edu

{jmatai,fporikli}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
Indoor scenes exhibit significant appearance variations
due to myriad interactions between arbitrarily diverse object
shapes, spatially-changing materials, and complex lighting. Shadows, highlights, and inter-reflections caused by
visible and invisible light sources require reasoning about
long-range interactions for inverse rendering, which seeks to
recover the components of image formation, namely, shape,
material, and lighting. In this work, our intuition is that
the long-range attention learned by transformer architectures is ideally suited to solve longstanding challenges in
single-image inverse rendering. We demonstrate with a specific instantiation of a dense vision transformer, IRISformer,
that excels at both single-task and multi-task reasoning required for inverse rendering. Specifically, we propose a
transformer architecture to simultaneously estimate depths,
normals, spatially-varying albedo, roughness and lighting
from a single image of an indoor scene. Our extensive evaluations on benchmark datasets demonstrate state-of-the-art
results on each of the above tasks, enabling applications
like object insertion and material editing in a single unconstrained real image, with greater photorealism than prior
works. Code and data are publicly released.1

1. Introduction
Inverse rendering has long been of great interest to the
computer vision community owing to its promise to decompose a scene into the intrinsic factors of shape, complex
spatially-varying lighting, and material, thereby enabling
downstream tasks of virtual object insertion, material editing, and relighting. The problem is particularly challenging
for indoor scenes, where complex appearances stem from
multiple interactions among the above intrinsic factors, such
as shadows, specularities, and interreflections.
Recent advances in inverse rendering has led to the emer1 https://github.com/ViLab-UCSD/IRISformer

Manmohan Chandraker1

Input Image

Previous Work

Our Result
Albedo

Roughness

Depth

Normals

Our Result

Albedo

Roughness

Depth

Normals

Previous Work

Lighting

Lighting
Attention 3

Attention 1

Attention 2

Attention 4

Figure 1. Given a single real world image, IRISformer simultaneously infers material (albedo and roughness), geometry (depth
and normals), and spatially-varying lighting of the scene. The
estimation enables virtual object insertion where we demonstrate
high-quality photorealistic renderings in challenging lighting conditions compared to previous work [19]. The learned attention is
also visualized for selected patches, indicating benefits of global
attention to reason about distant interactions (see text for details).

gence of numerous works undertaking either some specific
aspects of this challenge (geometry [8,24], albedo [4, 20,33],
lighting [9, 11, 18, 36]), or joint estimation [2, 19, 33, 39].
However, the task of scene decomposition can be extremely
ill-posed due to the inherent ambiguity between complex
lighting, geometry, and material which jointly govern image formation in indoor scenes. For example, high-intensity
pixel values can be explained by either specular or lightcolored material, particular local geometry, bright lighting,
or by a combination of all those factors. The problem is especially severe with only a single image as input, where prior
knowledge is necessary to disambiguate among all possible
intrinsic decompositions that explain the image. Classical
methods leverage strong heuristic priors in an optimization
objective [2, 3], which may not always hold for real world
scenes with complex geometry or lighting conditions.

2822

