Transferability Metrics for Selecting Source Model Ensembles
Andrea Agostinelli

Jasper Uijlings Thomas Mensink
Google Research

Vittorio Ferrari

{agostinelli, jrru, mensink, vittoferrari}@google.com

ResNet

HRNet

(Sec. 3.2)

Model Architectures

x
Target
Training
set

ILSVRC
Self-Supervised

ILSVRC
Supervised

Pre-training Schemes

x

(Sec. 3.1)
Source
Models

Selecting
Ensemble
(Sec. 5)

Ensemble mean IoU

Ensemble

Fine-tuning

Source Datasets

Predicted Transferability

Evaluating Transferability Metric (Sec. 4)
Predicting
Transferability

Evaluating

Target
Test
set

Figure 1. Overview of our method for predicting transferability of source model ensembles. We start from a large pool of pre-trained source
models, and form candidate ensembles by combining multiple source models. For each candidate ensemble we predict performance on the
target dataset with an efficient transferability metric. We show experimentally that this metric correlates well with actual performance after
fine-tuning the ensemble on the target dataset. Hence, it can be used to select the best ensemble without the expensive fine-tuning stage.

Abstract

We address the problem of ensemble selection in transfer learning: Given a large pool of source models we want
to select an ensemble of models which, after fine-tuning on
the target training set, yields the best performance on the
target test set. Since fine-tuning all possible ensembles is
computationally prohibitive, we aim at predicting performance on the target dataset using a computationally efficient transferability metric. We propose several new transferability metrics designed for this task and evaluate them
in a challenging and realistic transfer learning setup for semantic segmentation: we create a large and diverse pool of
source models by considering 17 source datasets covering
a wide variety of image domain, two different architectures,
and two pre-training schemes. Given this pool, we then automatically select a subset to form an ensemble performing
well on a given target dataset. We compare the ensemble selected by our method to two baselines which select a single
source model, either (1) from the same pool as our method;
or (2) from a pool containing large source models, each
with similar capacity as an ensemble. Averaged over 17
target datasets, we outperform these baselines by 6.0% and
2.5% relative mean IoU, respectively.

1. Introduction
In transfer learning we want to re-use knowledge previously learned on a source task to help learning a target task.
The most common form of transfer learning in computer
vision is to pre-train a single source model on the generic
ILSVRC dataset [3, 14, 26, 31, 33, 38, 59, 80] and then finetune it on the target dataset. However, often a more domainspecific approach can lead to better results [49, 54, 75].
Hence, it is beneficial to have a large pool of diverse source
models such that it contains models suited for many different target tasks. The problem then becomes: how can we
automatically and efficiently select good source models for
a given target task?
Recently, transferability metrics were introduced to address this problem [4, 44, 55, 65, 66, 76]. The general goal
is to select a single source model which, after fine-tuning
on the target training set, yields the best performance on the
target test set. Transferability metrics enable to select this
model efficiently without carrying out expensive fine-tuning
on the target training set.
While previous transferability metrics consider selecting a single source model, in this paper we aim at selecting a subset containing multiple source models to form an
ensemble. Ensembles are a general technique used to improve model accuracy, out-of-distribution robustness, and
to estimate uncertainty [7, 17, 23, 24, 39, 40, 56, 70]. Fur-

7936

