STCrowd: A Multimodal Dataset for Pedestrian Perception in Crowded Scenes
Peishan Cong1 , Xinge Zhu2 , Feng Qiao3 , Yiming Ren1 , Xidong Peng1 , Yuenan Hou4 ,
Lan Xu1,7 , Ruigang Yang5 , Dinesh Manocha6 , Yuexin Ma1,7†
1
ShanghaiTech University 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
RWTH Aachen University 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory
5
University of Kentucky 6 University of Maryland at College Park
7
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
1

{congpsh, renym1, pengxd, mayuexin}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Accurately detecting and tracking pedestrians in 3D
space is challenging due to large variations in rotations,
poses and scales. The situation becomes even worse for
dense crowds with severe occlusions. However, existing
benchmarks either only provide 2D annotations, or have
limited 3D annotations with low-density pedestrian distribution, making it difficult to build a reliable pedestrian
perception system especially in crowded scenes. To better evaluate pedestrian perception algorithms in crowded
scenarios, we introduce a large-scale multimodal dataset,
STCrowd. Specifically, in STCrowd, there are a total of
219 K pedestrian instances and 20 persons per frame on
average, with various levels of occlusion. We provide synchronized LiDAR point clouds and camera images as well
as their corresponding 3D labels and joint IDs. STCrowd
can be used for various tasks, including LiDAR-only, imageonly, and sensor-fusion based pedestrian detection and
tracking. We provide baselines for most of the tasks. In
addition, considering the property of sparse global distribution and density-varying local distribution of pedestrians,
we further propose a novel method, Density-aware Hierarchical heatmap Aggregation (DHA), to enhance pedestrian
perception in crowded scenes. Extensive experiments show
that our new method achieves state-of-the-art performance
for pedestrian detection on various datasets. https:
//github.com/4DVLab/STCrowd.git

1. Introduction
Accurate pedestrian perception in 3D space plays a crucial role in thorough scene understanding. Many applications also benefit from reliable and accurate pedestrian
†: Corresponding author.

Figure 1. STCrowd provides 2D/3D image annotations, 3D point
cloud annotations, and joint annotations for consecutive frames.
Note that STCrowd contains a large quantity of crowded scenes
with severe occlusions, which pose great challenges to pedestrian
detection and tracking.

perception [2, 4, 61], including surveillance, serving robots,
autonomous driving, etc. However, pedestrian perception
is intractable for three reasons. First, pedestrians are not
rigid bodies and they can have various poses. Second, humans are relatively small for sensors to capture compared
with other agents, such as vehicles. For instance, in LiDAR
point clouds, pedestrians in the distance are usually represented as a few sparse points. Third, people tend to congregate when walking, which makes the detection of each
individual person harder. Occlusion in crowded scenarios is
a thorny problem for pedestrian perception.
Many datasets [4, 9, 14, 16, 19, 23, 32, 36, 39, 53, 54] have
been collected to accelerate the research on the pedestrian
perception field. Previous pedestrian perception datasets
can be classified into two groups: image-based pedestrian datasets and multimodal traffic datasets. The former [5–7, 9, 14, 16, 23, 32, 36, 52–54] focus on pedestrian
detection and tracking on 2D images and merely provide

19608

