Towards Discriminative Representation:
Multi-view Trajectory Contrastive Learning for Online Multi-object Tracking

1

En Yu1 *, Zhuoling Li2∗ , Shoudong Han1†
Huazhong Univerisity of Science and Technology 2 Tsinghua University
{yuen, shoudonghan}@hust.edu.cn

lzl20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Discriminative representation is crucial for the association step in multi-object tracking. Recent work mainly
utilizes features in single or neighboring frames for constructing metric loss and empowering networks to extract
representation of targets. Although this strategy is effective, it fails to fully exploit the information contained in a
whole trajectory. To this end, we propose a strategy, namely
multi-view trajectory contrastive learning, in which each
trajectory is represented as a center vector. By maintaining all the vectors in a dynamically updated memory bank,
a trajectory-level contrastive loss is devised to explore the
inter-frame information in the whole trajectories. Besides,
in this strategy, each target is represented as multiple adaptively selected keypoints rather than a pre-defined anchor
or center. This design allows the network to generate richer
representation from multiple views of the same target, which
can better characterize occluded objects. Additionally, in
the inference stage, a similarity-guided feature fusion strategy is developed for further boosting the quality of the trajectory representation. Extensive experiments have been
conducted on MOTChallenge to verify the effectiveness of
the proposed techniques. The experimental results indicate
that our method has surpassed preceding trackers and established new state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
As a fundamental vision perception task, multiple object tracking (MOT) has been extensively deployed in broad
applications, e.g., autonomous driving, video analysis and
intelligent robots [6, 41]. Previous MOT methods mainly
adopt the tracking-by-detection paradigm [4, 27, 29, 39],
which mainly comprises two parts, i.e, detection and association. For the detection part, a detector is established
to localize objects of interest. In the association part, some
methods utilize a motion predictor for forecasting the posi* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. Comparison between existing methods and our proposed method. (a) Existing methods only utilize the information
in a single or two adjacent frames to learn representation. (b) On
the contrary, our method fully exploits the features in the whole
trajectories, which contain numerous frames.

tions of objects in the next frames and rely on the position
information to associate them [16]. However, when these
methods are applied to the challenging cases where targets
are missing for several frames, it is hard to reconnect these
targets to the corresponding trajectories correctly.
To alleviate this problem, existing trackers seek help
from appearance-based strategies [39, 47, 51], in which objects are identified based on the similarity of extracted features. Nevertheless, the effectiveness of the appearancebased association strategy is still limited. Many objects
with different identities are associated with the same trajectory because they are occluded or blurry, thus causing the
learned representation to be indistinguishable. Hence, extracting more meaningful and discriminative representation
is desired for enhancing the association accuracy.
In order to improve the quality of the extracted representation, we revisit existing representation learning methods in MOT and observe that they only use samples in a
single or neighboring frames to construct loss for training

8834

