AutoLoss-Zero: Searching Loss Functions from Scratch for Generic Tasks
Hao Li1∗† , Tianwen Fu2 * † , Jifeng Dai4,5 , Hongsheng Li1 , Gao Huang4 , Xizhou Zhu3‡
1
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Department of Information Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
SenseTime Research 4 Tsinghua University
5
Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
haoli@link.cuhk.edu.hk, futianwen@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, daijifeng001@gmail.com
hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk, gaohuang@tsinghua.edu.cn, zhuwalter@sensetime.com
Abstract
Significant progress has been achieved in automating
the design of various components in deep networks. However, the automatic design of loss functions for generic tasks
with various evaluation metrics remains under-investigated.
Previous works on handcrafting loss functions heavily rely
on human expertise, which limits their extensibility. Meanwhile, searching for loss functions is nontrivial due to the
vast search space. Existing efforts mainly tackle the issue by
employing task-specific heuristics on specific tasks and particular metrics. Such work cannot be extended to other tasks
without arduous human effort. In this paper, we propose
AutoLoss-Zero, which is a general framework for searching
loss functions from scratch for generic tasks. Specifically,
we design an elementary search space composed only of
primitive mathematical operators to accommodate the heterogeneous tasks and evaluation metrics. A variant of the
evolutionary algorithm is employed to discover loss functions in the elementary search space. A loss-rejection protocol and a gradient-equivalence-check strategy are developed so as to improve the search efficiency, which are applicable to generic tasks. Extensive experiments on various
computer vision tasks demonstrate that our searched loss
functions are on par with or superior to existing loss functions, which generalize well to different datasets and networks. Code shall be released.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed exciting progress in AutoML for deep learning [15, 35, 36, 41, 42, 68]. The automatic design of many components has been explored, ranging from architectures (e.g., neural architectures [50] and
normalization-activation operations [35]) to learning strate* Equal contribution. † This work is done when Hao Li and Tianwen Fu

are interns at SenseTime Research. ‡ Corresponding author.

gies (e.g., data augmentation strategies [15], dropout patterns [42], and training hyper-parameters [16]). However,
to automate the entire deep learning process, an essential
component is under-investigated, namely, the automatic design of loss functions for generic tasks.
Loss functions are indispensable parts in deep network
training. In various tasks, including semantic segmentation [7, 65], object detection [19, 51], instance segmentation [3, 23] and pose estimation [56], cross-entropy (CE)
and L1/L2 losses are the default choices for categorization
and regression, respectively. As the default loss functions
are usually approximations for specific evaluation metrics,
there usually exists a misalignment between the surrogate
loss and the final evaluation metric. For example, for
bounding box localization in object detection, L1 loss is
widely used, while the IoU metric is the standard evaluation metric [63]. Similar discrepancy has also been observed in semantic segmentation [31], where some metrics
measure the accuracy of the whole image, while others focus more on the segmentation boundaries. The misalignment between network training and evaluation results in
sub-optimal solutions with degraded performance.
A multitude of handcrafted loss functions have been proposed for different evaluation metrics. Since most desired
metrics are non-differentiable and cannot be directly used
as training objectives, many existing works [4, 19, 29, 33,
44, 53, 61] design differentiable variants of the CE and
L1/L2 losses by carefully analyzing specific evaluation metrics. Another series of works [2, 38, 43, 45, 52, 63, 66]
handcraft clever surrogate losses based on the mathematical
expressions of specific evaluation metrics. Although these
handcrafted loss functions show improvement on their target metrics, they heavily rely on expertise and careful analysis for specific scenarios, which limits their extendibility.
In this paper, we aim to automate the design of loss functions for generic tasks. Although there are several pioneer
works [30, 31, 37, 58] on loss function search, they are

1009

