ClothFormer: Taming Video Virtual Try-on in All Module
Jianbin Jiang1∗ , Tan Wang2 , He Yan2 , Junhui Liu2
1
BIGO 2 iQIYI Inc.
jiangjianbin@bigo.sg, {wangtan, yanhe, liujunhui}@qiyi.com

Abstract
The task of video virtual try-on aims to fit the target
clothes to a person in the video with spatio-temporal consistency. Despite tremendous progress of image virtual tryon, they lead to inconsistency between frames when applied
to videos. Limited work also explored the task of videobased virtual try-on but failed to produce visually pleasing
and temporally coherent results. Moreover, there are two
other key challenges: 1) how to generate accurate warping when occlusions appear in the clothing region; 2) how
to generate clothes and non-target body parts (e.g. arms,
neck) in harmony with the complicated background; To address them, we propose a novel video virtual try-on framework, ClothFormer, which successfully synthesizes realistic,
harmonious, and spatio-temporal consistent results in complicated environment. In particular, ClothFormer involves
three major modules. First, a two-stage anti-occlusion
warping module that predicts an accurate dense flow mapping between the body regions and the clothing regions.
Second, an appearance-flow tracking module utilizes ridge
regression and optical flow correction to smooth the dense
flow sequence and generate a temporally smooth warped
clothing sequence. Third, a dual-stream transformer extracts and fuses clothing textures, person features, and environment information to generate realistic try-on videos.
Through rigorous experiments, we demonstrate that our
method highly surpasses the baselines in terms of synthesized video quality both qualitatively and quantitatively† .

1. Introduction
The task of video virtual try-on aims to synthesize a coherent video that preserves the appearance of one target
clothes and the original person’s pose and body shape in
the source video. This task has attracted much attention in
recent years because of the prospects of its wide application
in e-commerce and short video industry.
* Work done in iQIYI Inc.
† The code and all demos are available at https://github.com/

luxiangju-PersonAI/ClothFormer.

Figure 1. Examples of our video virtual try-on results on the VVT
dataset and our dataset (first row).

Previous virtual try-on methods usually focus on imagebased operations [8, 12, 17, 18, 22, 28, 36, 44]. Among them,
CP-VTON [36] proposed a geometric matching module to
learn the parameters of TPS transformation, which greatly
improves the accuracy of deformation. WUTON [22] and
PFAFN [13] proposed parser-free methods to reduce the dependency of using accurate masks, and VITON-HD [8] further increased the resolution of the generated image. These
methods have achieved great success in different aspects.
However, image virtual try-on is far from video virtual tryon in terms of immersion, and it often lead to inconsistent
results between frames when image-based methods applied
to videos.
There are a few attempts of designing video virtual tryon. FW-GAN [9] is the first proposed method, which introduces the optical flow prediction module proposed in
Video2Video [38] to warp the past frames to synthesize
coherent future frames. Similarly, FashionMirror [7] also
predicts optical flow, however, it warps the past frames
to future frames at the feature level instead of the pixel
level, which enabled it can generates clothes in different views. MV-TON [48] further adds a memory refinement module to memorize the features of past frames. Although the above methods have made some progress in
video spatio-temporal consistency, however, their generated
frames are flickering and has a distance from achieving a

10799

