DEFEAT: Deep Hidden Feature Backdoor Attacks by Imperceptible
Perturbation and Latent Representation Constraints
Zhendong Zhao1,2 , Xiaojun Chen1,2∗, Yuexin Xuan1,2 , Ye Dong1,2 , Dakui Wang1,2 , Kaitai Liang3
1
School of Cyber Security,University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
Institute of Information Engineering,Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands
{zhaozhendong,chenxiaojun,xuanyuexin,dongye,wangdakui}@iie.ac.cn, kaitai.liang@tudelft.nl

Abstract

∗ Corresponding author

SIG

WaNet

DFST

DEFEAT(Ours)

GradCam

Deep neural networks (DNNs), which can learn efficient
feature representations and model complex predictive tasks
from large-scale data, have been deployed in real-world applications, such as computer vision [10], and natural language processing [34, 36]. But they are vulnerable to backdoor attacks [5, 9] which can secretly embed malicious behaviors to manipulate the model in use phase. For example,
an attacker may put a backdoor in a face recognition model

ReFool

Residual

1. Introduction

BadNets

Image

Backdoor attack is a type of serious security threat to
deep learning models. An adversary can provide users with
a model trained on poisoned data to manipulate prediction
behavior in test stage using a backdoor. The backdoored
models behave normally on clean images, yet can be activated and output incorrect prediction if the input is stamped
with a specific trigger pattern. Most existing backdoor attacks focus on manually defining imperceptible triggers in
input space without considering the abnormality of triggers’ latent representations in the poisoned model. These
attacks are susceptible to backdoor detection algorithms
and even visual inspection. In this paper, We propose a
novel and stealthy backdoor attack - DEFEAT. It poisons
the clean data using adaptive imperceptible perturbation
and restricts latent representation during training process
to strengthen our attack’s stealthiness and resistance to defense algorithms. We conduct extensive experiments on multiple image classifiers using real-world datasets to demonstrate that our attack can 1) hold against the state-of-theart defenses, 2) deceive the victim model with high attack
success without jeopardizing model utility, and 3) provide
practical stealthiness on image data.

Original

Figure 1. Visualization of backdoored images. Top: the original
image; backdoored images generated by BadNets, ReFool, Sinusoidal signal backdoor (SIG), WaNet, DFST and DEFEAT; Middle: the residual maps amplified by 2x; Down: feature heat maps
by GradCam [27].

to give authorization to an unauthorized user. This weakness may seriously affect the training results and meanwhile, users may not be aware that the model is corrupted.
Backdoor attacks [5, 9, 18] corrupt a part of the training data with a specific backdoor trigger and a predefined
target label. The DNNs trained on the poisoned data will
be infected with a backdoor, which leads to misclassifications on those inputs with the specific trigger pattern. In
practice, users may easily access to backdoors, say, downloading public pre-trained models from an untrusted party,
or crawling data from unreliable sources to train their own
models.
A core design of backdoor attacks relies on imperceptible trigger. Adversaries should ensure the backdoored
model to behave normally on clean inputs to make the backdoor hard to be noticed. Several techniques to improve the
stealthiness of backdoor attacks have since been proposed,
e.g., blended and patched trigger pattern approaches [2, 9,
18, 19, 40]. Some works have utilized adversarial example technology in crafting poisoned images [7, 14, 15]. Recently, WaNet [23] proposed a type of warping-based trig-

15213

