Learning to Memorize Feature Hallucination for One-Shot Image Generation
Yu Xie1 ,Yanwei Fu1 ,* Ying Tai2 ,Yun Cao2 ,Junwei Zhu2 ,Chengjie Wang2
1
School of Data Science, Fudan University, 2 Youtu Lab, Tencent
One-Shot

Our Randomly Generated Images from the One-Shot

Figure 1. Task illustration. Given the category of only one available image, our model well synthesizes the images of that category.

Abstract
This paper studies the task of One-Shot image Generation (OSG), where generation network learned on base
dataset should be generalizable to synthesize images of
novel categories with only one available sample per novel
category. Most existing methods for feature transfer in oneshot image generation only learn reusable features implicitly on pre-training tasks. Such methods would be likely
to overfit pre-training tasks. In this paper, we propose
a novel model to explicitly learn and memorize reusable
features that can help hallucinate novel category images.
To be specific, our algorithm learns to decompose image features into the Category-Related (CR) and CategoryIndependent(CI) features. Our model learning to memorize class-independent CI features which are further utilized
by our feature hallucination component to generate target
novel category images. We validate our model on several
benchmarks. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
model effectively boosts the OSG performance and can generate compelling and diverse samples.

1. Introduction
As humans, our knowledge of concepts and the rich
imagination ability may allow us to visualize or ‘halluci* Corresponding author. This work was supported in part by NSFC under Grant (No. 62076067), and SMSTM Project (2018SHZDZX01).

nate’ what the given image of the novel object would look
like in other poses, viewpoints, or background, as shown in
Fig. 1. Essentially, humans can robustly learn novel concepts with very little supervision, benefiting from the wellknown ability of learning to learn. Inspired by such ability,
previous works [6, 26, 28] study the recognition task in the
low-data regime. In contrast, this paper addresses the task
of One-Shot image Generation (OSG), which is defined as
learning to synthesize images of a novel category with only
one training example. Especially, the newly synthesized images should be visually similar to the given example. For
example, given a new example of a novel target category in
Fig. 1, the OSG task aims at generating new possible animal images by implicitly varying their key attributes, such
as poses, viewpoints, and actions while crucially not changing the category of the example image.
Extensive efforts have been devoted to the one-shot image generation task. Specifically, some few-shot recognition models [31, 35] explore the generative models as dataaugmentation methods, while these methods do not necessitate generating images of good visual quality. Then, to
reduce the cost, researchers [16, 24] study training GANs
using only a few images and produce high-quality images
of good texture yet lacking semantic information. On the
other hand, there are many transfer learning-based methods [14, 21, 33, 34] that transfer the pre-training model to
the target task with only a few training samples. In these
works, the models pre-trained on large datasets are adapted
to some specific novel tasks or domains.

9130

