Per-Clip Video Object Segmentation
Kwanyong Park1,†

Sanghyun Woo1,†
1

Seoung Wug Oh2

KAIST

2

In So Kweon1

Joon-Young Lee2

Adobe Research

Abstract
Recently, memory-based approaches show promising results on semi-supervised video object segmentation. These
methods predict object masks frame-by-frame with the help
of frequently updated memory of the previous mask. Different from this per-frame inference, we investigate an alternative perspective by treating video object segmentation
as clip-wise mask propagation. In this per-clip inference
scheme, we update the memory with an interval and simultaneously process a set of consecutive frames (i.e. clip) between the memory updates. The scheme provides two potential benefits: accuracy gain by clip-level optimization and
efficiency gain by parallel computation of multiple frames.
To this end, we propose a new method tailored for the perclip inference. Specifically, we first introduce a clip-wise
operation to refine the features based on intra-clip correlation. In addition, we employ a progressive matching
mechanism for efficient information-passing within a clip.
With the synergy of two modules and a newly proposed perclip based training, our network achieves state-of-the-art
performance on Youtube-VOS 2018/2019 val (84.6% and
84.6%) and DAVIS 2016/2017 val (91.9% and 86.1%). Furthermore, our model shows a great speed-accuracy tradeoff with varying memory update intervals, which leads to
huge flexibility.

Figure 1. (top) An illustrative example of per-clip inference where
the memory update interval L is 5. We mark memory frames using
red image borders. (bottom) Accuracy vs. FPS - We compare
our model under the different inference setting of L with SOTA
methods [9, 29, 35, 50, 52]. We report the overall score and FPS
on Youtube-VOS 2019 [47] validation set. For a fair comparison,
we compute the FPS of all the reported methods using the same
machine. We additionally report STCN variants, extended in the
same way as in ‘Ours’. Note that the FPS axis is in the log scale.

1. Introduction
The goal of semi-supervised video object segmentation
(VOS) is to segment foreground objects in every frame
of a video given a ground truth object mask in the first
frame. One of the latest breakthroughs in this task is a
memory-based approach that the Space-Time Memory network (STM) [29] proposed. STM encodes and stores the
past frames with the corresponding masks as memory (i.e.
memory update step) then estimates the mask of the current (query) frame through learned spatio-temporal memory
matching (i.e. mask prediction step). It iterates the mem† This work was done during an internship at Adobe Research.

ory update and the mask prediction steps frame-by-frame.
Since the success of STM, the memory-based approach
has dominated the field of semi-supervised VOS. Many
variants improve STM with advanced memory read process [8, 14, 22, 34, 35] or efficient memory storage [20, 46].
One notable improvement of the memory-based approach has been made in STCN [9]. It formulates memory
matching as direct image-to-image correspondence learning
and proposes siamese key encoders for memory and query
frames. STCN also shows that L2 similarity is more robust than inner-product for memory matching. With the
advanced memory matching, STCN showcases that mem-

1352

