Iterative Corresponding Geometry: Fusing Region and Depth for
Highly Efficient 3D Tracking of Textureless Objects

1

Manuel Stoiber1,2
Martin Sundermeyer1,2
Rudolph Triebel1,2
2
German Aerospace Center (DLR)
Technical University of Munich (TUM)
{firstname.lastname}@dlr.de

Abstract
Tracking objects in 3D space and predicting their 6DoF
pose is an essential task in computer vision. State-of-theart approaches often rely on object texture to tackle this
problem. However, while they achieve impressive results,
many objects do not contain sufficient texture, violating the
main underlying assumption. In the following, we thus propose ICG, a novel probabilistic tracker that fuses region
and depth information and only requires the object geometry. Our method deploys correspondence lines and points
to iteratively refine the pose. We also implement robust
occlusion handling to improve performance in real-world
settings. Experiments on the YCB-Video, OPT, and Choi
datasets demonstrate that, even for textured objects, our approach outperforms the current state of the art with respect
to accuracy and robustness. At the same time, ICG shows
fast convergence and outstanding efficiency, requiring only
1.3 ms per frame on a single CPU core. Finally, we analyze
the influence of individual components and discuss our performance compared to deep learning-based methods. The
source code of our tracker is publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
For many applications in robotic manipulation and augmented reality, it is essential to know the six degrees of freedom (6DoF) pose of relevant objects. To provide this information at high frequency, 3D object tracking is used. The
goal is to estimate an object’s position and orientation from
consecutive image frames given its 3D model. In real-world
applications, occlusions, motion blur, background clutter,
textureless surfaces, object symmetries, and real-time requirements remain difficult problems. Over the years many
approaches have been developed [29, 69]. They can be differentiated by the use of keypoints, edges, direct optimization, deep learning, object regions, and depth images.
While methods based on keypoints [38, 47, 48, 54, 61],
1 https://github.com/DLR-RM/3DObjectTracking

Figure 1. Tracking of a pentagon object for robotic manipulation.
The image on the left shows an overlay of the object model for the
predicted pose. On the right, probabilities that a pixel belongs to
the background are encoded in a grayscale image. Correspondence
lines are shown in yellow, with high probabilities indicated in red.
Projected correspondence points are illustrated in blue.

edges [12, 17, 20, 52], and direct optimization [1, 13, 34, 53]
were very popular in the past, multiple drawbacks exist.
Both keypoints and direct optimization are not suitable for
textureless objects. Edge-based methods, on the other hand,
typically struggle with background clutter and object texture. Further problems emerge from reflections and motion blur, which change the appearance of both texture and
edges. To overcome those issues, data-driven techniques
that use convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been
proposed [15, 31, 62, 64]. While most of those methods require significant computational resources and a detailed 3D
model, they achieve promising results. For the tracking of
textureless objects in cluttered environments, region-based
techniques have also become very popular [42, 56, 60, 73].
Furthermore, the emergence of consumer depth sensors
has enabled additional trackers that do not rely on texture
[11, 24, 37, 51, 66]. Finally, while all those methods can
be used independently, many approaches demonstrated the
benefits of combining different techniques [25, 26, 44, 59].
In the past, it was shown that a combination of region
and depth has great potential for the tracking of textureless objects [25, 44]. However, while region-based tech-

6855

