Bootstrapping ViTs: Towards Liberating Vision Transformers from Pre-training
Haofei Zhang1,∗ , Jiarui Duan1,∗ , Mengqi Xue1 , Jie Song1,† , Li Sun1 , Mingli Song1,2
1
Zhejiang University 2 Shanghai Institute for Advanced Study of Zhejiang University

Abstract
Recently, vision Transformers (ViTs) are developing
rapidly and starting to challenge the domination of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in the realm of computer vision (CV). With the general-purpose Transformer
architecture replacing the hard-coded inductive biases of
convolution, ViTs have surpassed CNNs, especially in datasufficient circumstances. However, ViTs are prone to over-fit
on small datasets and thus rely on large-scale pre-training,
which expends enormous time. In this paper, we strive to
liberate ViTs from pre-training by introducing CNNs’ inductive biases back to ViTs while preserving their network
architectures for higher upper bound and setting up more
suitable optimization objectives. To begin with, an agent
CNN is designed based on the given ViT with inductive biases. Then a bootstrapping training algorithm is proposed
to jointly optimize the agent and ViT with weight sharing,
during which the ViT learns inductive biases from the intermediate features of the agent. Extensive experiments
on CIFAR-10/100 and ImageNet-1k with limited training
data have shown encouraging results that the inductive
biases help ViTs converge significantly faster and outperform conventional CNNs with even fewer parameters. Our
code is publicly available at https://github.com/
zhfeing/Bootstrapping-ViTs-pytorch.

1. Introduction
The great successes of the convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [21, 23, 29, 42] have liberated researchers
from handcrafting visual features [14, 33]. By means of the
inductive biases [10], i.e., focusing on the localized features
and weight sharing, CNNs are potent tools for tackling visual recognition tasks [5, 21, 36]. Nevertheless, such biases
have constrained their abilities towards building deeper and
larger models, as they have ignored the long-range dependencies [15, 18].
In recent years, Transformers [46] have been proposed for replacing inductive biases with a general* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author, email: sjie@zju.edu.cn

Images

Agent CNN
Weight
Sharing

Inductive
Biases

Vision Transformer

Figure 1. Illustration of our proposed method for optimizing vision Transformers efficiently without pre-training. An agent CNN
is constructed according to the network architecture of the ViT
with shared weights, and the ViT learns inductive biases from intermediate features and predictions of the agent.

purpose network architecture in natural language processing (NLP). Exclusively relying on multi-head attention
mechanisms (MHA), Transformers have the inborn capability to capture the global dependencies within language
tokens and have become the de facto preferred data-driven
models in NLP [2, 17, 35]. Inspired by this, a growing number of researchers have introduced the Transformer architecture into the realm of computer vision (CV) [4,18,45,56].
It turns out an encouraging discovery that vision Transformers (ViTs) outperform state-of-the-art (SOTA) CNNs by a
large margin with a similar amount of parameters.
Despite the appealing achievements, ViTs suffer from
poor performance, especially without adequate annotations
or strong data augmentation strategies [8, 18, 45]. The
reasons for this circumstance are two fold: on the one
hand, the widely adopted multi-head self-attention mechanisms (MHSA) in ViTs have dense connections against
convolution [11], which is hard to optimize without prior
knowledge; on the other hand, Chen et al. [8] have illustrated that ViTs tend to converge to minima with sharp
regions, usually related to limited generalization capability and overfitting problems [7, 25]. Therefore, the typical
training scheme of Transformers in NLP [2, 17] relies on
the large-scale pre-training and then fine-tuning for downstream tasks, which consume enormous GPU (TPU) time
and energy [4, 18, 45]. For instance, Dosovitskiy et al. [18]
spend thousands of TPU days to pre-train a ViT with 303M
images. Spontaneously, it raises the following question:
how can we optimize ViTs efficiently without pre-training.

8944

