Low-Resource Adaptation for Personalized Co-Speech Gesture Generation
Chaitanya Ahuja1 , Dong Won Lee2 & Louis-Philippe Morency1
1
Language Technologies Institute, CMU & 2 Machine Learning Department, CMU
{cahuja, dongwonl}@andrew.cmu.edu, morency@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Personalizing an avatar for co-speech gesture generation
from spoken language requires learning the idiosyncrasies
of a person’s gesture style from a small amount of data. Previous methods in gesture generation require large amounts
of data for each speaker, which is often infeasible. We propose an approach, named DiffGAN, that efficiently personalizes co-speech gesture generation models of a high-resource
source speaker to target speaker with just 2 minutes of target
training data. A unique characteristic of DiffGAN is its ability to account for the crossmodal grounding shift, while also
addressing the distribution shift in the output domain. We
substantiate the effectiveness of our approach a large scale
publicly available dataset through quantitative, qualitative
and user studies, which show that our proposed methodology
significantly outperforms prior approaches for low-resource
adaptation of gesture generation. Code and videos can be
found at https://chahuja.com/diffgan.

1. Introduction
Technologies to assist human communication, both verbal (e.g. spoken language) and nonverbal (e.g. co-speech
gestures), have gained more traction in the past decade. One
promising direction is virtual reality [10, 17, 18, 29] which
aims at creating a more realistic online communication platform for embodied virtual agents [6, 28] and remote avatars
[38, 39]. These advancements could be seen as a normal
progression to speech-based technologies such as intelligent
personal assistants (e.g. Alexa, Siri, Cortana). These agents,
in the future, could also communicate more naturally with a
nonverbal embodiment that complements the verbal communication [33]. To enable this vision of immersive verbal and
nonverbal communication through an avatar, one technical
challenge is generating visual gestures based on input speech
and language [2, 12, 15, 21]. An even more challenging task
is the generation of personalized visual gestures, which reflects the idiosyncratic behaviours of a specific person [33].
The main goal of our paper is to create a personalized gesture generation model (e.g. as part of a personalized avatar)

Figure 1. Overview of the co-speech gesture personalization task.
On the left is a generative source model Gs pre-trained on a source
speaker. We adapt Gs to multiple target models Gt using lowresource data for each of the target speaker.

with limited data from a new speaker. In technical terms,
this problem requires an adaptation of crossmodal generative
models in a low-resource setting as illustrated in Figure 1.
Leveraging an existing source model, pretrained on a large
dataset of one speaker (i.e. source domain), our goal is to
personalize to a new speaker (i.e. target domain) with only 2
minutes of the target data.
The problem setting brings a unique challenge, typically
not studied in typical domain adaptation settings: crossmodal grounding shift. Due to the crossmodal nature of our
task, crossmodal grounding shift refers to the distributional
shift of the relationships between the input spoken language
modalities and output gesture modality. For example, consider a speaker, Aarti, who waves their right hand while
greeting a friend. These gestures are conditionally dependent on what the speaker says. We define such relationships
between the gestures and spoken language as crossmodal
grounding. While these relationships are conditioned on
spoken language, they are also heavily influenced by the
speaker’s idiosyncrasies. Now, consider a new speaker, Bob,
who chooses from a set of two gestures while greeting: a

20566

