Video-Text Representation Learning via Differentiable Weak Temporal Alignment
Dohwan Ko1 Joonmyung Choi1 Juyeon Ko1 Shinyeong Noh1
Kyoung-Woon On2 Eun-Sol Kim3 Hyunwoo J. Kim1 *
1

2

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University
Kakao Brain 3 Department of Computer Science, Hanyang University
{ikodoh, pizard, juyon98, dneirfi, hyunwoojkim}@korea.ac.kr
{kloud.ohn}@kakaobrain.com

{eunsolkim}@hanyang.ac.kr

Abstract

DiDeMo [3], EPIC-KITCHENS [13]. However, since labeling videos is expensive and time-consuming, it does
not scale well for sufficiently large datasets which are essential to learning generic video-text representations that
are readily applicable to a wide range of downstream
tasks that include text-to-video retrieval or video-text retrieval [27, 50, 51, 56], text-based action localization [3, 11],
action segmentation [29, 43] and video question answering [34, 46, 56]. Recent studies suggest that multi-modal
self-supervised learning with a huge amount of data is a
promising alternative to fully supervised methods [15, 54].
To this extent, HowTo100M [36] has been introduced,
which is composed of 100 million pairs of video clips and
captions from 1.22M narrated instructional videos.

Learning generic joint representations for video and text
by a supervised method requires a prohibitively substantial amount of manually annotated video datasets. As a
practical alternative, a large-scale but uncurated and narrated video dataset, HowTo100M, has recently been introduced. But it is still challenging to learn joint embeddings of video and text in a self-supervised manner, due to
its ambiguity and non-sequential alignment. In this paper,
we propose a novel multi-modal self-supervised framework
Video-Text Temporally Weak Alignment-based Contrastive
Learning (VT-TWINS) to capture significant information
from noisy and weakly correlated data using a variant of
Dynamic Time Warping (DTW). We observe that the standard DTW inherently cannot handle weakly correlated data
and only considers the globally optimal alignment path. To
address these problems, we develop a differentiable DTW
which also reflects local information with weak temporal
alignment. Moreover, our proposed model applies a contrastive learning scheme to learn feature representations on
weakly correlated data. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that VT-TWINS attains significant improvements in
multi-modal representation learning and outperforms various challenging downstream tasks. Code is available at
https://github.com/mlvlab/VT-TWINS.

1. Introduction
Learning video-text representations is an important problem in computer vision. In recent years, it has recently
drawn increasing attention due to a large amount of video
data and various applications. Previous works [32, 52, 57]
have achieved exciting results by learning mappings between video clips and texts but they usually require a large
amount of manual annotations such as MSR-VTT [55],
* is the corresponding author.

The HowTo100M is one of the largest video datasets
but it comes with several challenges. It is uncurated and
its video-text pairs are weakly correlated meaning that
given a video clip the caption depicting the visual content
may appear before/after the clip or not even exist (Figure 1). To handle the weakly correlated video-text pairs,
MIL-NCE [35] has proposed a multiple instance learning (MIL)-based contrastive learning adopting Noise Contrastive Learning (NCE) loss [19]. MIL-NCE treats the
multiple captions which are temporally close to one clip
as positive samples allowing one-to-many correspondence.
But this strong assumption often leads to suboptimal representation learning.
In this paper, to address the problem, we develop a
new weak temporal alignment algorithm building upon Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) [41]. In contrast to the standard DTW which is limited to sequential alignment, our
proposed alignment algorithm allows flexibility by skipping irrelevant pairs and starting/ending at arbitrary time
points. Also, it takes into account a globally optimal path
as well as locally optimal paths by introducing local neighborhood smoothing. More importantly, our alignment algorithm is differentiable so we incorporate it into represen-

5016

