Safe-Student for Safe Deep Semi-Supervised Learning with Unseen-Class
Unlabeled Data
Rundong He∗
Shandong University

Zhongyi Han*
Shandong University

Xiankai Lu
Shandong University

rundong he@mail.sdu.edu.cn

hanzhongyicn@gmail.com

carrierlxk@gmail.com

Yilong Yin†
Shandong University
ylyin@sdu.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep semi-supervised learning (SSL) methods aim to
take advantage of abundant unlabeled data to improve the
algorithm performance. In this paper, we consider the problem of safe SSL scenario where unseen-class instances appear in the unlabeled data. This setting is essential and
commonly appears in a variety of real applications. One
intuitive solution is removing these unseen-class instances
after detecting them during the SSL process. Nevertheless, the performance of unseen-class identification is limited by the small number of labeled data and ignoring
the availability of unlabeled data. To take advantage of
these unseen-class data and ensure performance, we propose a safe SSL method called SAFE-STUDENT from the
teacher-student view. Firstly, a new scoring function called
energy-discrepancy (ED) is proposed to help the teacher
model improve the security of instances selection. Then,
a novel unseen-class label distribution learning mechanism
mitigates the unseen-class perturbation by calibrating the
unseen-class label distribution. Finally, we propose an iterative optimization strategy to facilitate teacher-student network learning. Extensive studies on several representative datasets show that SAFE-STUDENT remarkably outperforms the state-of-the-art, verifying the feasibility and
robustness of our method in the under-explored problem.

1. Introduction
The recent remarkable success of deep learning methods
attributes to the advancements of learning algorithms and
the availability of large-scale labeled data [17, 30]. However, large-scale annotated data is scarce and costly to col* Contribute to this work equally
† Corresponding author

lect for various real-world applications, such as medical image analysis [12, 29] and image classification [14, 27]. In
contrast, unlabeled data is plentiful and cheap to collect,
stimulating the great research interest of SSL. Currently,
the research of deep SSL methods can be categorized into
three main branches: consistency regularization [18,31,33],
pseudo-labeling [3, 30, 36], and hybrid methods [1, 2, 32].
Although current deep SSL methods can enhance the
performance of learning models, the prerequisite is that the
unlabeled set derives from the identical distribution with the
labeled set. Once this condition is not satisfied in real scenarios, the performance of SSL models degenerates significantly [4, 9, 27]. Many real-world tasks involve the situation where unlabeled data contains some unseen-class instances. For example, at the beginning stage of the outbreak of COVID-19, the unlabeled data inevitably contains some imperceptible COVID-19 instances in the deep
SSL pneumonia classification [11]. These unseen-class instances heavily hinder the safety of the pneumonia classification model. We define this case as the problem of
Safe Deep semi-supervised learning with Unseen-class unlabeled data (SDU), which accommodates a variety of realworld applications but is rarely considered in the literature.
Considering the unseen-class instances contained in unlabeled data hurt the performance of seen-class classification easily, one intuitive way is to detect these unseenclass instances by unseen-class identification methods, remove them, and then use any existing SSL method to obtain
promising performance. Nevertheless, the performance of
unseen-class identification is limited by the small number of
labeled data. Several deep safe SSL methods are proposed
to alleviate the limitations [3, 4, 9, 37]. These deep safe SSL
methods select reliable seen-class instances from unlabeled
data to increase the number of labeled seen-class instances.
However, the selected seen-class instances are inaccurate
due to limited identification ability and the lack of suit-

14585

