REGTR: End-to-end Point Cloud Correspondences with Transformers
Zi Jian Yew
Gim Hee Lee
National University of Singapore
yewzijian@u.nus.edu

gimhee.lee@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Despite recent success in incorporating learning into
point cloud registration, many works focus on learning feature descriptors and continue to rely on nearest-neighbor
feature matching and outlier filtering through RANSAC to
obtain the final set of correspondences for pose estimation. In this work, we conjecture that attention mechanisms can replace the role of explicit feature matching and
RANSAC, and thus propose an end-to-end framework to
directly predict the final set of correspondences. We use
a network architecture consisting primarily of transformer
layers containing self and cross attentions, and train it to
predict the probability each point lies in the overlapping
region and its corresponding position in the other point
cloud. The required rigid transformation can then be estimated directly from the predicted correspondences without further post-processing. Despite its simplicity, our approach achieves state-of-the-art performance on 3DMatch
and ModelNet benchmarks. Our source code can be found
at https://github.com/yewzijian/RegTR.

1. Introduction
Rigid point cloud registration refers to the problem of
finding the optimal rotation and translation parameters that
align two point clouds. A common solution to point
cloud registration follows the following pipeline: 1) detect
salient keypoints, 2) compute feature descriptors for these
keypoints, 3) obtain putative correspondences via nearest
neighbor matching, and 4) estimate the rigid transformation, typically in a robust fashion using RANSAC. In recent
years, researchers have applied learning to point cloud registration. Many of these works focus on learning the feature
descriptors [14, 15, 54] and sometimes also the keypoint detection [2, 20, 49]. The final two steps generally remain unchanged and these approaches still require nearest neighbor
matching and RANSAC to obtain the final transformation.
These algorithms do not take the post-processing into account during training, and their performance can be sensitive to the post-processing choices to pick out the correct

(a) Input point clouds

REGTR

(b) Predicted correspondences and overlap

Pose Estimation
without RANSAC

(c) Estimated Registration

Figure 1. Our network directly outputs final correspondences and
the overlap scores. The required rigid transformation can then be
directly computed from these correspondences without RANSAC.

correspondences, e.g. number of sampled interest points or
distance threshold in RANSAC.
Several works [44, 45, 50] avoid the non-differentiable
nearest neighbor matching and RANSAC steps by estimating the alignment using soft correspondences computed
from the local feature similarity scores. In this work, we
take a slightly different approach. We observe that the
learned local features in these works are mainly used to establish correspondences. Thus, we focus on having the network directly predict a set of clean correspondences instead
of learning good features. We are motivated by the recent
line of works [7, 30] which make use of transformer attention [43] layers to predict the final outputs for various tasks
with minimal post-processing. Although attention mechanisms have previously been used in registration of both
point clouds [20, 44] and images [35], these works utilize

6677

