Hyperbolic Image Segmentation
Mina GhadimiAtigh1 ,* Julian Schoep1 ,* Erman Acar2 , Nanne van Noord1 , Pascal Mettes1
1
University of Amsterdam, 2 Leiden University, 2 Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam

(a) Prediction uncertainty for free

(b) Boundary information for free

Figure 1. Two examples of insights that come for free with Hyperbolic Image Segmentation. For both examples, each black dot
denotes a pixel embedding in hyperbolic space. Left (Pascal VOC): next to per-pixel classification, the distance to the origin in hyperbolic
space provides a free measure of uncertainty. Right (COCO-Stuff-10k): the hyperbolic positioning of pixels even allows us to pinpoint
interiors and edges of objects, as indicated by the colored boxes and their corresponding pixels in the segmentation map. Other benefits of
hyperbolic embeddings for segmentation include zero-label generalization and better performance in low-dimensional embedding spaces.

Abstract
For image segmentation, the current standard is to perform pixel-level optimization and inference in Euclidean
output embedding spaces through linear hyperplanes. In
this work, we show that hyperbolic manifolds provide a
valuable alternative for image segmentation and propose a
tractable formulation of hierarchical pixel-level classification in hyperbolic space. Hyperbolic Image Segmentation
opens up new possibilities and practical benefits for segmentation, such as uncertainty estimation and boundary information for free, zero-label generalization, and increased
performance in low-dimensional output embeddings.

1. Introduction
A ubiquitous goal in visual representation learning is to
obtain discriminative and generalizable embeddings. Such
visual embeddings are learned in a deep and highly nonlinear fashion. On top, a linear layer separates categories
through Euclidean hyperplanes. The choice for a zero cur* Equal contribution

vature Euclidean embedding space, although a de facto
standard, requires careful re-consideration as it has direct
consequences for how well a task can be optimized given
the latent structure that is inherently present in both the data
and the category space [19, 22, 29].
This work takes inspiration from recent literature advocating hyperbolic manifolds as embedding spaces for machine learning and computer vision tasks. Foundational
work showed that hyperbolic manifolds are able to embed hierarchies and tree-like structures with minimal distortion [29]. Follow up work has demonstrated the benefits of hyperboles for various tasks with latent hierarchical structures, from text embedding [42, 55] to graph inference [8, 12, 22]. Notably, Khrulkov et al. [19] showed that
hyperbolic embeddings also have profound connections to
visual data, due to latent hierarchical structures present in
vision datasets. This connection has brought along early hyperbolic success in computer vision for few-shot and zeroshot learning [15, 19, 23], unsupervised learning [32, 46],
and video recognition [25, 40].
Common amongst current hyperbolic computer vision
works is that the task at hand is global, i.e. an entire image or video is represented by a single vector in the hy-

4453

