S WIN BERT: End-to-End Transformers with Sparse Attention
for Video Captioning
Kevin Lin*, Linjie Li*, Chung-Ching Lin*, Faisal Ahmed, Zhe Gan, Zicheng Liu, Yumao Lu, Lijuan Wang
Microsoft
{keli, lindsey.li, chungching.lin, fiahmed, zhe.gan, zliu, yumaolu, lijuanw}@microsoft.com

Abstract
The canonical approach to video captioning dictates a
caption generation model to learn from ofﬂine-extracted
dense video features. These feature extractors usually operate on video frames sampled at a ﬁxed frame rate and are
often trained on image/video understanding tasks, without
adaption to video captioning data. In this work, we present
S WIN BERT, an end-to-end transformer-based model for
video captioning, which takes video frame patches directly
as inputs, and outputs a natural language description.
Instead of leveraging multiple 2D/3D feature extractors,
our method adopts a video transformer to encode spatialtemporal representations that can adapt to variable lengths
of video input without dedicated design for different frame
rates. Based on this model architecture, we show that video
captioning can beneﬁt signiﬁcantly from more densely sampled video frames as opposed to previous successes with
sparsely sampled video frames for video-and-language understanding tasks (e.g., video question answering). Moreover, to avoid the inherent redundancy in consecutive video
frames, we propose adaptively learning a sparse attention
mask and optimizing it for task-speciﬁc performance improvement through better long-range video sequence modeling. Through extensive experiments on 5 video captioning datasets, we show that S WIN BERT achieves acrossthe-board performance improvements over previous methods, often by a large margin. The learned sparse attention
masks in addition push the limit to new state of the arts,
and can be transferred between different video lengths and
between different datasets. Code is available at https:
//github.com/microsoft/SwinBERT.

1. Introduction
Video captioning [1,10,25,28,35,39,44,45,56] is the task
of describing the visual content of a given video in natural
language. As such, it requires an algorithm to understand
* Equal contribution.

Figure 1. Comparison between previous works and S WIN BERT.
Different from prior works that use ofﬂine-extracted 2D/3D features, we propose to adopt the video transformer as our video encoder, and present an end-to-end fully Transformer-based model
for video captioning. We further propose to adaptively learn a
sparse attention mask to improve long-range video sequence modeling.

and model the spatial-temporal dynamics in video, as well
as the relationships between visual and textual elements,
and to generate a sequence of output words. This has usually been tackled with transformer-based models that learn
from ofﬂine extracted video representations [21, 25, 31, 45]
(Figure 1 (a)). Speciﬁcally, multiple feature extractors,
usually trained on image/video understanding tasks (e.g.,
image classiﬁcation or action recognition), are employed
to extract 2D appearance features and 3D motion features
from densely sampled video frames. Although achieving
promising results, there exists a discrepancy in both data domain and task formulation between these off-the-shelf feature extractors and downstream video captioning. However,
end-to-end training with multiple feature extractors on such
dense video frames is computationally intensive, or even infeasible.

17949

