SS3D: Sparsely-Supervised 3D Object Detection from Point Cloud
Chuandong Liu1,2
Chenqiang Gao1,2 *
Fangcen Liu1,2
Jiang Liu3
Deyu Meng4,5
Xinbo Gao1
1
School of Communication and Information Engineering, Chongqing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, Chongqing, China
2
Chongqing Key Laboratory of Signal and Information Processing, Chongqing, China
3
Meta, Menlo Park, USA
4
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
5
Macau Institute of Systems Engineering, Macau University of Science and Technology, Taipa, Macau
Abstract

Training

Conventional deep learning based methods for 3D object
detection require a large amount of 3D bounding box annotations for training, which is expensive to obtain in practice.
Sparsely annotated object detection, which can largely reduce the annotations, is very challenging since the missingannotated instances would be regarded as the background
during training. In this paper, we propose a sparselysupervised 3D object detection method, named SS3D. Aiming to eliminate the negative supervision caused by the
missing annotations, we design a missing-annotated instance mining module with strict ﬁltering strategies to mine
positive instances. In the meantime, we design a reliable
background mining module and a point cloud ﬁlling data
augmentation strategy to generate the conﬁdent data for iteratively learning with reliable supervision. The proposed
SS3D is a general framework that can be used to learn
any modern 3D object detector. Extensive experiments on
the KITTI dataset reveal that on different 3D detectors, the
proposed SS3D framework with only 20% annotations required can achieve on-par performance comparing to fullysupervised methods. Comparing with the state-of-the-art
semi-supervised 3D objection detection on KITTI, our SS3D
improves the benchmarks by signiﬁcant margins under the
same annotation workload. Moreover, our SS3D also outperforms the state-of-the-art weakly-supervised method by
remarkable margins, highlighting its effectiveness.

Inference

Input

Input

Input

PV-RCNN

Our Model

PV-RCNN

Our Model

Fully-supervised

Sparsely-supervised

Predictions

Predictions

Input

Annotated Ground Truth
Predicted Bounding Box

Figure 1. Demonstration of the required annotations of the fullysupervised method and our method. The left case shows the training stage of PV-RCNN [16] which is a high-performance detector
with full annotations as input, while our model only annotates one
instance for each scene. The right case shows the prediction results
of PV-RCNN and our model, indicating that our model achieves
comparable performance of the fully-supervised method.

augmented/virtual reality, and indoor robotics. Recently,
a number of approaches [1, 17, 18, 34, 35] based on either voxel-wise or point-wise features have been proposed
and achieved high performance on large-scale benchmark
datasets [2, 21]. However, most of the proposed 3D object detectors require fully supervised learning, implying a
fully annotated dataset is required for the model learning.
Compared to 2D image objects, annotating 3D point cloud
objects is more labor-intensive: annotators have to switch
viewpoints or zoom in and out throughout a 3D scene carefully for labeling each 3D object. Therefore, developing 3D
detectors with on-par detection performance, while only requiring light-weighted object annotations, is a meaningful
problem to tackle for practical applications.

1. Introduction
Three-dimensional (3D) object detection, aiming to localize and categorize objects from 3D sensor data (e.g.,
LiDAR point cloud), has attracted increasing attention
due to its diversiﬁed applications in autonomous driving,
* Corresponding author.

8428

