ResSFL: A Resistance Transfer Framework for Defending Model Inversion
Attack in Split Federated Learning
Jingtao Li1 , Adnan Siraj Rakin1 , Xing Chen1 , Zhezhi He2 , Deliang Fan1 , Chaitali Chakrabarti1
School of Electrical Computer and Energy Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai

1

1

{jingtao1, asrakin, xchen382, dfan, chaitali}@asu.edu; 2 {zhezhi.he}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
This work aims to tackle Model Inversion (MI) attack on
Split Federated Learning (SFL). SFL is a recent distributed
training scheme where multiple clients send intermediate
activations (i.e., feature map), instead of raw data, to a central server. While such a scheme helps reduce the computational load at the client end, it opens itself to reconstruction of raw data from intermediate activation by the server.
Existing works on protecting SFL only consider inference
and do not handle attacks during training. So we propose ResSFL, a Split Federated Learning Framework that
is designed to be MI-resistant during training. It is based
on deriving a resistant feature extractor via attacker-aware
training, and using this extractor to initialize the clientside model prior to standard SFL training. Such a method
helps in reducing the computational complexity due to use
of strong inversion model in client-side adversarial training
as well as vulnerability of attacks launched in early training
epochs. On CIFAR-100 dataset, our proposed framework
successfully mitigates MI attack on a VGG-11 model with
a high reconstruction Mean-Square-Error of 0.050 compared to 0.005 obtained by the baseline system. The framework achieves 67.5% accuracy (only 1% accuracy drop)
with very low computation overhead. Code is released at:
https://github.com/zlijingtao/ResSFL.

1. Introduction
Collaborative training schemes have become popular in
applications where preserving data privacy is very important. A representative example is federated learning [13],
which has been used in a broad range of computer vision
tasks involving private data, such as in human face recognition. Split Federated Learning (SFL) [18] is a recent collaborative training scheme that combines the merits of Split
Learning (SL) [6] and Federated Learning (FL). It has signiﬁcant advantages on computation reduction and memory

Private
Inputs

Activation
࡭࢚࢏

Loss

grad

Client-side Model

Server-side Model

(a) Training process of SFL
Inputs

Outputs
Train
Query Client-side Model

Activation
࡭࢚࢏

Reconstructed
Input

Inversion
Model

(b) Server perform MI attack
Step-2: Transfer

SFL scheme

Source
Dataset
MI-Resistant

Clients
Step-1: Pre-training

Server

(c) Our proposed ResSFL two-step framework
Figure 1. ResSFL overview. (a) Multi-client SFL training process. (b) MI attack performed by server. The client-side model is
queried to build inversion model and the clients’ intermediate activations are used to reconstruct private data. (c) High-level view
of the ResSFL framework, consisting of pre-training step and resistance transfer step.

usage compared to FL [7, 13] and signiﬁcantly faster compared to the original SL scheme.
In SFL, a neural network model is split into a clientside model and a server-side model. Multiple clients operate on their private inputs using their client-side model and
pass the intermediate activations to the server. The server
then computes on the more expensive server-side model
and passes gradients back to clients. After an epoch, lo-

10194

