Non-parametric Depth Distribution Modelling based Depth Inference for
Multi-view Stereo
∗

Jiayu Yang1,2 , Jose M. Alvarez2 , Miaomiao Liu1
1
Australian National University, 2 NVIDIA
{jiayu.yang, miaomiao.liu}@anu.edu.au, josea@nvidia.com

Ref. Image

Ref. Depth

Unimodal baseline

PatchmatchNet [18]

Ours

Ref. Image

Error of baseline

Error of [18]

Error of ours

Figure 1. Performance analysis of cascade MVS methods on boundary regions. Compared with the unimodal baseline model, and the
state-of-the-art patchmatch based approach PatchmatchNet [18], our method based on non-parametric depth distribution modeling can
achieve more accurate depth estimation results on the boundary regions with abrupt depth changes.

Abstract
Recent cost volume pyramid based deep neural networks have unlocked the potential of efficiently leveraging
high-resolution images for depth inference from multi-view
stereo. In general, those approaches assume that the depth
of each pixel follows a unimodal distribution. Boundary
pixels usually follow a multi-modal distribution as they represent different depths; Therefore, the assumption results in
an erroneous depth prediction at the coarser level of the
cost volume pyramid and can not be corrected in the refinement levels leading to wrong depth predictions. In contrast,
we propose constructing the cost volume by non-parametric
depth distribution modeling to handle pixels with unimodal
and multi-modal distributions. Our approach outputs multiple depth hypotheses at the coarser level to avoid errors
in the early stage. As we perform local search around
these multiple hypotheses in subsequent levels, our approach does not maintain the rigid depth spatial ordering
and, therefore, we introduce a sparse cost aggregation network to derive information within each volume. We evaluate
our approach extensively on two benchmark datasets: DTU
and Tanks & Temples. Our experimental results show that
our model outperforms existing methods by a large margin
and achieves superior performance on boundary regions.

Code is available at https : / / github . com /
NVlabs/NP-CVP-MVSNet

1. Introduction
Multi-view stereo (MVS) aims to infer the 3D structure,
represented by a depth map, of a scene from a set of images
captured by a camera from multiple viewpoints. It is a fundamental problem for the computer vision community and
has been studied extensively for decades [13].
Recently, learning-based methods using a cost volume
pyramid [3, 5, 22] have emerged as the preferred technique to leverage high-resolution images leading to superior performance compared to other learning-based approaches [23,24]. These approaches usually perform a local
depth search around an initial depth estimate on a cost volume built at the coarser level. Then, assuming each pixel
follows a unimodal distribution, they estimate the depth
for each pixel as the expectation of approximated continuous depth distributions by a few depth samples within a
predefined range [3, 5, 22]. While these approaches have
achieved promising results, they tend to miss small objects
and boundary regions with abrupt depth changes, where the
∗ The work is done during an internship at NVIDIA

8626

