Generalizable Cross-modality Medical Image Segmentation via Style
Augmentation and Dual Normalization

1

Ziqi Zhou1 Lei Qi2 Xin Yang3 Dong Ni3 Yinghuan Shi1 * †
Nanjing University 2 Southeast University 3 Shenzhen University

zhouzq@smail.nju.edu.cn

qilei@seu.edu.cn

{xinyang, nidong}@szu.edu.cn

Abstract

* Corresponding author: Yinghuan Shi. This work was supported
by National Key Research and Development Program of China
(2019YFC0118300), NSFC Major Program (62192783), CAAI-Huawei
MindSpore Project (CAAIXSJLJJ-2021-042A), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation Project (2021M690609), and Jiangsu Natural Science
Foundation Project (BK20210224).
† Ziqi Zhou and Yinghuan Shi are with the State Key Laboratory for
Novel Software Technology and National Institute of Healthcare Data Science, Nanjing University, China. Lei Qi is with the School of Computer
Science and Engineering, Southeast University, China. Xin Yang and
Dong Ni are with the National-Regional Key Technology Engineering Laboratory for Medical Ultrasound, School of Biomedical Engineering, Health
Science Center, the Medical Ultrasound Image Computing Lab, the Marshall Laboratory of Biomedical Engineering, Shenzhen University, China.

T1

90

Ours
DeepAll
DoFE

80
70
Dice (%)

For medical image segmentation, imagine if a model was
only trained using MR images in source domain, how about
its performance to directly segment CT images in target domain? This setting, namely generalizable cross-modality
segmentation, owning its clinical potential, is much more
challenging than other related settings, e.g., domain adaptation. To achieve this goal, we in this paper propose
a novel dual-normalization model by leveraging the augmented source-similar and source-dissimilar images during our generalizable segmentation. To be specific, given
a single source domain, aiming to simulate the possible
appearance change in unseen target domains, we first utilize a nonlinear transformation to augment source-similar
and source-dissimilar images. Then, to sufficiently exploit these two types of augmentations, our proposed dualnormalization based model employs a shared backbone yet
independent batch normalization layer for separate normalization. Afterward, we put forward a style-based selection scheme to automatically choose the appropriate path
in the test stage. Extensive experiments on three publicly
available datasets, i.e., BraTS, Cross-Modality Cardiac,
and Abdominal Multi-Organ datasets, have demonstrated
that our method outperforms other state-of-the-art domain
generalization methods. Code is available at https://
github.com/zzzqzhou/Dual-Normalization.

T2

syh@nju.edu.cn

60
50
40
Easy
30
Prostate

(a) Example slices of T2 & T1.

Hard
BraTS

(b) Performance.

Figure 1. (a) Example slices from BraTS dataset; (b) Comparison
of our method with “DeepAll” and “DoFE” methods on the Crosscenter prostate segmentation task and the Cross-modality brain
tumor segmentation task.

1. Introduction
In recent years, profound progress in medical image segmentation has been achieved by deep convolutional neural
networks [22, 30, 35]. Benefiting from these recent efforts,
the accuracy of segmentation on medical images has now
been substantially improved. Despite their success, the distribution shift between training (or labeled) and test (or unlabeled) data usually results in a severe performance degeneration during the deployment of trained segmentation models. The reason for distribution shift typically come from
different aspects, e.g., different acquisition parameters, various imaging methods or diverse modalities.
To fight against domain shift, several practical settings
have been investigated, among which unsupervised domain
adaptation (UDA) based segmentation [6,14,44] is the most
popular one. Specifically, in UDA setting, by assuming
that test or unlabeled data could be observed, the model is
firstly trained on labeled source domain (i.e., training set)
along with unlabeled target domain (i.e., test set), by reducing their domain gap. Then, the trained model is employed
to segment the images from target domain. Nevertheless,
these UDA based models require that target domain could
210856

