CLIP-NeRF: Text-and-Image Driven Manipulation of Neural Radiance Fields
Can Wang1 , Menglei Chai2 , Mingming He3 , Dongdong Chen4 , Jing Liao1,†
1

City University of Hong Kong 2 Snap Inc. 3 USC Institute for Creative Technologies 4 Microsoft Cloud AI
cwang355-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, cmlatsim@gmail.com, hmm.lillian@gmail.com
cddlyf@gmail.com, jingliao@cityu.edu.hk

and rendering dedicated 3D structures [9, 14, 16, 23, 27, 34]
have motivated the research to beneﬁt the manipulation
from such representations. Among these works, neural radiance ﬁelds (NeRF) [23] utilize a volume rendering technique to render neural implicit representations for highquality novel view synthesis, providing an ideal representation for 3D content.

*

Abstract
We present CLIP-NeRF, a multi-modal 3D object manipulation method for neural radiance ﬁelds (NeRF). By leveraging the joint language-image embedding space of the
recent Contrastive Language-Image Pre-Training (CLIP)
model, we propose a uniﬁed framework that allows manipulating NeRF in a user-friendly way, using either a short
text prompt or an exemplar image. Speciﬁcally, to combine the novel view synthesis capability of NeRF and the
controllable manipulation ability of latent representations
from generative models, we introduce a disentangled conditional NeRF architecture that allows individual control over
both shape and appearance. This is achieved by performing
the shape conditioning via applying a learned deformation
ﬁeld to the positional encoding and deferring color conditioning to the volumetric rendering stage. To bridge this
disentangled latent representation to the CLIP embedding,
we design two code mappers that take a CLIP embedding
as input and update the latent codes to reﬂect the targeted
editing. The mappers are trained with a CLIP-based matching loss to ensure the manipulation accuracy. Furthermore,
we propose an inverse optimization method that accurately
projects an input image to the latent codes for manipulation
to enable editing on real images. We evaluate our approach
by extensive experiments on a variety of text prompts and
exemplar images and also provide an intuitive interface for
interactive editing.

Editing NeRF (e.g., deforming the shape or changing the
appearance color), however, is an extremely challenging
task. First, since NeRF is an implicit function optimized
per scene, we cannot directly edit the shape using the intuitively tools for the explicit representations [35, 40–42].
Second, unlike image manipulation where the single-view
information is enough to guide the editing [20, 43, 44], the
multi-view dependency of NeRF makes the manipulation
way more difﬁcult to control without the multi-view information. More recent works propose conditional NeRF [36],
which trains NeRF on one category of shapes and enables
manipulation via latent space interpolations utilizing the
pre-trained models. Based on the conditional NeRF, EditNeRF [21] takes the ﬁrst step to edit the shape and color of
NeRF given user scribbles. However, due to its limited capacity in shape manipulation, only adding or removing local
parts of the object is allows. In addition to achieving more
compelling and complicated manipulation, we seek to edit
NeRF in more intuitive ways, such as using a text prompt
or a single reference image.

In this paper, we explore how to individually manipulate the shape and the appearance of NeRF based on a
text prompt or a reference image in a uniﬁed framework.
Our framework is built on a novel disentangled conditional
1. Introduction
NeRF architecture, which is controlled by the latent space
disentangled into a shape code and an appearance code. The
With the explosive growth of 3D assets, the demand for
shape code guides the learning of a deformation ﬁeld to
manipulating 3D content to achieve versatile re-creation is
warp the volume to a new geometry, while the appearance
rising rapidly. While most existing 3D editing methods opcode allows controlling the emitted color of volumetric renerate on explicit 3D representations [7, 15, 45], the recent
dering. Based on our disentangled NeRF model, we take
advances of implicit volumetric representations in capturing
advantage of the recently proposed Contrastive Language†
Image Pre-training (CLIP) model [33] to learn two code
* Jing Liao is the corresponding author. Our project page is https:
3835 mappers, which map CLIP features to the latent space to
//cassiepython.github.io/clipnerf/
1

