PyMiceTracking: An Open-Source Toolbox For Real-Time Behavioral
Neuroscience Experiments
Richardson Menezes
Department of Computer
Engineering and Automation
UFRN, Natal, Brazil

Aron de Miranda
Brain Institute
Natal, Brazil

Abstract
The development of computational tools allows the advancement of research in behavioral neuroscience and elevates the limits of experiment design. Many behavioral
experiments need to determine the animal’s position from its
tracking, which is crucial for real-time decision-making and
further analysis of experimental data. Modern experimental
designs usually generate the recording of a large amount of
data, requiring the development of automatic computational
tools and intelligent algorithms for timely data acquisition
and processing. The proposed tool in this study initially
operates with the acquisition of images. Then the animal
tracking step begins with background subtraction, followed
by the animal contour detection and morphological operations to remove noise in the detected shapes. Finally, in
the final stage of the algorithm, the principal components
analysis (PCA) is applied in the obtained shape, resulting in
the animal’s gaze direction.

1. Introduction
The main goal of systems neuroscience is to describe
causal relationships between neural circuit activity and animal behavior. Over the last two decades, new technologies
for monitoring [1, 2] and manipulating [3] neural activity
with striking spatiotemporal resolution in freely behaving
animals have become available. To take full advantage of
these technologies, we critically depend on the ability to
interfere with real-time neural circuit activity in response to
ongoing animal behavior. However, current technology for
accurate online and real-time animal behavior tracking is a
major computational challenge in neuroscience experiments.
There are many approaches to tracking animal head direction. Classically, head-orientation detection is performed by
tracking at least two LEDs that are attached over the head of
the animal for this specific purpose [4–6]. However, LEDs

Helton Maia
School of Science and Technology
UFRN, Natal, Brazil
helton.maia@ect.ufrn.br

represent additional weight for the animal headstage with
significant consequences in the case of small animals, like
the mouse.
Recent advances in tracking technology using machine
learning [7] can satisfactorily solve the problem of headdirection tracking without the necessity of using LEDs. However, the computational cost of its implementation turns difficult its utilization for real-time online detection of behavioral
parameters in neuroscience experiments.
This study presents the development of a computational
tool called PyMiceTracking. It is written in the Python programming language. It allows simultaneous and real-time
tracking of rodent body parts without markers (e.g., center of mass, snout tip, and tail base position), allowing for
closed-loop experiments. PyMiceTracking also provides
an algorithm for estimation of the yaw of the head (i.e., the
head’s orientation in the 2D coordinates over the plane where
the animal navigates). Combining the simultaneous real-time
tracking of mouse body parts and head orientation allows
several possibilities for social and objects experimental investigation designs that could be associated with sensory and
optogenetic stimulations.
It is intended to demonstrate the functioning and implementation details of the PyMiceTracking toolbox and the
algorithms used for detecting body parts and estimating head
orientation. Is presented a benchmark test using online
available mouse behavioral datasets. Finally, we provide
a step-by-step guide for using PyMiceTracking covering all
installation steps and the creation of customized processing
pipelines for experiments with closed-loop feedback stimulation.

2. Methods
2.1. Computational Development
Here, computational development techniques are described, including the environment for software development,

