Rethinking Image Cropping:
Exploring Diverse Compositions from Global Views
Gengyun Jia, Huaibo Huang, Chaoyou Fu, Ran He*
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
NLPR & CRIPAC, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{gengyun.jia, huaibo.huang}@cripac.ia.ac.cn, {chaoyou.fu, rhe}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Existing image cropping works mainly use anchor evaluation methods or coordinate regression methods. However,
it is difficult for pre-defined anchors to cover good crops
globally, and the regression methods ignore the cropping
diversity. In this paper, we regard image cropping as a
set prediction problem. A set of crops regressed from multiple learnable anchors is matched with the labeled good
crops, and a classifier is trained using the matching results
to select a valid subset from all the predictions. This new
perspective equips our model with globality and diversity,
mitigating the shortcomings but inherit the strengthens of
previous methods. Despite the advantages, the set prediction method causes inconsistency between the validity labels and the crops. To deal with this problem, we propose to
smooth the validity labels with two different methods. The
first method that uses crop qualities as direct guidance is
designed for the datasets with nearly dense quality labels.
The second method based on the self distillation can be used
in sparsely labeled datasets. Experimental results on the
public datasets show the merits of our approach over stateof-the-art counterparts.

Figure 1. A diagram of different image cropping models. The anchor evaluation model (top left) can output diverse crops from predefined anchors, but these anchors cannot encompass good crops
globally. The coordinate regression model (top right) crops from
global image, but just outputs one good crop and ignores the others
(e.g. the box with red dashed line). Our model (bottom) combines
their strengths and overcomes their weaknesses, leading to diverse
crops from global views.

1. Introduction
Image cropping has been widely used to improve image composition. Automatic image cropping is developed to make the technique friendly to amateurs and nonspecialists. Previous works [3, 7, 26, 31, 47] usually merge
the expert knowledge such as the “Rule of Thirds” into the
models to guide the cropping. Such methods enable interpretability of the cropping process but are weak in learning
sophisticated features. In recent years, many data-driven
approaches built upon deep CNNs have been proposed.
These methods are roughly categorized into anchor evaluation methods [4, 17, 20, 37–40, 43, 44] and coordinate re* corresponding author

gression methods [8, 11, 14–16, 24]. The former assigns
quality scores to the pre-defined anchors. The latter directly
regresses the coordinates of one crop on the input images.
The anchor evaluation methods show the merits of generating diverse good crops. As shown in the top-left of Fig. 1,
users can select an arbitrary number of crops according to
the evaluated scores. But most anchor generation rules cannot search the cropping spaces globally, resulting in the possible omission of good crops. On the contrary, coordinate
regression methods use a global view to cover all possibilities. But they only predict one crop from an image, which
is insufficient for most images as shown in the top-right of
Fig. 1. Besides, learning one best crop may cause ambiguity

2446

