Accurate 3D Body Shape Regression using Metric and Semantic Attributes
Vasileios Choutas*1 , Lea Müller*1 , Chun-Hao P. Huang1 , Siyu Tang2 , Dimitrios Tzionas1 , Michael J. Black1
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 ETH Zürich
{vchoutas, lea.mueller, paul.huang, stang, dtzionas, black}@tuebingen.mpg.de
* Equal contribution, alphabetical order

Figure 1. Existing work on 3D human reconstruction from a color image focuses mainly on pose. We present SHAPY, a model that
focuses on body shape and learns to predict dense 3D shape from a color image, using crowd-sourced linguistic shape attributes. Even
with this weak supervision, SHAPY outperforms the state of the art (SOTA) [52] on in-the-wild images with varied clothing.

Abstract
While methods that regress 3D human meshes from images have progressed rapidly, the estimated body shapes often do not capture the true human shape. This is problematic since, for many applications, accurate body shape is as
important as pose. The key reason that body shape accuracy
lags pose accuracy is the lack of data. While humans can label 2D joints, and these constrain 3D pose, it is not so easy
to “label” 3D body shape. Since paired data with images
and 3D body shape are rare, we exploit two sources of information: (1) we collect internet images of diverse “fashion”
models together with a small set of anthropometric measurements; (2) we collect linguistic shape attributes for a
wide range of 3D body meshes and the model images. Taken
together, these datasets provide sufficient constraints to infer dense 3D shape. We exploit the anthropometric measurements and linguistic shape attributes in several novel
ways to train a neural network, called SHAPY, that regresses 3D human pose and shape from an RGB image.

We evaluate SHAPY on public benchmarks, but note that
they either lack significant body shape variation, groundtruth shape, or clothing variation. Thus, we collect a new
dataset for evaluating 3D human shape estimation, called
HBW, containing photos of “Human Bodies in the Wild”
for which we have ground-truth 3D body scans. On this
new benchmark, SHAPY significantly outperforms state-ofthe-art methods on the task of 3D body shape estimation.
This is the first demonstration that 3D body shape regression from images can be trained from easy-to-obtain anthropometric measurements and linguistic shape attributes.
Our model and data are available at: shapy.is.tue.mpg.de

1. Introduction
The field of 3D human pose and shape (HPS) estimation
is progressing rapidly and methods now regress accurate 3D
pose from a single image [7, 26, 28, 30–33, 43, 65, 67]. Un-

2718

