RIO: Rotation-equivariance supervised learning of robust inertial odometry
Caifa Zhou1
Dandan Zeng
Yongliang Wang
Xiya Cao1 *
Riemann lab, 2012 Laboratories, Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd

Abstract

1. Introduction
Accurate and robust localization with low-cost Inertial
Measurement Units (IMUs) is an ideal solution to a wide
range of applications from augmented reality [34] to indoor positioning services [30,35]. An IMU usually consists
of accelerometers and gyroscopes, sometimes magnetometers and can sample linear acceleration, angular velocity and
magnetic field density in an energy-efficient way. It can be
light-weight and pretty cheap that many mobile devices like
smartphones and VR headsets are instrumented with it. In
many scenarios such as indoor or underground where global
navigation satellite system is not available, ubiquitous IMU
is a promising signal source, which can provide reliable and
continuous location service. Unlike Visual-Inertial Odometry (VIO) [9] that is sensitive to surroundings and cannot
work under extreme lighting, IMU-only inertial odometry
is more desired and possible to perform accurate and robust
localization every time and everywhere [11, 20].
Recent advances of data-driven approaches (e.g., IONet
[4], RoNIN [14], TLIO [20]) based on machine learning
* 1 denotes equal contribution.

uncertainty estimation

Ground-truth
Estimation

Ground-truth
Estimation

6
Y axis, meters

This paper introduces rotation-equivariance as a selfsupervisor to train inertial odometry models. We demonstrate that the self-supervised scheme provides a powerful
supervisory signal at training phase as well as at inference
stage. It reduces the reliance on massive amounts of labeled
data for training a robust model and makes it possible to update the model using various unlabeled data. Further, we
propose adaptive Test-Time Training (TTT) based on uncertainty estimations in order to enhance the generalizability
of the inertial odometry to various unseen data. We show
in experiments that the Rotation-equivariance-supervised
Inertial Odometry (RIO) trained with 30% data achieves
on par performance with a model trained with the whole
dataset. Adaptive TTT improves models’ performance in
all cases and makes more than 25% improvements under
several scenarios. We release our code and dataset at this
website.

11

0

50

100
150
auxiliary losses

0

50

100
Velocity MSE

0

50
100
150
Timestamps, seconds

1

-4

150

-9
0

3
6
X axis, meters

-3

0
3
6
X axis, meters

9

Figure 1. An example trajectory estimation improved by RIO.
On the left, we show original model performance before rotationequivariance supervised learning and right is the result of RIO.
In the middle, we show uncertainty estimation (orange), auxiliary losses (blue) computed by the self-supervised task, original
estimated velocity MSE (red) and updated model velocity MSE
(green).

and deep learning have pushed the limit of traditional inertial odometry [15, 22]. These advancements make IMU device usable in the wild. However, to the best of our knowledge, all of them are based on purely supervised learning,
which is notoriously weak under distribution shifts. IMU
sensor data varies widely with different devices and users,
and sometimes the sensor data drifts over time. It is hard to
control the distribution variability when the supervised algorithms are deployed in diverse applications. A rich and
diverse datasets such as RoNIN [14] can alleviate the problem to some extent, but it is cumbersome to collect such a
big dataset and there are always scenarios that the dataset
does not include and therefore the supervised model cannot
capture their characteristics.
In order to mitigate the challenge of distribution shift
in real-world, we propose a geometric constraint, rotationequivariance, that can improve generalizability of deep
model in training phase and help the deep model to learn
from shifted sensor data at inference time. HeadingAgnostic Coordinate Frame (HACF) is one coordinate
frame whose Z-axis is aligned with gravity as presented in
RoNIN [14]. We use HACF to solve pedestrian trajectory
estimation and constrain rotation under horizontal plane.
The assumption of rotation-equivariance is when the IMU

6614

