Representing 3D Shapes with Probabilistic Directed Distance Fields
Tristan Aumentado-Armstrong1,2,3 Stavros Tsogkas1 Sven Dickinson1,2,3 Allan Jepson1,2
1
Samsung AI Centre Toronto 2 University of Toronto 3 Vector Institute for AI
tristan.a@partner.samsung.com, {stavros.t,s.dickinson,allan.jepson}@samsung.com

Abstract

tempts to infer the 3D factors (e.g., shape, pose, texture,
lighting) that gave rise to its 2D perceptions.

Differentiable rendering is an essential operation in
modern vision, allowing inverse graphics approaches to 3D
understanding to be utilized in modern machine learning
frameworks. Explicit shape representations (voxels, point
clouds, or meshes), while relatively easily rendered, often
suffer from limited geometric fidelity or topological constraints. On the other hand, implicit representations (occupancy, distance, or radiance fields) preserve greater fidelity,
but suffer from complex or inefficient rendering processes,
limiting scalability. In this work, we endeavour to address
both shortcomings with a novel shape representation that
allows fast differentiable rendering within an implicit architecture. Building on implicit distance representations,
we define Directed Distance Fields (DDFs), which map an
oriented point (position and direction) to surface visibility
and depth. Such a field can render a depth map with a single
forward pass per pixel, enable differential surface geometry
extraction (e.g., surface normals and curvatures) via network derivatives, be easily composed, and permit extraction
of classical unsigned distance fields. Using probabilistic
DDFs (PDDFs), we show how to model inherent discontinuities in the underlying field. Finally, we apply our method
to fitting single shapes, unpaired 3D-aware generative image modelling, and single-image 3D reconstruction tasks,
showcasing strong performance with simple architectural
components via the versatility of our representation.

This can permit learning more powerful representations
with weaker supervision. Neural radiance fields (NeRFs)
[47], for instance, can be used for 3D inference [89] and
3D-aware generative image modelling [4, 51, 67], trained
entirely on 2D data. Similarly, implicit geometric fields,
such as occupancy fields [46] and signed distance fields
(SDFs) [55], have recently been used in conjunction with
differentiable renderering as well [25, 41, 52]. Other works
have learned textured mesh inference and/or generation via
rendering-based approaches (e.g., [1, 13, 19, 57, 76]).

1. Introduction
Three-dimensional shapes are represented in a variety of
ways in modern computer vision and machine learning systems, with differing utilities depending on the task to which
they are applied. Recent advances in representation learning, however, capitalize on the inherent 3D structure of the
world, and its link to generating the 2D images seen by
our eyes and algorithms, via differentiable rendering procedures compatible with neural network architectures. This
enables an analysis-by-synthesis paradigm [90] that treats
vision as “inverse graphics” [35, 63], wherein the model at-

Nevertheless, it is still not always clear which representation is best for a given task. Voxels and point clouds tend to
have reduced geometric fidelity, while meshes suffer from
the difficulties inherent in discrete structure generation, often leading to topological and textural fidelity constraints,
or dependence of rendering efficiency on shape complexity [39]. While implicit shapes can have superior fidelity,
they struggle with complex or inefficient rendering procedures, requiring multiple network forward passes and/or
complex calculations per pixel [41, 47, 72], and may be difficult to use for certain tasks (e.g., deformation, segmentation, or correspondence). Thus, a natural question is how
to design a method capable of fast differentiable rendering,
yet still retaining high-fidelity geometric information that is
useful for a variety of downstream applications.
In this work, we explore directed distance fields (DDFs),
a representation that (i) captures the detailed geometry of
a scene or object, including higher-order differential quantities and internal geometry, (ii) can be differentiably rendered efficiently, compared to common implicit shape or
radiance-based approaches, (iii) is trainable with (pointwise) depth data, (iv) can be easily composed, and (v) allows extraction of classical unsigned distance fields. The
definition is simple: for a given shape, we learn a field that
maps any position and orientation to visibility (i.e., whether
the surface exists from that position along that direction)
and distance (i.e., how far the surface is along that ray, if
it is visible). Fig. 1 illustrates how DDFs can be viewed
as implicitly storing all possible depth images of a given

19343

