Threshold Matters in WSSS: Manipulating the Activation for the Robust and
Accurate Segmentation Model Against Thresholds
Minhyun Lee*, Dongseob Kim∗ , Hyunjung Shim†
Yonsei University
{lmh315, kou.k, kateshim}@yonsei.ac.kr

Distribution of the optimal threshold

Abstract
Weakly-supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) has
recently gained much attention for its promise to train segmentation models only with image-level labels. Existing
WSSS methods commonly argue that the sparse coverage
of CAM incurs the performance bottleneck of WSSS. This
paper provides analytical and empirical evidence that the
actual bottleneck may not be sparse coverage but a global
thresholding scheme applied after CAM. Then, we show that
this issue can be mitigated by satisfying two conditions; 1)
reducing the imbalance in the foreground activation and 2)
increasing the gap between the foreground and the background activation. Based on these findings, we propose
a novel activation manipulation network with a per-pixel
classification loss and a label conditioning module. Perpixel classification naturally induces two-level activation in
activation maps, which can penalize the most discriminative parts, promote the less discriminative parts, and deactivate the background regions. Label conditioning imposes that the output label of pseudo-masks should be any
of true image-level labels; it penalizes the wrong activation
assigned to non-target classes. Based on extensive analysis and evaluations, we demonstrate that each component
helps produce accurate pseudo-masks, achieving the robustness against the choice of the global threshold. Finally,
our model achieves state-of-the-art records on both PASCAL VOC 2012 and MS COCO 2014 datasets. The code is
available at https://github.com/gaviotas/AMN.

1. Introduction
Weakly-supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) requires only weak supervision (e.g., image-level labels [35,
36], scribbles [31], bounding boxes [19]) as opposed to the
fully supervised model, which involves costly pixel-level
annotations. In this work, we address WSSS using image* indicates an equal contribution.
† Hyunjung Shim is a corresponding author.

(a)

Frequency

𝜏𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑏𝑎𝑙 = 0.15

𝜏𝑜𝑝𝑡

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Motivating examples show that the optimal threshold per
image (τopt ) from the same dog class is quite different from each
other. (a) The distribution of the optimal threshold on PASCAL
VOC 2012 train set, (b) the activation maps, (c) the thresholded
masks using a global threshold τglobal = 0.15.

level labels because of its low labeling cost. The overall
pipeline of WSSS consists of two stages. The pseudo-mask
is first generated from an image classifier, and then it is used
as supervision to train a segmentation network.
The prevalent technique for generating pseudo-masks is
class activation mapping (CAM) [45]. It uses the intermediate classifier’s activation to compute the class activation
map corresponding to its image-level label. The common
practice of WSSS is to apply a global threshold to the activation map (i.e., assigning the object class if the activation
is greater than the threshold) for obtaining the pseudo-mask.
Existing methods point out that the pseudo-mask obtained
from CAM only captures the most discriminative parts of
the object, incurring the performance bottleneck. Therefore, most existing studies have expanded object coverage
by manipulating the image [29, 39] or feature map [18, 26].
However, we argue that the performance bottleneck of

4330

