Leverage Your Local and Global Representations: A New Self-Supervised
Learning Strategy
Tong Zhang1 Congpei Qiu2 Wei Ke2 Sabine Süsstrunk1 Mathieu Salzmann1
1
School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL, Switzerland
2
Xi’an Jiaotong University, China

Abstract
Self-supervised learning (SSL) methods aim to learn
view-invariant representations by maximizing the similarity between the features extracted from different crops of
the same image regardless of cropping size and content. In
essence, this strategy ignores the fact that two crops may
truly contain different image information, e.g., background
and small objects, and thus tends to restrain the diversity of
the learned representations. In this work, we address this
issue by introducing a new self-supervised learning strategy, LoGo, that explicitly reasons about Local and Global
crops. To achieve view invariance, LoGo encourages similarity between global crops from the same image, as well
as between a global and a local crop. However, to correctly
encode the fact that the content of smaller crops may differ
entirely, LoGo promotes two local crops to have dissimilar representations, while being close to global crops. Our
LoGo strategy can easily be applied to existing SSL methods. Our extensive experiments on a variety of datasets and
using different self-supervised learning frameworks validate its superiority over existing approaches. Noticeably,
we achieve better results than supervised models on transfer learning when using only 1/10 of the data.1

1. Introduction
Building on the great success of supervised learning in
visual tasks such as image classification [20,25,26] and object detection [15,19], significant efforts have recently been
dedicated to learning high-level representations without human annotations. Inspired by the pre-training stage in natural language processing, e.g. GPT [32] and BERT [13], such
a self-supervised learning (SSL) approach aims to learn
representations that extract useful information for a downstream task in an unsupervised manner, thus providing an
1 Our
code and pretrained models can be found at
https://github.com/ztt1024/LoGo-SSL. Correspondence to Ke Wei
(wei.ke@mail.xjtu.edu.cn).

effective initialization to start from when some annotated
data for the downstream tasks become available. Recently,
SSL has been proven to be as effective as supervised pretraining, or even more effective in some cases [6, 10].
The basic principle behind existing SSL approaches can
be traced back to [17, 29] and consists of learning a representation that is shared across different views of the same
input, yet carries discriminative information. In vision
tasks, this is typically achieved by maximizing the similarity between two augmented views of the same image while
penalizing trivial solutions using various techniques. For
example, contrastive learning [9, 18] incorporates negative
pairs, where one view comes from a different image, to
prevent the network from constantly generating the same
output; non-contrastive methods [11, 16] only rely on positive pairs by modifying the back-propagation mechanism to
prevent collapse; clustering-based methods [2, 6] perform
online clustering to keep the consistency between exemplar representations (the centroids of clusters) and different
views of the same image.
Intuitively, one should expect the representations of random crops with smaller sizes to have a larger variance than
that of larger crops because, as shown in Figure 1, they may
truly encode entirely different content. Nevertheless, existing methods encourage all the random crops of the same
image to have similar representations. This complicates the
learning process and tends to lead the network to discarding valuable image information to achieve such invariance.
This was, for example, observed in [7], where the multicrop strategy of [6] was shown to yield a performance drop
when applied to other SSL methods, such as BYOL [16],
SimSiam [11], and MoCo [18]
In this paper, we address this limitation by introducing a
new multi-crop SSL strategy, LoGo, which exploits the relationships between local and global image patches in different, well-adapted ways, and can easily be integrated into
existing SSL frameworks. Specifically, we exploit two different kinds of crops: Large ones that encompass a global
view of the input image, thus being well-suited to learn a
view-invariant representation; and small ones with a higher

16580

