Bridge-Prompt: Towards Ordinal Action Understanding in Instructional Videos
Muheng Li1 , Lei Chen1 , Yueqi Duan2 , Zhilan Hu3 , Jianjiang Feng1 , Jie Zhou1 , Jiwen Lu†,1
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
3
Media Technology Institute, Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.

Abstract
…

Action recognition models have shown a promising capability to classify human actions in short video clips. In a
real scenario, multiple correlated human actions commonly
occur in particular orders, forming semantically meaningful human activities. Conventional action recognition approaches focus on analyzing single actions. However, they
fail to fully reason about the contextual relations between
adjacent actions, which provide potential temporal logic
for understanding long videos. In this paper, we propose
a prompt-based framework, Bridge-Prompt (Br-Prompt), to
model the semantics across adjacent actions, so that it simultaneously exploits both out-of-context and contextual
information from a series of ordinal actions in instructional videos. More specifically, we reformulate the individual action labels as integrated text prompts for supervision, which bridge the gap between individual action semantics. The generated text prompts are paired with corresponding video clips, and together co-train the text encoder and the video encoder via a contrastive approach.
The learned vision encoder has a stronger capability for
ordinal-action-related downstream tasks, e.g. action segmentation and human activity recognition. We evaluate the
performances of our approach on several video datasets:
Georgia Tech Egocentric Activities (GTEA), 50Salads, and
the Breakfast dataset. Br-Prompt achieves state-of-the-art
on multiple benchmarks. Code is available at: https:
//github.com/ttlmh/Bridge-Prompt.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the flourish of video analysis. Understanding human actions is the key to analyzing massive amounts of video data, which is conducive to
a wide range of applications including video retrieval [8],
video captioning [28] and video summarization [2]. Among
the many sub-topics in action analysis, action recognition is
† Corresponding author.

…

taking
bread

…

putting cheese
on bread

(a) Discrete class-ID

1

2

…

…

adding mayonnaise
and mustard

…

(unknown)

(c) Text prompt representations

3

?

This video contains four actions in total.
Firstly, the person is taking bread.

(b) Graph-based class-ID

After that, he/she is putting cheese on bread.
Then, the step is adding mayonnaise and mustard.

1

Graph

2

3

?

Finally, put the bread on cheese and bread.
Text prompts
Text embeddings

Figure 1. Comparisons of conventional representations and
Bridge-Prompt representations for ordinal actions. The human activity of making cheese sandwich contains four actions. Suppose
the final action putting the bread on cheese and bread is unseen
in training set. Conventional approaches in (a) and (b) are unable
to depict the intra-semantics and inter-relations of all four actions,
while our Bridge-Prompt representations in (c) is able to capture
the full semantic information.

a basic and core issue, which has made remarkable progress
under various well-designed models [3, 5, 11].
Meanwhile, the current research trend of video analysis is experiencing a transition from understanding singlesemantics short video clips to longer and more complex
videos [38]. The increased attention on instructional video
analysis has shown the significance of understanding semantically rich video contents [29, 38, 46]. From the perspective of action analysis, conventional action recognition
approaches focus on classifying the single action being performed in a short video clip [5, 36]. In contrast, instructional video analysis methods need to study a series of actions being performed in longer time duration. In order to
analyze instructional videos, we do not only need to understand the semantics of individual actions, but are also

19880

