NinjaDesc: Content-Concealing Visual Descriptors via Adversarial Learning
Tony Ng1,2 Hyo Jin Kim1† Vincent T. Lee1 Daniel DeTone1 Tsun-Yi Yang1
Tianwei Shen1 Eddy Ilg1 Vassileios Balntas1 Krystian Mikolajczyk2 Chris Sweeney1
1
Reality Labs, Meta 2 Imperial College London

Abstract
In the light of recent analyses on privacy-concerning
scene revelation from visual descriptors, we develop descriptors that conceal the input image content. In particular, we propose an adversarial learning framework for
training visual descriptors that prevent image reconstruction, while maintaining the matching accuracy. We let a feature encoding network and image reconstruction network
compete with each other, such that the feature encoder tries
to impede the image reconstruction with its generated descriptors, while the reconstructor tries to recover the input image from the descriptors. The experimental results
demonstrate that the visual descriptors obtained with our
method significantly deteriorate the image reconstruction
quality with minimal impact on correspondence matching
and camera localization performance.

1. Introduction
Local visual descriptors [7, 13, 56, 72, 74] are fundamental to a wide range of computer vision applications such
as SLAM [15, 40, 42, 45], SfM [1, 64, 71], wide-baseline
stereo [30, 43], calibration [49], tracking [24, 44, 51], image
retrieval [3, 4, 32, 46, 47, 66, 77, 78], and camera pose estimation [5,17,54,61,62,75,76]. These descriptors represent
local regions of images and are used to establish local correspondences between and across images and 3D models.
The descriptors take the form of vectors in highdimensional space, and thus are not directly interpretable
by humans. However, researchers have shown that it is possible to reveal the input images from local visual descriptors [10, 16, 80]. With the recent advances in deep learning,
the quality of the reconstructed image content has been significantly improved [11, 53]. This poses potential privacy
concerns for visual descriptors if they are used for sensitive
data without proper encryption [11, 69, 80].
To prevent the reconstruction of the image content from
visual descriptors, several methods have been proposed.
These methods include obfuscating keypoint locations by

Figure 1. Our proposed content-concealing visual descriptor. a)
We train NinjaNet, the content-concealing network via adversarial learning to give NinjaDesc. b) On the two examples shown,
we compare inversions on SOSNet [74] descriptors vs. NinjaDesc
(encoding SOSNet with NinjaNet). c) NinjaDesc is able to conceal
facial features and landmark structures, while retaining correspondences. Image credits: laylamoran4battersea & sgerner (Flickr)1 .

lifting them to lines that pass through the original points [21,
65, 69, 70], or to affine subspaces with augmented adversarial feature samples [18] to increase the difficulty of recovering the original images. However, recent work [9] has
demonstrated that the closest points between lines can yield
a good approximation to the original points’ locations.
In this work, we explore whether such local feature inversion could be mitigated at the descriptor level. Ideally,
we want a descriptor that does not reveal the image content without a compromise in its performance. This may
seem counter-intuitive due to the trade-off between utility
and privacy discussed in the recent analysis on visual descriptors [11], where the utility is defined as matching accuracy, and the privacy is defined as non-invertibility of the
descriptors. The analysis showed that the more useful the
descriptors are for correspondence matching, the easier it is
to invert them. To minimize this trade-off, we propose an

† Corresponding author.

1 CC BY 2.0 & CC BY-SA 2.0 licenses.

12797

