VALHALLA: Visual Hallucination for Machine Translation
Yi Li* 1
1

Rameswar Panda2 Yoon Kim3 Chun-Fu (Richard) Chen2
Rogerio Feris2 David Cox2 Nuno Vasconcelos1

UC San Diego, 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, 3 MIT CSAIL

Abstract
Designing better machine translation systems by considering auxiliary inputs such as images has attracted much
attention in recent years. While existing methods show
promising performance over the conventional text-only translation systems, they typically require paired text and image
as input during inference, which limits their applicability
to real-world scenarios. In this paper, we introduce a visual hallucination framework, called VALHALLA, which
requires only source sentences at inference time and instead uses hallucinated visual representations for multimodal machine translation. In particular, given a source
sentence an autoregressive hallucination transformer is
used to predict a discrete visual representation from the
input text, and the combined text and hallucinated representations are utilized to obtain the target translation. We
train the hallucination transformer jointly with the translation transformer using standard backpropagation with
cross-entropy losses while being guided by an additional
loss that encourages consistency between predictions using either ground-truth or hallucinated visual representations. Extensive experiments on three standard translation
datasets with a diverse set of language pairs demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach over both text-only baselines and state-of-the-art methods. Project page: http:
//www.svcl.ucsd.edu/projects/valhalla.

1. Introduction
Machine Translation (MT) is a core task in natural language processing and has undergone several paradigm shifts
over the past few decades, from early rules-based systems [38] to pipelined statistical MT approaches [25, 33]
to recent end-to-end neural network-based models [9, 58,
1, 62]. While such advances have led to impressive results
on standard benchmarks, existing systems by and large utilize text-only information and lack any explicit grounding
* Work done during an internship at the MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab.

EN: A snowboarder
wearing a red coat is
going down a snowcovered slope.

(b) Visual Context

(a)

DE: Ein snowboarder in
einem roten anzug fährt
eine schneebedeckte
piste herunter.

Can visual
hallucination
improve machine
translation?

(c) Visual Hallucination

Figure 1: Visual context such as images has been exploited in designing better machine translation systems. Different from most
existing methods that require manually annotated sentence-image
pairs as the input during inference, we introduce VALHALLA, that
leverages hallucinated visual representation from the source sentences at test time for improved machine translation.

to the real world. There has thus been a growing interest
in developing multimodal MT systems that can incorporate
rich external information into the modeling process.
Consider the example in Figure 1(a), where a source sentence in English (blue box) is to be translated to a target
sentence in German (red box). Since both sentences depict
the same visual scene, shown in Figure 1(b), there is common grounding information across the two sentences. More
generally, while there are many different ways to describe a
situation in the physical world, the underlying visual perception is shared among speakers of different languages. The
addition of visual context in the form of images is thus likely
to help the machine translation. In particular, grounding
should improve the data-efficiency of translation methods
and benefit translation in low resource scenarios.
This has motivated much recent work on vision-based
multimodal machine translation (MMT), which aims to improve machine translation systems by utilizing the visual
modality [6, 30, 76, 20]. These methods typically require
source sentences to be paired with the corresponding images
during training and testing, which hinders their applicability

5216

