Modeling 3D Layout For Group Re-Identification
Quan Zhang1 , Kaiheng Dang1 , Jian-Huang Lai1,2,3,4 ,* Zhanxiang Feng1 , Xiaohua Xie1,2,3
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, Guangzhou, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
4
Key Laboratory of Video and Image Intelligent Analysis and Applicaiton Technology,
Ministry of Public Security, China
{zhangq48, dangkh}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {stsljh, fengzhx7, xiexiaoh6}@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Group re-identification (GReID) attempts to correctly
associate groups with the same members under different
cameras. The main challenge is how to resist the membership and layout variations. Existing works attempt to incorporate layout modeling on the basis of appearance features
to achieve robust group representations. However, layout
ambiguity is introduced because these methods only consider the 2D layout on the imaging plane. In this paper,
we overcome the above limitations by 3D layout modeling. Specifically, we propose a novel 3D transformer (3DT)
that reconstructs the relative 3D layout relationship among
members, then applies sampling and quantification to preset a series of layout tokens along three dimensions, and
selects the corresponding tokens as layout features for each
member. Furthermore, we build a synthetic GReID dataset,
City1M, including 1.84M images, 45K persons and 11.5K
groups with 3D annotations to alleviate data shortages and
poor annotations. To the best of our knowledge, 3DT is
the first work to address GReID with 3D perspective, and
the City1M is the currently largest dataset. Several experiments show the superiority of our 3DT and City1M. Our
project has been released on https://github.com/
LinlyAC/City1M-dataset.

1. Introduction
Group re-identification (GReID) aims to match groups
with the same members under different cameras. Usually,
we deal with groups of 2 to 6 members, and we treat group
images with more than 60% of the same members as the
same group class. GReID aims to bring positive services
and contributions to human society and eliminate potential social risks, such as child trafficking and kidnapping.
* Corresponding Author.

Input

ID3

Imaging
plane

Existing
Method

ID2

2D layout
Modeling

Y

ID1

Depth
(Ignore)

X

Depth map

ID3

3D layout

ID2

Modeling

ID1

X

Our
Method

Y

Imaging
plane

Depth

(Reconstruction)

Figure 1. The illustration of our novelty. The X-Y plane represents
the imaging plane. The Depth dimension represents the distance
from person to camera. In the depth map, the darker the color, the
closer to the camera, and vice versa.

GReID has potential applications in detecting and preventing these events, which protects the safety of citizens. The
challenge of GReID is how to jointly model the appearance
and layout features of group images.
Most existing methods [4, 9, 22, 23] adopt only the appearance features of groups. However, the appearances of
group images are vulnerable to member occlusion and variations, leading to a large performance drop. In addition,
some methods [24] attempt to extract features from layout
relationships to alleviate the lack of appearances. Unfortunately, existing layout-based methods belong to the 2D
modeling, which ignores member depth information and
leads to unsatisfactory performance. We denote this shortcoming as the 2D layout ambiguity. As shown in Fig. 1,
ID2 and ID3 are incorrectly modeled as neighbors on 2D

7512

