DeepFusion: Lidar-Camera Deep Fusion for Multi-Modal 3D Object Detection
Yingwei Li1,2∗ Adams Wei Yu2∗ Tianjian Meng2 Ben Caine2 Jiquan Ngiam2 Daiyi Peng2
Junyang Shen2 Yifeng Lu2 Denny Zhou2 Quoc V. Le2 Alan Yuille1 Mingxing Tan2
1
2
Johns Hopkins University
Google
{ywli, adamsyuwei, tanmingxing}@google.com
(a) Point Decoration (previous)

Abstract

1. Introduction
Lidars and cameras are two types of complementary sensors for autonomous driving. For 3D object detection, lidars
provide low-resolution shape and depth information, while
cameras provide high-resolution shape and texture information. While one would expect the combination of both sensors to provide the best 3D object detector, it turns out that
most state-of-the-art 3D object detectors use only lidar as
∗ Equal contribution. Work done when YL was an intern at Google.

Lidar Points

Camera Img.

Camera Feat.
Extractor

Lidar Feat.
Extractor

Camera
Feature

Predictions

(b) Deep Fusion (ours)
Lidar Points

Camera Img.

Lidar
Feature

Camera
Feature

Lidar Feat.
Extractor

Lidar
Feature

Camera Feat.
Extractor

Camera
Feature

Predictions

Concat

l

q

kc
vc

LiDAR to Camera
Cross Attention

Lidars and cameras are critical sensors that provide complementary information for 3D detection in autonomous driving. While prevalent multi-modal methods [34, 36] simply decorate raw lidar point clouds with
camera features and feed them directly to existing 3D detection models, our study shows that fusing camera features
with deep lidar features instead of raw points, can lead
to better performance. However, as those features are often augmented and aggregated, a key challenge in fusion is
how to effectively align the transformed features from two
modalities. In this paper, we propose two novel techniques:
InverseAug that inverses geometric-related augmentations,
e.g., rotation, to enable accurate geometric alignment between lidar points and image pixels, and LearnableAlign
that leverages cross-attention to dynamically capture the
correlations between image and lidar features during fusion. Based on InverseAug and LearnableAlign, we develop a family of generic multi-modal 3D detection models named DeepFusion, which is more accurate than previous methods. For example, DeepFusion improves PointPillars, CenterPoint, and 3D-MAN baselines on Pedestrian
detection for 6.7, 8.9, and 6.2 LEVEL 2 APH, respectively.
Notably, our models achieve state-of-the-art performance
on Waymo Open Dataset, and show strong model robustness against input corruptions and out-of-distribution data.
Code will be publicly available at https://github.
com/tensorflow/lingvo.

Fused
Feature

FC

LearnableAlign

Figure 1. Our method fuses two modalities on deep feature level,
while previous state-of-the-art methods (PointPainting [34] and
PointAugmenting [36] as examples) decorate lidar points with
camera features on input level. To address the modality alignment issue (see Section 1) for deep feature fusion, we propose two
techniques InverseAug (see Figure 2 and 3) and LearnableAlign,
a cross-attention-based feature-level alignment technique.

the input (Waymo Challenge Leaderboard, accessed on Oct
14, 2021). This indicates that how to effectively fuse the
signals from these two sensors still remain challenging. In
this paper, we strive to provide a generic and effective solution to this problem.
Existing approaches in the literature for fusing lidars and
cameras broadly follow two approaches (Figure 1): they either fuse the features at an early stage, such as by decorating
points in the lidar point cloud with the corresponding camera features [34, 36], or they use a mid-level fusion where

17182

