BEHAVE: Dataset and Method for Tracking Human Object Interactions
Bharat Lal Bhatnagar1,2 , Xianghui Xie2 , Ilya A. Petrov1 , Cristian Sminchisescu3 , Christian Theobalt2 ,
and Gerard Pons-Moll1,2
1

2

University of Tübingen, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
3
Google Research

{i.petrov, gerard.pons-moll}@uni-tuebingen.de, {bbhatnag, xxie, theobalt}@mpi-inf.mpg.de,
sminchisescu@google.com

Abstract
Modelling interactions between humans and objects in
natural environments is central to many applications including gaming, virtual and mixed reality, as well as human
behavior analysis and human-robot collaboration. This
challenging operation scenario requires generalization to
vast number of objects, scenes, and human actions. Unfortunately, there exist no such dataset. Moreover, this data
needs to be acquired in diverse natural environments, which
rules out 4D scanners and marker based capture systems.
We present BEHAVE dataset, the first full body humanobject interaction dataset with multi-view RGBD frames
and corresponding 3D SMPL and object fits along with the
annotated contacts between them. We record ∼15k frames
at 5 locations with 8 subjects performing a wide range of
interactions with 20 common objects. We use this data
to learn a model that can jointly track humans and objects in natural environments with an easy-to-use portable
multi-camera setup. Our key insight is to predict correspondences from the human and the object to a statistical
body model to obtain human-object contacts during interactions. Our approach can record and track not just the
humans and objects but also their interactions, modeled as
surface contacts, in 3D. Our code and data can be found at:
http://virtualhumans.mpi-inf.mpg.de/behave.

1. Introduction
The last decade has seen rapid progress in modelling the
appearance of humans ranging from body pose, shape [52,
58, 60, 61, 81], faces [74] and even detailed clothing [5, 7,
11, 57, 65]. With various practical use cases like virtual tryon, personalised avatar creation, and several applications

Figure 1. Given a multi-view RGBD sequence, our method tracks
the human, the object and their contacts in 3D.

in augmented and mixed reality, or human-robot collaboration, the focus on humans is justified. Beyond modelling appearance, few methods have focused on capturing and synthesizing human interactions (human-object/scene interaction). There exists work to capture humans in a static 3D
scene [33], even without using external cameras [30], and
work to synthesize static poses [34, 49], or full body movement [32, 32, 50, 68] in a 3D scene.
These methods show growing interest in modelling human behavior, highlighting a need to capture real human interactions. Existing methods [32, 68] however are
learned from high quality curated data captured using optical marker based motion capture systems or wearable sensors. Unfortunately, such commercial systems are expensive, drastically limit the interactions that can be captured,
and often fail when tracking humans and objects under occlusion. In addition, the recording volume is spatially confined and difficult to re-locate, thus limiting the activities,
scenes, and objects that can be captured. Wearable sensors [30] are not restricted in volume, but close range interaction can not be accurately captured. Altogether, the

15935

