L-Verse: Bidirectional Generation Between Image and Text
Taehoon Kim*
Gwangmo Song
Sihaeng Lee
Sangyun Kim
Yewon Seo
Soonyoung Lee
Seung Hwan Kim
Honglak Lee
Kyunghoon Bae
LG AI Research

Abstract
Far beyond learning long-range interactions of natural
language, transformers are becoming the de-facto standard
for many vision tasks with their power and scalability. Especially with cross-modal tasks between image and text,
vector quantized variational autoencoders (VQ-VAEs) are
widely used to make a raw RGB image into a sequence
of feature vectors. To better leverage the correlation between image and text, we propose L-Verse, a novel architecture consisting of feature-augmented variational autoencoder (AugVAE) and bidirectional auto-regressive transformer (BiART) for image-to-text and text-to-image generation. Our AugVAE shows the state-of-the-art reconstruction performance on ImageNet1K validation set, along with
the robustness to unseen images in the wild. Unlike other
models, BiART can distinguish between image (or text) as a
conditional reference and a generation target. L-Verse can
be directly used for image-to-text or text-to-image generation without any finetuning or extra object detection framework. In quantitative and qualitative experiments, L-Verse
shows impressive results against previous methods in both
image-to-text and text-to-image generation on MS-COCO
Captions. We furthermore assess the scalability of L-Verse
architecture on Conceptual Captions and present the initial result of bidirectional vision-language representation
learning on general domain.

1. Introduction
Image-to-text and text-to-image generation and can be
summarized as a task of learning cross-modal representations of image and text. Recent studies [7, 10, 11, 32]
on vision-language tasks have highly improved the performance of each target task, in particular with various transformer architectures [3, 4, 9, 45]. Initially designed to understand natural language, the dot-product multi-head attention mechanism [45] effectively learns long-range interactions of sequential data. To leverage transformer archi* Correspondence to: taehoon.kim@lgresearch.ai

a full moon behind buildings

lone astronomer in empty planet

GT: A young boy in the park
throwing a frisbee.

GT: A laptop and a cell phone on
a table.

GT: A small bathroom is shown
from a door.

L-Verse: A young boy throwing
a green frisbee in a lush green
park.

L-Verse: A collection of electronic L-Verse: A bathroom with a
devices and cords sitting on top of a shower curtain over the bathtub
table.
next to a toilet.

a sunset view with the river

Figure 1. Examples of L-Verse on zero-shot text-to-image generation (256 × 256 pixels) on Conceptual Captions (top) and imageto-text generation on MS-COCO Captions (bottom). Trained in
bidirectional manner, L-verse can both generate well-conditioned
synthetic images and detailed captions without any finetuning.

tectures [45] also in vision domains, an input image is factorized into a sequence of latent feature vectors.
To encode an image into a sequence of latent feature vectors, vector quantized variational autoencoder (VQVAE) [44] can be used to learn a discrete latent representation with quantized embedding vectors from the visual codebook. VQ-VAE is a simple and powerful representation learning method to make image sequential and
is widely used in conditional image generation tasks with
auto-regressive pairs like RNNs [33, 44] or transformers
[10–12, 32]. Improving the reconstruction quality of VQVAE is also an active area of research [12, 32, 33].
Combining an auto-regressive transformer [3] with a feature extractor like VQ-VAEs or other deep convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) is becoming a popular approach
for various vision-language tasks. However, training a
model for unidirectional image-to-text [7] or text-to-image
[10, 32] generation task still requires a large amount of data

16526

