Ithaca365: Dataset and Driving Perception
under Repeated and Challenging Weather Conditions
Carlos A. Diaz-Ruiz1 Youya Xia1 Yurong You1 Jose Nino1 Junan Chen1
Josephine Monica1 Xiangyu Chen1 Katie Luo1 Yan Wang1 Marc Emond1
Wei-Lun Chao2 Bharath Hariharan1 Kilian Q. Weinberger1 Mark Campbell1
1
Cornell University 2 The Ohio State University

Abstract
Advances in perception for self-driving cars have accelerated in recent years due to the availability of large-scale
datasets, typically collected at specific locations and under
nice weather conditions. Yet, to achieve the high safety requirement, these perceptual systems must operate robustly
under a wide variety of weather conditions including snow
and rain. In this paper, we present a new dataset to enable
robust autonomous driving via a novel data collection process — data is repeatedly recorded along a 15 km route under diverse scene (urban, highway, rural, campus), weather
(snow, rain, sun), time (day/night), and traffic conditions
(pedestrians, cyclists and cars). The dataset includes images and point clouds from cameras and LiDAR sensors,
along with high-precision GPS/INS to establish correspondence across routes. The dataset includes road and object
annotations using amodal masks to capture partial occlusions and 3D bounding boxes. We demonstrate the uniqueness of this dataset by analyzing the performance of baselines in amodal segmentation of road and objects, depth
estimation, and 3D object detection. The repeated routes
opens new research directions in object discovery, continual learning, and anomaly detection. Link to Ithaca365:
https://ithaca365.mae.cornell.edu/

1. Introduction
The self-driving car research community has made major
advancements in computer vision and perception by relying
on vast amounts of real world sensory datasets. To date,
many datasets have been published [4, 6, 14, 18, 32], including some with benchmark challenges associated with different perception tasks. These tasks include 2D image detection [22,30], depth estimation (stereo [5,35] and monocular [11]), 3D object detection (stereo [19, 29, 34] and LiDAR [8, 36, 38]), semantic [39] and instance segmentation
[20, 21]. The KITTI dataset [14] has been used for many
of these benchmarks due to its comprehensive annotations
and ground truths. However, like many of the others [9], the

KITTI dataset was collected in only sunny/clear conditions.
There is a need in the research community for large-scale
datasets with multi-modal sensor data (LiDAR, cameras,
and GPS/IMU) in adverse weather conditions to be able
to train and test the performance and robustness of object
detectors, image segmentation, and depth estimation algorithms across varying conditions. The lack of data in these
challenging conditions ultimately limits the generalizability
of the perception approaches, and as such, limits the applicability of self-driving cars only to environments with nice
weather conditions. Recently, a few datasets with more diverse traffic, scenes, and weather conditions have been published [4, 6, 24]. These datasets include rain, low light conditions at night, or very bright conditions, but do not include
snowy conditions. One such dataset with snowy conditions
is the Canadian Adverse Driving Conditions Dataset [26], a
dataset collected in Waterloo. However, this dataset is primarily snowy conditions, and includes just 3D object labels.
Moreover, to our knowledge an amodal segmentation
dataset with varying weather conditions does not exist.
Amodal perception [20,40] aims to perceive and understand
the physical structure and semantics of occluded objects and
scenes. Amodal perception is critical for autonomous driving as the ability to infer the whole shape of objects (e.g.,
other vehicles, pedestrians, and road) around a mobile platform allows for safer and more efficient navigation. This is
especially useful in highly cluttered environments or complex traffic scenes, where determining safe, collision free
paths based only on visible cues is difficult. The KINS
dataset [28] augments KITTI [13] with amodal foreground
masks and while [23] augments Cityscapes [9] with amodal
background classes, but both of these are only in sunny and
clear conditions. There are a few recent developments that
address amodal segmentation [20, 23, 28]. Unfortunately,
existing literature lacks progress in these areas, primarily
due to the lack of large-scale, diverse datasets annotated
with amodal masks.
In this paper we provide three major contributions. First,
we release a large-scale, weather and environmental di-

21383

