Training High-Performance Low-Latency Spiking Neural Networks by
Differentiation on Spike Representation
Qingyan Meng1,2 , Mingqing Xiao3 , Shen Yan4 , Yisen Wang3,5 , Zhouchen Lin3,5,6, *, Zhi-Quan Luo1,2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 2 Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
3
Key Lab. of Machine Perception (MoE), School of Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
4
Center for Data Science, Peking University 5 Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
6
Peng Cheng Laboratory
qingyanmeng@link.cuhk.edu.cn, {mingqing xiao, yanshen, yisen.wang, zlin}@pku.edu.cn,
luozq@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
Spiking Neural Network (SNN) is a promising energyefficient AI model when implemented on neuromorphic
hardware. However, it is a challenge to efficiently train
SNNs due to their non-differentiability. Most existing methods either suffer from high latency (i.e., long simulation
time steps), or cannot achieve as high performance as Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs). In this paper, we propose
the Differentiation on Spike Representation (DSR) method,
which could achieve high performance that is competitive to
ANNs yet with low latency. First, we encode the spike trains
into spike representation using (weighted) firing rate coding. Based on the spike representation, we systematically
derive that the spiking dynamics with common neural models can be represented as some sub-differentiable mapping.
With this viewpoint, our proposed DSR method trains SNNs
through gradients of the mapping and avoids the common
non-differentiability problem in SNN training. Then we analyze the error when representing the specific mapping with
the forward computation of the SNN. To reduce such error,
we propose to train the spike threshold in each layer, and
to introduce a new hyperparameter for the neural models.
With these components, the DSR method can achieve stateof-the-art SNN performance with low latency on both static
and neuromorphic datasets, including CIFAR-10, CIFAR100, ImageNet, and DVS-CIFAR10.

1. Introduction
Inspired by biological neurons that communicate using
spikes, Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) have recently received surging attention. This promise depends on their energy efficiency on neuromorphic hardware [7, 31,35], while
deep Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) require substantial
* Corresponding author.

power consumption.
However, the training of SNNs is a major challenge
[43] since information in SNNs is transmitted through
non-differentiable spike trains. Specifically, the nondifferentiability in SNN computation hampers the effective usage of gradient-based backpropagation methods. To
tackle this problem, the surrogate gradient (SG) method
[15,33,40,46,53] and the ANN-to-SNN conversion method
[4, 10, 38, 39, 50] have been proposed and yielded the best
performance. In the SG method, an SNN is regarded as a recurrent neural network (RNN) and trained by the backpropagation through time (BPTT) framework. And during backpropagation, gradients of non-differentiable spike functions
are approximated by some surrogate gradients. Although
the SG method can train SNNs with low latency (i.e., short
simulation time steps), it cannot achieve high performance
comparable to leading ANNs. Besides, the adopted BPTT
framework needs to backpropagate gradients through both
the layer-by-layer spatial domain and the temporal domain,
leading to a long training time and high memory cost of
the SG method. The high training costs further limit the
usage of large-scale network architectures. On the other
hand, the ANN-to-SNN conversion method directly determines the network weights of an SNN from a corresponding
ANN, relying on the connection between firing rates of the
SNN and activations of the ANN. The conversion method
enables the obtained SNN to perform as competent as its
ANN counterpart. However, intolerably high latency is typically required, since only a large number of time steps can
make the firing rates closely approach the high-precision activation values of ANNs [21, 38]. Overall, SNNs obtained
by the two widely-used methods either cannot compete their
ANN counterparts, or suffer from high latency.
In this paper, we overcome both the low performance and
high latency issues by introducing the Differentiation on

12444

