3D Scene Painting via Semantic Image Synthesis
Jaebong Jeong∗

Janghun Jo
Sunghyun Cho
POSTECH GSAI & CSE

Jaesik Park

{jbjeong, jhjo432, s.cho, jaesik.park}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract

Input

We propose a novel approach to 3D scene painting using a configurable 3D scene layout. Our approach takes a
3D scene with semantic class labels as input and trains a
3D scene painting network that synthesizes color values for
the input 3D scene. We exploit an off-the-shelf 2D semantic image synthesis method to teach the 3D painting network without explicit color supervision. Experiments show
that our approach produces images with geometrically correct structures and supports scene manipulation, such as
the change of viewpoint, object poses, and painting style.
Our approach provides rich controllability to synthesized
images in the aspect of 3D geometry.

3D Scene Painting

Rendered Image

Change View

Edit Scene

Change Style

1. Introduction
Creating realistic 3D scenes becomes crucial due to the
increasing demands of unobserved content for virtual realism. However, it is regarded as a challenging problem because many components depend on human labor [5, 7, 10,
24] or manual capture of real scenes [45]. In particular,
painting a scene is hard for a human, and it takes extra effort
if we want to change the style after the creation. There are
some attempts to focus on automatic 3D scene painting to
resolve the issues. For instance, given a 3D scene and reference image, they find a texture from a texture database,
which has a similar color distribution to the reference image [54]. However, making a large-scale texture set is a burden due to the variety of scene geometry.
We propose an automatic painting approach for 3D scene
creation in this work. For 3D scene painting, our approach
learns a 3D scene painting network that takes a 2D semantic
map and 3D coordinate map as input and produces a 2D image with realistic RGB colors. Training a 3D scene painting
network, on the other hand, requires numerous colored 3D
scenes with semantic labels for supervision, which are hard
to acquire. To overcome this, we propose to utilize techniques already developed for 2D image synthesis. Specif∗ Part of this work was done while the first author was a research intern
at Microsoft Research Asia.

Figure 1. The colored 3D scenes using the proposed method. Our
framework learns to paint a scene given 3D geometry and semantic
label map. The images are rendered from colored 3D scenes and
provide a way to change viewpoints, scene style manipulation, and
scene editing.

ically, given a 3D scene with object-wise semantic labels,
we render 2D maps of 3D coordinates and semantic labels.
The rendered maps are then fed to a realistic image synthesis module to synthesize 2D RGB images, which are used as
pseudo-ground-truth labels for training our 3D scene painting network to produce realistic colors. As our network is
conditioned on 3D coordinates, it produces consistent colors under the change of viewpoint.

2262

