A Framework for Learning Ante-hoc Explainable Models via Concepts
Anirban Sarkar
IIT Hyderabad
Telangana, India

Deepak Vijaykeerthy
IBM Research
Bangalore, India

Anindya Sarkar
IIT Hyderabad
Telangana, India

cs16resch11006@iith.ac.in

deepakvij@in.ibm.com

anindyasarkar.ece@gmail.com

Vineeth N Balasubramanian
IIT Hyderabad
Telangana, India
vineethnb@iith.ac.in

Abstract
Self-explaining deep models are designed to learn the latent concept-based explanations implicitly during training,
which eliminates the requirement of any post-hoc explanation generation technique. In this work, we propose one
such model that appends an explanation generation module on top of any basic network and jointly trains the whole
module that shows high predictive performance and generates meaningful explanations in terms of concepts. Our
training strategy is suitable for unsupervised concept learning with much lesser parameter space requirements compared to baseline methods. Our proposed model also has
provision for leveraging self-supervision on concepts to extract better explanations. However, with full concept supervision, we achieve the best predictive performance compared to recently proposed concept-based explainable models. We report both qualitative and quantitative results with
our method, which shows better performance than recently
proposed concept-based explainability methods. We reported exhaustive results with two datasets without ground
truth concepts, i.e., CIFAR10, ImageNet, and two datasets
with ground truth concepts, i.e., AwA2, CUB-200, to show
the effectiveness of our method for both cases. To the best of
our knowledge, we are the first ante-hoc explanation generation method to show results with a large-scale dataset such
as ImageNet.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen an exponentially increasing interest in explainability of decisions of Deep Neural Network (DNN) models across domains including biometrics,
healthcare, autonomous navigation and many more. Existing efforts in computer vision including occlusion-based,

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed framework. Our framework
offers a way to train models that can not only predict but also explain their predictions. It can be easily integrated with existing
backbone networks. Compared to existing techniques, it provides
the flexibility to incorporate different forms of supervision (including weaker forms of supervision like self-supervision) whenever
available or feasible.

gradient-based and Shapley value-based efforts largely perform post hoc analysis [23, 27, 36], of an already trained
model to identify what a DNN model looked at in an input image while making a prediction. While this is useful,
the separation of explanation from prediction is not ideal.
When an explanation goes wrong, it is not trivial to understand if the explanation method is incorrect, or if the model
itself relied on spurious correlations to make a prediction.
This has paved the need for ante hoc methods that jointly
learn to explain and predict, and thus learn inherently interpretable models.
Efforts on envisioning interpretable learning models by
Rudin [25] and Lipton [18] have stressed on the importance
of implicitly interpretable methods over post hoc explanations in elaborate terms. In a more recent exposition, Rudin
et al [26] identified ten challenges of interpretable machine

10286

