Neural Collaborative Graph Machines for Table Structure Recognition
Hao Liu†*

Xin Li*

Bing Liu Deqiang Jiang
Tencent YouTu Lab

Yinsong Liu

Bo Ren

{ivanhliu, fujikoli, billbliu, dqiangjiang, jasonysliu, timren}@tencent.com

Modality1

Abstract

Modality3

Recently, table structure recognition has achieved impressive progress with the help of deep graph models. Most
of them exploit single visual cues of tabular elements or simply combine visual cues with other modalities via early fusion to reason their graph relationships. However, neither
early fusion nor individually reasoning in terms of multiple modalities can be appropriate for all varieties of table
structures with great diversity. Instead, different modalities are expected to collaborate with each other in different
patterns for different table cases. In the community, the importance of intra-inter modality interactions for table structure reasoning is still unexplored. In this paper, we define it
as heterogeneous table structure recognition (Hetero-TSR)
problem. With the aim of filling this gap, we present a novel
Neural Collaborative Graph Machines (NCGM) equipped
with stacked collaborative blocks, which alternatively extracts intra-modality context and models inter-modality interactions in a hierarchical way. It can represent the intrainter modality relationships of tabular elements more robustly, which significantly improves the recognition performance. We also show that the proposed NCGM can modulate collaborative pattern of different modalities conditioned on the context of intra-modality cues, which is vital
for diversified table cases. Experimental results on benchmarks demonstrate our proposed NCGM achieves state-ofthe-art performance and beats other contemporary methods
by a large margin especially under challenging scenarios.

1. Introduction
Table structure recognition (TSR) aims to recognize the
table internal structure to the machine readable data mainly
presented in two formats: logical structure [18, 46] and
physical structure [2, 13, 20, 22, 27, 30, 31, 34, 35, 40, 45].
More concretely, logical structure only focuses on whether
two table elements belong to the same row, column or cells
(i.e., logical relationships), while the physical one contains
* Equal contribution. † Contact person.

Relation graph

Modality2

Fusion

×

(a) Early fusion-based method
Modality1

Table image
with table elements

Modality2

Fusion

Row Relation Results

(b) Late fusion-based method

Anchor element
Predicted connections
Missing connections

Modality3

Modality1
Modality2

Collaborative graph

✓

…

Modality3

Collaboration

Table image
with table elements

(c) Our NCGM

Row Relation Results
of our NCGM

Figure 1. Illustration of motivation of the proposed NCGM.
(a) Early fusion-based method. The multiple modalities of table
elements are fused before modeling their relationships. (b) Late
fusion-based method. The multiple modalities are modeled on
their intra-modality relationships which are then fused for final results prediction. Due to lack of collaboration, for a distorted table
case, previous methods cannot well extract the row relations (connected by blue lines) for an anchor element (yellow) with some
true relation lost (green dotted line). (c) Our proposed NCGM.
Different modalities are built into graphs with collaboration, which
well accommodate the distorted table case.

not only logical relationships but also physical coordinates
of cell boxes. The recognized tabular structure is essential
to many downstream applications [12, 17]. Although many
previous algorithms [2,13,18,20,22,30,31,34,35,40,45,46]
have achieved impressive progress in the community, TSR
is still a challenging task due to two factors of complicated
tables. The interior factor is complex table structure where
spanning cell occupies at least two columns or rows, while
exterior one is table distortion incurred by capture device.
Intuitively, table elements (text segment bounding boxes
or table cells) commonly have inherent relationships and
natural graph structure. Therefore, recent methods [2,
30, 34] attempt to attack the problem via constructing visual cues of table elements as graphs and applying the
deep graph model, such as Graph Convolutional Networks
(GCN) [15] to reason their relationships. To introduce
richer table information, several methods [20, 30, 34] con-

4533

