Semi-Supervised Video Semantic Segmentation
with Inter-Frame Feature Reconstruction
Jiafan Zhuang, Zilei Wang∗, Yuan Gao
University of Science and Technology of China
{jfzhuang, gyy}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zlwang@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

···

One major challenge for semantic segmentation in realworld scenarios is only limited pixel-level labels available
due to high expense of human labor though a vast volume
of video data is provided. Existing semi-supervised methods attempt to exploit unlabeled data in model training, but
they just regard video as a set of independent images. To
better explore semi-supervised segmentation problem with
video data, we formulate a semi-supervised video semantic
segmentation task in this paper. For this task, we observe
that the overﬁtting is surprisingly severe between labeled
and unlabeled frames within a training video although they
are very similar in style and contents. This is called innervideo overﬁtting, and it would actually lead to inferior performance. To tackle this issue, we propose a novel interframe feature reconstruction (IFR) technique to leverage
the ground-truth labels to supervise the model training on
unlabeled frames. IFR is essentially to utilize the internal relevance of different frames within a video. During
training, IFR would enforce the feature distributions between labeled and unlabeled frames to be narrowed. Consequently, the inner-video overﬁtting issue can be effectively
alleviated. We conduct extensive experiments on Cityscapes
and CamVid, and the results demonstrate the superiority
of our proposed method to previous state-of-the-art methods. The code is available at https://github.com/
jfzhuang/IFR.

Sampled Labeled Frames

···
Sampled Unlabeled Frames

Training Data for SSIS

Remaining Unlabeled Frames

Expanded Training Data

Figure 1. Illustration of expanded training data. As commonly
adopted in SSIS, only one frame from each video is sampled and
used as the training data. These frames are divided into labeled and
unlabeled ones. To fully utilize video data, we propose to supplement the remaining video frames into unlabeled data for training.

beled images. Besides regular supervised learning on labeled images, SSIS methods usually construct extra supervision signals for unlabeled images, e.g., consistency constraint [17, 23] and pseudo label [4, 32]. It is shown that
they can bring considerable performance improvement on
the challenging datasets, e.g., PASCAL VOC [8].
In real-world scenarios, we can usually collect the video
data conveniently and economically, but only a few videos
would be annotated with a single frames due to the high
expense of human labor. For example, Cityscapes [6] as a
representative dataset contains 2975 videos in the training
subset, and only the 20th frame in each video is annotated.
That is, there are actually many unlabeled frames that can
be utilized for model training. However, the existing SSIS
methods [4, 17, 23] do not fully exploit video data, in which
only one frame is sampled from each video for model training and a large amount of unlabeled frames are ignored. To
better explore unlabeled videos, we propose to expand the
training data setting of SSIS by leveraging remaining video
frames, as shown in Figure 1.
A nature way to utilize extra unlabeled frames is to perform SSIS with adding the remaining frames into unlabeled
training data. Here we particularly implement two SOTA
SSIS methods, i.e., CAC [17] and CPS [4]. Table 1 gives the

1. Introduction
As a fundamental task in computer vision, image semantic segmentation has beneﬁted numerous downstream applications. However, the training data for semantic segmentation requires pixel-level labeling, which is very expensive and time-consuming. Recently, semi-supervised image segmentation (SSIS) is proposed to train models with
a limited number of labeled images and additional unla∗ Corresponding author

3263

