Vision Transformer Slimming: Multi-Dimension Searching
in Continuous Optimization Space
Arnav Chavan∗1,3 , Zhiqiang Shen* 2,3 , Zhuang Liu4 , Zechun Liu5 , Kwang-Ting Cheng6 and Eric Xing2,3
1
IIT Dhanbad 2 CMU 3 MBZUAI 4 UC Berkeley 5 Reality Labs, Meta Inc. 6 HKUST
arnav.18je0156@am.iitism.ac.in {zhiqians,zechunl}@andrew.cmu.edu zhuangl@berkeley.edu
timcheng@ust.hk epxing@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
This paper explores the feasibility of finding an optimal sub-model from a vision transformer and introduces
a pure vision transformer slimming (ViT-Slim) framework.
It can search a sub-structure from the original model endto-end across multiple dimensions, including the input tokens, MHSA and MLP modules with state-of-the-art performance. Our method is based on a learnable and unified
`1 sparsity constraint with pre-defined factors to reflect the
global importance in the continuous searching space of different dimensions. The searching process is highly efficient
through a single-shot training scheme. For instance, on
DeiT-S, ViT-Slim only takes ∼43 GPU hours for the searching process, and the searched structure is flexible with diverse dimensionalities in different modules. Then, a budget threshold is employed according to the requirements of
accuracy-FLOPs trade-off on running devices, and a retraining process is performed to obtain the final model. The
extensive experiments show that our ViT-Slim can compress
up to 40% of parameters and 40% FLOPs on various vision transformers while increasing the accuracy by ∼0.6%
on ImageNet. We also demonstrate the advantage of our
searched models on several downstream datasets. Our code
is available at https://github.com/Arnav0400/
ViT-Slim.

1. Introduction
Transformer [49] has been a strong network model for
various vision tasks, such as image classification [14, 28,
38,46,53], object detection [3,43,64], segmentation [50,54,
61], etc. It is primarily composed of three underlying modules: Multi-Head Self-Attention (MHSA), Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) and Image Patching Mechanism. The major
limitation of ViT in practice is the enormous model sizes
* indicates equal contribution. This work was done when Arnav was a
research assistant at MBZUAI, Zhiqiang Shen is the corresponding author.

and excessive training and inference costs, which hinders
its broader usage in real-world applications. Thus, a large
body of recent studies has focused on compressing the vision transformer network through searching a stronger and
more efficient architecture [6–8, 34, 42] for better deployment on various hardware devices.
However, many commonly-used searching strategies are
recourse-consuming, such as the popular reinforcement
learning and evolutionary searching approaches. Singlepath one-shot (SPOS) [15] is an efficient searching strategy
and promising solution for this task, while it still needs to
train the supernet for hundreds of epochs and then evaluate thousands of subnets for finding out the optimal subarchitecture, which is still time-consuming, typically with
more than tens of GPU days.
Recently, there are some works utilizing Batch Normalization (BN) scaling parameter as the indicator for the importance of operations to prune or search subnets, such as
Network Slimming [27], SCP [23], BN-NAS [5], etc., since
BN’s parameter is an existing factor and light-weight measure metric in the network for the importance of subnets.
This searching method can offer 10× speedup of training
than SPOS in general. But in practice, not all networks
contain BN layers, such as the transformers. Also, there
are many unique properties in a transformer design like the
dependency of input tokens from shallow layers to deep layers. Simply utilizing such a strategy is not necessarily practical or optimal for the newer transformer models.
Consequently, the main remaining problem is that there
is no BN layer involved in conventional transformer architectures, so we cannot directly employ the scaling coefficient in BN as the indicator for searching. To address
this, in this work we propose to incorporate the explicitly
soft masks to indicate the global importance of dimensions
across different modules of a transformer. We consider
jointly searching on all three dimensions in a transformer
end-to-end, including: layerwise tokens/patches, MHSA
and MLP dimensions. In particular, we design additional
differentiable soft masks on different modules for the in-

4931

