Arbitrary-Scale Image Synthesis
Evangelos Ntavelis 1,2

Mohamad Shahbazi1
Martin Danelljan1

1

Iason Kastanis2

Radu Timofte1

Luc Van Gool1,3

Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, CH 2 Robotics & ML, CSEM, CH 3 KU Leuven, BE
entavelis,mshahbazi,radu.timofte,martin.danelljan,vangool@vision.ee.ethz.ch

(a) What we train with

(c) What we can do without explicit training

(b) What we train for

Figure 1. (a) We train with our scale-consistent positional encodings and modified generator architecture that enables (b) synthesis of
arbitrary scales and multi-scale consistency. (c) We showcase our results for novel configurations not encountered during training such as
generation at never-seen-before scales, extrapolation and editing using spatial transformations such warping and stretching.

Abstract
Positional encodings have enabled recent works to train
a single adversarial network that can generate images of
different scales. However, these approaches are either limited to a set of discrete scales or struggle to maintain good
perceptual quality at the scales for which the model is not
trained explicitly. We propose the design of scale-consistent
positional encodings invariant to our generator’s layers
transformations. This enables the generation of arbitraryscale images even at scales unseen during training. Moreover, we incorporate novel inter-scale augmentations into
our pipeline and partial generation training to facilitate the
synthesis of consistent images at arbitrary scales. Lastly,
we show competitive results for a continuum of scales on
various commonly used datasets for image synthesis.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [9] are the most
commonly used paradigm for generating and manipulating
images and videos [12,24,25,29,30,35,36]. The promising

results obtained by GANs have motivated several applications of computer graphics and visual content generation.
Ideally, a GAN model is not only capable of generating images similar to the training data but also provides the flexibility to manipulate and control the generation process for
the target application [13, 27]. For instance, a GAN model
used for animations and videos should be able to generate
objects in different positions, scales, and viewpoints while
maintaining consistency over other attributes of the object.
Having a single model that provides control over different
object attributes has received substantial attention from the
research community [7, 18, 20]. However, most of the existing GAN models are limited to the positional priors of
their training data, making them unable to generate unseen
translations and scales.
Xu et al. [37] recently revealed that convolutional GANs
learn the positional priors of their training data by using the
zero paddings in the convolutions as an imperfect and implicit positional encoding. Motivated by such discovery, explicit positional encodings have been proposed to make the
GAN models equivariant to different translations, scales,

11533

