PlaneMVS: 3D Plane Reconstruction from Multi-View Stereo
Jiachen Liu1,2 * Pan Ji2† Nitin Bansal2
1
The Pennsylvania State University

Changjiang Cai2 Qingan Yan2 Xiaolei Huang1 Yi Xu2
2
OPPO US Research Center, InnoPeak Technology, Inc.

Abstract
We present a novel framework named PlaneMVS for 3D
plane reconstruction from multiple input views with known
camera poses. Most previous learning-based plane reconstruction methods reconstruct 3D planes from single images, which highly rely on single-view regression and suffer
from depth scale ambiguity. In contrast, we reconstruct 3D
planes with a multi-view-stereo (MVS) pipeline that takes
advantage of multi-view geometry. We decouple plane reconstruction into a semantic plane detection branch and a
plane MVS branch. The semantic plane detection branch is
based on a single-view plane detection framework but with
differences. The plane MVS branch adopts a set of slanted
plane hypotheses to replace conventional depth hypotheses to perform plane sweeping strategy and finally learns
pixel-level plane parameters and its planar depth map. We
present how the two branches are learned in a balanced
way, and propose a soft-pooling loss to associate the outputs of the two branches and make them benefit from each
other. Extensive experiments on various indoor datasets
show that PlaneMVS significantly outperforms state-of-theart (SOTA) single-view plane reconstruction methods on
both plane detection and 3D geometry metrics. Our method
even outperforms a set of SOTA learning-based MVS methods thanks to the learned plane priors. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first work on 3D plane reconstruction
within an end-to-end MVS framework.

1. Introduction
3D planar structure reconstruction from RGB images has
been an important yet challenging problem in computer vision for decades. It aims to detect piece-wise planar regions and predict the corresponding 3D plane parameters
from RGB images. The recovered 3D planes can be used
in various applications such as robotics [46], Augmented
Reality (AR) [4], and indoor scene understanding [51].
Traditional methods [9, 13, 43] work well in certain
cases but usually highly rely on some assumptions (e.g.,
* Work primarily done while interning at OPPO US Research Center
† Corresponding author (peterji530@gmail.com)

Figure 1. Comparison among: (a) single-view plane reconstruction framework, (b) conventional depth-based MVS framework,
(c) the proposed multi-view plane reconstruction framework. Our
system employs slanted plane hypotheses for plane-sweeping to
build the plane MVS branch, which interacts with the plane detection branch. The two branches can benefit from each other.

Manhattan-world assumption [9]) of the target scene and
are thus not always robust in complicated real-world cases.
Recently, some methods [31, 32, 47, 56, 61] have been proposed to recover planes from single-view images based on
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). These methods
could reconstruct 3D planes better in terms of completeness
and robustness compared with traditional methods. However, all of them, albeit achieving reasonable results on 2D
plane segmentation, attempt to recover 3D plane geometry
from a single image, which is an ill-posed problem as it only
relies on single-view regression for plane parameters and
has ambiguity in depth scale recovery. Thus the recovered
3D planes from those methods are far from being accurate.
The limitations of these methods motivate us to consider the
possibility of reconstructing 3D planes from multiple views

8665

