Look Back and Forth: Video Super-Resolution with Explicit Temporal Difference Modeling
Xin Tao1
Changlin Li1
Ruihuang Li3
Takashi Isobe1
Xu Jia2 *
Yongjie Shi4
Jing Mu1
Huchuan Lu2,5
Yu-Wing Tai1 *
1
2
Kuaishou Technology
Dalian University of Technology
3
4
5
Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Peking University
Peng Cheng Laboratory
{isobetakashi, taoxin, lichanglin, mujing03, daiyurong}@kuaishou.com
{xjia, lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn

csrhli@comp.polyu.edu.hk

shiyongjie@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Temporal modeling is crucial for video super-resolution.
Most of the video super-resolution methods adopt the optical flow or deformable convolution for explicitly motion
compensation. However, such temporal modeling techniques
increase the model complexity and might fail in case of occlusion or complex motion, resulting in serious distortion
and artifacts. In this paper, we propose to explore the role
of explicit temporal difference modeling in both LR and HR
space. Instead of directly feeding consecutive frames into
a VSR model, we propose to compute the temporal difference between frames and divide those pixels into two subsets
according to the level of difference. They are separately
processed with two branches of different receptive fields in
order to better extract complementary information. To further enhance the super-resolution result, not only spatial
residual features are extracted, but the difference between
consecutive frames in high-frequency domain is also computed. It allows the model to exploit intermediate SR results
in both future and past to refine the current SR output. The
difference at different time steps could be cached such that information from further distance in time could be propagated
to the current frame for refinement. Experiments on several video super-resolution benchmark datasets demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed method and its favorable
performance against state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Super-resolution (SR) is an important vision task that
aims at recovering high-resolution (HR) images from lowresolution (LR) observations. Single image super-resolution
(SISR) [2, 7, 10, 18, 19, 21, 31, 41, 46] methods reply much
on image prior learned from large datasets or self-similarity
within images to synthesize high frequency contents, while
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. VSR performance comparison on Vid4 [27] in terms of
PSNR (dB) and runtime (ms). Our proposed ETDM outperforms
the previous methods with high efficiency.

video super-resolution (VSR) methods [1, 15, 16, 22, 25, 28,
37, 43] are expected to extract valuable complementary details from neighbouring frames, which could provide more
information to alleviate the ill-posed problem. Both of these
tasks have achieved remarkable progress thanks to the development of deep learning techniques. As more and more
videos are recorded, VSR has become a key component in
many applications such as video remastering, live streaming
and surveillance.
To effectively explore abundant spatial-temporal information within frames, some methods [4, 23, 36, 37, 40, 42, 45] attempt to model temporal information across frames through
explicit or implicit motion compensation. However, explicit
motion compensation [40, 42] would increase the model
complexity, and inevitable errors in motion estimation may
cause distortion and degrade super-resolution results. The
methods with implicit motion compensation, e.g., 3D convolutional layer [17, 29], bet all on model capacity, ignoring

17411

