3D Shape Variational Autoencoder Latent Disentanglement
via Mini-Batch Feature Swapping for Bodies and Faces
Simone Foti

Bongjin Koo Danail Stoyanov Matthew J. Clarkson
University College London
s.foti@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Figure 1. Schematic Description of the Proposed Method. Left: an arbitrary identity feature is selected and a mini-batch of vertices (Xij )
is created by swapping features across different 3D shapes. Colours represent identities. Notice that features from the same identity have
the same colour. Centre: a 3D-VAE ({E, G}) encodes Xij in its latent representations zij = (zfij |zcij ), which are subsequently decoded
into X′ij . In this case f corresponds to the nose. Therefore, while zfij controls the shape of the nose, zcij controls the shape of the rest of
the face. Right: visual representation of all the different mesh features for which we seek to obtain a disentangled latent representation.

Abstract
Learning a disentangled, interpretable, and structured
latent representation in 3D generative models of faces and
bodies is still an open problem. The problem is particularly
acute when control over identity features is required. In this
paper, we propose an intuitive yet effective self-supervised
approach to train a 3D shape variational autoencoder
(VAE) which encourages a disentangled latent representation of identity features. Curating the mini-batch generation
by swapping arbitrary features across different shapes allows to define a loss function leveraging known differences
and similarities in the latent representations. Experimental
results conducted on 3D meshes show that state-of-the-art
methods for latent disentanglement are not able to disentangle identity features of faces and bodies. Our proposed

method properly decouples the generation of such features
while maintaining good representation and reconstruction
capabilities. Our code and pre-trained models are available at github.com/simofoti/3DVAE-SwapDisentangled.

1. Introduction
The generation of 3D human faces and bodies is a complex task with multiple potential applications ranging from
movie and game productions, to augmented and virtual reality, as well as healthcare applications. Currently, the generation procedure is either manually performed by highly
skilled artists or it involves semi-automated avatar design
tools. Even though these tools greatly simplify the design
process, they are usually limited in flexibility because of
the intrinsic constraints of the underlying generative mod-

18730

