NeRFusion: Fusing Radiance Fields for Large-Scale Scene Reconstruction
*

Xiaoshuai Zhang1 Sai Bi2 Kalyan Sunkavalli2 Hao Su1 Zexiang Xu2
1
2
University of California, San Diego
Adobe Research
{xiz040,haosu}@eng.ucsd.edu

{sbi,sunkaval,zexu}@adobe.com

Ourspretrained

Input
View

Novel
View

Oursft-20min

NeRF12h

…
17.18

22.09

16.98

17.09

21.29

17.02

…

Figure 1. We propose a novel method to enable fast reconstruction of volumetric radiance fields of large-scale scenes. Our method uses a
novel recurrent network – that is generalizable and trained across scenes – to sequentially reconstruct a radiance field of a large indoor scene
in ScanNet [11] from an input image sequence (marked in yellow) via direct inference. The predicted field can be directly used to render
realistic images at novel viewpoints (marked in red), achieving comparable quality to NeRF [28] that takes 12 hours per-scene optimization.
This radiance field can be further fine-tuned for a short period of 20 min, leading to boosted quality that significantly outperforms NeRF.

Abstract
While NeRF [28] has shown great success for neural reconstruction and rendering, its limited MLP capacity and
long per-scene optimization times make it challenging to
model large-scale indoor scenes. In contrast, classical 3D
reconstruction methods can handle large-scale scenes but
do not produce realistic renderings. We propose NeRFusion, a method that combines the advantages of NeRF and
TSDF-based fusion techniques to achieve efficient largescale reconstruction and photo-realistic rendering. We process the input image sequence to predict per-frame local
radiance fields via direct network inference. These are then
fused using a novel recurrent neural network that incrementally reconstructs a global, sparse scene representation in
real-time at 22 fps. This global volume can be further finetuned to boost rendering quality. We demonstrate that NeRFusionachieves state-of-the-art quality on both large-scale
indoor and small-scale object scenes, with substantially
faster reconstruction than NeRF and other recent methods.1
* Research partially done during Xiaoshuai’s internship at Adobe Research
1 https://jetd1.github.io/NeRFusion-Web/

1. Introduction
Reconstructing and rendering large-scale indoor scenes
from RGB images is challenging but crucial for various
applications in computer vision and graphics, including
AR/VR, e-commerce, and robotics. While truncated signed
distance function (TSDF) fusion techniques [29, 42] can
achieve efficient reconstruction, these methods often use
depth sensors and focus on geometric reconstruction only,
and cannot synthesize realistic images. Recently, NeRF
[28] proposed optimizing scene radiance fields, represented
using global MLPs, from RGB images to achieve photorealistic novel view synthesis. However, NeRF cannot handle large-scale scenes well due to its limited MLP network
capacity and impractical slow per-scene optimization.
In this work, we aim to achieve fast, large-scale scenelevel radiance field reconstruction to make neural scene reconstruction and rendering more practical. As opposed to
small-scale object-centric scenes, we use “large-scale” to
refer to full-size indoor scenes, like ScanNet scenes [11]),
with multiple rooms and objects with complex scene geometry and appearance. To achieve fast radiance field reconstruction on such challenging scenes, we propose a novel
neural framework that uses recurrent neural modules to in15449

