Long-term Video Frame Interpolation via Feature Propagation
Dawit Mureja Argaw
In So Kweon
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
Daejeon, Republic of Korea
{dawitmureja, iskweon77}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Video frame interpolation (VFI) works generally predict
intermediate frame(s) by first estimating the motion between
inputs and then warping the inputs to the target time with
the estimated motion. This approach, however, is not optimal when the temporal distance between the input sequence
increases as existing motion estimation modules cannot effectively handle large motions. Hence, VFI works perform
well for small frame gaps and perform poorly as the frame
gap increases. In this work, we propose a novel framework
to address this problem. We argue that when there is a large
gap between inputs, instead of estimating imprecise motion
that will eventually lead to inaccurate interpolation, we can
safely propagate from one side of the input up to a reliable
time frame using the other input as a reference. Then, the
rest of the intermediate frames can be interpolated using
standard approaches as the temporal gap is now narrowed.
To this end, we propose a propagation network (PNet) by
extending the classic feature-level forecasting with a novel
motion-to-feature approach. To be thorough, we adopt a
simple interpolation model along with PNet as our full
model and design a simple procedure to train the full model
in an end-to-end manner. Experimental results on several
benchmark datasets confirm the effectiveness of our method
for long-term VFI compared to state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Video frame interpolation (VFI) aims at predicting one
or more intermediate frames from a given frame sequence.
Given inputs ⟨xt , xt+n ⟩, where n is the frame gap between
the inputs, existing VFI works generally follow two steps.
First, they estimate the motion between xt and xt+n using off-the-shelf motion estimation modules or by imposing
motion constraints. Then, they warp the inputs to the target
time and synthesize an intermediate frame.
VFI works target temporal super-resolution on a premise
that the frame rate of the input sequence is often already sufficiently high. We have experimentally verified
this notion by evaluating several state-of-the-art VFI meth-

ods [2, 12, 17, 19, 30] on input sequences sampled at different frame rates. Even though a reasonable performance
decrease is an expected phenomenon, we observed a significant drop in performance when the frame rate of the input
sequence decreases (see Table 1), highlighting that interpolating frames becomes very challenging as the temporal
distance between consecutive frames increases. Moreover,
far less attention has been given to this problem in past literature as most evaluations have been done on videos with
fixed frame rate (mostly 30 fps). We argue that the main
reason behind this limitation is partly associated with the
working principle of VFI works. If the estimated motion
between inputs is inaccurate, then the interpolated frame
synthesized by time warping the inputs with the estimated
motion will also likely be inaccurate. This is particularly
problematic when the temporal gap between input frames
is large as existing flow or kernel based motion estimation
modules can not effectively handle large motions.
In this work, we tackle the long-term video interpolation
problem and propose a general VFI framework robust to relatively low frame rates. Specifically, when there is a large
gap between input frames, instead of predicting the motion
between the inputs which will likely be imprecise and eventually lead to inaccurate interpolation, we conjecture that
we can safely propagate from one side of the input to a reliable extent of time using the other input as a useful reference, i.e. given ⟨xt , xt+n ⟩, we propagate up to xt+∆t from
the side of the first input xt and we similarly propagate up
to xt+n−∆t from the side of the second input xt+n , where
∆t is the extent of propagation. This is intuitive because
the intermediate frames in the neighborhood of xt will most
likely depend on xt compared to xt+n , and vice versa. Once
we propagate to a reliable time frame from both sides, the
rest of the intermediate frames between xt+∆t and xt+n−∆t
can be interpolated using existing interpolation approaches
as the temporal gap is now reduced to n − 2∆t.
To this end, we propose a propagation network (PNet)
that predicts future frames by relying more on one of the
inputs while attending the other. We accomplish this by
extending the classic feature-to-feature (F2F) forecasting

3543

