Compound Domain Generalization via Meta-Knowledge Encoding
Chaoqi Chen1 , Jiongcheng Li2,4 , Xiaoguang Han3 , Xiaoqing Liu2 , Yizhou Yu1 *
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 Deepwise AI Lab
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen) 4 Xiamen University
cqchen1994@gmail.com, jiongchengli@stu.xmu.edu.cn
hanxiaoguang@cuhk.edu.cn, Liuxiaoqing@deepwise.com, yizhouy@acm.org

Abstract
Domain generalization (DG) aims to improve the generalization performance for an unseen target domain by using the knowledge of multiple seen source domains. Mainstream DG methods typically assume that the domain label of each source sample is known a priori, which is challenged to be satisfied in many real-world applications. In
this paper, we study a practical problem of compound DG,
which relaxes the discrete domain assumption to the mixed
source domains setting. On the other hand, current DG algorithms prioritize the focus on semantic invariance across
domains (one-vs-one), while paying less attention to the
holistic semantic structure (many-vs-many). Such holistic semantic structure, referred to as meta-knowledge here,
is crucial for learning generalizable representations. To
this end, we present COmpound domain generalization via
Meta-knowledge ENcoding (COMEN), a general approach
to automatically discover and model latent domains in two
steps. Firstly, we introduce Style-induced Domain-specific
Normalization (SDNorm) to re-normalize the multi-modal
underlying distributions, thereby dividing the mixture of
source domains into latent clusters. Secondly, we harness
the prototype representations, the centroids of classes, to
perform relational modeling in the embedding space with
two parallel and complementary modules, which explicitly
encode the semantic structure for the out-of-distribution
generalization. Experiments on four standard DG benchmarks reveal that COMEN exceeds the state-of-the-art performance without the need of domain supervision.

1. Introduction
The success of many computer vision algorithms hinges
on a strong presumption that the training and test data are
independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.). In practice,
however, this hypothesis is prone to be violated due to the
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Top: (a) Vanilla domain generalization. (b) Compound
domain generalization. Bottom: The workflow of our approach.

change of environments, imaging devices, selection bias, to
name a few. How to generalize a well-trained model to outof-distribution domains has motivated a body of research on
Domain Adaptation (DA) [15, 37, 48, 52, 54, 68, 70] and Domain Generalization (DG) [2, 8, 9, 31, 34, 41]. In contrast
to DA problem where the unlabeled or partially labeled target data is available, DG considers a harder problem setting
where a model trained on a set of source domain data should
directly generalize to an unseen target domain with different data statistics, without the need of accessing to target
domain data for retraining or fine-tuning (cf. Fig. 1 (a)).
Mainstream DG literature typically assumes that the domain label of each source sample is known a priori, which
is too restrictive to be satisfied in many practical applications. For instance, with the explosive increase of the multisource data from Internet, a mixture of multiple source
data can be easily collected. However, manually dividing
the crawled images into multiple domains requires tedious
labor-intensive work given a large amount of training data.
Meanwhile, the latent domains may blend and interact in

7119

