Robust Image Forgery Detection over Online Social Network Shared Images
Haiwei Wu, Jiantao Zhou, Jinyu Tian, and Jun Liu
State Key Laboratory of Internet of Things for Smart City
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau
{yc07912, jtzhou, yb77405, yc07453}@um.edu.mo

Abstract
The increasing abuse of image editing softwares, such
as Photoshop and Meitu, causes the authenticity of digital images questionable. Meanwhile, the widespread availability of online social networks (OSNs) makes them the
dominant channels for transmitting forged images to report fake news, propagate rumors, etc. Unfortunately,
various lossy operations adopted by OSNs, e.g., compression and resizing, impose great challenges for implementing the robust image forgery detection. To fight against the
OSN-shared forgeries, in this work, a novel robust training scheme is proposed. We first conduct a thorough analysis of the noise introduced by OSNs, and decouple it into
two parts, i.e., predictable noise and unseen noise, which
are modelled separately. The former simulates the noise
introduced by the disclosed (known) operations of OSNs,
while the latter is designed to not only complete the previous one, but also take into account the defects of the
detector itself. We then incorporate the modelled noise
into a robust training framework, significantly improving
the robustness of the image forgery detector. Extensive experimental results are presented to validate the superiority of the proposed scheme compared with several stateof-the-art competitors. Finally, to promote the future development of the image forgery detection, we build a public forgeries dataset based on four existing datasets and
three most popular OSNs. The designed detector recently
won the top ranking in a certificate forgery detection competition1 . The source code and dataset are available at
https://github.com/HighwayWu/ImageForensicsOSN.

1. Introduction
The ever-increasing popularity of powerful image editing softwares has made the manipulation of images an extremely easy task. The manipulated or forged images are
becoming increasingly dangerous in various fields such as
1 https://tianchi.aliyun.com/competition/entrance/531812/introduction

Figure 1. The detection results of DFCN [42] and ours by using
an original forgery and the one transmitted through an OSN. The
left girl is spliced (forged).

removing copyright watermarks, producing fake news, and
being forged evidence in court. Meanwhile, with the vigorous development of the Internet, online social networks
(OSNs) have become dominant platforms for information
transmission, where images occupy a large portion. Many
forged images are transmitted over various OSNs, influencing people’s opinion towards e.g., important documents
(certificates), commercial products, political issues, etc.
A large number of methods [4, 5, 8, 11, 12, 18, 20–23, 26,
27, 36, 37, 39, 42] have been proposed to detect and localize image forgery. Some of them are designed to detect
specific forms of tampering, such as splicing [18,26], copymove [23, 39] and inpainting [21, 22, 36], while the others
aim to identify more complex or compound forgeries. However, few research has been done to explicitly address the
design of the robust forgery detection against the lossy operations in the ubiquitous OSN platforms. Such a topic is
very important because these lossy operations can severely
degrade the detection performance. As shown in Fig. 1,
the state-of-the-art algorithm [42] can accurately detect the
forged regions from the original forgery; but the detection
performance would be severely degraded when handling the
forgery transmitted through Facebook.
For mitigating the negative impacts of OSNs, the first

13440

