V2C: Visual Voice Cloning
Qi Chen1 * Mingkui Tan2 Yuankai Qi1 Jiaqiu Zhou2,3 Yuanqing Li2,3† Qi Wu1†
1
University of Adelaide 2 South China University of Technology 3 Pazhou Lab
{qi.chen04, qi.wu01}@adelaide.edu.au, qykshr@gmail.com
{auyqli, mingkuitan}@scut.edu.cn, mszjq@mail.scut.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Voice Cloning (VC) [2, 9, 20, 30] aims to convert a paragraph of text to speech with the desired voice from a reference audio. However, there exist many applications in the
real world that require the generated speeches not only using a template voice but also being with rich emotions (e.g.,
angry, happy, and sad), such as movie dubbing. This is be* Partial of the work was performed when Qi Chen was an intern at
Pazhou Lab.
† Corresponding authors.

21242

content
voice

Reference
Audio

Speech

(a) Voice Cloning (VC)
Text

Elsa: Do you want to
build a snowman?

voice

Reference
Audio
Reference
Video

content

…

Model

Existing Voice Cloning (VC) tasks aim to convert a paragraph text to a speech with desired voice speciﬁed by a reference audio. This has signiﬁcantly boosted the development of artiﬁcial speech applications. However, there also
exist many scenarios that cannot be well reﬂected by these
VC tasks, such as movie dubbing, which requires the speech
to be with emotions consistent with the movie plots. To ﬁll
this gap, in this work we propose a new task named Visual Voice Cloning (V2C), which seeks to convert a paragraph of text to a speech with both desired voice speciﬁed by a reference audio and desired emotion speciﬁed by
a reference video. To facilitate research in this ﬁeld, we
construct a dataset, V2C-Animation, and propose a strong
baseline based on existing state-of-the-art (SoTA) VC techniques. Our dataset contains 10,217 animated movie clips
covering a large variety of genres (e.g., Comedy, Fantasy)
and emotions (e.g., happy, sad). We further design a set of
evaluation metrics, named MCD-DTW-SL, which help evaluate the similarity between ground-truth speeches and the
synthesised ones. Extensive experimental results show that
even SoTA VC methods cannot generate satisfying speeches
for our V2C task. We hope the proposed new task together
with the constructed dataset and evaluation metric will facilitate the research in the ﬁeld of voice cloning and broader
vision-and-language community. Source code and dataset
will be released in https://github.com/chenqi008/V2C.

Elsa: Do you want to
build a snowman?

Model

Text

emotion

Speech

(b) Visual Voice Cloning (V2C)
Figure 1. (a) Voice Cloning (VC) vs. (b) Visual Voice Cloning
(V2C). Given an input triplet (i.e., subtitle/text, reference audio,
and target video), our V2C task seeks to convert the text into a
speech, which should be with the voice of reference audio and the
emotion derived from reference video. Note that the reference audio only provides an expected voice while its content is irrelevant.

yond the scope of conventional VC tasks (Figure 1(a)), as
no extra guiding information can be used to generate desired tones and rhythms. Considering that we humans accomplish the movie dubbing task with the most reference
from visual observations (e.g., watching the movie to grasp
the emotion of characters), we propose an extension task of
VC, namely Visual Voice Cloning (V2C).
An example of the proposed V2C task is shown in Figure 1(b). Unlike the conventional VC task, which converts text to speech only aided by a reference audio, our
V2C task takes a triplet (text/subtitle, reference audio, reference video) as input and expects a resulting speech with
the same voice but varying emotions derived from the reference video. The text/subtitle is the content that the generated speech needs to cover. The reference audio includes
a pre-recorded voice of the target speaker from a different

