Boosting Black-Box Attack with Partially Transferred
Conditional Adversarial Distribution
Yan Feng1,6,∗ , Baoyuan Wu2,3,† , Yanbo Fan4 , Li Liu2,3 , Zhifeng Li5 and Shu-Tao Xia1,7,†
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, China
2
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
3
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, 4 Tencent AI Lab,
5
Tencent Data Platform, 6 Meituan, 7 Research Center of Artificial Intelligence, Peng Cheng Laboratory

Abstract
This work studies black-box adversarial attacks against
deep neural networks (DNNs), where the attacker can only
access the query feedback returned by the attacked DNN
model, while other information such as model parameters
or the training datasets are unknown. One promising approach to improve attack performance is utilizing the adversarial transferability between some white-box surrogate
models and the target model (i.e., the attacked model). However, due to the possible differences on model architectures
and training datasets between surrogate and target models,
dubbed “surrogate biases”, the contribution of adversarial
transferability to improving the attack performance may be
weakened. To tackle this issue, we innovatively propose a
black-box attack method by developing a novel mechanism of
adversarial transferability, which is robust to the surrogate
biases. The general idea is transferring partial parameters
of the conditional adversarial distribution (CAD) of surrogate models, while learning the untransferred parameters
based on queries to the target model, to keep the flexibility
to adjust the CAD of the target model on any new benign
sample. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets and
attacking against real-world API demonstrate the superior
attack performance of the proposed method. The code will
be available at https://github.com/Kira0096/CGATTACK.

attacker can only access the query feedback returned by the
attacked model, while model parameters are unknown to the
attacker. Since it is difficult to access model parameters in
real-world scenarios, black-box attack is more practical, and
it is also the main focus of this work.

It has been well known [4, 14] that adversarial examples
are serious threats to deep neural networks (DNNs). Existing
adversarial attacks can be generally partitioned into two main
categories. The first category is white-box attack [14], where
the attacker can access parameters of the attacked DNN
model. The second one is black-box attack [12], where the

If only utilizing the query feedback, it is difficult to
achieve high attack success rate under limited query budgets.
One promising approach to improve the attack performance,
including attack success rate and query efficiency, is utilizing the adversarial transferability [10, 11, 54] between some
white-box surrogate models and the target model (i.e., the attacked model). Many adversarial transferabilities have been
proposed in existing works, such as the gradient [9, 17], or
the projection from a low-dimensional space to the original
sample space [25], etc. These transferabilities have shown
positive contributions to improving the attack performance
in some black-box attack scenarios, especially in the closedset scenario, where the training dataset of the target model is
known to the attacker. However, their effects may be significantly influenced by the differences between surrogate and
target models. More precisely, architectures between surrogate and target models may be different, probably leading
to different feedback to the same query. Secondly, under the
practical scenario of open-set black-box attack where the
training dataset is unknown to the attacker, even using the
same architecture, different training sets (including samples
and class labels) will also lead to different parameters. We
generally summarize the differences, caused by architectures
and training datasets between surrogate and target models as
surrogate biases. If the biases are too large, the transferred
information may mislead the search of adversarial perturbation for attacking the target model, causing the degradation
of the contribution of adversarial transferability to improving
the attack performance (as demonstrated later in Sec. 4.3).

* Part of this work was done when he was an intern at Tencent AI Lab.
† Corresponds to Baoyuan Wu (wubaoyuan@cuhk.edu.cn) and ShuTao Xia (xiast@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn).

To mitigate the above issue, the transferred term should be
not only informative but also robust to surrogate biases. To
this end, we focus on the conditional adversarial distribu-

1. Introduction

15095

