GLAMR: Global Occlusion-Aware Human Mesh Recovery
with Dynamic Cameras
Ye Yuan2*

Umar Iqbal1
Pavlo Molchanov1
Kris Kitani2
1
2
NVIDIA
Carnegie Mellon University
https://nvlabs.github.io/GLAMR

Jan Kautz1

Input Video from Dynamic Cameras

Obstruction

Outside FoV

Missed Detection

Start Frame

End Frame

Infilled Pose

Infilled Pose

Infilled Pose

GLAMR (Ours)

Standard Human Mesh Recovery Method

Figure 1. GLAMR (Left) recovers human meshes in consistent global coordinates and infills missing poses (transparent) due to various
occlusions (obstruction, missed detection, outside field of view), while standard human mesh recovery methods (Right) fail to do so.

Abstract
We present an approach for 3D global human mesh recovery from monocular videos recorded with dynamic cameras. Our approach is robust to severe and long-term occlusions and tracks human bodies even when they go outside
the camera’s field of view. To achieve this, we first propose
a deep generative motion infiller, which autoregressively infills the body motions of occluded humans based on visible motions. Additionally, in contrast to prior work, our
approach reconstructs human meshes in consistent global
coordinates even with dynamic cameras. Since the joint reconstruction of human motions and camera poses is underconstrained, we propose a global trajectory predictor that
generates global human trajectories based on local body
movements. Using the predicted trajectories as anchors,
we present a global optimization framework that refines the
predicted trajectories and optimizes the camera poses to
match the video evidence such as 2D keypoints. Experiments on challenging indoor and in-the-wild datasets with
dynamic cameras demonstrate that the proposed approach
* Work done during an internship at NVIDIA.

outperforms prior methods significantly in terms of motion
infilling and global mesh recovery.

1. Introduction
Recovering fine-grained 3D human meshes from monocular videos is essential for understanding human behaviors
and interactions, which can be the cornerstone for numerous applications including virtual or augmented reality, assistive living, autonomous driving, etc. Many of these applications use dynamic cameras to capture human behaviors
yet also require estimating human motions in global coordinates consistent with their surroundings. For instance,
assistive robots and autonomous vehicles need a holistic
understanding of human behaviors and interactions in the
world to safely plan their actions even when they are moving. Therefore, our goal in this paper is to tackle the important task of recovering global human meshes from monocular videos captured by dynamic cameras.
However, this task is highly challenging for two main
reasons. First, dynamic cameras make it difficult to estimate
human motions in consistent global coordinates. Existing
human mesh recovery methods estimate human meshes in

11038

