Self-supervised Deep Image Restoration via Adaptive Stochastic Gradient
Langevin Dynamics
Weixi Wang, Ji Li, and Hui Ji
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore, 119076, Singapore
wangweixi@u.nus.edu, matliji@nus.edu.sg, matjh@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
While supervised deep learning has been a prominent
tool for solving many image restoration problems, there is
an increasing interest on studying self-supervised or unsupervised methods to address the challenges and costs of
collecting truth images. Based on the neuralization of a
Bayesian estimator of the problem, this paper presents a
self-supervised deep learning approach to general image
restoration problems. The key ingredient of the neuralized
estimator is an adaptive stochastic gradient Langevin dynamics algorithm for efficiently sampling the posterior distribution of network weights. The proposed method is applied
on two image restoration problems: compressed sensing
and phase retrieval. The experiments on these applications
showed that the proposed method not only outperformed
existing non-learning and unsupervised solutions in terms of
image restoration quality, but also is more computationally
efficient.

1. Introduction
Image restoration is about calculating an image x from
a collection of its measurements, denoted by y, whose relationship can be described as
  \label {eq:prob} \bm {y} = \Psi (\bm {x}) +\bm {n}, 

(1)

where Ψ denotes the image formation process and n denotes
measurement noise. Image restoration is one fundamental problem encountered in a wide range of image-related
applications. For example, image restoration in digital photography, compressed sensing, computed tomography (CT),
and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in medical imaging, phase retrieval for scientific imaging, and many others.
In general, the problem (1) is an ill-posed inverse problem,
whose direct inversion is either not unique or sensitive to
measurement noise.
Over last decades, regularization method, or equivalently
Bayesian estimator, has been the dominant tool for image

restoration. These non-learning methods either impose certain prior or assume certain prior distribution on images for
addressing solution ambiguity and noise sensitivity. However, it remains challenging to define an accurate image
prior. In recent years, deep neural network (DNN) emerges
as a prominent tool for solving inverse problems; see e.g.
[11, 12, 16, 17, 20, 33, 49, 52, 58, 61, 62]. The majority of
existing DNN-based solutions are supervised on an external
training dataset with truth images. Such a prerequisite on
truth images limits their wider applications in practice. For
example, collecting truth images can be very challenging and
costly in medical imaging and scientific imaging. Also, the
generalization performance of a supervised learning method
can be a concern in practice, if the network is trained over
a biased dataset where the structures of test images are not
present in training samples.
In recent years, it is receiving an increasing interest on
developing deep learning methods for imaging, which do
not require truth images for training DNNs. The so-called
plug-and-play prior attempts to address such an issue by
adopting some pre-trained denoising network in an iterative
image restoration scheme; See e.g. [35, 48, 56, 63]. While
these methods do not explicitly call truth images, the pretrained networks are still supervised over the dataset with
truth images related to the image for restoration. Another
approach is using generative adversarial network (GAN)
to synthesize training samples for training the network; see
e.g. [43]. Similarly, the performance of GAN-based methods
highly relies on the effectiveness of the pre-trained GAN
model on simulating truth images. While GAN has been
very effective on simulating the images in specific domain
such as face and text, it is not so for other types of images,
e.g., medical images and scientific images.
The methods above are not completely free from the
prerequisite of accessing related truth images. Recently,
there has been a rapid progress on unsupervised or selfsupervised learning for image denoising using un-trained
DNNs; See e.g. [3, 14, 28, 40, 41, 50, 55]. However, the
generalization of these denoising networks to ill-posed image
restoration problems is not trivial. The existence of the non-

1989

