Deep Depth from Focus with Differential Focus Volume
Fengting Yang Xiaolei Huang Zihan Zhou
The Pennsylvania State University
{fuy34, suh972, zuz22}@psu.edu

Abstract

one cannot estimate the absolute depth from a single image
without scene priors, even if the camera is well-calibrated.

Depth-from-focus (DFF) is a technique that infers depth
using the focus change of a camera. In this work, we propose a convolutional neural network (CNN) to find the bestfocused pixels in a focal stack and infer depth from the focus estimation. The key innovation of the network is the
novel deep differential focus volume (DFV). By computing
the first-order derivative with the stacked features over different focal distances, DFV is able to capture both the focus and context information for focus analysis. Besides, we
also introduce a probability regression mechanism for focus
estimation to handle sparsely sampled focal stacks and provide uncertainty estimation to the final prediction. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed model
achieves state-of-the-art performance on multiple datasets
with good generalizability and fast speed.

In this work, we utilize both the focus and context cues
and develop a deep depth-from-focus (DFF) network for focus analysis and depth inference. We prefer DFF over the
other focus-based technique, namely depth-from-defocus
(DFD), because of its generalizability. For DFD, a mathematical model between the depth and the defocus pattern
needs to be established. These methods commonly assume
the object point is centralized at a small plane and the point
spread function (PSF) follows a certain distribution [25].
But such assumptions may not hold in real-world scenarios.
DFF only assumes there is one and only one best-focused
frame for a pixel in a focal stack, which is guaranteed in
theory [39] for thin lens cameras if the sampling focal distances are dense enough. The focal distance of the bestfocused frame can serve as the pixel depth estimation.

1. Introduction
Recovering depth using a single RGB camera is a critical problem in 3D vision. Many applications can benefit
from this technique, including 3D reconstruction, virtual
and augmented reality, and image editing. In the literature, various cues have been explored to tackle the problem, such as focus [33], ego-motion [40], and structuredlight patterns [3]. But cues like ego-motion and structuredlight patterns require either extra motion or additional devices, which limit their applications on smart devices and
hand-held cameras. In contrast, the focus (or defocus) cue
is what we can gain almost for “free.” To capture a wellfocused image, many digital cameras rapidly sweep a focal
plane in its focus range, resulting in a series of images (i.e.,
a focal stack) with different focal distances. A pioneering
work [45] has shown that depth can be inferred from focal
stacks taken by a mobile phone.
Image context is another “free” cue we can get from pictures. Based on it, a series of works [9, 11, 35, 36] have
shown the ability to infer depth from a single image. But
it is still a challenge to generalize these single-view methods to unknown scenes. Plus, due to the scale ambiguity,

Several major challenges still exist in DFF. The first one
is the focus measure design. A large number of focus measures have been proposed, but none of them is perfect in the
wild environment [34]. The second one is regarding textureless regions. As the responses to focus measures stay
low in textureless regions, the context information has to be
used to infer the focus status [4, 10]. The third one is the
high sampling frequency requirement. In theory, for an object point falls into the depth of field of a camera, there must
be one sharpest pixel in the focal sweep. But it may not be
visible if the sampling frequency is low. Thus, many traditional DFF methods [29, 44] take tens of frames as input,
which limits their running speed.
To overcome these challenges, we propose to learn a
deep focus measure with the convolutional neural network
(CNN). The global information embedded in the deep features extracted by the CNN can help focus analysis in textureless regions. Further, the focus status is represented as
a probability distribution of the best-focused pixels, which
can be learned from a limited number of frames. Note that
earlier works [6, 13, 47] have also tried to tackle the DFF
problem with CNN. But their networks are adopted from
either the general dense prediction tasks [6, 13] or the video
representation task [47], not specifically designed for DFF.

12642

