Language-Bridged Spatial-Temporal Interaction for
Referring Video Object Segmentation
Zihan Ding1,4,5

Tianrui Hui2,3 Junshi Huang4 Xiaoming Wei4 Jizhong Han2,3
1
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University
2
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Meituan 5 Hangzhou Innovation Institute, Beihang University
Spatial

Abstract
Referring video object segmentation aims to predict foreground labels for objects referred by natural language expressions in videos. Previous methods either depend on 3D
ConvNets or incorporate additional 2D ConvNets as encoders to extract mixed spatial-temporal features. However,
these methods suffer from spatial misalignment or false distractors due to delayed and implicit spatial-temporal interaction occurring in the decoding phase. To tackle these
limitations, we propose a Language-Bridged Duplex Transfer (LBDT) module which utilizes language as an intermediary bridge to accomplish explicit and adaptive spatialtemporal interaction earlier in the encoding phase. Concretely, cross-modal attention is performed among the temporal encoder, referring words and the spatial encoder to
aggregate and transfer language-relevant motion and appearance information. In addition, we also propose a Bilateral Channel Activation (BCA) module in the decoding
phase for further denoising and highlighting the spatialtemporal consistent features via channel-wise activation.
Extensive experiments show our method achieves new stateof-the-art performances on four popular benchmarks with
6.8% and 6.9% absolute AP gains on A2D Sentences and
J-HMDB Sentences respectively, while consuming around
7× less computational overhead 1 .

1. Introduction
Referring video object segmentation (RVOS), which
aims to segment the target object referred by a natural language expression in video frames, is an emerging task at
the intersection of computer vision and natural language
processing. Different from semi-automatic video object
segmentation (SVOS) [3, 7, 31, 38], where the target ob* Corresponding author
1 https://github.com/dzh19990407/LBDT

language
Motion
Transfer

girl
in
white

Si Liu1,5 *

Temporal
Motion
Aggregation

shirt
jumping
brown
Appearance
Aggregation

cat
walking

Appearance
Transfer

inside
rotating
wheel

Figure 1. Illustration of our main idea. (Top) For temporal→language→spatial transfer, the referring words (e.g., “jumping”) can aggregate language-relevant motion information from
the temporal features, which can help the spatial encoder recognize correct actions. (Bottom) For spatial→language→temporal
transfer, the referring words (e.g., “brown”) can aggregate the
language-relevant appearance information from the spatial features, which helps the temporal encoder remove the disturbance
of background motion (e.g., the rotating wheel).

ject is referred by the manually annotated mask in the first
frame, RVOS is more challenging for identifying the targets
due to the variance of free-form expressions. Providing a
more natural way for human-computer interaction, RVOS
opens up a wide range of applications including languagebased video editing [5], language-guided video summarization [29], and video question answering [14, 39], etc.
The keys to solving RVOS are spatial-temporal interaction and cross-modal alignment [12, 41]. Existing methods
mainly focus on the latter and design several mechanisms
(e.g., cross-modal attention [30, 37], capsule routing [25],
and dynamic convolution [6, 36]) to mine the semantic
correspondence between vision and language modalities.
However, all these methods have limitations on spatial-

4964

