Towards Semi-Supervised Deep Facial Expression Recognition with An Adaptive
Confidence Margin

1

Hangyu Li1 , Nannan Wang1 *, Xi Yang1 , Xiaoyu Wang2 , Xinbo Gao3
Xidian University, 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
3
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications

hangyuli.xidian@gmail.com, nnwang@xidian.edu.cn, yangx@xidian.edu.cn
fanghuaxue@gmail.com, gaoxb@cqupt.edu.cn

Only parts of unlabeled data are selected to train models for most semi-supervised learning methods, whose confidence scores are usually higher than the pre-defined threshold (i.e., the confidence margin). We argue that the recognition performance should be further improved by making
full use of all unlabeled data. In this paper, we learn an
Adaptive Confidence Margin (Ada-CM) to fully leverage
all unlabeled data for semi-supervised deep facial expression recognition. All unlabeled samples are partitioned
into two subsets by comparing their confidence scores with
the adaptively learned confidence margin at each training
epoch: (1) subset I including samples whose confidence
scores are no lower than the margin; (2) subset II including samples whose confidence scores are lower than the
margin. For samples in subset I, we constrain their predictions to match pseudo labels. Meanwhile, samples in
subset II participate in the feature-level contrastive objective to learn effective facial expression features. We extensively evaluate Ada-CM on four challenging datasets,
showing that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance, especially surpassing fully-supervised baselines in
a semi-supervised manner. Ablation study further proves
the effectiveness of our method. The source code is available at https://github.com/hangyu94/Ada-CM .

1. Introduction
Facial expression recognition (FER) aims to make computers understand visual emotion. Recently, the advancement of deep FER is largely promoted by large-scale labeled datasets, e.g., RAF-DB [16] and AffectNet [22].
However, the collection of large-scale labels is quite expensive and difficult. Besides, existing labels often fail to
* Corresponding author

0.970

HA

High prediction confidence (≥0.9)
0.967

SA

0.943

AN

Low prediction confidence (0.75~0.9)

0.833

DI

0.833

NE

0.767

FE

0.917

0.687

SU
0.700

FE

DI
0.710

SA

Lower prediction confidence ( ≤ 0.75)

Abstract

Figure 1. Confidence scores by 30 volunteers on ten faces
annotated with seven classes, including surprise, fear, disgust,
happiness, sadness, anger and neutral. The upper left corner of
each face is tagged with its confidence score. All faces are divided
into three groups based on the confidence score. The results provide insights that the confidence scores may be inconsistent among
different classes and even the confidence gap between intra-class
expressions may be large, e.g., faces annotated with Sadness.

satisfy actual fine-grained needs and the re-labeling data requires human experts. Therefore, it is urgent to develop
a powerful method for training models on a large amount
of data without corresponding labels, i.e., semi-supervised
deep facial expression recognition (SS-DFER).
Most recent semi-supervised learning (SSL) algorithms
achieve competitive performance by predicting artificial labels of unlabeled data. For example, pseudo-labeling methods [12, 14, 24, 35] utilize the model predictions as artificial labels to retrain CNN models. Typically, FixMatch
[28] explores weakly-augmented and strongly-augmented
data pairs and selects only unlabeled samples with highconfidence predictions, whose confidence scores are above
the pre-defined fixed threshold (e.g., 0.95).
Despite excellent performance on common classification
tasks, the threshold-based pseudo-labeling strategy is still
challenging for SS-DFER mainly due to two reasons: (1)
The fixed threshold for all categories. Facial expressions
from different categories are classified with varying degrees
of difficulty. To better understand this, we randomly pick

4166

