The Neurally-Guided Shape Parser:
Grammar-based Labeling of 3D Shape Regions with Approximate Inference
R. Kenny Jones
Brown University

Aalia Habib
Brown University

Abstract
We propose the Neurally-Guided Shape Parser (NGSP),
a method that learns how to assign fine-grained semantic
labels to regions of a 3D shape. NGSP solves this problem
via MAP inference, modeling the posterior probability of
a label assignment conditioned on an input shape with a
learned likelihood function. To make this search tractable,
NGSP employs a neural guide network that learns to approximate the posterior. NGSP finds high-probability label assignments by first sampling proposals with the guide
network and then evaluating each proposal under the full
likelihood. We evaluate NGSP on the task of fine-grained
semantic segmentation of manufactured 3D shapes from PartNet, where shapes have been decomposed into regions that
correspond to part instance over-segmentations. We find that
NGSP delivers significant performance improvements over
comparison methods that (i) use regions to group per-point
predictions, (ii) use regions as a self-supervisory signal or
(iii) assign labels to regions under alternative formulations.
Further, we show that NGSP maintains strong performance
even with limited labeled data or noisy input shape regions.
Finally, we demonstrate that NGSP can be directly applied
to CAD shapes found in online repositories and validate its
effectiveness with a perceptual study.

1. Introduction
The ability to semantically segment 3D shapes is important for numerous applications in vision, graphics, and
robotics: reverse-engineering the part structure of an object
to support editing and manipulation; producing training data
for structure-aware generative shape models [10, 14, 24];
helping autonomous agents understand how to interact with
objects in their environment [1]; and more. These applications often demand that the parts detected be fine-scale
(e.g. wheels of an office chair) and hierarchically-organized
(e.g. a cabinet door decomposes into a handle, door, and
frame). Producing such segmentations has proved to be a

Rana Hanocka
University of Chicago

Daniel Ritchie
Brown University

challenging task, as it is expensive to gather large amounts
of data at this granularity; PartNet [25] is the only existing
large-scale dataset of this type.
Recent work on 3D shape semantic segmentation has
mainly focused on end-to-end approaches that operate on
shape atoms (e.g. mesh faces, point cloud points, occupancy
grid voxels), i.e. the lowest-level geometric entity in the
input representation [12, 28, 29, 38]. While these methods
achieve impressive performance on many tasks, they do not
often transfer well to domains with fine-grained labels or
when access to labeled data is limited. We postulate that one
reason for this phenomenon is that attempting to label shape
atoms directly results in a massive search space, allowing
learning-based methods to overfit unless the ratio of labeled
shape instances to the label set complexity is high.
One way to address this issue is to design systems that
make use of shape regions. When the number of shape
regions becomes significantly smaller than the number of
shape atoms, the label assignment problem becomes easier.
Such a framing may allow methods to learn fine-grained
semantic segmentation when access to labeled data is limited.
When shape regions are provided, they can be used in various
ways: (i) as a post-process aggregation on top of shape
atom predictions, (ii) to formulate auxiliary self-supervised
objectives, or (iii) as the object to be labeled. Methods that
operate within this last paradigm can more directly reason
about relationships between regions, which can help improve
fine-grained segmentation performance by better considering
the context of a region within the entire shape.
The problem of decomposing a shape into regions useful
for semantic segmentation is application-dependent. For
CAD shapes and scenes found in online repositories, this
type of region decomposition is often produced as a byproduct of the modeling process, e.g. each part instance
will be made out of one or more connected mesh components [22, 34, 43]. Discovering region decompositions for
shapes that do not already provide them is a well-studied
problem within computer vision and graphics. There has
been considerable recent effort on unsupervised techniques
that approximate 3D shapes with primitives [6,17,27,32,33],

11614

