Contextual Outpainting with Object-Level Contrastive Learning
Jiacheng Li1
Chang Chen2
Zhiwei Xiong1 *
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.

Figure 1. Contextual outpainting: given foreground contents, synthesizes coherent and natural background contents. The proposed
method predicts diverse semantic layouts first, and synthesizes realistic background contents with the help of predicted semantic layouts.
For each example, we show the semantic layouts (in red dashed boxes) and the outpainted images (in red boxes) generated by our method
after the input foreground image and the ground truth image, respectively.

Abstract
We study the problem of contextual outpainting, which
aims to hallucinate the missing background contents based
on the remaining foreground contents. Existing image outpainting methods focus on completing object shapes or extending existing scenery textures, neglecting the semantically meaningful relationship between the missing and remaining contents. To explore the semantic cues provided
by the remaining foreground contents, we propose a novel
ConTextual Outpainting GAN (CTO-GAN), leveraging the
semantic layout as a bridge to synthesize coherent and diverse background contents. To model the contextual correlation between foreground and background contents, we incorporate an object-level contrastive loss to regularize the
learning of cross-modal representations of foreground contents and the corresponding background semantic layout,
facilitating accurate semantic reasoning. Furthermore, we
improve the realism of the generated background contents
via detecting generated context in adversarial training. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed method
achieves superior performance compared with existing solutions on the challenging COCO-stuff dataset. Project
page: https://ddlee-cn.github.io/cto-gan.
* Corresponding author: zwxiong@ustc.edu.cn.

1. Introduction
Image outpainting, also referred to as image extrapolation or image extension, is a long-lived task in computer vision. Many real-world scenarios have a strong demand for
high-quality image extrapolations, like simulating different
views of the current visual content in virtual reality. Early
image outpainting methods rely on a retrieval and stitching process to extend image patches [18, 49, 69]. Recently,
learning-based methods have made impressive progress in
synthesizing visually pleasing results [13, 21, 53, 61]. However, existing image outpainting methods mainly focus on
completing object shapes or extending existing scenery textures. The contextual relationship between foreground and
background contents remains unexplored.
In this work, we study a variant of the outpainting problem, named contextual outpainting, which aims to synthesize coherent and natural background contents from the remaining foreground contents, as shown in Fig. 1. As humans, it is easy for us to hallucinate the empirical context given common objects, since we relate objects with
their context unconsciously in everyday life. There are
many potential applications of contextual outpainting techniques, such as generating plausible backgrounds for the
salient objects in online advertising, film making, and aug-

11451

