Improving Adversarial Transferability via Neuron Attribution-based Attacks
Jen-tse Huang1
Yizhan Huang1
Jianping Zhang1
Weibin Wu2 *
Wenxuan Wang1
Yuxin Su2
Michael R. Lyu1
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
School of Software Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
{jpzhang, jthuang, yzhuang9, wxwang, lyu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, {wuwb36, suyx35}@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are known to be vulnerable to adversarial examples. It is thus imperative to devise effective attack algorithms to identify the deficiencies of
DNNs beforehand in security-sensitive applications. To efficiently tackle the black-box setting where the target model’s
particulars are unknown, feature-level transfer-based attacks propose to contaminate the intermediate feature outputs of local models, and then directly employ the crafted
adversarial samples to attack the target model. Due to the
transferability of features, feature-level attacks have shown
promise in synthesizing more transferable adversarial samples. However, existing feature-level attacks generally employ inaccurate neuron importance estimations, which deteriorates their transferability. To overcome such pitfalls,
in this paper, we propose the Neuron Attribution-based Attack (NAA), which conducts feature-level attacks with more
accurate neuron importance estimations. Specifically, we
first completely attribute a model’s output to each neuron
in a middle layer. We then derive an approximation scheme
of neuron attribution to tremendously reduce the computation overhead. Finally, we weight neurons based on their
attribution results and launch feature-level attacks. Extensive experiments confirm the superiority of our approach to
the state-of-the-art benchmarks. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/jpzhang1810/NAA .

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been deployed in
many safety-critical real-world applications, such as autonomous driving and medical diagnosis. However, recent
research shows that DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial attacks [30], which add human-imperceptible perturbations to
clean images to mislead DNNs. It is thus imperative to devise effective attack algorithms to identify the deficiencies
* Corresponding author.

Benign Image

Source Model Attention Target Model Attention

Adversarial Image

Source Model Attention Target Model Attention

Figure 1. Visualization of model attentions on both the benign
image and adversarial image generated by our method. The attentions of both the source model and target model change dramatically on the adversarial image compared with the benign image.

of DNNs beforehand, which serves as the first step to improve their robustness.
There are generally two categories of adversarial attacks: white-box and black-box attacks. Attackers under the
white-box setting can fetch the structures and parameters of
the target models to craft adversarial examples. In contrast,
under the black-box setting, attackers have no access to the
model structure and parameters. In real-world applications,
the DNN models are generally deployed in the black-box
situation. Therefore, we focus on black-box attacks in this
work.
Black-box attacks can be roughly divided into querybased and transfer-based schemes. Query-based methods
approximate the gradient information by queries [1, 14, 32]
to generate adversarial examples. However, query-based
methods are impractical since large quantities of queries
are not allowed in reality. As a result, researchers turn to
efficient transfer-bases attacks [6, 7, 9, 19, 38], which employ white-box attacks to attack a local surrogate model,

14993

