Deep Hyperspectral-Depth Reconstruction Using Single Color-Dot Projection
Chunyu Li, Yusuke Monno, and Masatoshi Okutomi
Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan
{lchunyu,ymonno}@ok.sc.e.titech.ac.jp, mxo@ctrl.titech.ac.jp

Abstract

1. Introduction
Depth reconstruction and hyperspectral reﬂectance reconstruction (spectral reconstruction, for short) are two active research areas in the ﬁelds of computer vision and image processing. Depth reconstruction aims at obtaining a
scene’s depth map, which presents the distances from the
camera to each scene point. On the other hand, spectral reconstruction aims at acquiring scene’s spectral reﬂectance
information, which provides the wavelength-by-wavelength
reﬂectance of each scene point. Since the depth and the
spectral reﬂectance provides the scene’s geometric and photometric properties, respectively, simultaneously acquiring
them, which we refer to as hyperspectral-depth reconstruction, has various potential applications such as cultural heritage [6, 19], artwork authentication [30], material classiﬁ19770

Color-dot
projection
Projector

RGB camera

Setup

CNN
(mm)
731
669
607
544
482

Estimated depth

Single RGB image

Reflectance

Depth reconstruction and hyperspectral reﬂectance reconstruction are two active research topics in computer vision and image processing. Conventionally, these two topics have been studied separately using independent imaging setups and there is no existing method which can acquire depth and spectral reﬂectance simultaneously in one
shot without using special hardware. In this paper, we propose a novel single-shot hyperspectral-depth reconstruction method using an off-the-shelf RGB camera and projector. Our method is based on a single color-dot projection,
which simultaneously acts as structured light for depth reconstruction and spatially-varying color illuminations for
hyperspectral reﬂectance reconstruction. To jointly reconstruct the depth and the hyperspectral reﬂectance from a
single color-dot image, we propose a novel end-to-end network architecture that effectively incorporates a geometric
color-dot pattern loss and a photometric hyperspectral reﬂectance loss. Through the experiments, we demonstrate
that our hyperspectral-depth reconstruction method outperforms the combination of an existing state-of-the-art singleshot hyperspectral reﬂectance reconstruction method and
depth reconstruction method.

Wavelength

Estimated spectral reflectance

Figure 1. The overview of our system. From a single RGB image
captured with a random color-dot projection, we simultaneously
reconstruct the depth and the spectral reﬂectance for each pixel.

cation [5, 25], plant modeling [26], and relighting [35].
Although depth reconstruction and spectral reconstruction have been studied separately, some systems are recently designed to simultaneously acquire both the depth
and the spectral reﬂectance. They typically combine a
conventional depth-sensing technology with a hyperspectral camera [9, 13, 32, 34, 36, 39]. However, the requirement of a hyperspectral camera makes the system high cost.
Some other systems use a standard RGB camera in conjunction with a variable and controllable light source, which
emits temporally-changing illuminations to acquire multiband spectral observations [15,21–23,27,28,37]. However,
these systems require multiple shots and thus are not applicable to dynamic scenes. Very recently, Baek et al. have
proposed a single-shot system that uses a standard RGB
camera and a diffractive optical element attached in front
of the camera [3]. Although this system realizes a compact
design using existing optical components, it still requires
customized hardware design.
In this paper, we propose a novel single-shot system
to simultaneously acquire the depth and the spectral reﬂectance using a standard RGB camera and an off-theshelf RGB projector (see Fig. 1). Our system is based

