InfoGCN: Representation Learning for Human Skeleton-based Action Recognition
Hyung-gun Chi1∗ , Myoung Hoon Ha2∗ , Seunggeun Chi1 , Sang Wan Lee2 , Qixing Huang3 , Karthik Ramani1,4
1
School of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, USA
2
KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea 3 The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, USA
4
School of Mechanical Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, USA
{hgchi,sgchi,ramani}@purdue.edu, mh.ha.soar@gmail.com, sangwan@kaist.ac.kr, huangqx@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Human skeleton-based action recognition offers a valuable means to understand the intricacies of human behavior because it can handle the complex relationships between physical constraints and intention. Although several
studies have focused on encoding a skeleton, less attention has been paid to embed this information into the latent representations of human action. InfoGCN proposes
a learning framework for action recognition combining a
novel learning objective and an encoding method. First,
we design an information bottleneck-based learning objective to guide the model to learn informative but compact
latent representations. To provide discriminative information for classifying action, we introduce attention-based
graph convolution that captures the context-dependent intrinsic topology of human action. In addition, we present
a multi-modal representation of the skeleton using the relative position of joints, designed to provide complementary spatial information for joints. InfoGCN1 surpasses
the known state-of-the-art on multiple skeleton-based action recognition benchmarks with the accuracy of 93.0%
on NTU RGB+D 60 cross-subject split, 89.8% on NTU
RGB+D 120 cross-subject split, and 97.0% on NW-UCLA.

1. Introduction
Human action recognition is a fundamental problem in
computer vision with rich applications, including emergency detection [36], sign language recognition [35], and
gesture recognition for VR / AR [57], to name a few. In
particular, human action recognition based on the skeleton [6, 7, 19, 44, 58] has attracted much interest in computer
vision because of its robustness against a cluttered background. One of the key achievements in skeleton-based action recognition is a graph convolution network (GCN [21])
based approach.
* These authors contributed equally to this work
1 Code is available at github.com/stnoah1/infogcn

Figure 1. Conceptual diagram of InfoGCN. We propose an IB
objective and a corresponding loss to guide our model to learn
maximally informative representations for skeleton-based action
recognition. The encoder infers an intrinsic topology of joints,
which provides contextual information beyond physical connectivity. The colored lines on the bottom indicate inferred intrinsic
topology, and the thickness represents the strength of the relation.

This paper introduces a novel skeleton-based prediction
framework for action recognition. Our approach advances
the state-of-the-art in three critical aspects. The first is
the algorithm for representation learning. A large body of
works have demonstrated that representation learning considerably influences the performance of machine learning
tasks [2, 5, 13, 23, 29, 59, 61]. Our approach is inspired
by the information bottleneck (IB) theory [49]. We derive
novel IB objective and the corresponding loss to learn the
latent representation to be maximally informative to the target variable while compressing the input information conditionally and marginally, as illustrated at the top of Fig. 1.
The model learned with the proposed objective performs
recognition by encoding implicit and general latent representation, bridging the input-level physical information and
action semantics.
The second is the encoding method of the skeleton.
Graph representation of the skeleton using bone connectiv-

20186

