Targeted Supervised Contrastive Learning for Long-Tailed Recognition
Tianhong Li1,∗ Peng Cao1,∗
Rogerio Feris2
1

Yuan Yuan1 Lijie Fan1 Yuzhe Yang1
Piotr Indyk1 Dina Katabi1

MIT CSAIL, 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Abstract
Real-world data often exhibits long tail distributions
with heavy class imbalance, where the majority classes can
dominate the training process and alter the decision boundaries of the minority classes. Recently, researchers have investigated the potential of supervised contrastive learning
for long-tailed recognition, and demonstrated that it provides a strong performance gain. In this paper, we show
that while supervised contrastive learning can help improve
performance, past baselines suffer from poor uniformity
brought in by imbalanced data distribution. This poor uniformity manifests in samples from the minority class having poor separability in the feature space. To address this
problem, we propose targeted supervised contrastive learning (TSC), which improves the uniformity of the feature
distribution on the hypersphere. TSC first generates a set
of targets uniformly distributed on a hypersphere. It then
makes the features of different classes converge to these
distinct and uniformly distributed targets during training.
This forces all classes, including minority classes, to maintain a uniform distribution in the feature space, improves
class boundaries, and provides better generalization even
in the presence of long-tail data. Experiments on multiple datasets show that TSC achieves state-of-the-art performance on long-tailed recognition tasks.

1. Introduction
Real-world data often has a long tail distribution over
classes: A few classes contain many instances (head
classes), whereas most classes contain only a few instances
(tail classes). For critical applications, such as medical diagnosis, autonomous driving, and fairness, the data
are by their nature heavily imbalanced, and the minority
classes are particularly important (minority classes can be
patients or accidents [41, 49, 51]). Interest in such problems has motivated much recent research on imbalanced
∗ Indicates equal contribution.

▲ Class Center

(a) KCL

Acc:
94.3%

● Data Points

Acc:
83.2%

Acc:
72.7%
Plane
Cat
Dog

(b) TSC (Ours)

Acc:
94.5%

Acc:
87.4%

Acc:
80.9%

𝝆 = 𝟏: 𝟏: 𝟏

𝝆 = 𝟏𝟎: 𝟏: 𝟏

𝝆 = 𝟏𝟎𝟎: 𝟏: 𝟏

Figure 1. Test data feature distribution of (a) k-positive contrastive
learning (KCL) and (b) TSC for three classes of CIFAR10 (plane,
cat, dog), for different training data imbalance ratios ρ. With high
imbalance ratio, class centers learned by KCL exhibit poor uniformity while class centers learned by TSC are still uniformly distributed and thus TSC achieves better performance (where Acc
refers to Accuracy on test data).

classification, where the training dataset is imbalanced or
long-tailed but the test dataset is equally distributed among
classes [4, 24, 46, 49, 50].
Long-tailed and imbalanced datasets pose major challenges for classification tasks leading to a significant performance drop [1, 2, 8, 48, 52]. Techniques such as data resampling [1,2,5,40] and loss re-weighting [3,4,9,11,25,26]
can improve the performance of tail classes but typically
harm head classes [24]. Recently, researchers have investigated the potential of supervised contrastive learning for
long-tailed recognition, and demonstrated that it provides
a strong performance gain [23]. They further proposed kpositive contrastive learning (KCL), a variant of supervised
contrastive learning that yields even better performance on
long-tailed datasets.
However, while supervised contrastive learning can be
beneficial, applying the contrastive loss (including the KCL
loss) to imbalanced data can yield poor uniformity, which
hampers performance. Uniformity is a desirable property [46]; it refers to that in an ideal scenario supervised contrastive learning should converge to an embedding

6918

