SLIC: Self-Supervised Learning with Iterative Clustering for Human Action
Videos
Salar Hosseini Khorasgani*
Yuxuan Chen*
University of Toronto

Florian Shkurti

{salar.hosseinikhorasgani, yuxuansherry.chen}@mail.utoronto.ca, florian@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
Self-supervised methods have significantly closed the gap
with end-to-end supervised learning for image classification [13, 24]. In the case of human action videos, however,
where both appearance and motion are significant factors of
variation, this gap remains significant [28, 58]. One of the
key reasons for this is that sampling pairs of similar video
clips, a required step for many self-supervised contrastive
learning methods, is currently done conservatively to avoid
false positives. A typical assumption is that similar clips
only occur temporally close within a single video, leading
to insufficient examples of motion similarity. To mitigate
this, we propose SLIC, a clustering-based self-supervised
contrastive learning method for human action videos. Our
key contribution is that we improve upon the traditional
intra-video positive sampling by using iterative clustering
to group similar video instances. This enables our method
to leverage pseudo-labels from the cluster assignments to
sample harder positives and negatives. SLIC outperforms
state-of-the-art video retrieval baselines by +15.4% on top-1
recall on UCF101 and by +5.7% when directly transferred
to HMDB51. With end-to-end finetuning for action classification, SLIC achieves 83.2% top-1 accuracy (+0.8%) on
UCF101 and 54.5% on HMDB51 (+1.6%). SLIC is also
competitive with the state-of-the-art in action classification
after self-supervised pretraining on Kinetics400.

1. Introduction
Self-supervision tasks have emerged as effective pretraining methods for image classification, retrieval, and other
downstream tasks. They have also been shown to outperform end-to-end supervised learning in a number of settings [13, 34]. A key assumption in many self-supervised
methods is the ability to do instance discrimination, by sampling or generating similar and dissimilar data, given a query.
While this is a reasonable assumption for training image rep* The two authors contributed equally to this paper.

Figure 1. Nearest neighbor retrieval results of SLIC after pretraining on UCF101. The leftmost column is the query video from
the UCF101 test set. On the right are the top 5 nearest neighbours
from the training set in UCF101. Incorrect retrieval results are
highlighted in red.

resentations, for example by generating similar data through
augmentations and dissimilar data by random sampling, it
becomes much more challenging in the case of video representations as we need to account for motion-based as well
as appearance-based similarities.
Different clips might have dissimilar appearances and the
same motion (e.g. running at different locations), or similar appearances but different motions (e.g. playing cricket
or golf with a green field as the background). In instance
discrimination we sample positive video instances conservatively, typically by assuming that they only occur temporally
close within a single video, and sample negatives randomly
from different videos. Even though some methods attempted
to improve upon instance discrimination by sampling harder
positives using additional views, self-supervised pretraining of video representations is still not as effective as fully
supervised pretraining (when evaluating on downstream clas-

16091

