Dynamic Kernel Selection for Improved Generalization and Memory Efficiency
in Meta-learning

†

Arnav Chavan∗†‡ , Rishabh Tiwari*∗†‡ , Udbhav Bamba†‡ and Deepak K. Gupta†
Transmute AI Lab (Texmin Hub), Indian Institute of Technology, ISM Dhanbad
{arnavchavan04,akchitra99,ubamba98,guptadeepak2806}@gmail.com

Abstract
Gradient based meta-learning methods are prone to
overfit on the meta-training set, and this behaviour is more
prominent with large and complex networks. Moreover,
large networks restrict the application of meta-learning
models on low-power edge devices. While choosing smaller
networks avoid these issues to a certain extent, it affects
the overall generalization leading to reduced performance.
Clearly, there is an approximately optimal choice of network architecture that is best suited for every meta-learning
problem, however, identifying it beforehand is not straightforward. In this paper, we present M ETA DOCK, a taskspecific dynamic kernel selection strategy for designing
compressed CNN models that generalize well on unseen
tasks in meta-learning. Our method is based on the hypothesis that for a given set of similar tasks, not all kernels of
the network are needed by each individual task. Rather,
each task uses only a fraction of the kernels, and the selection of the kernels per task can be learnt dynamically
as a part of the inner update steps. M ETA DOCK compresses the meta-model as well as the task-specific inner
models, thus providing significant reduction in model size
for each task, and through constraining the number of active kernels for every task, it implicitly mitigates the issue
of meta-overfitting. We show that for the same inference
budget, pruned versions of large CNN models obtained using our approach consistently outperform the conventional
choices of CNN models. M ETA DOCK couples well with
popular meta-learning approaches such as iMAML [22].
The efficacy of our method is validated on CIFAR-fs [1] and
mini-ImageNet [28] datasets, and we have observed that
our approach can provide improvements in model accuracy
of up to 2% on standard meta-learning benchmark, while
reducing the model size by more than 75%. Our code is
available at https://github.com/transmuteAI/
MetaDOCK.
* indicates equal contribution. Arnav Chavan is the corresponding author.

1. Introduction
An important characteristic desired by any artificial intelligence (AI) system is the ability to solve tasks under
several different conditions, and that it can adapt quickly in
unseen environments with the help of limited data. While
the field of deep learning has progressed significantly with
the development of several efficient algorithms, it is well
known that the standard learning methods tend to perform
well when training is done with the millions of data points
and break down when the statistics of the inference data
differs from that of the training set. Meta-learning tries to
solve this problem by learning-to-learn the model weights
over different episodes from a family of tasks with limited
data. This learning process helps the models to generalize
well and adapt quickly over unseen tasks with the help of
few examples. Such setting has many practical advantages
in vision and reinforcement learning problems like few-shot
image classification [3, 11, 22, 28], navigation [30], domain
adaptation [5] to name a few.
The key idea behind these kind of meta-learning approaches is to learn generalized weights which can be modified easily for a newer task. Gradient based approaches
tend to face the problem of overfitting to a greater extent than other methods. The two kind of overfitting observed in them are - 1) Inner-task overfitting, which refers
to task-specific overfitting of the meta-model, an extensive
research has been done on this problem [13, 33] as it commonly seen in all the deep learning approaches and several
methods have been proposed to counter this, for example,
inner-regularization, dropout, weight decay, learning rate
scheduling, etc. 2) Inter-task overfitting or meta-overfitting,
that is overfitting of meta-model on seen tasks and failure to
generalize well on unseen tasks, the study on this problem
is limited, few of the common approaches are adding implicit regularizations [22], choosing larger CNN networks
to increase learning capacity [13], using initialization techniques to improve generalisation [25].
In this paper, we propose to improve the generalization of gradient based meta-learning models as well as

9851

