Learning from Temporal Gradient for Semi-supervised Action Recognition
Junfei Xiao1
Longlong Jing2
Lin Zhang3
Ju He1
Zongwei Zhou1
Alan Yuille1
Yingwei Li1
1

Qi She4

2
Johns Hopkins University
The City University of New York
3
4
Carnegie Mellon University
ByteDance

t t+1

Abstract
Semi-supervised video action recognition tends to enable deep neural networks to achieve remarkable performance even with very limited labeled data. However, existing methods are mainly transferred from current imagebased methods (e.g., FixMatch). Without specifically utilizing the temporal dynamics and inherent multimodal attributes, their results could be suboptimal. To better leverage the encoded temporal information in videos, we introduce temporal gradient as an additional modality for more
attentive feature extraction in this paper. To be specific, our
method explicitly distills the fine-grained motion representations from temporal gradient (TG) and imposes consistency across different modalities (i.e., RGB and TG). The
performance of semi-supervised action recognition is significantly improved without additional computation or parameters during inference. Our method achieves the stateof-the-art performance on three video action recognition
benchmarks (i.e., Kinetics-400, UCF-101, and HMDB-51)
under several typical semi-supervised settings (i.e., different ratios of labeled data). Code is made available at
https://github.com/lambert-x/video-semisup.

1. Introduction
As a fundamental task for video understanding, video action recognition has drawn much attention from the community and industry [5, 9, 45, 47]. Unlike image-related tasks,
networks for video-related tasks are normally easier to overfit due to the complexity of the tasks [23, 45, 46]. The common practice is to firstly pre-train the network on large-scale
datasets (e.g., Kinetics [4] of up to 650, 000 video clips) and
then finetune on downstream small datasets to obtain better
performance [9, 15, 32, 33].
However, since annotating large-scale video datasets is
time-consuming and expensive, training models on a large
dataset collected with complete annotations is impeded. To
utilize large-scale datasets with acceptable costs, some researchers have turned to designing semi-supervised learning

t+7

Frame t

Frame t - Frame t+1
—

Frame t - Frame t+7

RGB

Fast Temporal Gradient

Slow Temporal Gradient

Fast TG

Ours (RGB)

RGB

Slow TG

52.9

40

45

50

55

—

68.3
67.3
60

65

70

74.1
75

80

Top-1 Accuracy (%)
Figure 1. Top: A sketch diagram that describes the formulation
of different modalities (i.e., RGB, fast and slow temporal gradient (TG)). Bottom: A comparison of Top-1 accuracy with FixMatch [38] as the baseline of semi-supervised learning method.
The chart compares the performance of different input modalities
(i.e., RGB, slow TG and fast TG). The remarkable performance
with TG motivates us to figure out a way to efficiently utilize this
fruitful modality. By distilling knowledge from temporal gradient
to RGB, our model is able to significantly outperform the models
taking either temporal gradient or RGB frames as input.

models which have good generalization ability with limited
annotations [21, 37, 55, 58]. As pseudo-label based methods (e.g., FixMatch [38] and MixMatch [2]) have shown
outstanding performance on semi-supervised image classification, most previous video-based methods are heavily
built on them to utilize the unlabeled data. Although these
preliminary attempts have obtained acceptable results, most
methods [21, 58] are just taking video clips as ‘images’ in
3D without further consideration of the video properties.
Videos are significantly different from images, and the

3252

