Real-Time, Accurate, and Consistent Video Semantic Segmentation
via Unsupervised Adaptation and Cross-Unit Deployment on Mobile Device
Hyojin Park*
Alan Yessenbayev
Tushar Singhal
Navin Kumar Adhikari
Yizhe Zhang†
Shubhankar Mangesh Borse
Hong Cai
Nilesh Prasad Pandey
Fei Yin
Frank Mayer
Balaji Calidas
Fatih Porikli
Qualcomm AI Research‡

Abstract
This demonstration showcases our innovations on efficient, accurate, and temporally consistent video semantic
segmentation on mobile device. We employ our test-time
unsupervised scheme, AuxAdapt, to enable the segmentation model to adapt to a given video in an online manner.
More specifically, we leverage a small auxiliary network to
perform weight updates and keep the large, main segmentation network frozen. This significantly reduces the computational cost of adaptation when compared to previous
methods (e.g., Tent, DVP), and at the same time, prevents
catastrophic forgetting. By running AuxAdapt, we can considerably improve the temporal consistency of video segmentation while maintaining the accuracy.
We demonstrate how to efficiently deploy our adaptive
video segmentation algorithm on a smartphone powered by
a Snapdragon® Mobile Platform1 . Rather than simply running the entire algorithm on the GPU, we adopt a crossunit deployment strategy. The main network, which will be
frozen during test time, will perform inferences on a highly
optimized AI accelerator unit, while the small auxiliary network, which will be updated on the fly, will run forward
passes and back-propagations on the GPU. Such a deployment scheme best utilizes the available processing power
on the smartphone and enables real-time operation of our
adaptive video segmentation algorithm. We provide example videos in supplementary material.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a core functionality for visual scene understanding and is of great importance to
1 Snapdragon is a product of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc. and/or its
subsidiaries.
*Corresponding author. Email: hyojinp@qti.qualcomm.com
†Contributed to this work while at Qualcomm AI Research
‡Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

(a) Sample video segmentation without AuxAdapt

(b) Sample video segmentation with AuxAdapt
Figure 1. Snapshots of our video segmentation demonstration. (a)
Sample video segmentation without using AuxAdapt. (b) Sample
video segmentation with AuxAdapt. When using AuxAdapt, we
see higher temporal consistency and an overall better quality of
video segmentation. On the other hand, without AuxAdapt, the
segmentation suffers from flickering artifacts, e.g., in the regions
that transition between road/sidewalk and vegetation.

various applications, such as AR/VR, self-driving/ADAS,
robotics, and mobile image/video processing. Given the
rapid growth of video data in recent years, the ability to
segment video content has become increasingly important.
However, directly applying an image-based segmentation
model to video data often results in temporally inconsistent
(e.g., flickering) outputs, an example of which is shown in
Fig. 1 (a). These artifacts can significantly impact downstream applications like background editing and degrade
user experience.
In the literature, researchers have looked into various
ways to improve temporal consistency. A major line of
work utilizes optical flow during training and/or testing, as
it captures pixel correspondence across frames [1–5]. However, their performance is constrained by the quality of the

