SeeThroughNet: Resurrection of Auxiliary Loss
by Preserving Class Probability Information
Dasol Han∗, Jaewook Yoo∗ , Dokwan Oh†
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology
{dasol.han,jaewook.yoo,dokwan.oh}@samsung.com

Abstract
Auxiliary loss is additional loss besides the main branch
loss to help optimize the learning process of neural networks. In order to calculate the auxiliary loss between the
feature maps of intermediate layers and the ground truth
in the field of semantic segmentation, the size of each feature map must match the ground truth. In all studies using the auxiliary losses with the segmentation models, from
what we have investigated, they either use a down-sampling
function to reduce the size of the ground truth or use an upsampling function to increase the size of the feature map
in order to match the resolution between the feature map
and the ground truth. However, in the process of selecting representative values through down-sampling and upsampling, information loss is inevitable. In this paper, we
introduce Class Probability Preserving (CPP) pooling to alleviate information loss in down-sampling the ground truth
in semantic segmentation tasks. We demonstrated the superiority of the proposed method on Cityscapes, Pascal VOC,
Pascal Context, and NYU-Depth-v2 datasets by using CPP
pooling with auxiliary losses based on seven popular segmentation models. In addition, we propose See-Through
Network (SeeThroughNet) that adopts an improved multiscale attention-coupled decoder structure to maximize the
effect of CPP pooling. SeeThroughNet shows cutting-edge
results in the field of semantic understanding of urban street
scenes, which ranked #1 on the Cityscapes benchmark.

1. Introduction
Increasing the depth of the convolutional neural network
can introduce optimization difficulties as shown in [6, 24].
To solve this vanishing gradient problem in the field of image classification, directly connected auxiliary classifiers
were used to provide extra gradients into some intermediate
layers. The auxiliary classifiers have been widely used in
the variations of the Inception architecture of GoogLeNet
∗ Indicates equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. Visualizations of the effect of Class Probability Preserving (CPP) pooling. The images are from Cityscapes. For the occluded train (in the red box), the occluded building (the bus stop in
the orange box), and the poles in the distance (in the yellow box),
the DeepLabV3+ [5] model w/ CPP shows finer and stronger activation in the Grad-CAM [34] visualization (the left column) than
the DeepLabV3+ original model. In the inference results (the right
column), the w/ CPP model shows correct and fine segmentation.
The enlarged views are provided (the yellow box).

[38] and ResNet [18], where the motivation was to provide useful gradients directly to intermediate layers as extra
supervision during training to resist the vanishing gradient
problem in very deep networks.
Similar attempts have been made in the field of semantic
segmentation. For example, [53, 55, 56] used ResNet-101
as a backbone and adopted an auxiliary head in the intermediate layer as specified in [53]. Since the feature map
of the auxiliary head connected layer and ground truth are
used to calculate the auxiliary loss, their resolutions should
be the same. The auxiliary head is responsible for re-sizing
the resolution of the intermediate feature map to that of the
ground truth through a re-sizing operation.

4463

