Generalizing Interactive Backpropagating Refinement for Dense Prediction
Networks
Fanqing Lin
Brigham Young University

Brian Price
Adobe Research

Tony Martinez
Brigham Young University

fanqinglin@byu.edu

bprice@adobe.com

martinez@cs.byu.edu

Abstract
As deep neural networks become the state-of-the-art approach in the field of computer vision for dense prediction
tasks, many methods have been developed for automatic estimation of the target outputs given the visual inputs. Although the estimation accuracy of the proposed automatic
methods continues to improve, interactive refinement is oftentimes necessary for further correction. Recently, feature backpropagating refinement scheme [25] (f-BRS) has
been proposed for the task of interactive segmentation,
which enables efficient optimization of a small set of auxiliary variables inserted into the pretrained network to produce object segmentation that better aligns with user inputs. However, the proposed auxiliary variables only contain channel-wise scale and bias, limiting the optimization
to global refinement only. In this work, in order to generalize backpropagating refinement for a wide range of dense
prediction tasks, we introduce a set of G-BRS (Generalized Backpropagating Refinement Scheme) layers that enable both global and localized refinement for the following
tasks: interactive segmentation, semantic segmentation, image matting and monocular depth estimation. Experiments
on SBD, Cityscapes, Mapillary Vista, Composition-1k and
NYU-Depth-V2 show that our method can successfully generalize and significantly improve performance of existing
pretrained state-of-the-art models with only a few clicks.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has revolutionized the task of dense prediction, allowing a breakthrough for pixel-classification
problems such as semantic segmentation [2, 17, 18, 36] and
pixel-regression problems such as depth estimation [3, 4,
7, 13]. While these automatic methods are constantly improving in performance, a user has no resource to make
corrections on the estimated output other than using external tools that do not leverage any learned features. To
enable user interactions, dense prediction tasks such as in-

teractive segmentation [9, 14, 16, 21, 30] and image matting [1, 5, 20, 29, 35] use user inputs in forms of distance
maps and trimap respectively as network input. Although
the additional information can be helpful during forward
propagation, deep networks are still free to generate predictions inconsistent with the user-provided inputs.
In this work, we investigate whether a pretrained automatic dense prediction method can be effectively converted into an efficient interactive method without any additional retraining. This is a significant task as deep networks are commonly applied in interactive ways for photography [11,32,34,37,38], videography [22,23,31], special
effects [6,8,28], etc. Two prior works, both focused primarily on interactive segmentation, have inspired our method.
Backpropagating Refinement Scheme (BRS) [12] performs
interactive segmentation using an initial forward pass given
the input image and distance maps generated from a set of
clicks as in [30]. To additionally refine the prediction and
encourage consistency with the input clicks, it sets the input distance maps as the trainable parameters and performs
backpropagation using loss computed from the prediction
and the clicked labels. BRS also briefly extends this idea to
a few other applications: semantic segmentation, saliency
detection and medical image segmentation, showing potential use of BRS for CNNs in general. A follow-on work,
f -BRS [25] later argues that due to the need for online backpropagation through the entire network, BRS has slow inference speed and is computationally expensive. To this
end, instead of using the input distance maps as trainable
parameters, f -BRS inserts a pair of auxiliary parameters that
act as channel-wise scale and bias after an intermediate network layer, requiring backpropagation through a subpart of
the network while achieving nearly equivalent performance.
Despite the improved efficiency of f -BRS, it comes with
a major disadvantage: the proposed auxiliary channel-wise
scale and bias are only capable of global modification. This
not only neglects the need for localized refinement in many
vision applications, but also makes the modified output susceptible to undesired global changes while correcting for
existing clicks. To make efficient and effective refinement

773

