Large-Scale Pre-training for Person Re-identification with Noisy Labels
Dengpan Fu1 Dongdong Chen3 Hao Yang2 Jianmin Bao2 *
Lu Yuan3 Lei Zhang4 Houqiang Li1 Fang Wen 2 Dong Chen2
1

University of Science and Technology of China
fdpan@mail.ustc.edu.cn

2

Microsoft Research, 3 Microsoft Cloud AI, 4 IDEA

cddlyf@gmail.com

lihq@ustc.edu.cn

{jianbao,haya,luyuan,fangwen,doch}@microsoft.com, leizhang@idea.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper aims to address the problem of pre-training
for person re-identification (Re-ID) with noisy labels. To
setup the pre-training task, we apply a simple online multiobject tracking system on raw videos of an existing unlabeled Re-ID dataset “LUPerson” and build the Noisy
Labeled variant called “LUPerson-NL”. Since theses ID
labels automatically derived from tracklets inevitably contain noises, we develop a large-scale Pre-training framework utilizing Noisy Labels (PNL), which consists of three
learning modules: supervised Re-ID learning, prototypebased contrastive learning, and label-guided contrastive
learning. In principle, joint learning of these three modules not only clusters similar examples to one prototype,
but also rectifies noisy labels based on the prototype assignment. We demonstrate that learning directly from raw
videos is a promising alternative for pre-training, which
utilizes spatial and temporal correlations as weak supervision. This simple pre-training task provides a scalable
way to learn SOTA Re-ID representations from scratch on
“LUPerson-NL” without bells and whistles. For example,
by applying on the same supervised Re-ID method MGN,
our pre-trained model improves the mAP over the unsupervised pre-training counterpart by 5.7%, 2.2%, 2.3% on
CUHK03, DukeMTMC, and MSMT17 respectively. Under
the small-scale or few-shot setting, the performance gain is
even more significant, suggesting a better transferability of
the learned representation. Code is available at https:
//github.com/DengpanFu/LUPerson-NL.

1. Introduction
A large high-quality labeled dataset for person reidentification (Re-ID) is labor intensive and costly to create. Existing fully labeled datasets [25, 52, 58, 61] for person Re-ID are all of limited scale and diversity compared
to other vision tasks. Therefore, model pre-training be* Corresponding author.

(a) Market1501 with MGN

(b) Market1501 with IDE

(c) DukeMTMC with MGN

(d) DukeMTMC with IDE

Figure 1. Comparing person Re-ID performances of three pretrained models on two methods (IDE [59] and MGN [51]). Results are reported on Market1501 and DukeMTC, with different
scales under the small-scale setting. IN.sup. refers to the model
supervised pre-trained on ImageNet, LUP.unsup. is the model unsupervised pre-trained on LUPserson, and LUPnl.pnl. is the model
pre-trained on our LUPerson-NL dataset using our proposed PNL.

comes a crucial approach to achieve good Re-ID performance. However, due to the lack of large-scale Re-ID
dataset, most previous methods simply use the models pretrained on the crowd-labeled ImageNet dataset, resulting in
a limited improvement because of the big domain gap between generic images in ImageNet and person-focused images desired by the Re-ID task. To mitigate this problem,
the recent work [12] has demonstrated that unsupervised
pre-training on a web-scale unlabeled Re-ID image dataset
“LUPerson” (sub-sampled from massive streeview videos)
surpasses that of pre-training on ImageNet.
In this paper, our hypothesis is that scalable ReID pretraining methods that learn directly from raw videos can
generate better representations. To verify it, we propose the
noisy labels guided person Re-ID pre-training, which leverages the spatial and temporal correlations in videos as weak

2476

