SphericGAN: Semi-supervised Hyper-spherical Generative Adversarial
Networks for Fine-grained Image Synthesis
Tianyi Chen1 , Yunfei Zhang1 , Xiaoyang Huo1 , Si Wu1,2∗, Yong Xu1,2,3 , and Hau San Wong4
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
Communication and Computer Network Laboratory of Guangdong
4
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
{csttychen, cszhangyunfei, csxyhuo}@mail.scut.edu.cn, {cswusi, yxu}@scut.edu.cn,
cshswong@cityu.edu.hk

1. Introduction
Generative learning aims to model complex real-world
data distributions, such that high-fidelity data can be synthesized from random vectors drawn from a prior distribution.
∗ Corresponding author.

′𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿′
′𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃

Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)-based models have greatly facilitated image synthesis. However, the
model performance may be degraded when applied to finegrained data, due to limited training samples and subtle
distinction among categories. Different from generic GANs, we address the issue from a new perspective of discovering and utilizing the underlying structure of real data
to explicitly regularize the spatial organization of latent space. To reduce the dependence of generative models on labeled data, we propose a semi-supervised hyper-spherical
GAN for class-conditional fine-grained image generation,
and our model is referred to as SphericGAN. By projecting random vectors drawn from a prior distribution onto
a hyper-sphere, we can model more complex distributions,
while at the same time the similarity between the resulting
latent vectors depends only on the angle, but not on their
magnitudes. On the other hand, we also incorporate a mapping network to map real images onto the hyper-sphere, and
match latent vectors with the underlying structure of real
data via real-fake cluster alignment. As a result, we obtain a spatially organized latent space, which is useful for
capturing class-independent variation factors. The experimental results suggest that our SphericGAN achieves stateof-the-art performance in synthesizing high-fidelity images
with precise class semantics.

′𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅′

Abstract

Real images

Fake images

Figure 1. Illustration of our proposed hyper-spherical latent space.
By match with the prior clusters of real data, the distribution of
latent vectors can be complex, which is useful for capturing the
class-independent variation factors.

The existing generative methods can be roughly divided into three groups: autoregressive models [31, 36], Variational Auto-Encoders (VAE) [21] and Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) [14,41]. In particular, GAN-based methods have achieved impressive performance in synthesizing
high-quality images [9, 10, 17–19, 33]. A variety of conditional GAN architectures have been developed to regularize
the data generation process, such as controlling class semantics of synthesized images [5, 6]. To reduce the dependence of class-conditional GANs on labeled training data,
semi-supervised generative learning focuses on how to incorporate unlabeled data in the adversarial training process
[4, 26, 27, 39]. However, most of the current GAN-based
methods are unable to accommodate the fine-grained data
scenarios, since generic real-fake data distribution matching is inadequate to capture the subtle distinctions among
fine-grained classes.
Enlarging the latent space is an effective way to improve
a GAN in capturing the factors of variation in fine-grained
data. FineGAN [34] and MixNMatch [25] adopt hierarchi-

10001

