Ranking-Based Siamese Visual Tracking
Feng Tang1,2 Qiang Ling1∗
1
Department of Automation, University of Science and Technology of China, China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center, China
tang0420@mail.ustc.edu.cn, qling@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

1

1

0.8

Current Siamese-based trackers mainly formulate the visual tracking into two independent subtasks, including classification and localization. They learn the classification
subnetwork by processing each sample separately and neglect the relationship among positive and negative samples.
Moreover, such tracking paradigm takes only the classification confidence of proposals for the final prediction, which
may yield the misalignment between classification and localization. To resolve these issues, this paper proposes a
ranking-based optimization algorithm to explore the relationship among different proposals. To this end, we introduce two ranking losses, including the classification one
and the IoU-guided one, as optimization constraints. The
classification ranking loss can ensure that positive samples rank higher than hard negative ones, i.e., distractors,
so that the trackers can select the foreground samples successfully without being fooled by the distractors. The IoUguided ranking loss aims to align classification confidence
scores with the Intersection over Union(IoU) of the corresponding localization prediction for positive samples, enabling the well-localized prediction to be represented by
high classification confidence. Specifically, the proposed two ranking losses are compatible with most Siamese trackers and incur no additional computation for inference. Extensive experiments on seven tracking benchmarks, including OTB100, UAV123, TC128, VOT2016, NFS30, GOT10k and LaSOT, demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed ranking-based optimization algorithm. The code and
raw results are available at https://github.com/
sansanfree/RBO.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking aims to estimate the location information of an arbitrary target in each frame of a video
sequence. In most situations, only the initial target infor∗ Corresponding Author.

0.6

Rank

Rank
0.95

0.4

0.2

0

0.9

Positive Samples

Hard Negative Samples

Easy Negative Samples

(a) Classification Ranking

IoU:

0.82

0.9

0.75

0.8

0.78

(b) IoU-guided Ranking

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed two ranking losses. The classification loss enables positive samples to rank higher than hard
negative samples, aiming to suppress the classification confidence
of distractors. The IoU ranking loss aims to align classification
with localization, i.e., that the samples with larger IoUs are expected to gain higher classification confidence scores.

mation is provided for trackers, then trackers are required
to model the target appearance in the next frames. Since
target-specific information is only available at test-time, the
target model cannot be obtained via offline network training.
Recently, many researchers exploit how to take the power of deep learning technology to solve the tracking task.
Siamese network is one of the most popular deep learning
paradigm. As pioneer work, SiamFC [1] formulates visual
tracking into a deep target matching problem. To be specific, SiamFC consists of two branches, i.e., target template
and search region. Its former branch is used to model the
target as a fixed exemplar and the later branch processes
the possible regions. SiamFC inspires many later trackers [26, 27, 46, 50] that are built upon the Siamese network architecture and can achieve state-of-the-art performance. Among them, SiamRPN introduces region proposal networks(RPN) consisting of a classification head for foregroundbackground discrimination and a regression head for anchor refinement. SiamRPN++ [26] and SiamFC++ [50] unleash the capability of deeper backbone networks, such as
ResNet [21] and GoogleNet [37], to enhance feature representation. Inspired by anchor-free object detectors like
FCOS [39] and CornerNet [25], many anchor-free tracker-

8741

