A Scalable Combinatorial Solver for Elastic
Geometrically Consistent 3D Shape Matching
Paul Roetzer1,2
Paul Swoboda3
Daniel Cremers1
Florian Bernard2
1
2
TU Munich
University of Bonn
MPI Informatics3

Time [h]

1
Windheuser [66]
Ours
0.5

100

Orientation-preserving matching

Partial-to-partial shape matching (without using complete shape)

200

300
400
# Faces

500

Runtime comparison to Windheuser et al.

Figure 1. We propose a novel combinatorial solver for the non-rigid matching of 3D shapes based on discrete orientation-preserving
diffeomorphisms [66] (left). For the first time we utilize an orientation-preserving diffeomorphism to constrain the challenging problem
of non-rigidly matching a pair of partial shapes without availability of complete shapes (center). Our solver scales significantly better
compared to existing solvers and can thus handle shapes with practically relevant resolutions (right).

Abstract
We present a scalable combinatorial algorithm for globally optimizing over the space of geometrically consistent
mappings between 3D shapes. We use the mathematically elegant formalism proposed by Windheuser et al. [66]
where 3D shape matching was formulated as an integer linear program over the space of orientation-preserving diffeomorphisms. Until now, the resulting formulation had
limited practical applicability due to its complicated constraint structure and its large size. We propose a novel primal heuristic coupled with a Lagrange dual problem that
is several orders of magnitudes faster compared to previous solvers. This allows us to handle shapes with substantially more triangles than previously solvable. We demonstrate compelling results on diverse datasets, and, even
showcase that we can address the challenging setting of
matching two partial shapes without availability of complete shapes. Our code is publicly available at http:
//github.com/paul0noah/sm-comb.

1. Introduction
The shape matching problem is widely studied in graphics and vision due to its high relevance in numerous appli-

cations, including 3D reconstruction, tracking, shape modeling, shape retrieval, interpolation, texture transfer, or the
canonicalization of geometric data for deep learning. Shape
matching refers to finding correspondences between parts
of shapes – for example, the shapes may be represented as
triangular surface meshes, and correspondences may be obtained between vertices or triangles of individual shapes.
While identifying such correspondences is a relatively easy
task for humans, from a computational perspective shape
matching is much more challenging. This is because many
formulations lead to high-dimensional combinatorial optimization problems. While some of them are efficiently
solvable, e.g. based on the linear assignment problem [47],
such simple approaches do not take geometric relations between the shape parts into account and thus typically lead to
poor matchings. In contrast, most practically relevant formulations account for geometric consistency in some form,
which in turn lead to significantly more difficult optimization problems (e.g. the NP-hard quadratic assignment problem [51], or mixed-integer programming formulations [3]).
A decade ago Windheuser et al. [66, 67] proposed an elegant formalism for the deformable matching of 3D shapes.
Most notably, their approach is able to account for geometric consistency based on an orientation-preserving discrete
diffeomorphism. While this formulation is conceptually ap-

428

