Urban Radiance Fields
Konstantinos Rematas1 Andrew Liu1 Pratul Srinivasan1 Jonathan Barron1
Andrea Tagliasacchi1,2 Thomas Funkhouser1 Vittorio Ferrari1
1

Google Research

2

Simon Fraser University
Input

Abstract
The goal of this work is to perform 3D reconstruction
and novel view synthesis from data captured by scanning
platforms commonly deployed for world mapping in urban
outdoor environments (e.g., Street View). Given a sequence
of posed RGB images and lidar sweeps acquired by cameras
and scanners moving through an outdoor scene, we produce
a model from which 3D surfaces can be extracted and novel
RGB images can be synthesized. Our approach extends Neural Radiance Fields, which has been demonstrated to synthesize realistic novel images for small scenes in controlled
settings, with new methods for leveraging asynchronously
captured lidar data, for addressing exposure variation between captured images, and for leveraging predicted image
segmentations to supervise densities on rays pointing at
the sky. Each of these three extensions provides significant
performance improvements in experiments on Street View
data. Our system produces state-of-the-art 3D surface reconstructions and synthesizes higher quality novel views in
comparison to both traditional methods (e.g. COLMAP) and
recent neural representations (e.g. Mip-NeRF).

1. Introduction
In this work we investigate neural scene representations
for world mapping, with the goal of performing 3D reconstruction and novel view synthesis from data commonly
captured by mapping platforms such as Street View [23].
This setting features large outdoor scenes, with many buildings and other objects, natural illumination from the sun, and
is generally less controlled than previous work [42, 43]. We
focus on street-level mapping: a person carrying a camera
rig with a lidar sensor placed on a backpack walking through
a city. The camera captures panoramas of the street scene
while the lidar sensor reconstructs a 3D point cloud.
Street-level mapping is challenging for neural representations, as the area of interest covers a large area, usually hundreds of square meters. This significantly differs from previous works, which largely focus on either synthetic data [49,

Novel views

3D reconstruction

Figure 1. Overview – Given a set of panoramas and lidar observations from an urban setting, we estimate a neural representation
that can be used for novel view synthesis and accurate 3D reconstruction.

56] or small regions of real scenes [8, 10, 42, 43, 64, 72].
Moreover, the scenes contain a large variety of objects, both
in terms of geometry and appearance (e.g. buildings, cars,
signs, trees, vegetation). The camera locations are biased
towards walking patterns (e.g. walking a straight line) without focusing on any particular part of the scene. This results
in parts of the scene being observed by only a small number of cameras, in contrast to other datasets [34, 43, 50, 57]
which capture scenes uniformly with a large number of cameras. Furthermore, the sky is visible in most street scenes,
introducing an infinitely distant element that behaves differently than the solid structures near the cameras. The images
typically have highly varying exposures as the cameras use
auto-exposure, and the illumination brightness varies depending on the sun’s visibility and position. Combined with
auto white balance, this results in the same structure having
different colors when observed from different cameras. Finally, the lidar points have lower resolution in distant parts
of the scene, and are even completely absent in some parts
of the scene (e.g., for shiny or transparent surfaces).
In this paper we extend the popular NeRF [42] model in
three ways to tailor it to the unique features of the Street
View setting and to tackle the challenges above. First, we
incorporate lidar information in addition to RGB signals.
By carefully fusing these two modalities, we can compensate for the sparsity of viewpoints in such large scale and
complex scenes. We introduce a series of lidar-based losses
that allow accurate surface estimation both for solid structures like buildings and for volumetric formations such as

12932

