LIFT: Learning 4D LiDAR Image Fusion Transformer for 3D Object Detection
Yihan Zeng1 Da Zhang2 Chunwei Wang1 Zhenwei Miao2
Ting Liu2 Xin Zhan2 Dayang Hao2 Chao Ma1 *
1
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Alibaba DAMO Academy
{zengyihan, weiwei0224, chaoma}@sjtu.edu.cn, zhangda.zhang@alibaba-inc.com

(a)
Camera Image
(b)

Fusion Scheme

(i) Separate Interaction

(ii) Mutual Interaction

Camera Feature

* Corresponding author.

Occlusion

LiDAR Feature

3D object detection plays the primary role in scene understanding for autonomous driving, where cameras and
LiDAR are two standard complementary sensors for autonomous vehicles to perceive environments in time. Cameras provide sequential 2D images with rich texture and
color cues, while LiDAR specializes in distance sensing via
continuous sparse 3D points. Successfully detecting 3D objects in the environments hinges on the best exploitation
of all available data across sensors and time to cooperate
complementary information. However, we observe that the
cross-sensor information may be misaligned over time, as
illustrated in Figure 1(a). The reasons lie in two aspects.
First, there may exist asynchronous timelines between LiDAR and cameras. Second, the different coordinate systems
across sensors introduce spatial misalignment even between

Missing Points
GT Boxes

1. Introduction

LiDAR Point

LiDAR and camera are two common sensors to collect
data in time for 3D object detection under the autonomous
driving context. Though the complementary information
across sensors and time has great potential of benefiting
3D perception, taking full advantage of sequential crosssensor data still remains challenging. In this paper, we propose a novel LiDAR Image Fusion Transformer (LIFT) to
model the mutual interaction relationship of cross-sensor
data over time. LIFT learns to align the input 4D sequential
cross-sensor data to achieve multi-frame multi-modal information aggregation. To alleviate computational load, we
project both point clouds and images into the bird-eye-view
maps to compute sparse grid-wise self-attention. LIFT also
benefits from a cross-sensor and cross-time data augmentation scheme. We evaluate the proposed approach on the
challenging nuScenes and Waymo datasets, where our LIFT
performs well over the state-of-the-art and strong baselines.

LiDAR Points

Abstract

Figure 1. Illustration of the information interaction between sequential cross-sensor data. (a) The misaligned complementary information cross sensors over time. (b) Information fusion scheme:
(i) Integrating the cross-sensor data at the corresponding timestamp, then combining the sequential information within sensor
streams. (ii) Aggregating information from all timestamps in
cross-sensor data streams. Mutual interaction can better connect
misaligned complementary information across sensors and time.

synchronized images and point clouds.
Due to the challenges of jointly processing sequential cross-sensor data, existing 3D object detection algorithms independently perform information fusion over time
or across sensors. On one hand, a large portion of approaches attempt to exploit the valuable temporal information from multiple frames or a longer sequential input [18, 35, 41, 42]. In addition to the straight-forward point
concatenation [20, 35] to produce denser point cloud, con-

17172

