TVConv: Efficient Translation Variant Convolution
for Layout-aware Visual Processing

1

Jierun Chen1 , Tianlang He1 , Weipeng Zhuo1 , Li Ma1 , Sangtae Ha2 , S.-H. Gary Chan1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 2 University of Colorado at Boulder
{jcheneh, theaf, wzhuo, lmaag, gchan}@cse.ust.hk, sangtae.ha@colorado.edu

Abstract
As convolution has empowered many smart applications,
dynamic convolution further equips it with the ability to
adapt to diverse inputs. However, the static and dynamic
convolutions are either layout-agnostic or computationheavy, making it inappropriate for layout-specific applications, e.g., face recognition and medical image segmentation. We observe that these applications naturally exhibit
the characteristics of large intra-image (spatial) variance
and small cross-image variance. This observation motivates our efficient translation variant convolution (TVConv)
for layout-aware visual processing. Technically, TVConv is
composed of affinity maps and a weight-generating block.
While affinity maps depict pixel-paired relationships gracefully, the weight-generating block can be explicitly overparameterized for better training while maintaining efficient inference. Although conceptually simple, TVConv significantly improves the efficiency of the convolution and
can be readily plugged into various network architectures.
Extensive experiments on face recognition show that TVConv reduces the computational cost by up to 3.1× and improves the corresponding throughput by 2.3× while maintaining a high accuracy compared to the depthwise convolution. Moreover, for the same computation cost, we boost
the mean accuracy by up to 4.21%. We also conduct experiments on the optic disc/cup segmentation task and obtain better generalization performance, which helps mitigate the critical data scarcity issue. Code is available at
https://github.com/JierunChen/TVConv.

1. Introduction
With the breakthrough of deep neural networks, we are
witnessing a flourishing growth in AI-powered applications
and services. While a performance gain usually comes with
an overhead of model size and computation, more interest has been devoted to the lightweight and computationefficient network design, which can unleash the potential

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 1. Various applications with specific layout: (a) brain MRI
analysis, (b) face recognition, (c) industrial product defects detection and (d) optic disc/cup segmentation. Each application exhibits large intra-image variance and small cross-image variance,
as shown in subfigure (e), where the statistic is calculated from
the intermediate VGG [35] feature maps by feeding the LFW face
verification dataset [15].

for on-device inference for user experience and privacy.
Despite various neural network architectures [11, 25, 32,
39] being proposed for efficiency, their fundamental operators remain more or less the same, e.g., vanilla convolution (conv) and depthwise conv. These operators share one
key characteristic, translation equivariance [51], i.e., filters
are shared spatially in a sliding window manner. Though it
saves parameters for a lightweight model, it deprives the
model of being adaptive to different positions in an image. Therefore, it has to exhaustively learn many filters for
feature matching [49], which results in a massive waste of
computation for many tasks with a specific layout.
For layout-specific tasks, as in Fig. 1, the inputs demonstrate a regional statistic with large intra-image (spatial)
variance and small cross-image variance. For example,
when we use face ID to securely and conveniently unlock
our mobile phones, our hair generally appears on the upper region, vertically followed by our forehead, eyes, nose,
mouth, jaw, etc. Similar tasks include, but are not limited
to, talking head generation, industrial product defects detection, and medical image processing.

12548

