Amodal Panoptic Segmentation
Rohit Mohan
Abhinav Valada
University of Freiburg
{mohan, valada}@cs.uni-freiburg.de

Abstract
Humans have the remarkable ability to perceive objects
as a whole, even when parts of them are occluded. This ability of amodal perception forms the basis of our perceptual
and cognitive understanding of our world. To enable robots
to reason with this capability, we formulate and propose a
novel task that we name amodal panoptic segmentation. The
goal of this task is to simultaneously predict the pixel-wise
semantic segmentation labels of the visible regions of stuff
classes and the instance segmentation labels of both the
visible and occluded regions of thing classes. To facilitate
research on this new task, we extend two established benchmark datasets with pixel-level amodal panoptic segmentation
labels that we make publicly available as KITTI-360-APS
and BDD100K-APS. We present several strong baselines,
along with the amodal panoptic quality (APQ) and amodal
parsing coverage (APC) metrics to quantify the performance
in an interpretable manner. Furthermore, we propose the
novel amodal panoptic segmentation network (APSNet), as
a first step towards addressing this task by explicitly modeling the complex relationships between the occluders and
occludes. Extensive experimental evaluations demonstrate
that APSNet achieves state-of-the-art performance on both
benchmarks and more importantly exemplifies the utility of
amodal recognition. The datasets are available at http:
//amodal-panoptic.cs.uni-freiburg.de.

1. Introduction
Humans rely on their ability to perceive complete physical
structures of objects even when they are only partially visible,
to navigate through their daily lives [19]. This ability, known
as amodal perception, serves as the link that connects our perception of the world to its cognitive understanding. However,
unlike humans, robots are limited to modal perception [17,
27, 36], which restricts their ability to emulate the visual
experience that humans have. In this work, we bridge this
gap by proposing the amodal panoptic segmentation task.
Any given scene can broadly be categorized into two
components: stuff and thing. Regions that are amorphous or

(a) Panoptic Segmentation

(b) Amodal Panoptic Segmentation
Figure 1. Illustration of (a) panoptic segmentation and (b) amodal panoptic
segmentation that encompasses visible regions of stuff classes, and both
visible and occluded regions of thing classes as amodal masks.

uncountable belong to stuff classes (e.g., sky, road, sidewalk,
etc.), and the countable objects of the scene belong to thing
classes (e.g., cars, trucks, pedestrians, etc.). The amodal
panoptic segmentation task illustrated in Fig. 1 (b) aims to
concurrently predict the pixel-wise semantic segmentation
labels of visible regions of stuff classes, and instance segmentation labels of both the visible and occluded regions of thing
classes. We believe this task is the ultimate frontier of visual
recognition and will immensely benefit the robotics community. For example, in automated driving, perceiving the
whole structure of traffic participants at all times, irrespective
of partial occlusions [28], will minimize the risk of accidents.
Moreover, by inferring the relative depth ordering of objects
in a scene, robots can make complex decisions such as in
which direction to move relative to the object of interest [9]
to obtain a clearer view without additional sensor feedback.
Amodal panoptic segmentation is substantially more challenging as it entails all the challenges of its modal counterpart (scale variations, illumination changes, cluttered background, etc.) while simultaneously requiring more complex

21023

