Neural Data-Dependent Transform for Learned Image Compression
Dezhao Wang
Wenhan Yang
Yueyu Hu
Jiaying Liu*
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
Abstract
Learned image compression has achieved great success
due to its excellent modeling capacity, but seldom further
considers the Rate-Distortion Optimization (RDO) of each
input image. To explore this potential in the learned codec,
we make the ﬁrst attempt to build a neural data-dependent
transform and introduce a continuous online mode decision
mechanism to jointly optimize the coding efﬁciency for each
individual image. Speciﬁcally, apart from the image content
stream, we employ an additional model stream to generate
the transform parameters at the decoder side. The presence of a model stream enables our model to learn more
abstract neural-syntax, which helps cluster the latent representations of images more compactly. Beyond the transform
stage, we also adopt neural-syntax based post-processing
for the scenarios that require higher quality reconstructions
regardless of extra decoding overhead. Moreover, the involvement of the model stream further makes it possible to
optimize both the representation and the decoder in an online way, i.e. RDO at the testing time. It is equivalent to a
continuous online mode decision, like coding modes in the
traditional codecs, to improve the coding efﬁciency based
on the individual input image. The experimental results
show the effectiveness of the proposed neural-syntax design and the continuous online mode decision mechanism,
demonstrating the superiority of our method in coding efﬁciency. Our project is available at: https://dezhaowang.github.io/Neural-Syntax-Website/.

1. Introduction
Image compression is one of the most fundamental technologies since human society has entered the digital information age. It becomes more and more important when
currently the big data applications meet the constantly in* Corresponding author. This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant No.
2018AAA0102702, the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Contract No.62172020, and a research achievement of Key Laboratory
of Science, Techonology and Standard in Press Industry (Key Laboratory
of Intelligent Press Media Technology) and State Key Laboratory of Media
Convergence Production Technology and Systems.

17379

Image Dataset
Transform Coefficient
(a)

(b)

(c)

One Transform for All
- Less flexible to model
global distribution
e.g. JPEG, Hyper-prior

One Transform for One Cluster
- Discrete mode decision
- Hand-crafted designed prior
e.g. VVC, Ensemble Learning

One Transform for One Input
- Continuous mode decision
- Learned from data
- Model in the local manifold
Æ More compact transform

Figure 1. Three transform paradigms. (a) Single transform
adopted in previous end-to-end trained image compression methods. (b) Cluster-speciﬁed transform utilized in conventional image
codecs. (c) Proposed data-dependent transform. In our method,
the transform is generated based on the input sample. By modeling the distribution in a local manifold, we derive a more compact
transform and make the decoder more powerful and ﬂexible.

creased visual experience demand, e.g. high-resolution
visual applications like 8K streaming and Virtual Reality (VR). Continuous endeavors are made to obtain highly
efﬁcient compressed and high-quality images/videos that
can be stored, displayed, and analyzed with limited hardware resources.
In recent decades, a series of codecs have been developed to optimize the reconstruction quality (i.e. distortion)
with bit-rate constraints (rate) jointly, which forms the core
problem of lossy compression: rate-distortion optimization (RDO). It perfectly describes the key aspects of human
needs for a large amount of images/videos: maximizing reconstruction quality leads to preserving the critical visual
information of the image signal; whereas minimizing the
bit-rate beneﬁts the efﬁcient transmission and storage.
The mainstream image compression standards and systems, e.g. JPEG [31] and BPG [14] based on HEVC [30],
adopt the route of transform/hybrid coding framework for
RDO. The framework consists of cascaded transform, quantization and entropy coding. The elaborate designs of these
components lead to higher coding efﬁciency. Among these
efforts, there are two important directions. One branch of
researches focus on designing more powerful transforms,
e.g. the improved variants [3, 29, 33] of discrete cosine

