Degree-of-linear-polarization-based Color Constancy
Taishi Ono

Yuhi Kondo
Legong Sun
Teppei Kurita
Yusuke Moriuchi
Sony Group Corporation, Tokyo, Japan

{Taishi.Ono,Yuhi.Kondo,Legong.Sun,Teppei.Kurita,Yusuke.Moriuchi}@sony.com

Figure 1. Degree of linear polarization (DoLP) of achromatic pixels are always achromatic regardless of the illumination colors.
Raw-RGB images (top) and their DoLP values of RGB (bottom). Achromatic patches located in the bottom rows have always achromatic
DoLP values.

Abstract
Color constancy is an essential function in digital photography and a fundamental process for many computer vision applications. Accordingly, many methods have been
proposed, and some recent ones have used deep neural networks to handle more complex scenarios. However, both the
traditional and latest methods still impose strict assumptions on their target scenes in explicit or implicit ways. This
paper shows that the degree of linear polarization dramatically solves the color constancy problem because it allows
us to find achromatic pixels stably. Because we only rely
on the physics-based polarization model, we significantly
reduce the assumptions compared to existing methods. Furthermore, we captured a wide variety of scenes with groundtruth illuminations for evaluation, and the proposed approach achieved state-of-the-art performance with a low
computational cost. Additionally, the proposed method
can estimate illumination colors from chromatic pixels and
manage multi-illumination scenes. Lastly, the evaluation
scenes and codes are publicly available to encourage more
development in this field.

1. Introduction
When a light source illuminates an object, the observed
color is determined by the reflectance of the object and the

illumination color. The goal of color constancy is to separate the illumination color from the observation and obtain
an image equivalent to one captured under achromatic illumination. Because human vision inherently has this ability [6], color constancy is vital for digital photography to
capture suitable images for human preferences. Additionally, color constancy is critical for various computer vision
applications [5, 23, 57], including methods using deep neural network (DNN) [2]. However, color constancy is still
a challenging problem because separating the material reflectance and illumination color from observation is fundamentally ill-posed.
Some studies have introduced statistical knowledge
about objects or illuminations in scenes to overcome the
difficulty. Gray-world [12] and its extensions [17, 51] exploit the assumption that the average value of objects’ reflectance in a scene becomes achromatic. White-patch
methods [20, 35] assume that scenes include perfect reflection and regard the area as the representation of the illumination color. However, natural scenes frequently violate
these statistical expectations, which significantly degrades
the quality of the results.
Regarding data-driven algorithms, several illuminationestimation models have been developed using training data
sets [11, 21, 23, 31]. More recently, methods that exploit
DNNs have been proposed and have achieved higher performance [30,41,47]. Furthermore, several approaches have

19740

