B-cos Networks: Alignment is All We Need for Interpretability
Moritz Böhle

Mario Fritz

Bernt Schiele

MPI for Informatics
Saarland Informatics Campus

CISPA Helmholtz Center
for Information Security

MPI for Informatics
Saarland Informatics Campus

Fig. 1. Top: Inputs xi to a B-cos DenseNet-121. Bottom: B-cos network explanation for class c (c: image label). Specifically, we visualise
the c-th row of W1→L (xi ) as applied by the model, see Eq. (13); no masking of the original image is used for these visualisations. For
the last 2 images, we also show the explanation for the 2nd most likely class. For details on the visualisation of W1→L (xi ), see Sec. 4.

Abstract
We present a new direction for increasing the interpretability of deep neural networks (DNNs) by promoting
weight-input alignment during training. For this, we propose to replace the linear transforms in DNNs by our Bcos transform. As we show, a sequence (network) of such
transforms induces a single linear transform that faithfully summarises the full model computations. Moreover,
the B-cos transform introduces alignment pressure on the
weights during optimisation. As a result, those induced linear transforms become highly interpretable and align with
task-relevant features. Importantly, the B-cos transform is
designed to be compatible with existing architectures and
we show that it can easily be integrated into common models such as VGGs, ResNets, InceptionNets, and DenseNets,
whilst maintaining similar performance on ImageNet. The
resulting explanations are of high visual quality and perform well under quantitative metrics for interpretability.
Code available at github.com/moboehle/B-cos.

1. Introduction
While deep neural networks (DNNs) are highly successful in a wide range of tasks, explaining their decisions remains an open research problem [29]. The difficulty here lies in the fact that such explanations need to
faithfully summarise the internal model computations and
present them in a human-interpretable manner. E.g., it
is well known that piece-wise linear models (e.g., ReLUbased [24]) are accurately summarised by a linear transform
for every input [23]. However, despite providing an accurate summary, these piece-wise linear transforms are gen-

erally not intuitively interpretable for humans and typically
perform poorly under quantitative interpretability metrics,
cf. [32, 43]. Recent work thus aimed to improve the explanations’ interpretability, often focusing on their visual quality [2]. However, gains in the visual quality of the explanations often came at the cost of their model-faithfulness [2].
Instead of optimising the explanation method, in this
work we aim to optimise the DNNs to inherently provide an
explanation that fulfills the aforementioned requirements—
the resulting explanations constitute both a faithful summary and have a clear interpretation for humans. For this,
we propose the B-cos transform as a drop-in replacement
for linear transforms. As such, the B-cos transform can easily be integrated into a wide range of existing DNN architectures and we show that the resulting B-cos DNNs provide
high-quality explanations for their decisions, see Fig. 1.
To ensure that these explanations constitute a faithful
summary of the models, we design the B-cos transform as
an input-dependent linear transform. Importantly, any sequence of such transforms therefore induces a single linear
transform that faithfully summarises the entire sequence. In
order to make the induced linear transforms interpretable,
the B-cos transform is designed to induce alignment pressure on the weights during optimisation, which optimises
the model weights to align with task-relevant input patterns. The linear transform induced by the model thus has
a clear interpretation: it is a direct reflection of the weights
the model has learnt during training and specifically reflects
those weights that best align with a given input.
In summary, we make the following contributions:
(1) We introduce the B-cos transform to improve neural
network interpretability. By promoting weight-input align-

10329

