A Simple Multi-Modality Transfer Learning Baseline for
Sign Language Translation
Yutong Chen1 * Fangyun Wei2 Xiao Sun2 Zhirong Wu2 Stephen Lin2
1
Tsinghua University 2 Microsoft Research Asia
chenytjudy@gmail.com

{fawe, xias, wuzhiron, stevelin}@microsoft.com

Abstract
This paper proposes a simple transfer learning baseline for sign language translation. Existing sign language
datasets (e.g. PHOENIX-2014T, CSL-Daily) contain only
about 10K-20K pairs of sign videos, gloss annotations and
texts, which are an order of magnitude smaller than typical parallel data for training spoken language translation
models. Data is thus a bottleneck for training effective sign
language translation models. To mitigate this problem, we
propose to progressively pretrain the model from generaldomain datasets that include a large amount of external
supervision to within-domain datasets. Concretely, we pretrain the sign-to-gloss visual network on the general domain
of human actions and the within-domain of a sign-to-gloss
dataset, and pretrain the gloss-to-text translation network
on the general domain of a multilingual corpus and the
within-domain of a gloss-to-text corpus. The joint model
is fine-tuned with an additional module named the visuallanguage mapper that connects the two networks. This simple baseline surpasses the previous state-of-the-art results
on two sign language translation benchmarks, demonstrating the effectiveness of transfer learning. With its simplicity
and strong performance, this approach can serve as a solid
baseline for future research.

1. Introduction
Sign languages are visual signals for communication
among the deaf and hard of hearing. These languages are
primarily expressed through manual articulations, but are
also greatly aided by the movement of body, head, mouth,
eyes and eyebrows. While technology for automatic machine translation of spoken languages have successfully
been deployed in production [8,25,33,44], research on sign
language translation (SLT) lags behind and is still in earlystage development. An effective system for automatic sign
language translation may help to build a bridge between
* Accomplished during Yutong Chen’s internship at MSRA.

End-to-end Training
Visual Pretraining
Language Pretraining
Visual Supervision
Visual Feature

Visual Encoder

Sign Videos

Language
Supervision

Translation Decoder

Translation Encoder
Language Feature

Visual-Language Mapper
Figure 1. We decouple sign language translation into a visual task
(left part) and a language task (right part), and propose a visuallanguage mapper (V-L Mapper) to bridge the connection between
them. The decoupling allows both the visual and language networks to be effectively and independently pretrained before joint
training. Both spatio-temporal information from sign videos and
semantic knowledge from text transcriptions are encoded through
VL-Mapper.

hearing-impaired and unimpaired people.
Existing sign language translation methods follow the
framework of neural machine translation (NMT) originally
developed for spoken languages [4–6, 46, 49, 50], with the
distinction that the source language is represented as spatiotemporal pixels instead of discrete tokens. To be concrete, sign videos are first fed into a video backbone network to extract an intermediate representation, which is
then mapped to the target language text via NMT. The intermediate representation is usually supervised by glosses1 [6,
49,50], where each gloss corresponds to the semantic meaning of a single sign (e.g. happy, sad) in the continuous video
input.
Despite adopting the formulation of advanced neural
machine translation, the current results are far from sat1 Glosses are the word-for-word transcription of sign language where
each gloss is a unique label for a sign. Typically, we identify each gloss by
a capitalized word which is loosely associated with the sign’s meaning.

5120

