Homography Loss for Monocular 3D Object Detection
Jiaqi Gu1,2 , Bojian Wu1 ,* Lubin Fan1 , Jianqiang Huang1 , Shen Cao1 , Zhiyu Xiang2 , Xian-Sheng Hua1
1
Alibaba Cloud Computing Ltd., 2 Zhejiang University

Abstract
Monocular 3D object detection is an essential task in
autonomous driving. However, most current methods consider each 3D object in the scene as an independent training
sample, while ignoring their inherent geometric relations,
thus inevitably resulting in a lack of leveraging spatial constraints. In this paper, we propose a novel method that takes
all the objects into consideration and explores their mutual
relationships to help better estimate the 3D boxes. Moreover, since 2D detection is more reliable currently, we also
investigate how to use the detected 2D boxes as guidance
to globally constrain the optimization of the corresponding
predicted 3D boxes. To this end, a differentiable loss function, termed as Homography Loss, is proposed to achieve
the goal, which exploits both 2D and 3D information, aiming at balancing the positional relationships between different objects by global constraints, so as to obtain more accurately predicted 3D boxes. Thanks to the concise design,
our loss function is universal and can be plugged into any
mature monocular 3D detector, while significantly boosting
the performance over their baseline. Experiments demonstrate that our method yields the best performance (Nov.
2021) compared with the other state-of-the-arts by a large
margin on KITTI 3D datasets.

1. Introduction
Monocular 3D object detection is a fundamental task in
computer vision, where the goal is to localize and estimate
3D bounding boxes, parameterized by location, dimension,
and orientation, of objects from a single image. It can be applied to various scenes, such as autonomous driving, robotic
navigation, etc. However, it is an ill-posed and challenging
problem since a single image cannot provide explicit depth
information. To acquire such resources, most existing methods resort to LiDAR sensors to obtain accurate depth measurements [29], or stereo cameras for stereo depth estimation [15], but they will increase the cost of practical usages.
In comparison, the monocular camera is cost-effective.
* Corresponding author: ustcbjwu@gmail.com

(a) each object is an independent training sample

(b) each object is geometrically associated with others

(c) Bird’s Eye View

Figure 1. (a) Most of existing methods consider each object as a
single training sample, (b) our proposed homography loss establishes connections between objects, and applies 2D detection as
guidance to help constrain 3D localization in (c) Bird’s Eye View.

Most of the existing monocular 3D object detection
methods have already achieved remarkable high accuracy
with fixed camera settings. However, in their training strategies, each 3D object in the scene is treated as an individual sample without considering the mutual relationships
with other neighboring objects, for example, as shown in
Fig. 1(a). Assuming that, if the predicted 3D box of a single
object obviously deviates from its ground truth, without additional constraints, it is usually hard for the network to refine and correct the estimated position of this specific sample. To handle this, apart from the regression loss defined
by minimizing the discrepancies between the predicted 3D
boxes and the ground truths, many algorithms propose projection loss [15, 17, 25, 26] to constrain the optimization of
3D boxes with the supervision of corresponding projected
2D ground truth boxes. However, the 3D localization of a
single object is still independent of the others. Differently,
MonoPair [7] exploits the object relationships and builds
scene graph to enhance the mutual connections of objects
during training and inference. They fully leverage the spatial relationships between close-by objects instead of individually focusing on the information-constrained single object. An obvious drawback is that an object can only locally
connect with its nearest neighbor.
On the other hand, a large percent of approaches are effective for normal objects. In reality, only the foreground

1080

