P3 IV: Probabilistic Procedure Planning from Instructional Videos
with Weak Supervision
He Zhao1,2

Isma Hadji1 Nikita Dvornik1 Konstantinos G. Derpanis1,2
Richard P. Wildes1,2 Allan D. Jepson1
1
Samsung AI Centre Toronto, 2 York University
{zhufl, kosta, wildes}@eecs.yorku.ca, {isma.hadji, n.dvornik, allan.jepson}@samsung.com

Abstract
In this paper, we study the problem of procedure planning in instructional videos. Here, an agent must produce a plausible sequence of actions that can transform
the environment from a given start to a desired goal
state. When learning procedure planning from instructional
videos, most recent work leverages intermediate visual observations as supervision, which requires expensive annotation efforts to localize precisely all the instructional steps
in training videos. In contrast, we remove the need for expensive temporal video annotations and propose a weakly
supervised approach by learning from natural language instructions. Our model is based on a transformer equipped
with a memory module, which maps the start and goal observations to a sequence of plausible actions. Furthermore,
we augment our model with a probabilistic generative module to capture the uncertainty inherent to procedure planning, an aspect largely overlooked by previous work. We
evaluate our model on three datasets and show our weaklysupervised approach outperforms previous fully supervised
state-of-the-art models on multiple metrics.

1. Introduction
Procedure planning is a natural task for humans – one
must plan out a sequence of actions that takes one from the
current state to the desired goal. While effortless for humans, procedure planning is notoriously hard for artificial
agents. Nevertheless, solving procedure planning is of great
importance for building next-level artificial intelligence systems capable of analyzing and mimicking human behaviour,
and eventually assisting humans in goal-directed problem
solving, e.g., cooking, assembling furniture or tasks that
can be represented as a clear set of instructions. Traditionally, procedure planning has been addressed in structured
environments, such as object manipulation on a table surface [13, 43]. While restricting the environment helps improve planning, it also limits the range of possible applica-

Supervised by language instructions (ours)

𝑎!

𝑎#

𝑎"

𝑎$

Add
Season

Open
Lid

Put Steak
On Grill

𝑙!

𝑙"

𝑙#

𝒗𝒔𝒕𝒂𝒓𝒕

𝒗𝒈𝒐𝒂𝒍

Supervised by visual observations

𝑎!

𝑎#

𝑎"

𝒗𝒔𝒕𝒂𝒓𝒕

𝒗𝟏

1:24 - 1:32

1:43 - 2:07

𝑠!

𝑒!

𝑎$

𝒗𝟐

𝒗𝟑

𝒗𝒈𝒐𝒂𝒍

2:56 - 2:59

3:58 - 4:15

5:07 - 5:31

𝑠"

𝑒"

𝑠#

𝑒#

𝒕

Figure 1. Illustration of weak language supervision for procedure
planning. Fully supervised approaches (bottom row) learn models
from step labels, ai , and intermediate visual representations, vi ,
over T finite steps. This strategy requires knowing the starting, si ,
and ending, ei , timestamps, for each intermediate step. In contrast,
our approach (top row) exploits natural language representations,
li , of the intermediate labels, ai , as a surrogate supervision, which
only requires labeling the order of events. Note that the action
label, ai , is a discrete variable, whereas the action language representation, li , is a pre-trained continuous embedding.

tions. Here, we follow more recent work [8] and tackle procedure planning in the realm of instructional videos [46,54].
Given visual observations of the start and goal states, the
task is to predict a sequence of high-level actions needed to
achieve a goal; see Fig 1. This task is particularly challenging as it requires parsing unstructured environments, recognizing human activities and understanding human-object
interactions. Yet, the range of applications for such planners
is broad, which motivates research efforts on this problem.
Current approaches for procedure planning from instructional videos share a serious limitation – reliance on strong
supervision with expensive annotations [6, 8, 45]. Specifically, all such methods require access to (i) a list of action
labels used to transition from start to the goal state and (ii)

2938

