Interacting Attention Graph for Single Image Two-Hand Reconstruction
Mengcheng Li1 , Liang An1 , Hongwen Zhang1 , Lianpeng Wu2 , Feng Chen1 , Tao Yu1 , Yebin Liu1
1
Tsinghua University 2 Hisense Inc.

Abstract
Graph convolutional network (GCN) has achieved great
success in single hand reconstruction task, while interacting two-hand reconstruction by GCN remains unexplored.
In this paper, we present Interacting Attention Graph Hand
(IntagHand), the first graph convolution based network
that reconstructs two interacting hands from a single RGB
image. To solve occlusion and interaction challenges of
two-hand reconstruction, we introduce two novel attention
based modules in each upsampling step of the original
GCN. The first module is the pyramid image feature attention (PIFA) module, which utilizes multiresolution features to implicitly obtain vertex-to-image alignment. The
second module is the cross hand attention (CHA) module
that encodes the coherence of interacting hands by building dense cross-attention between two hand vertices. As
a result, our model outperforms all existing two-hand reconstruction methods by a large margin on InterHand2.6M
benchmark. Moreover, ablation studies verify the effectiveness of both PIFA and CHA modules for improving
the reconstruction accuracy. Results on in-the-wild images and live video streams further demonstrate the generalization ability of our network. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Dw1010/IntagHand.

1. Introduction
Interacting two-hand reconstruction is one of the fundamental tasks towards manifold industrial applications
such as virtual reality (VR), human-computer-interaction
(HCI), robotics, holoportation, digital medicine, etc. Recently, monocular single hand pose and shape recovery has
witnessed great success owing to deep neural networks [3,
12,21,49,52] and large scale datasets [13,16,25,26,53,54].
However, two-hand reconstruction is more challenging and
remains unsolved for two reasons. First, severe mutual occlusions and appearance similarity confuse the feature extractors, making it difficult for networks to align hand poses
with image features. Second, the interaction context between two hands is difficult to be effectively formulated
during network design and training.

Figure 1. Illustration of our IntagHand for two-hand reconstruction. Top: results on InterHand2.6M [25] dataset. Bottom: realtime two-hand motion capture results on live video streams. Our
method produces high quality two-hand mesh reconstruction of
flexible hand poses under severe occlusions.

Monocular depth-based two-hand tracking [22, 27, 28,
38–40] has been studied for years and promising results
have been demonstrated. However, the energy demand
and algorithm complexity restrict the ubiquitous application
of depth-based methods. Recently, Wang et al. [40] contributes a monocular RGB based two-hand reconstruction
by tracking dense matching map. However, the tracking
procedure itself is inherently sensitive to fast motion, and
does not take full advantage of prior knowledge between
interacting hands. Since the proposal of the large scale
two-hand dataset InterHand2.6M [25], learning based single image two-hand reconstruction methods have emerged.
Existing methods [11, 18, 25, 46] either employ 2.5D
heatmaps to estimate hand joint positions [11, 18, 25], or
use them as attention maps to extract sparse image features [46]. However, such sparse local image features encoded in the heatmaps could not effectively model hand
surface occlusions, and could not extract dense interaction
context. In contrast, vertex-based graph convolutional net-

2761

