Neural Texture Extraction and Distribution for Controllable
Person Image Synthesis

1

Yurui Ren1 Xiaoqing Fan1 Ge Li 1 Shan Liu2 Thomas H. Li3,1
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University 2 Tencent America
3
Advanced Institute of Information Technology, Peking University
yrren@pku.edu.cn

fanxiaoqing@stu.pku.edu.cn

shanl@tencent.com

tli@aiit.org.cn

Pose Control

Abstract
We deal with the controllable person image synthesis
task which aims to re-render a human from a reference image with explicit control over body pose and appearance.
Observing that person images are highly structured, we
propose to generate desired images by extracting and distributing semantic entities of reference images. To achieve
this goal, a neural texture extraction and distribution operation based on double attention is described. This operation
first extracts semantic neural textures from reference feature maps. Then, it distributes the extracted neural textures
according to the spatial distributions learned from target
poses. Our model is trained to predict human images in arbitrary poses, which encourages it to extract disentangled
and expressive neural textures representing the appearance
of different semantic entities. The disentangled representation further enables explicit appearance control. Neural
textures of different reference images can be fused to control
the appearance of the interested areas. Experimental comparisons show the superiority of the proposed model. Code
is available at https://github.com/RenYurui/
Neural- Texture- Extraction- Distribution.

1. Introduction
Synthesizing person images with explicitly controlling
the body pose and appearance is an important task with a
large variety of applications. Industries such as electronic
commerce, virtual reality, and next-generation communication require such algorithms to generate content. Typical
examples are shown in Fig. 1. It can be seen that the desired
output images are not aligned with the reference images.
Therefore, a fundamental challenge for generating photorealistic target images is to accurately deform the reference
images according to the modifications.

geli@ece.pku.edu.cn

Reference

Skeleton

Reference

Synthesized Image

Reference

Skeleton

Appearance Control

Garment

Synthesized Image

Reference

Synthesized Image

Head

Synthesized Image

Figure 1. Controllable person image synthesis. Our model can
generate realistic images by explicitly controlling the poses and
appearance of reference images.

However, Convolutional Neural Networks lack the ability to enable efficient spatial transformation [6, 27]. Building blocks of CNNs process one local neighborhood at a
time. To model long-term dependencies, stacks of convolutional operations are required to obtain large receptive
fields. Realistic textures will be “washed away” during the
repeating local operations. Flow-based methods [14, 22, 25,
28] are proposed to enable efficient spatial transformation.
These methods predict 2D coordinate offsets assigning a
sampling position for each target point. Although realistic
textures can be reconstructed, these methods yield noticeable artifacts, which is more evident when complex deformations and severe occlusions are observed [21].

13535

