NICE-SLAM: Neural Implicit Scalable Encoding for SLAM
Zihan Zhu1,2∗
1

Viktor Larsson3
Songyou Peng2,4 *
Zhaopeng Cui1 †
Martin R. Oswald2,5

Weiwei Xu1
Hujun Bao1
Marc Pollefeys2,6

2
3
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
ETH Zurich
Lund University
4
5
6
MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
University of Amsterdam
Microsoft

Abstract
Neural implicit representations have recently shown encouraging results in various domains, including promising progress in simultaneous localization and mapping
(SLAM). Nevertheless, existing methods produce oversmoothed scene reconstructions and have difficulty scaling
up to large scenes. These limitations are mainly due to their
simple fully-connected network architecture that does not
incorporate local information in the observations. In this
paper, we present NICE-SLAM, a dense SLAM system that
incorporates multi-level local information by introducing
a hierarchical scene representation. Optimizing this representation with pre-trained geometric priors enables detailed reconstruction on large indoor scenes. Compared to
recent neural implicit SLAM systems, our approach is more
scalable, efficient, and robust. Experiments on five challenging datasets demonstrate competitive results of NICESLAM in both mapping and tracking quality. Project page:
https:// pengsongyou.github.io/ nice-slam.

1. Introduction
Dense visual Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
(SLAM) is a fundamental problem in 3D computer vision with many applications in autonomous driving, indoor
robotics, mixed reality, etc. In order to make a SLAM system truly useful for real-world applications, the following
properties are essential. First, we desire the SLAM system
to be real-time. Next, the system should have the ability
to make reasonable predictions for regions without observations. Moreover, the system should be able to scale up to
large scenes. Last but not least, it is crucial to be robust to
noisy or missing observations.
In the scope of real-time dense visual SLAM system,
many methods have been introduced for RGB-D cameras in
the past years. Traditional dense visual SLAM systems [29,
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Multi-room Apartment 3D Reconstruction using
NICE-SLAM. A hierarchical feature grid jointly encodes geometry and color information and is used for both mapping and tracking. We depict the final mesh and camera tracking trajectory.

41, 58, 59] fulfil the real-time requirement and can be used
in large-scale scenes, but they are unable to make plausible
geometry estimation for unobserved regions. On the other
hand, learning-based SLAM approaches [3,12,47,67] attain
a certain level of predictive power since they typically train
on task-specific datasets. Moreover, learning-based methods tend to better deal with noises and outliers. However,
these methods are typically only working in small scenes
with multiple objects. Recently, Sucar et al. [46] applied a
neural implicit representation in the real-time dense SLAM
system (called iMAP), and they showed decent tracking
and mapping results for room-sized datasets. Nevertheless,
when scaling up to larger scenes, e.g., an apartment consisting of multiple rooms, significant performance drops are
observed in both the dense reconstruction and camera tracking accuracy.
The key limiting factor of iMAP [46] stems from its use
of a single multi-layer perceptron (MLP) to represent the
entire scene, which can only be updated globally with every
new, potentially partial RGB-D observations. In contrast,
recent works [37, 48] demonstrate that establishing multi-

12786

