Registering Explicit to Implicit: Towards High-Fidelity Garment mesh
Reconstruction from Single Images
Heming Zhu1,2 Lingteng Qiu1,2 Yuda Qiu1 Xiaoguang Han1,3 B
1
SSE, CUHKSZ 2 SRIBD 3 FNii, CUHKSZ
hanxiaoguang@cuhk.edu.cn

Figure 1. Given a single in-the-wild clothed human image, ReEF can generate high-fidelity layered garment meshes. The appearances
of the reconstructed garments are well aligned with the input image. Moreover, the produced garments can be placed on other virtual
characters.

Abstract

been a laborious task, which may take hours even for an
expert modeler.

Fueled by the power of deep learning techniques and
implicit shape learning, recent advances in single-image
human digitalization have reached unprecedented accuracy and could recover fine-grained surface details such
as garment wrinkles. However, a common problem for
the implicit-based methods is that they cannot produce
separated and topology-consistent mesh for each garment
piece, which is crucial for the current 3D content creation
pipeline. To address this issue, we proposed a novel geometry inference framework ReEF that reconstructs topologyconsistent layered garment mesh by registering the explicit
garment template to the whole-body implicit fields predicted from single images. Experiments demonstrate that
our method notably outperforms the counterparts on singleimage layered garment reconstruction and could bring
high-quality digital assets for further content creation.

In contrast, in-the-wild images are easily accessible with
commercial cameras and from the internet. Therefore, recent researches have extensively studied human digitalization from single in-the-wild images, aiming at assisting
people without expertise to generate visually plausible 3D
human-related contents efficiently.

1. Introduction
High-quality human-related 3D contents are highly demanded by various real-world applications, including virtual live-streaming, gaming, and filming. However, producing visually plausible 3D digital human assets has always

Compared with the recent advances in single image body
[3, 13, 20–22, 24, 27, 33, 35, 37] and clothed human reconstruction [1, 2, 7, 25, 32, 36, 38, 42, 44], research on single
image layered garment reconstruction is quite sparse. The
main challenges towards a high-fidelity garment reconstruction are as two folds: generating garment styles and recovering surface details. To generate garments with different styles, Multi-Garment Net(MGN) [5], BCNet [17] and
SMPLicit [10] adopted either explicit parametric models or
implicit parametric models trained on the digital wardrobes
but failed to recover the garments with novel garment styles
from the image. To generate novel garment styles from
the input images, Deep Fashion3D [53] proposed to depict garment styles with the feature lines predicted from
the input image. Nevertheless, it fails to generate garment
styles well aligned with the input images due to the inac-

3845

