A Re-Balancing Strategy for Class-Imbalanced Classification
Based on Instance Difficulty
Sihao Yu, Jiafeng Guo∗ , Ruqing Zhang, Yixing Fan, Zizhen Wang and Xueqi Cheng
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
CAS Key Lab of Network Data Science and Technology, Institute of Computing Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{yusihao,guojiafeng,zhangruqing,fanyixing,wangzizhen,cxq}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Real-world data often exhibits class-imbalanced distributions, where a few classes (a.k.a. majority classes) occupy most instances and lots of classes (a.k.a. minority
classes) have few instances. Neural classification models
usually perform poorly on minority classes when training
on such imbalanced datasets. To improve the performance
on minority classes, existing methods typically re-balance
the data distribution at the class level, i.e., assigning higher
weights to minority classes and lower weights to majority
classes during the training process. However, we observe
that even the majority classes contain difficult instances to
learn. By reducing the weights of the majority classes, such
instances would become more difficult to learn and hurt
the overall performance consequently. To tackle this problem, we propose a novel instance-level re-balancing strategy, which dynamically adjusts the sampling probabilities
of instances according to the instance difficulty. Here the
instance difficulty is measured based on the learning speed
of instance, which is inspired by the human-leaning process (i.e., easier instances will be learned faster). We theoretically prove the correctness and convergence of our resampling algorithm. Empirical experiments demonstrate
that our method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art
re-balancing methods on the class-imbalanced datasets.

1. Introduction
Over the years, the performance of the classification
has witnessed incredible progress on high-quality synthetic
datasets, e.g., CIFAR [40], ImageNet [36], MS-COCO [26].
However, the datasets in real-world applications often exhibit imbalanced data distributions [27, 30]. This imbalance
is intuitively reflected by the sizes of different classes. On
one hand, there are some classes that have a large number of
∗ Corresponding author: Jiafeng Guo

(a) The Digit Distribution.

(b) Accuracy of Evens.

Figure 1. Binary Classification on the Long-Taied MNIST. Fig. 1a
shows the digit and class distribution of the training data. Fig. 1b
shows the validation accuracy of digits in the even class. ”Others”
denotes the average accuracy of digit 0, 2, 4, 6. ”Normal” shows
the results of base model. ”Balance” shows the results of the classbalance loss which reduces the weight of the majority class.

instances. We call them majority classes in this paper. On
the other hand, there are also some classes that have rarely
few instances. We call them minority classes in this paper. Such class-imbalanced distributions pose critical challenges for neural classification models. Neural models perform with biases toward the majority classes when training
on such datasets [1, 37]. Therefore, models usually perform
poorly on the minority classes [7].
The class-imbalanced classification problem has attracted a lot of attention in the machine learning community
[13, 27]. Researchers have introduced a variety of strategies to re-balance the data distribution when training the
model. The mainstream solutions are re-sampling and reweighting. Re-sampling methods directly adjust the training data by repeating the instances of minority classes and
removing some instances of majority classes [6, 16, 41, 44].
The re-weighting methods focus on the cost(e.g., loss) of
different classes, specifically paying more attention to the
minority classes’ cost and less on the majority classes [5,7].
In summary, existing methods typically consider and solve
the imbalance problem at the class level by adjusting the
observed class distribution.

70

