DearKD: Data-Efficient Early Knowledge Distillation for Vision Transformers
Xianing Chen1 ,* Qiong Cao2†, Yujie Zhong3 , Jing Zhang4 , Shenghua Gao156†, Dacheng Tao24
1
ShanghaiTech University, 2 JD Explore Academy, 3 Meituan Inc.,
4
The University of Sydney, 5 Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging,
6
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Energy Efficient and Custom AI IC
{chenxn1,gaoshh}@shanghaitech.edu.cn {mathqiong2012,dacheng.tao}@gmail.com
jaszhong@hotmail.com jing.zhang1@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Transformers are successfully applied to computer vision due to their powerful modeling capacity with selfattention. However, the excellent performance of transformers heavily depends on enormous training images. Thus,
a data-efficient transformer solution is urgently needed.
In this work, we propose an early knowledge distillation
framework, which is termed as DearKD, to improve the
data efficiency required by transformers. Our DearKD is
a two-stage framework that first distills the inductive biases from the early intermediate layers of a CNN and then
gives the transformer full play by training without distillation. Further, our DearKD can be readily applied to
the extreme data-free case where no real images are available. In this case, we propose a boundary-preserving intradivergence loss based on DeepInversion to further close the
performance gap against the full-data counterpart. Extensive experiments on ImageNet, partial ImageNet, data-free
setting and other downstream tasks prove the superiority of
DearKD over its baselines and state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Transformers [4, 14, 47] have shown a domination trend
in NLP studies owing to their strong ability in modeling
long-range dependencies by the self-attention mechanism.
Recently, transformers are applied to various computer vision tasks and achieve strong performance [7,15,32]. However, transformers require an enormous amount of training
data since they lack certain inductive biases (IB) [12,15,46,
52]. Inductive biases can highly influence the generalization of learning algorithms, independent of data, by pushing
learning algorithms towards particular solutions [16,17,35].
* This work was done when Xianing Chen was intern at JD Explore
Academy.
† Corresponding authors.

Figure 1. Illustration of data-efficient of our DearKD. We compare the data-efficient properties of DearKD in three situations
with different numbers of real training images: the full ImageNet,
the partial ImageNet and the data-free case (i.e. without any real
images) with DeiT and DeiT .

Unlike transformers, CNNs are naturally equipped with
strong inductive biases by two constraints: locality and
weight sharing mechanisms in the convolution operation.
Thus, CNNs are sample-efficient and parameter-efficient
due to the translation equivariance properties [12, 41, 42].
Recently, some researchers have proposed to explicitly
insert convolution operations into vision transformers to introduce inductive biases [11, 18, 30, 50–52]. However, the
forcefully modified structure may destroy the intrinsic properties in transformers and reduce their capacity.
Another line of work [46] utilizes Knowledge Distillation (KD) [23] to realize data-efficient transformers. By
distillation, the inductive biases reflected in the dark knowledge from the teacher network can be transferred to the student [1]. DeiT [46], as a typical method in this line, has
successfully explored the idea of distilling knowledge from
CNNs to transformers and greatly increased the data efficiency of transformer training. Nevertheless, DeiT still suffers two drawbacks:

12052

