Finding Badly Drawn Bunnies
Lan Yang1,2 Kaiyue Pang2 Honggang Zhang1 * Yi-Zhe Song2
1
PRIS, School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China
2
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom
{ylan, zhhg}@bupt.edu.cn, {kaiyue.pang, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract

Quality-aware sketch

Draw
Rabbit

data consumption

Under 20 seconds

As lovely as bunnies are, your sketched version would
probably not do it justice (Fig. 1). This paper recognises
this very problem and studies sketch quality measurement
for the first time – letting you find these badly drawn ones.
Our key discovery lies in exploiting the magnitude (L2
norm) of a sketch feature as a quantitative quality metric.
We propose Geometry-Aware Classification Layer (GACL),
a generic method that makes feature-magnitude-as-qualitymetric possible and importantly does it without the need for
specific quality annotations from humans. GACL sees feature magnitude and recognisability learning as a dual task,
which can be simultaneously optimised under a neat crossentropy classification loss. GACL is lightweight with theoretic guarantees and enjoys a nice geometric interpretation
to reason its success. We confirm consistent quality agreements between our GACL-induced metric and human perception through a carefully designed human study. Notably,
we demonstrate three practical sketch applications enabled
for the first time using our quantitative quality metric.

1. Introduction
Everybody can sketch, the debate is on how well. With
the proliferation of touchscreen devices, the urge to sketch
is ever more pronounced. This is not to mention the broad
range of sketch-enabled applications – from recognition
[10,26,46,64], parsing [24,45,63], recreating [8,16,28,50],
to leveraging sketch as a query modality for image search
[3, 29, 38, 42, 43] and visual content manipulation [5, 20, 57,
69], or even enabling a drawing agent that excels human at
a Pictionary-like sketching game [2].
This paper recognises this very “how well” problem and
proposes a learnable metric that for the first time tells us
just how badly drawn my bunny (or any other sketch) is –
so from the collection of bunny sketches in Fig. 1(a) to an
ordered list of bunnies from worse to best in Fig. 1(b). As
* corresponding author

Got it!

GACL
Crowdsourced sketches
labelled as rabbits

Applications

Quality discovery by GACL

Ø Should we treat them equally?

worst

0
0.15

best

Scoring

1.0

0.35

Ø Are they even rabbit sketches?

(a)

0.70

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Not every free-hand bunny sketch is of equal quality.
(b) We contribute an annotation-free solution (GACL) for discriminating quality between bunny (and many other category) sketches.
We show quality discovery under GACL supports reasonable level
of quality examination from humans.

interesting as the problem sounds in its own right, it also
underpins many facets of sketch research at large. These
include but not limited to (i) disentangling human factor in
model prediction, i.e. whether the model is bad or the sketch
is; (ii) facilitating better representation learning, i.e. making
data-driven models less prone to overfit by learning against
specific quality level; (iii) sketching assistance applications,
e.g. helping users to move towards a better bunny.
Quantifying sketch quality is non-trivial. The first obstacle is the fatal lack of existing sketch datasets annotated
with human quality ratings. This essentially renders most
of the recent works on image quality assessment that predicts human opinion scores inapplicable [31,47,52,68]. The
sketch-specific trait as a vector representation of sequential
coordinates also sets it apart from another line of works on
trying to model human-interpretable image quality directly
from low-level statistical distortions [1, 21, 58, 66] – compared with visual artefacts such as noise, blur and compression, sketch quality is more of a subjective interpretation of
holistic visual concepts.

7482

