Learning Pixel-Level Distinctions for Video Highlight Detection
Fanyue Wei1 * Biao Wang2
1

Tiezheng Ge2

Yuning Jiang2

Wen Li1

Lixin Duan1†

School of Computer Science and Engineering & Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, UESTC

2

Alibaba Group

{wfanyue, liwenbnu, lxduan}@gmail.com, {eric.wb, tiezheng.gtz, mengzhu.jyn}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
The goal of video highlight detection is to select the most
attractive segments from a long video to depict the most
interesting parts of the video. Existing methods typically
focus on modeling relationship between different video segments in order to learning a model that can assign highlight
scores to these segments; however, these approaches do not
explicitly consider the contextual dependency within individual segments. To this end, we propose to learn pixel-level
distinctions to improve the video highlight detection. This
pixel-level distinction indicates whether or not each pixel
in one video belongs to an interesting section. The advantages of modeling such fine-level distinctions are two-fold.
First, it allows us to exploit the temporal and spatial relations of the content in one video, since the distinction of
a pixel in one frame is highly dependent on both the content before this frame and the content around this pixel in
this frame. Second, learning the pixel-level distinction also
gives a good explanation to the video highlight task regarding what contents in a highlight segment will be attractive
to people. We design an encoder-decoder network to estimate the pixel-level distinction, in which we leverage the 3D
convolutional neural networks to exploit the temporal context information, and further take advantage of the visual
saliency to model the spatial distinction. State-of-the-art
performance on three public benchmarks clearly validates
the effectiveness of our framework for video highlight detection.

1. Introduction
Along with the explosive development of mobile devices, a tremendous number of videos are now produced
and uploaded to the Internet every day. As a result, picking the most attractive video clips from a lengthy video to
create a selection of shining moments is becoming increasingly important, especially for social video platforms such
* Work done during an internship at Alibaba Group
† The corresponding author

……

……

……

……

video segments pair

……

Highlight
Scoring
Model

(a) Existing methods
Our
Model

video frames sequence
……

video frames sequence

Our
Model

highlight
segment

highlight non-highlight
frame
pixel map

highlight
pixel map
(b) Our approach

highlight
frame

Figure 1. Video highlight detection is highly context-dependent.
While previous methods are usually trained to predict the highlight
score for a video segment directly, our method takes the temporal and spatial information into account and predicts the fine-level
pixel-level distinction as the surrogate task.

as YouTube and Instagram. As a result, video highlight detection, which aims to select the most attractive segments
from an unedited video, has drawn increasing interest from
in the research community.
Most existing works [9, 12, 36] interpret the video highlight detection task as a segment-level ranking problem.
These approaches treat each segment as an individual sample and extract the features for video segments. They then
compare pairwise segments in order to learn a model that assigns highlight scores to these segments, such that the highlight segments receive higher scores than the non-highlight
segments from the raw video. Recently, SL [34] developed a set-based mechanism that is capable of identifying
whether or not a video segment is highlight by transformer.
However, these existing methods do utilize both temporal and localized information, but not explicitly considering
the contextual dependency within the segment, which is in
fact crucial for video highlight detection.
Intuitively, when people watch videos, a specific part is

3073

