3D human tongue reconstruction from single “in-the-wild” images
Stylianos Ploumpis1,2 *
1

Stylianos Moschoglou1,2 *
Stefanos Zafeiriou1,2

Imperial College London, UK

2

Vasileios Triantafyllou2

Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd

1 {s.ploumpis,s.moschoglou,s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk

2 {vasilios.triantafyllou}@huawei.com

Figure 1. We propose a framework that accurately derives the 3D tongue shape from single images. A high detailed 3D point cloud of the
tongue surface and a full head topology along with the tongue expression can be estimated from the image domain. As we demonstrate,
our framework is able to capture the tongue shape even in adverse “in-the-wild” conditions.

Abstract
3D face reconstruction from a single image is a task
that has garnered increased interest in the Computer Vision
community, especially due to its broad use in a number of
applications such as realistic 3D avatar creation, pose invariant face recognition and face hallucination. Since the
introduction of the 3D Morphable Model in the late 90’s,
we witnessed an explosion of research aiming at particularly tackling this task. Nevertheless, despite the increasing
level of detail in the 3D face reconstructions from single
images mainly attributed to deep learning advances, finer
and highly deformable components of the face such as the
tongue are still absent from all 3D face models in the literature, although being very important for the realness of the
3D avatar representations. In this work we present the first,
to the best of our knowledge, end-to-end trainable pipeline
that accurately reconstructs the 3D face together with the
tongue. Moreover, we make this pipeline robust in “in-thewild” images by introducing a novel GAN method tailored
for 3D tongue surface generation. Finally, we make publicly available to the community the first diverse tongue

dataset, consisting of 1, 800 raw scans of 700 individuals
varying in gender, age, and ethnicity backgrounds* . As we
demonstrate in an extensive series of quantitative as well
as qualitative experiments, our model proves to be robust
and realistically captures the 3D tongue structure, even in
adverse “in-the-wild” conditions.

1. Introduction
Recently, 3D face reconstruction from single “in-thewild” images has been a very active topic in Computer Vision with applications ranging from realistic 3D avatar creation to image imputation and face recognition [12, 14, 22,
37, 39, 44]. Nevertheless, despite the improvement in the
quality of the 3D reconstructions, all of these methods do
not accommodate any statistical variations in the oral cavity let alone a tongue template mesh. As a result, the oral
region is completely disregarded from the final result.
Being able to reconstruct the tongue expression has multiple advantages in various applications. First of all, the
generated avatars would be more realistic and would be able

* Authors contributed equally.

* Project url: www.github.com/steliosploumpis/tongue

2771

