GateHUB: Gated History Unit with Background Suppression for Online Action
Detection
Junwen Chen⋆‡
Gaurav Mittal⋆†
Ye Yu†
Yu Kong‡
Mei Chen†
†
‡
Microsoft
Rochester Institute of Technology

Online action detection is the task of predicting the action as soon as it happens in a streaming video. A major
challenge is that the model does not have access to the future and has to solely rely on the history, i.e., the frames
observed so far, to make predictions. It is therefore important to accentuate parts of the history that are more informative to the prediction of the current frame. We present
GateHUB, Gated History Unit with Background Suppression, that comprises a novel position-guided gated crossattention mechanism to enhance or suppress parts of the
history as per how informative they are for current frame
prediction. GateHUB further proposes Future-augmented
History (FaH) to make history features more informative by
using subsequently observed frames when available. In a
single unified framework, GateHUB integrates the transformer’s ability of long-range temporal modeling and the
recurrent model’s capacity to selectively encode relevant
information. GateHUB also introduces a background suppression objective to further mitigate false positive background frames that closely resemble the action frames. Extensive validation on three benchmark datasets, THUMOS,
TVSeries, and HDD, demonstrates that GateHUB significantly outperforms all existing methods and is also more
efficient than the existing best work. Furthermore, a flowfree version of GateHUB is able to achieve higher or close
accuracy at 2.8× higher frame rate compared to all existing
methods that require both RGB and optical flow information
for prediction.

1. Introduction
Online action detection is the task to predict actions in
a streaming video as they unfold [12]. It is critical to applications including autonomous driving, public safety, virtual
and augmented reality. Unlike action detection in the offline
setting, where the entire untrimmed video is observable at
any given moment, a major challenge for online action de⋆ Authors with equal contribution.

This work was done as Junwen Chen’s internship project at Microsoft.

{jc1088,yu.kong}@rit.edu

Vanilla Cross-Attention

Higher Cross-Attention Weight

Lower Cross-Attention Weight

…
Informative

✕
Informative

Uninformative

Uninformative

Background

…
History
Gated History Unit (GHU) – Gated Cross-Attention

Latent Encoding

Abstract

Latent Encoding

{gaurav.mittal, yu.ye, mei.chen}@microsoft.com

Higher Gated Cross-Attention Weight
(More Enhanced)

Lower Gated Cross-Attention Weight
(More Suppressed)

Cliff Diving

✓

…
Uninformative

Uninformative

Informative

Informative

Figure 1. We show an example video stream (middle row) where
the current frame (magenta) contains Cliff Diving action. Weights
from vanilla cross-attention (top row) do not correlate with how
informative each history frame is to current frame prediction, leading to incorrect prediction of Background. Our novel Gated History Unit (GHU) (bottom row) calibrates cross-attention weights
using gating scores to enhance history frames that are informative to current frame prediction (green) and suppress uninformative ones (red), leading to accurate prediction of Cliff Diving.

tection is that the predictions are solely based on observations of history without access to video frames in the future.
The model needs to build a causal reasoning of the present
in correlation to what happened hitherto, and as efficiently
as possible for the online setting.
Prior work for online action detection [14, 15, 19, 35,
48, 52] include recurrent-based LSTMs [21] and GRUs [9]
that are prone to forgetting informative history as sequential frame processing is ineffective in preserving long-range
interactions. Emerging methods [46, 49] employ transformers [42] to mitigate this by encoding sequential frames in
parallel via self-attention. Some improve model efficiency
by using cross-attention [23, 49] to compress the video sequence into a fixed-sized latent encoding for prediction.
Fig. 1 shows an example video stream (middle row)
where the latest (current) frame contains Cliff Diving action. It is worth noting that, as commonly observed in video
sequences, not every history frame is informative for current frame prediction (e.g. frames showing people cheering

19925

