Contrastive Learning for Unsupervised Video Highlight Detection
Taivanbat Badamdorj1

Mrigank Rochan2

Yang Wang2,3

Li Cheng1

1

University of Alberta
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
University of Manitoba

2

Abstract
Video highlight detection can greatly simplify video
browsing, potentially paving the way for a wide range of applications. Existing efforts are mostly fully-supervised, requiring humans to manually identify and label the interesting moments (called highlights) in a video. Recent weakly
supervised methods forgo the use of highlight annotations,
but typically require extensive efforts in collecting external
data such as web-crawled videos for model learning. This
observation has inspired us to consider unsupervised highlight detection where neither frame-level nor video-level annotations are available in training. We propose a simple
contrastive learning framework for unsupervised highlight
detection. Our framework encodes a video into a vector representation by learning to pick video clips that help to distinguish it from other videos via a contrastive objective using dropout noise. This inherently allows our framework to
identify video clips corresponding to highlight of the video.
Extensive empirical evaluations on three highlight detection benchmarks demonstrate the superior performance of
our approach.

1. Introduction
Video highlight detection aims to automatically find the
interesting moments (called “highlights”) within videos.
With the explosion of video content in the past decade, it
has become even more important due to its broad range
of applications, such as video retrieval, recommendation,
browsing, and editing. In recent years, there has been
significant progress in video highlight detection. Existing
efforts predominantly focus on the fully-supervised scenario [9, 14, 19, 31, 36, 42, 47, 48], which requires manual
annotation of the highlight moments in the training videos.
Since manual annotations are expensive to obtain, recent
weakly supervised methods [3, 6, 18, 28, 29, 43] make use of
Code: https://github.com/tkbadamdorj/CHD.

t-SNE visualization of video clusters
Non-highlight clips

Highlight clips

Figure 1. Highlight detection using contrastive learning. Our
model identifies highlight clips in a video because they form better clusters for contrastive learning. We use t-SNE [39] to visualize a video and its nearest neighbors using non-highlight clips and
highlight clips. Each point represents a video clip, and each color
represents a video. We see that poor clusters in the non-highlight
clip embedding space (left) are clearer in the highlight clip embedding space (right). Ellipses are drawn around the clusters to show
that video clusters that are not separable in the non-highlight clip
embedding space (red and dark blue, yellow and light blue) are
separated in the highlight clip embedding space. The green, yellow, and pink videos also form tighter clusters. Thus, our model
learns to pick highlight clips to do well on the contrastive learning
task. See text for detailed explanation.

video-level labels such as video category as a weak supervision signal. However, the state-of-the-art methods often
rely on large-scale external data. For example, LM [43]
employs 10 million Instagram videos to train their model.
Recent advances in contrastive learning have helped
close the gap between unsupervised models and their supervised counterparts [5, 8]. The goal of contrastive learning is
to learn an unsupervised representation of some data that is
useful for downstream tasks. For images, the task is usually classification. In this domain, a model is trained to map

14042

