CADTransformer: Panoptic Symbol Spotting Transformer for CAD Drawings
Zhiwen Fan1 , Tianlong Chen1 , Peihao Wang1 , Zhangyang Wang1
1
The University of Texas at Austin
{zhiwenfan,tianlong.chen,peihaowang,atlaswang}@utexas.edu

Abstract
Understanding 2D computer-aided design (CAD) drawings plays a crucial role for creating 3D prototypes in architecture, engineering and construction (AEC) industries.
The task of automated panoptic symbol spotting, i.e., to spot
and parse both countable object instances (windows, doors,
tables, etc.) and uncountable stuff (wall, railing, etc.) from
CAD drawings, has recently drawn interests from the computer vision community. Unfortunately, the highly irregular ordering and orientations set major roadblocks for
this task. Existing methods, based on convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) and/or graph neural networks (GNNs),
regress instance bounding boxes in the pixel domain and
then convert the predictions into symbols. In this paper,
we present a novel framework named CADTransformer,
that can painlessly modify existing vision transformer (ViT)
backbones to tackle the above limitations for the panoptic symbol spotting task. CADTransformer tokenizes directly from the set of graphical primitives in CAD drawings, and correspondingly optimizes line-grained semantic and instance symbol spotting altogether by a pair of
prediction heads. The backbone is further enhanced with
a few plug-and-play modifications, including a neighborhood aware self-attention, hierarchical feature aggregation,
and graphic entity position encoding, to bake in the structure prior while optimizing the efficiency. Besides, a new
data augmentation method, termed Random Layer, is proposed by the layer-wise separation and recombination of
a CAD drawing. Overall, CADTransformer significantly
boosts the previous state-of-the-art from 0.595 to 0.685 in
the panoptic quality (PQ) metric, on the recently released
FloorPlanCAD dataset. We further demonstrate that our
model can spot symbols with irregular shapes and arbitrary orientations. Our codes are available in https:
//github.com/VITA-Group/CADTransformer.

1. Introduction
1.1. A Primer for CAD Panoptic Symbol Spotting
Symbol spotting [42, 43, 45, 47] refers to a particular
application of pattern recognition, in which symbols with

stairs

(a) GT

(b) CADTransformer

(c) Results of [17]

(d) GT

(e) CADTransformer

(f) Results of [17]

Figure 1. CADTransformer makes predictions on graphic entities,
without converting the predicted 2D bounding boxes on pixel images to the label on graphical entities. (a) and (d): Panoptic annotations. (b) and (e): Results from the proposed CADTransformer.
(c) and (f): Results from PanCADNet [17]. Red arrows indicate
spotting results of adjacent symbols, bounding box in (c) shows
one of predicted boxes of [17] for stair symbol.

domain-specific semantics are localized and recognized to
predefined symbol types. Symbols with simple line segment groups with an engineering, electronics or architectural flair, which constitute some examples of symbols.
Therefore, symbol spotting plays a crucial role for document image analysis community [42] and architecture, engineering and construction (AEC) industries [17]. In architecture, a 2D computer-aided design (CAD) drawing typically
contains accurate geometric and rich semantic information
of a cross-section of a 3D design [17]. With the perception
of such CAD drawings, 3D prototypes and the according
3D model can be efficiently and precisely reconstructed.
However, unlike images which are arranged on regular
pixel grids, a CAD drawing is composed of graphical primitives (e.g., arc, circle, polyline, etc.). It is non-trivial to spot
each symbol (set of graphical primitives) in CAD drawing
due to the presence of occlusion, cluster, appearance variations, and large unbalanced distribution of the categories.
Traditional symbol spotting methods are typically carried

10986

