gDNA: Towards Generative Detailed Neural Avatars
Xu Chen1,3 Tianjian Jiang1 Jie Song1 Jinlong Yang3
Michael J. Black3 Andreas Geiger2,3 Otmar Hilliges1
1

ETH Zürich, Department of Computer Science 2 University of Tübingen
3
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
https://xuchen-ethz.github.io/gdna

Figure 1. Generative Detailed Neural Avatars. We propose a method to generate 1) a diverse set of 3D virtual humans of 2) varied
identity, gender and shapes, appearing in 3) different clothing styles and poses, with 4) realistic and stochastic details such as wrinkles in
garments. Our multi-subject method learns shape, articulation and clothing details from few posed scans without requiring skinning weight
supervision. The method is able to synthesize novel identities that are not in the training set and generalizes to unseen poses.

Abstract
To make 3D human avatars widely available, we must be
able to generate a variety of 3D virtual humans with varied
identities and shapes in arbitrary poses. This task is challenging due to the diversity of clothed body shapes, their
complex articulations, and the resulting rich, yet stochastic geometric detail in clothing. Hence, current methods
that represent 3D people do not provide a full generative
model of people in clothing. In this paper, we propose a
novel method that learns to generate detailed 3D shapes of
people in a variety of garments with corresponding skinning weights. Specifically, we devise a multi-subject forward skinning module that is learned from only a few posed,
un-rigged scans per subject. To capture the stochastic nature of high-frequency details in garments, we leverage an
adversarial loss formulation that encourages the model to
capture the underlying statistics. We provide empirical evidence that this leads to realistic generation of local details
such as wrinkles. We show that our model is able to generate natural human avatars wearing diverse and detailed
clothing. Furthermore, we show that our method can be
used on the task of fitting human models to raw scans, outperforming the previous state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
The ability to easily create diverse high-quality virtual
humans with full control over their pose has many applications in movie production, games, VR/AR, architecture, and
computer vision. While modern computer graphics techniques achieve photorealism, they typically require a lot of
expertise and extensive manual effort. Our goal is to make
3D human avatars widely accessible by learning a generative model of people. Towards this goal, we propose the
first method that can generate 1) diverse 3D virtual humans
with 2) various identities and shapes, appearing in 3) different clothing styles and poses, with 4) realistic and stochastic
high-frequency details such as wrinkles in garments.
Generative modeling of 3D rigid objects has recently
seen rapid progress, fueled by continuous and resolutionindependent neural 3D representations [13, 40, 43, 48, 54].
However, modeling clothed humans and their articulation is
more difficult due to the complex interaction of garments,
their topology, and pose-driven deformations. Recent work
leverages neural implicit surfaces to learn high-quality articulated avatars for a single subject [12, 15, 52, 58] but
these methods are not generative, i.e. they cannot synthesize novel human identities and shapes. Generative models of clothing exist that augment SMPL by predicting displacements from the body mesh (CAPE [36]), or by drap-

20427

