Point Cloud Color Constancy
Xiaoyan Xing1, *, Yanlin Qian2, *, Sibo Feng2, , Yuhan Dong1,†, and Jiri Matas3
1
Tsinghua University, 2 Independent Researcher, 3 Czech Technical University

PCCC (Ours)
FFCC (Model Q)
FC4
Gray Index
Gray World

500+
400
4x
fast

PCCC

200
100

(B)

(C) (F)

6

Extract
illumination

to Point Cloud

300

5

4

3

+25%
accurate

2

1

Depth Information
Global
Illumination

Raw Linear RGB Image

(A)

(D)

(E)

Figure 1. We present Point Cloud Color Constancy (PCCC), which is simple, efficient and hardware friendly. (A): Raw RGB-D image.
(B): RGB point cloud generated by (A). (C): Point Cloud with illumination rendered from PCCC. (D) 2D illuminant map extracted from
(C). (E) Color corrected image. (F): Speed, accuracy and parameter number comparison with state-of-the-art color constancy methods.

Abstract
In this paper, we present Point Cloud Color Constancy,
in short PCCC, an illumination chromaticity estimation algorithm exploiting a point cloud. We leverage the depth
information captured by the time-of-flight (ToF) sensor
mounted rigidly with the RGB sensor, and form a 6D cloud
where each point contains the coordinates and RGB intensities, noted as (x,y,z,r,g,b). PCCC applies the PointNet architecture to the color constancy problem, deriving the illumination vector point-wise and then making a global decision
about the global illumination chromaticity. On two popular RGB-D datasets, which we extend with illumination
information, as well as on a novel benchmark, PCCC obtains lower error than the state-of-the-art algorithms. Our
method is simple and fast, requiring merely 16 × 16-size input and reaching speed over 140 fps (CPU time), including
the cost of building the point cloud and net inference.
∗ Equal contribution/† Corresponding author. Code & Data: https:
//github.com/xyxingx/Point-Cloud-Color-Constancy

1. Introduction
There are over a billion smartphone cameras capturing
photographs, where the procedure of perceiving true colors
of the real world happens in the ISP pipeline. In general, a
good-looking picture relies on a single CMOS sensor with
a certain color filter array. On flagship smartphones, there
is a trend of leveraging two or more digital sensors to “compute” a higher-quality image. Such cases include {main
camera, tele camera} [2], {main camera, near inferred sensor} [48], and {color camera and time-of-flight (ToF) depth
sensor} [45]. In this work, we proceed in this direction and
use a color camera and a ToF sensor. A ToF depth sensor
has been commonly employed for other applications; e.g.,
auto focus, bokeh effect and 3D face and skeleton scanning.
Here we show a novel task based on combing the RGB and
ToF sensors – RGB-D or point-cloud illumination estimation.
Illumination estimation refers to the task of estimating
the normalized illumination chromaticity given a raw im-

19750

