Label-Only Model Inversion Attacks via Boundary Repulsion
Mostafa Kahla
Virginia Tech

Si Chen
Virginia Tech

Hoang Anh Just
Virginia Tech

Ruoxi Jia
Virginia Tech

kahla@vt.edu

chensi@vt.edu

just@vt.edu

ruoxijia@vt.edu

Abstract
Recent studies show that the state-of-the-art deep neural networks are vulnerable to model inversion attacks, in
which access to a model is abused to reconstruct private
training data of any given target class. Existing attacks
rely on having access to either the complete target model
(whitebox) or the model’s soft-labels (blackbox). However,
no prior work has been done in the harder but more practical scenario, in which the attacker only has access to the
model’s predicted label, without a confidence measure. In
this paper, we introduce an algorithm, Boundary-Repelling
Model Inversion (BREP -MI), to invert private training data
using only the target model’s predicted labels. The key idea
of our algorithm is to evaluate the model’s predicted labels
over a sphere and then estimate the direction to reach the
target class’s centroid. Using the example of face recognition, we show that the images reconstructed by BREP -MI
successfully reproduce the semantics of the private training data for various datasets and target model architectures. We compare BREP -MI with the state-of-the-art whitebox and blackbox model inversion attacks, and the results
show that despite assuming less knowledge about the target model, BREP -MI outperforms the blackbox attack and
achieves comparable results to the whitebox attack. Our
code is available online. 1

1. Introduction
Machine learning (ML) algorithms are often trained on
private or sensitive data, such as face images, medical
records, and financial information. Unfortunately, since ML
models tend to memorize information about training data,
even when stored and processed securely, privacy information can still be exposed through the access to the models [20]. Indeed, the prior study of privacy attacks has
demonstrated the possibility of exposing training data at
different granularities, ranging from “coarse-grained” information, such as determining whether a certain point partici1 https://github.com/m- kahla/Label- Only- ModelInversion-Attacks-via-Boundary-Repulsion

pates in training [10,14,16,21] or whether a training dataset
satisfies certain properties [9,15], to more “fine-grained” information, such as reconstructing the raw data [2, 3, 7, 24].
We focus on model inversion (MI) attacks, which recreates training data or sensitive attributes given the access to
the trained model. MI attacks cause tremendous harm due
to the “fine-grained” information revealed by the attacks.
For instance, MI attacks applied to personalized medicine
prediction models result in the leakage of individuals’ genomic attributes [8]. Recent works show that MI attacks
could even successfully reconstruct high-dimensional data,
such as images. For instance, [3, 7, 23, 24] demonstrated the
possibility of recovering an image of a person from a face
recognition model given just their name.
Existing MI attacks have either assumed that the attacker
has the complete knowledge of the target model or assumed
that the attack can query the model and receive model’s
output as confident scores. The former and the latter are
often referred to as the whitebox and the blackbox threat
model, respectively. The idea underlying existing whitebox MI attacks [3, 24] is to synthesize the sensitive feature that achieves the maximum likelihood under the target
model. The synthesis is implemented as a gradient ascent
algorithm. By contrast, existing blackbox attacks [2,19] are
based on training an attack network that predicts the sensitive feature from the input confidence scores. Despite
the exclusive focus on these two threat models, in practice, ML models are often packed into a blackbox that only
produces hard-labels when being queried. This label-only
threat model is more realistic as ML models deployed in
user-facing services need not expose raw confidence scores.
However, the design of label-only MI attacks is much more
challenging than the whitebox or blackbox attacks given the
limited information accessible to the attacker.
In this paper, we introduce, BREP -MI, a general algorithm for MI attack in the label-only setting, where the attacker can make queries to the target model and obtain hard
labels, instead of confidence scores. Similar to the main
idea of whitebox attacks, we still try to synthesize the most
likelihood input for the target class under the target model.
However, in the label-only setting, we cannot directly cal-

15045

