Cross-Modal Transferable Adversarial Attacks from Images to Videos
Zhipeng Wei1,2 , Jingjing Chen1,2†, Zuxuan Wu1,2 , Yu-Gang Jiang1,2
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center on Intelligent Visual Computing
zpwei21@m.fudan.edu.cn, {chenjingjing, zxwu, ygj}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent studies have shown that adversarial examples
hand-crafted on one white-box model can be used to attack other black-box models. Such cross-model transferability makes it feasible to perform black-box attacks, which
has raised security concerns for real-world DNNs applications. Nevertheless, existing works mostly focus on investigating the adversarial transferability across different deep
models that share the same modality of input data. The
cross-modal transferability of adversarial perturbation has
never been explored. This paper investigates the transferability of adversarial perturbation across different modalities, i.e., leveraging adversarial perturbation generated on
white-box image models to attack black-box video models.
Specifically, motivated by the observation that the low-level
feature space between images and video frames are similar, we propose a simple yet effective cross-modal attack
method, named as Image To Video (I2V) attack. I2V generates adversarial frames by minimizing the cosine similarity between features of pre-trained image models from
adversarial and benign examples, then combines the generated adversarial frames to perform black-box attacks on
video recognition models. Extensive experiments demonstrate that I2V can achieve high attack success rates on different black-box video recognition models. On Kinetics-400
and UCF-101, I2V achieves an average attack success rate
of 77.88% and 65.68%, respectively, which sheds light on
the feasibility of cross-modal adversarial attacks.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved significant progress in a
series of computer vision tasks, such as image recognition [3, 4, 12], video classification [41], object detection
[24], and action recognition [2, 11], etc. However, recent studies have shown that deep neural networks (DNNs)
† Correspondence to: Jingjing Chen.

are highly vulnerable to adversarial examples [21, 28, 29],
which are generated by adding small human-imperceptible
perturbations that can lead to wrong predictions. The existence of adversarial examples has posed serious security
threats for the application of DNNs, such as autonomous
driving [25], face recognition [8], video analysis [5, 31, 34],
etc. As a result, adversarial examples have attracted numerous research attentions in recent years.
It has been demonstrated in recent works [22,33] that adversarial examples have the property of transferability, i.e.,
the adversarial example generated from one model can be
used to attack other models. Such cross-model transferability makes it feasible to perform black-box attacks by
leveraging adversarial examples handcrafted on white-box
models. As a result, how to enhance the transferability of
adversarial examples for efficient black-box attacks has attracted several research interests recently. These works either perform data augmentation [7, 20, 38], optimize gradient calculations [6, 20, 36], or disrupt common properties
among different models [37], to avoid the generated adversarial samples being overfitted to white-box models. Nevertheless, all of these works require the white-box models and
target black-box models to be homomodal, which share the
same modal of input data. Transferability between heteromodal models has never been explored.
To bridge this gap, this paper investigates the crossmodal transferability of adversarial examples. Specifically,
we explore the adversarial transferability between image
models and video models by performing transfer-based
black-box attacks on video models with image models pretrained on ImageNet only. This is an extremely challenging setting since there are no white-box video models for
generating video adversarial samples. There are two major obstacles in transferring adversarial perturbations generated on images models to attack video models. First, in
addition to the domain gap between image and video data,
video data contain additional temporal information, which
leads to differences in the learned features between image
models and video models. The difference makes it diffi-

15064

