Contrastive Boundary Learning for Point Cloud Segmentation
Liyao Tang1 , Yibing Zhan2 , Zhe Chen1 , Baosheng Yu1 , Dacheng Tao2,1
1
The University of Sydney, Australia 2 JD Explore Academy, China
ltan9687@uni.sydney.edu.au, zhanyibing@jd.com, {zhe.chen1, baosheng.yu}@sydney.edu.au
dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract
Point cloud segmentation is fundamental in understanding 3D environments. However, current 3D point cloud
segmentation methods usually perform poorly on scene
boundaries, which degenerates the overall segmentation
performance. In this paper, we focus on the segmentation
of scene boundaries. Accordingly, we first explore metrics to evaluate the segmentation performance on scene
boundaries. To address the unsatisfactory performance on
boundaries, we then propose a novel contrastive boundary learning (CBL) framework for point cloud segmentation. Specifically, the proposed CBL enhances feature discrimination between points across boundaries by contrasting their representations with the assistance of scene contexts at multiple scales. By applying CBL on three different baseline methods, we experimentally show that CBL
consistently improves different baselines and assists them
to achieve compelling performance on boundaries, as well
as the overall performance, e.g. in mIoU. The experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our method and
the importance of boundaries for 3D point cloud segmentation. Code and model will be made publicly available at
https://github.com/LiyaoTang/contrastBoundary.

1. Introduction
3D point cloud semantic segmentation aims to assign
semantic categories to each 3D data point, while robust
3D segmentation is very important for various applications
[19, 64], including autonomous driving, unmanned aerial
vehicles, and augmented reality.
However, despite that various point cloud segmentation
methods have been developed, little attention has been put
on boundaries in 3D point clouds. Accurate segmentation
on scene boundaries can be of great importance. Firstly, a
clean boundary estimation can be beneficial for overall segmentation performance. For example, in 2D image segmentation, accurate segmentation on boundary is the key to generate high-fidelity masks [8, 36, 69]. Secondly, compared

Ground Truth

boundary in ground truth

mIoU
B-IoU

Baseline

CBL

feature discrimination to neighbors

70.3
41.5

73.5
44.2

Figure 1. Contrastive Boundary Learning (top) discovers boundary from ground truth in each sub-sampled point cloud, i.e., subscene, through the sub-sampling procedure. By imposing contrastive optimization on boundary areas at multiple scales, CBL
enhances the feature discrimination across boundaries (middle).
Without an explicit boundary prediction, CBL improves boundary
segmentation and achieves better scene segmentation results (bottom). The visualization is conducted on S3DIS testset Area 5.

to object categories that usually have a large portion of 3D
points, such as buildings and trees, erroneous boundary segmentation could affect the recognition of object categories
with much fewer points (e.g., pedestrians and pillars) to a
greater extent. This can be particularly hazardous for applications like autonomous driving, e.g., crashing into curbs
if boundaries are recognized inaccurately by a self-driving
car.

8489

