Split Hierarchical Variational Compression
Tom Ryder,* Chen Zhang∗†, Ning Kang†, Shifeng Zhang†
†
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{chenzhang10, kang.ning2, zhangshifeng4}@huawei.com

Abstract
Variational autoencoders (VAEs) have witnessed great success in performing the compression of image datasets. This
success, made possible by the bits-back coding framework, has
produced competitive compression performance across many
benchmarks. However, despite this, VAE architectures are currently limited by a combination of coding practicalities and
compression ratios. That is, not only do state-of-the-art methods,
such as normalizing flows, often demonstrate out-performance,
but the initial bits required in coding makes single and parallel
image compression challenging. To remedy this, we introduce
Split Hierarchical Variational Compression (SHVC). SHVC
introduces two novelties. Firstly, we propose an efficient autoregressive prior, the autoregressive sub-pixel convolution, that
allows a generalisation between per-pixel autoregressions and
fully factorised probability models. Secondly, we define our
coding framework, the autoregressive initial bits, that flexibly
supports parallel coding and avoids – for the first time – many
of the practicalities commonly associated with bits-back coding.
In our experiments, we demonstrate SHVC is able to achieve
state-of-the-art compression performance across full-resolution
lossless image compression tasks, with up to 100x fewer model
parameters than competing VAE approaches.

1. Introduction
The volume of data, measured in terms of IP traffic, is
currently witnessing an exponential year-on-year growth [9].
Fuelled by the demand for high-resolution media content, it
is estimated that 80% of this data is in the form of images
and video [9]. Data service providers, such as cloud and
streaming platforms, have consequently seen costs associated
with transmission and storage become prohibitively expensive.
For example, an increased demand for streaming services forced
major providers to throttle the maximum resolution of video
content to 720p during the coronavirus pandemic. As such,
these challenges have renewed the need for the development
of high-performance data compression codecs.
* co-first author.

The work of Tom Ryder is conducted during his
employment at Huawei Technologies R&D UK.

One solution to this problem has been the development of
approaches using likelihood-based generative models capable of
discrete density estimation [3,6,13,14,18,22,24,35,36,42,43].
Such methods operate by learning a deep probabilistic model of
the data distribution, which, in combination with entropy coders,
can be used to compress data. Here, according to Shannon’s
source coding theorem [21], the minimal required average
codelength is bounded by the expected negative log-likelihood
of the data distribution.
From this family of generative models, there have emerged
three dominant modes for data compression: normalizing
flows [3, 14, 42, 43], variational autoencoders [18, 24, 36] and
autoregressive models [15, 31, 37] 1. In fact, each of these
approaches can be thought of as a traversal on the Pareto
frontier of inference speed and compression performance. With
broad generality, autoregressive models can often be the most
powerful but the slowest; variational autoencoders are often the
weakest but the fastest; and normalizing flows – depending on
the variant – sit somewhere in between.
In this paper, we consider data compression with VAEs, and
focus on extending the efficient frontier; obtaining solutions
faster than popular VAEs that achieve state-of-the-art compression ratios. Use of VAEs, however, poses two outstanding
challenges. Firstly, we should achieve competitive coding ratios
without greatly sacrificing time complexity. For example, best
iterates currently require one of two ingredients to improve performance: building either a deep hierarchy of latent variables [8]
or use of autoregressive priors [11,29]. The latter idea, especially
popular in the codecs of the lossy compression community [25],
posits a model that flexibly learns both local (via autoregression)
and global (via hierarchical latent representation) data modalities
(e.g. low-frequency information). Whilst these approaches, such
as MS-PixelCNN [29] and PixelVAE [11], have had some success in achieving more efficient trade-offs, generation of even
moderately sized images is still to the order of minutes [22].
Secondly, there should exist a practical means by which to
efficiently perform single-image compression. Single-image
compression then permits parallel coding, which is highly
1 Most recently, score-based generative models have been adapted for data
compression [16], but current approaches require an impractical number of
operations at inference time.

386

