Self-Supervised Equivariant Learning for Oriented Keypoint Detection
Jongmin Lee

Byungjin Kim

Minsu Cho

Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), South Korea
http://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/REKD

Abstract
Detecting robust keypoints from an image is an integral
part of many computer vision problems, and the characteristic orientation and scale of keypoints play an important role for keypoint description and matching. Existing
learning-based methods for keypoint detection rely on standard translation-equivariant CNNs but often fail to detect
reliable keypoints against geometric variations. To learn
to detect robust oriented keypoints, we introduce a selfsupervised learning framework using rotation-equivariant
CNNs. We propose a dense orientation alignment loss by
an image pair generated by synthetic transformations for
training a histogram-based orientation map. Our method
outperforms the previous methods on an image matching
benchmark and a camera pose estimation benchmark.

1. Introduction
Detecting robust keypoints is an integral part of many
computer vision tasks, such as image matching [21], visual
localization [28, 54, 55], SLAM [13, 14, 39], and 3D reconstruction [1, 19, 57, 76]. The robust keypoints, in principle, are consistently localizable, being invariant to photometric/geometric variations of an image induced by viewpoint/illumination changes, and a keypoint is typically assigned with its characteristic orientation/scale as a geometric feature, which plays an important role for keypoint description [14, 15, 27, 37, 41, 45, 51, 62, 63, 70] or matching [6,53,71,73], as shown in Fig. 1. As rotation frequently
occurs for patterns of interests in real-world images, the
keypoints and their geometric features are required to be
consistent w.r.t rotation of the image in particular.
The early methods have detected keypoints with their
charateristic orientation/scale using a hand-crafted filter
on a shallow gradient-based feature map. For example,
SIFT [27] detects the keypoints by finding local extrema in
difference-of-Gaussian (DoG) features on a scale space and
obtains a dominant orientation from gradient histograms.
While such a technique has proven effective for shallow

(a) Key.Net
(b) ours
Figure 1. Visualization of the predicted matches to compare the
existing keypoint detector Key.Net [3] (left) with our oriented keypoint detector (right). We draw the correct matches (green) and the
incorrect matches (red) using the ground-truth homography. We
extract 300 keypoints and use HardNet [37] descriptor for matching. The arrows of the keypoints in the right denote the estimated
orientations which are used for filtering outliers.

gradient-based feature maps, it cannot be applied to deep
feature maps from standard networks, where rotation or
scaling induces unpredictable variations of features. Recent
methods [3, 41, 58, 70], thus, rely on learning from data.
They typically train a convolutional neural network (CNN)
for keypoint detection and/or description by regressing orientation and scale. Some [3,41] adopt self-supervised learning through synthetic transformation, while others [58, 70]
train the networks through strong supervision by homography or SfM. All these approaches, however, often fail to
detect reliable keypoints against geometric variations; they
learn invariance or equivariance by relying on training with
data augmentation, which does not provide a sufficient level
for keypoint detection.
In this work, we propose a self-supervised equivariant
learning method for oriented keypoint detection. Recent
studies [10,11,29,68,69,75] introduce different equivariant
neural networks that embed an explicit structure for equivariant learning by design. The group-equivariant CNNs

4847

