Fairness-aware Adversarial Perturbation Towards Bias Mitigation for
Deployed Deep Models
Zhibo Wang†,‡ , Xiaowei Dong†,∗ , Henry Xue♯ , Zhifei Zhang≀ , Weifeng Chiu♯ , Tao Wei♯ , Kui Ren‡
† School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, P. R. China
‡ School of Cyber Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, P. R. China
≀ Adobe Research, USA
♯ Ant Group, P. R. China,
{zhibowang, xwdong}@whu.edu.cn, gkn1fexxx@gmail.com, zzhang@adobe.com
{weifeng.qwf, lenx.wei}@antgroup.com, kuiren@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Prioritizing fairness is of central importance in artificial intelligence (AI) systems, especially for those societal
applications, e.g., hiring systems should recommend applicants equally from different demographic groups, and risk
assessment systems must eliminate racism in criminal justice. Existing efforts towards the ethical development of AI
systems have leveraged data science to mitigate biases in
the training set or introduced fairness principles into the
training process. For a deployed AI system, however, it may
not allow for retraining or tuning in practice. By contrast,
we propose a more flexible approach, i.e., fairness-aware
adversarial perturbation (FAAP), which learns to perturb
input data to blind deployed models on fairness-related features, e.g., gender and ethnicity. The key advantage is that
FAAP does not modify deployed models in terms of parameters and structures. To achieve this, we design a discriminator to distinguish fairness-related attributes based on latent representations from deployed models. Meanwhile, a
perturbation generator is trained against the discriminator, such that no fairness-related features could be extracted
from perturbed inputs. Exhaustive experimental evaluation
demonstrates the effectiveness and superior performance of
the proposed FAAP. In addition, FAAP is validated on realworld commercial deployments (inaccessible to model parameters), which shows the transferability of FAAP, foreseeing the potential of black-box adaptation.

1. Introduction
AI systems have been widely deployed in many highstakes applications, e.g., face recognition [3,21], hiring pro∗ Xiaowei Dong is the corresponding author.

cess [14, 15], health care [13], etc. However, some existing
AI systems are found to treat individuals unequally based
on protected attributes, e.g., ethnicity, gender, and nationality. Such biases are referred to as unfairness. For instance, Amazon realized that their automatic recruitment
system presents skewness between male and female candidates [12], i.e., male candidates are with higher probability
to be hired as compared to female candidates. The COMPAS, which is an assessment system of recidivating risk, is
found to have racial prejudice [6]. Such unfairness has been
a subtle and ubiquitous nature of AI systems, thus it is nontrivial to mitigate the unfairness, ideally without touching
the deployed models.
Many works have been proposed to mitigate unfairness/biases, which can be divided into three categories
according to the stage de-biasing is applied, i.e., preprocessing, in-processing, and post-processing. From the
perspective of pre-processing, [8, 16, 17, 27, 31] mitigated
biases in the training dataset, thus mitigating the bias during training the model. For the in-processing methods,
[1, 19, 30] introduced fairness-related penalties into the
learning process to train a fairer model. These methods
need to retrain or fine-tune the target models, while these
are unsuitable if the models are deployed without access to
their training set. [7] proposed a boosting method to postprocess a deployed deep learning model to produce a new
classifier that has equal accuracy in different people groups.
However, [7] needs to replace the final classifier and cannot
ensure statistical and predictive parity, e.g., individuals in
different groups are equally treated in prediction.
To the best of our knowledge, existing works are not
suitable to improve fairness at the inference phase without changing the deep model. Therefore, it is imperative
to propose a practical approach to mitigate the unfairness
of deployed models without changing their parameters and
structures. Since deep models tend to learn spurious corre-

10379

