Rethinking Minimal Sufficient Representation in Contrastive Learning
Haoqing Wang*1
Xun Guo2
Zhi-Hong Deng1
Yan Lu2
1
2
Peking University
Microsoft Research Asia
{wanghaoqing, zhdeng}@pku.edu.cn

{xunguo, yanlu}@microsoft.com

More Task-relevant Information
Shared Task-relevant Information in Representation I(z1,v2,T)
Representation z1
Non-shared Task-relevant Information in Representation I(z1,T|v2)

Abstract
Contrastive learning between different views of the data
achieves outstanding success in the field of self-supervised
representation learning and the learned representations are
useful in broad downstream tasks. Since all supervision
information for one view comes from the other view, contrastive learning approximately obtains the minimal sufficient representation which contains the shared information and eliminates the non-shared information between
views. Considering the diversity of the downstream tasks,
it cannot be guaranteed that all task-relevant information
is shared between views. Therefore, we assume the nonshared task-relevant information cannot be ignored and
theoretically prove that the minimal sufficient representation in contrastive learning is not sufficient for the downstream tasks, which causes performance degradation. This
reveals a new problem that the contrastive learning models have the risk of over-fitting to the shared information
between views. To alleviate this problem, we propose to
increase the mutual information between the representation and input as regularization to approximately introduce more task-relevant information, since we cannot utilize any downstream task information during training. Extensive experiments verify the rationality of our analysis
and the effectiveness of our method. It significantly improves the performance of several classic contrastive learning models in downstream tasks. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Haoqing-Wang/InfoCL.

1. Introduction
Recently, contrastive learning [6–8, 18, 51] between different views of the data achieves outstanding success in the
field of self-supervised representation learning. The learned
representations are useful for broad downstream tasks in
practice, such as classification, detection and segmentation
[20]. In contrastive learning, the representation that contains all shared information between views is defined as suf* The work was done when the author was with MSRA as an intern.

v2

v1
z1suf

Increasing I(z1, v1)

T
Sufficient Representation

v2

v1
z1suf

T
Sufficient Representation

Figure 1. Demonstration of our motivation using information diagrams. Based on the (approximately minimal) sufficient representation learned in contrastive learning, increasing I(z1 , v1 ) approximately introduces more non-shared task-relevant information.

ficient representation, while the representation that contains
only the shared and eliminates the non-shared information
is defined as minimal sufficient representation [43]. Contrastive learning maximizes the mutual information between
the representations of different views, thereby obtaining the
sufficient representation. Furthermore, since all supervision
information for one view comes from the other view [15],
the non-shared information is often ignored, so that the minimal sufficient representation is approximately obtained.
Tian et al. [40] find that the optimal views for contrastive
learning depend on the downstream tasks when the minimal
sufficient representation is obtained. In other words, the optimal views for task T1 may not be suitable for task T2 . The
reason may be that some information relevant to T2 is not
shared between these views. In this work, we formalize this
conjecture and assume that the non-shared task-relevant information cannot be ignored. Based on this assumption, we
theoretically prove that the minimal sufficient representation contains less task-relevant information than other sufficient representations and has a non-ignorable gap with the
optimal representation, which causes performance degradation. Concretely, we consider two types of the downstream
task, i.e., classification and regression task, and prove that
the lowest achievable error of the minimal sufficient representation is higher than other sufficient representations.
According to our analysis, when some task-relevant information is not shared between views, the learned representation in contrastive learning is not sufficient for the
downstream tasks. This reveals that the contrastive learning

16041

