Grounding Answers for Visual Questions Asked by Visually Impaired People
Chongyan Chen1 , Samreen Anjum2 , Danna Gurari1,2
1

University of Texas at Austin 2 University of Colorado Boulder

Abstract
Visual question answering is the task of answering
questions about images. We introduce the VizWiz-VQAGrounding dataset, the first dataset that visually grounds
answers to visual questions asked by people with visual impairments. We analyze our dataset and compare it with
five VQA-Grounding datasets to demonstrate what makes
it similar and different. We then evaluate the SOTA VQA
and VQA-Grounding models and demonstrate that current
SOTA algorithms often fail to identify the correct visual evidence where the answer is located. These models regularly struggle when the visual evidence occupies a small
fraction of the image, for images that are higher quality,
as well as for visual questions that require skills in text
recognition. The dataset, evaluation server, and leaderboard all can be found at the following link: https:
//vizwiz.org/tasks-and-datasets/answergrounding-for-vqa/.

Figure 1. (a) We introduce a new dataset challenge that supports
the task of grounding the visual evidence needed to answer visual
questions asked by people with vision impairments. This enables
valuable use cases including (b) background obfuscation to limit
inadvertent privacy leaks and (c) automatic magnification to expedite low vision users’ abilities to answer their questions.

1. Introduction
Visual question answering (VQA) is the task of providing a natural language answer to a question about an image.
While most VQA services only return a natural language
answer, our work is motivated by the belief that it is also
valuable for a VQA service to return the region in the image used to arrive at the answer. We call this task of locating
the relevant visual evidence answer grounding.
Numerous applications would be possible if answer
groundings were provided in response to visual questions.
First, they enable assessment of whether a VQA model reasons based on the correct visual evidence. This is valuable
as an explanation as well as to support developers in debugging models. Second, answer groundings enable segmenting the relevant content from the background. This is a valuable precursor for obfuscating the background to preserve
privacy, given that photographers can inadvertently capture
private information in the background of their images [14]
(exemplified in Figure 1b). Third, users with low vision
could more quickly find the desired information if a service instead magnified the relevant visual evidence. This is

valuable in part because answers from VQA services can be
insufficient, including because humans suffer from “reporting bias” meaning they describe what they find interesting
without understanding what a person/population is seeking.
This is exemplified in Figure 1c, where the most popular response from 10 answers is the generic answer ‘pasta’ rather
than the specific flavor, ‘Creamy Tomato Basil Penne’.
While datasets have been introduced to encourage
progress on the answer grounding problem, all proposed
dataset challenges originate from contrived visual questions [6, 9, 11, 17, 18, 22, 26, 37, 42]. This includes scraping images from photo-sharing websites (e.g., Flickr) and
then generating questions automatically [6], by using image
annotations paired with question templates to create questions about the images or (2) manually [9, 11, 18, 42], by
asking crowdworkers to make up questions about an image that would stump a robot. Yet, prior work has shown
that such contrived settings can manifest different characteristics from authentic VQA use cases [15, 39]. This
can cause algorithms trained and evaluated on contrived

19098

