RADU: Ray-Aligned Depth Update Convolutions for ToF Data Denoising
Michael Schelling, Pedro Hermosilla, Timo Ropinski
Ulm University, Germany
{michael-1.schelling, pedro-1.hermosilla-casajus, timo.ropinski}@uni-ulm.de

ToF
Depth Map

Abstract
Time-of-Flight (ToF) cameras are subject to high levels of noise and distortions due to Multi-Path-Interference
(MPI). While recent research showed that 2D neural networks are able to outperform previous traditional Stateof-the-Art (SOTA) methods on correcting ToF-Data, little
research on learning-based approaches has been done to
make direct use of the 3D information present in depth images. In this paper, we propose an iterative correcting approach operating in 3D space, that is designed to learn on
2.5D data by enabling 3D point convolutions to correct the
points’ positions along the view direction. As labeled real
world data is scarce for this task, we further train our network with a self-training approach on unlabeled real world
data to account for real world statistics. We demonstrate
that our method is able to outperform SOTA methods on
several datasets, including two real world datasets and a
new large-scale synthetic data set introduced in this paper.

1. Introduction
Time of Flight (ToF) cameras are devices that are able
to capture depth information of a scene by measuring the
time the light emitted by the device needs to travel back
once intersecting with an object. In practice, timing the reception of a light impulse requires precise and costly hardware and, as a result, consumer-level ToF cameras perform
indirect measurements. The most common types are socalled Amplitude-Modulated Continuous-Wave (AMCW)
ToF cameras, as they are for example used by the Kinect.
The working principle of these AMCW cameras is to emit
a periodically modulated light signal and retrieve the phase
shift of the received signal, through which the travel time
of the light and, consequently, the distance of the object to
the camera is given [12]. However, the continuous illumination of the scene inevitably leads to Multi-Path Interference (MPI), as not only the direct reflection is received but
also indirectly illumination which significantly impairs the
depth estimation. Furthermore, these ToF cameras suffer

Iterative
Point Update

2D-3D
Img.
Plane

Denoised
Depth Map

3D-2D
Img.
Plane

Figure 1. Given an initial ToF depth reconstruction our method
projects the problem into a latent 3D space. The 3D point positions
are updated iteratively along the camera rays using RADU point
convolutions, in order to optimize the final 2D depth prediction.

from low Signal to Noise Ratios (SNR) on dark surfaces
and the mixed pixel effect along sharp object edges [12].
Since deep learning approaches have shown great success in visual computing problems, many works have investigated the capabilities of 2D neural networks to correct ToF
depth images [1, 3, 4, 10, 11, 29]. However, existing methods treat the task of ToF correction as a 2D image problem
and do not take into account the explicit 3D information in
their computations. In these works, the depth information
is usually used as an input to standard Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) for images [1, 3, 19, 27, 28], while the
underlying 3D structure is not analyzed. In this work instead, we propose a new neural network architecture that
projects the problem into the 3D domain and makes use of
point convolutional neural networks [14] to analyze the erroneous reconstruction and adjust the point positions along
the view direction, see Fig. 1. This iterative process makes
small changes to the point positions to reduce the error level
in between the convolutional layers and improve the final
depth reconstruction. Further, we propose a novel finetuning procedure for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) based on self-training methods, to transfer the knowledge acquired by our network from synthetic to real world
ToF data. The effectiveness of this approach is evaluated
on both synthetic and real datasets and proves to be able
to outperform existing methods. Moreover, we introduce a
large-scale high-resolution dataset consisting of challenging
scenes, containing high MPI levels, materials which pro-

671

