DAIR-V2X: A Large-Scale Dataset for Vehicle-Infrastructure Cooperative
3D Object Detection
Haibao Yu1 , Yizhen Luo1,3 , Mao Shu2 , Yiyi Huo1,4 , Zebang Yang1,3 , Yifeng Shi2 , Zhenglong Guo2 ,
Hanyu Li2 , Xing Hu2 , Jirui Yuan1 , Zaiqing Nie1 *
Institute for AI Industry Research(AIR), Tsinghua University
2
Baidu Inc. 3 Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
4
University of Chinese Academy of Science
1

{yuhaibao@air.,luoyz18@mails.,yzb19@mails.,yuanjirui@air.,zaiqing@air.}tsinghua.edu.cn,
{shumao,shiyifeng,guozhenglong,lihanyu02,huxing}@baidu.com, huoyiyi18@mails.ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Autonomous driving faces great safety challenges for a
lack of global perspective and the limitation of long-range
perception capabilities. It has been widely agreed that
vehicle-infrastructure cooperation is required to achieve
Level 5 autonomy. However, there is still NO dataset from
real scenarios available for computer vision researchers
to work on vehicle-infrastructure cooperation-related problems. To accelerate computer vision research and innovation for Vehicle-Infrastructure Cooperative Autonomous
Driving (VICAD), we release DAIR-V2X Dataset, which is
the first large-scale, multi-modality, multi-view dataset from
real scenarios for VICAD. DAIR-V2X comprises 71254 LiDAR frames and 71254 Camera frames, and all frames
are captured from real scenes with 3D annotations. The
Vehicle-Infrastructure Cooperative 3D Object Detection
problem (VIC3D) is introduced, formulating the problem of
collaboratively locating and identifying 3D objects using
sensory inputs from both vehicle and infrastructure. In addition to solving traditional 3D object detection problems,
the solution of VIC3D needs to consider the temporal asynchrony problem between vehicle and infrastructure sensors
and the data transmission cost between them. Furthermore, we propose Time Compensation Late Fusion (TCLF),
a late fusion framework for the VIC3D task as a benchmark based on DAIR-V2X. Find data, code, and more upto-date information at https://thudair.baai.ac.cn/index and
https://github.com/AIR-THU/DAIR-V2X.

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving (AD) is arguably one of the hottest
topics currently occupying public attention and imagina* Corresponding author. 3,4 Work done while at AIR.

tion. The success of deep neural networks brings the
promise of solving AD’s core requirement to perceive the
surrounding environment from point cloud [15, 20, 28], images [7, 18] or multi-modality data [21, 24]. Despite its

Figure 1. Datasets available for 3D Object Detection in autonomous driving. DAIR-V2X is the first real-world V2X dataset
for VICAD.

great progress recently, autonomous driving still faces great
safety challenges for a lack of global perspective and the
limitation of long-range perception capability. It has been
widely agreed that vehicle-infrastructure cooperation is required to achieve Level 5 autonomy. Utilizing both vehicle and infrastructure sensors brings a number of significant advantages, including providing a global perspective
far beyond the current horizon and covering blind spots.
Advances in communications like V2X (vehicle to everything) have made it possible to utilize data from infrastructure sensors [3, 22]. However, there is still NO dataset from
real scenarios available for researchers to work on vehicleinfrastructure cooperation-related problems.
To accelerate computer vision research and innovation

21361

