Shape from Thermal Radiation:
Passive Ranging Using Multi-spectral LWIR Measurements
Kenichiro Tanaka2
Takahiro Kushida1 *
Yasuto Nagase1 *
1
Takuya Funatomi
Yasuhiro Mukaigawa1
1
Nara Institute of Science and Technology (NAIST), Japan 2 Ritsumeikan University, Japan
{nagase.yasuto.nx0, kushida.takahiro.kh3, funatomi, mukaigawa}@is.naist.jp
ken-t@fc.ritsumei.ac.jp

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new cue of depth sensing
using thermal radiation. Our method realizes passive, texture independent, far range, and dark scene applicability,
which can broaden the depth sensing subjects. A key observation is that thermal radiation is attenuated by the air
and is wavelength dependent. By modeling the wavelengthdependent attenuation by the air and building a multispectral LWIR measurement system, we can jointly estimate
the depth, temperature, and emissivity of the target. We
analytically show the capability of the thermal radiation
cue and show the effectiveness of the method in real-world
scenes using an imaging system with a few bandpass filters.

1. Introduction
Depth sensing is an important technology, as shown
by its wide range of applications. Depth sensing techniques refer to physics-based cues used to recover the scene
depth, known as “shape from X.” Historically, a great number of cues such as triangulation/disparity [23], time-offlight [21], polarization [46], shading [25], silhouettes [9],
focus/defocus [44], and texture [60] have been proposed.
These “X” cues play an important role in depth sensing in
various scenarios. However, existing depth sensing techniques require either clear visibility of the texture or an active light source to illuminate the surface, and there is no
approach to passively measure depth in dark environments.
In this paper, we propose an unprecedented depth sensing modality that can be used in dark and passive scenarios.
As a key to achieving this property, we use the attenuation
of long wavelength infrared (LWIR) radiation through the
air. As all objects emit thermal radiation according to their
temperature, we can see the objects without any active light
sources. Besides, since the attenuation of LWIR is much

Target

Band-pass
Filters
LWIR
Air
camera

Estimated images

Depth

Depth: d

Emissivity

Temperature

Figure 1. Overview of the shape from thermal radiation. Our
method jointly estimates the depth, temperature, and emissivity
images from multi-spectral LWIR images. A key observation is
that thermal radiation from the target object is attenuated through
the air and is wavelength dependent.

larger than that of visible light and the amount of attenuation decays exponentially with respect to the depth, it is
possible to recover the depth.
Because the observed intensity depends on both the object’s temperature and the attenuation, we have to separate
these factors. Fortunately, attenuation through the air is
wavelength dependent. Thus, we use multi-spectral observation in the LWIR range to jointly estimate the depth and
temperature of the target object as shown in Fig. 1.
This paper focuses on the possibility of depth sensing by
only using passive thermal radiation. The contributions of
this study are twofold.
• We propose a novel cue for “shape from X” techniques. The shape from thermal radiation uses the attenuation of thermal radiation by the air. This is new to
computer vision and computational imaging areas and
broadens the field of research.
• To the best of our knowledge, the proposed method
is the first attempt to realize passive, texture-less, far
range, and can be used for dark scenes. This property
proves that air absorption cues in LWIR are useful for
depth sensing.

* Equal contribution.

12661

