Equalized Focal Loss for Dense Long-Tailed Object Detection
Bo Li1∗

Yongqiang Yao2∗
Jingru Tan1∗†
Gang Zhang3
Fengwei Yu2
Jianwei Lu1 †
Ye Luo1
1
2
3
Tongji University
SenseTime Research
Tsinghua University
{1911030,yeluo}@tongji.edu.cn, {soundbupt,tanjingru120}@gmail.com
yufengwei@sensetime.com, zhang-g19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, jwlu33@126.com

Abstract
Despite the recent success of long-tailed object detection, almost all long-tailed object detectors are developed
based on the two-stage paradigm. In practice, one-stage
detectors are more prevalent in the industry because they
have a simple and fast pipeline that is easy to deploy. However, in the long-tailed scenario, this line of work has not
been explored so far. In this paper, we investigate whether
one-stage detectors can perform well in this case. We discover the primary obstacle that prevents one-stage detectors from achieving excellent performance is: categories
suffer from different degrees of positive-negative imbalance
problems under the long-tailed data distribution. The conventional focal loss balances the training process with the
same modulating factor for all categories, thus failing to
handle the long-tailed problem. To address this issue, we
propose the Equalized Focal Loss (EFL) that rebalances
the loss contribution of positive and negative samples of
different categories independently according to their imbalance degrees. Specifically, EFL adopts a category-relevant
modulating factor which can be adjusted dynamically by
the training status of different categories. Extensive experiments conducted on the challenging LVIS v1 benchmark
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method. With
an end-to-end training pipeline, EFL achieves 29.2% in
terms of overall AP and obtains significant performance
improvements on rare categories, surpassing all existing
state-of-the-art methods. The code is available at https:
//github.com/ModelTC/EOD.

1. Introduction
Long-tailed object detection is a challenging task receiving increasing attention today. In the long-tailed scenario,
data usually comes with a Zipfian distribution (e.g. LVIS
∗ Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Author.

frequent

frequent
common

rare

common

rare
background

background

two-stage det-head

one-stage det-head

ROIAlign

foreground
RPN

background

backbone

Two-stage Pipeline

backbone

One-stage Pipeline

Figure 1. Visualization of the training pipeline in one-stage detectors and two-stage detectors. Different shapes indicate different
categories, and their corresponding colors indicate the labels of
the classifier at different stages.

[11]) in which a few head classes contain plenty of instances
and dominate the training process. In contrast, a significant number of tail classes are instance-scarce thus perform
poorly. Common solutions to long-tailed object detection
are data resampling [6, 11, 35, 45, 47], decoupled training
[17, 25, 45], and loss reweighting [39, 40, 44]. Despite those
successes in alleviating the problem, almost all those detectors are developed based on two-stage approaches popularized by R-CNN [12, 36]. In practice, one-stage detectors
are more appropriate for a realistic scenario than two-stage
ones because they are computationally efficient and easy to
deploy. However, there is no relevant work in this area.
In contrast to two-stage methods that incorporate a re-

6990

