Learning based Multi-modality Image and Video Compression
Guo Lu1 , Tianxiong Zhong1 , Jing Geng1 , Qiang Hu2 , and Dong Xu3
1

Beijing Institute of Technology, {sdluguo, inkosizhong}@gmail.com, janegeng@bit.edu.cn
2
ShanghaiTech University, huqiang@shanghaitech.edu.cn
3
University of Sydney, dong.xu@sydney.edu.au
Abstract

Multi-modality (i.e., multi-sensor) data is widely used in
various vision tasks for more accurate or robust perception. However, the increased data modalities bring new
challenges for data storage and transmission. The existing data compression approaches usually adopt individual
codecs for each modality without considering the correlation between different modalities. This work proposes
a multi-modality compression framework for infrared and
visible image pairs by exploiting the cross-modality redundancy. Specifically, given the image in the reference modality (e.g., the infrared image), we use the channel-wise alignment module to produce the aligned features based on the
affine transform. Then the aligned feature is used as the
context information for compressing the image in the current modality (e.g., the visible image), and the corresponding affine coefficients are losslessly compressed at negligible cost. Furthermore, we introduce the Transformer-based
spatial alignment module to exploit the correlation between
the intermediate features in the decoding procedures for different modalities. Our framework is very flexible and easily extended for multi-modality video compression. Experimental results show our proposed framework outperforms
the traditional and learning-based single modality compression methods on the FLIR and KAIST datasets.

1. Introduction
In several practical vision applications (e.g., autonomous
driving), cameras from different modalities such as visible
or infrared imaging cameras are often jointly used for various computer vision tasks by exploiting the complementary characteristic. For example, the visible (RGB) cameras
can often provide continuous, high-resolution color images
but may not work well for extreme-low lighting scenarios,
which is precisely what infrared cameras can help. At the
same time, infrared cameras are easily disturbed by abnormal heat sources, but the drawback can be compensated by
using visible cameras. However, these multiple modalities
Jing Geng is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. The comparison between video compression, stereo
compression and multi-modality compression.
Our multimodality compression approach uses the cross-modality infrared
image to facilitate the compression of visible image.

visual analysis approaches [10, 13, 25, 26, 47, 48] will increase the storage and transmission costs as more images
from different modalities are transmitted to the decoder side
for visual analysis. Therefore, how to design an efficient
compression method for multi-modality visual data is a new
and challenging research problem.
In the past decades, a lot of traditional and learningbased compression methods [1,3,5,6,9,30,32,34,36–38,42]
have been proposed for image or video compression. However, most existing works focused on single-modality image
compression without considering the correlation between
different modalities. Due to the strong correlation between
the images from different modalities, we cannot use the
existing single-modality compression methods to fully exploit the compression redundancy. One of the most related
research topics is stereo image compression, where crossview redundancy is exploited by using various view alignment approaches. However, compared with the stereo images that share similar distribution, the intensity of different
modality images may be quite different (see Fig. 1). Therefore, the commonly used alignment techniques like blockbased motion/disparity estimation [19] or homograph transform [14] are not feasible enough for multi-modality compression. Moreover, considering that the multi-modality
data like infrared and visible image pairs represent the same
scene in different perspectives, the compression for pixelwise motion/disparity information from most existing estimation approaches will consume a large number of bits for

6083

