Single-Photon Structured Light
Varun Sundar † Sizhuo Ma † Aswin C. Sankaranarayanan ‡ Mohit Gupta †
†
University of Wisconsin-Madison ‡ Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
We present a novel structured light technique that uses
Single Photon Avalanche Diode (SPAD) arrays to enable
3D scanning at high-frame rates and low-light levels. This
technique, called “Single-Photon Structured Light”, works
by sensing binary images that indicates the presence or absence of photon arrivals during each exposure; the SPAD
array is used in conjunction with a high-speed binary projector, with both devices operated at speeds as high as
20 kHz. The binary images that we acquire are heavily influenced by photon noise and are easily corrupted by ambient
sources of light. To address this, we develop novel temporal sequences using error correction codes that are designed to be robust to short-range effects like projector and
camera defocus as well as resolution mismatch between the
two devices. Our lab prototype is capable of 3D imaging in
challenging scenarios involving objects with extremely low
albedo or undergoing fast motion, as well as scenes under
strong ambient illumination.

1. Introduction
Structured light (SL) 3D imaging systems have inherent
tradeoffs that balance the precision of the 3D scan against
its acquisition time. For instance, temporally-multiplexed
SL techniques [21, 22, 25] achieve high depth resolution
by projecting multiple patterns, thereby precluding highspeed capture. At the other extreme, SL based on spatiallymodulated patterns [27, 62] can facilitate single-shot scans,
but require assumptions of spatial-smoothness that invariably result in loss of detail.
The tradeoffs inherent to SL systems are exacerbated
when operating in challenging regimes with low signal-tonoise ratios (SNR) arising from either low-albedo objects,
dynamic scenes, or strong ambient illumination. In these
scenarios, using longer temporal codes can offer robustness
and precision, but at the cost of lowered acquisition speed.
One way to mitigate the loss in time resolution is to use
high-speed cameras and projectors. However, this approach
∗ This research was supported in part by the National Science Foun-

dation under the grants 1943149 and 1652569, and the UW-Madison CS
summer research award. We also thank Edoardo Charbon for access to the
SwissSPAD2 array used in this work.

is limited by large bandwidth requirements and, more fundamentally, the presence of read noise. Each image has a
constant amount of read noise, immaterial of the exposure
time; this can dominate the received signal as the exposure
times and, consequently, the image intensities are reduced.
This paper envisions a class of Single-Photon Structured Light systems that are based on single-photon detectors, such as Single Photon Avalanche Diodes (SPADs).
SPADs can be operated at very high speeds when detecting photons and not their time-of-arrivals. In this ‘photon detection’ mode, the measurements are binary-valued—
indicating whether or not a photon arrival occurred during
a given acquisition time. For instance, a recently developed
SPAD array [60] can capture ∼105 binary frames at 1/8-th
megapixel resolution. Our key observation is that the binary measurements, normally considered a limitation due to
limited information, are sufficient for a large family of SL
coding schemes [53] that are binary as well. Since SPADs
count photon arrivals, they are not corrupted by read noise.
Finally, the use of SPADs for SL finds a natural coupling in
high-speed projectors that use digital micromirror devices
(DMDs) for displaying binary patterns.
Coding and decoding for Single-Photon SL. Due to the
probabilistic nature of photon arrivals, the binary-valued
measurements captured by SPADs are prone to strong photon noise. For instance, in the presence of strong ambient
light, the SPAD could detect a photon even when the corresponding projector pixel is dark. Traditional SL coding
schemes are designed for regimes where the image measurements are not binary-valued, and hence are not suitable for Single-Photon SL. We formulate novel SL encoding
strategies using error-correction codes that enable robust decoding for Single-Photon SL even under large photon noise.
Beyond achieving robustness to photon noise, SL coding
schemes must account for various imaging phenomena such
as projector and camera defocus. Naı̈ve error-correcting
codes do not consider these practical effects, and thus cannot be used in a real-world SL system. We design a new
class of hierarchical codes using error correction and binary phase shifting that guarantee a minimum stripe width,
which provides robustness to such non-idealities. Finally,
we design a high-throughput decoding scheme for the proposed codes to enable real-time decoding of the measurements. Our implementation can decode a disparity map for

17865

