Learning Semantic Associations for Mirror Detection
Huankang Guan
Jiaying Lin
Rynson W.H. Lau*
City University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Mirrors generally lack a consistent visual appearance,
making mirror detection very challenging. Although recent
works that are based on exploiting contextual contrasts
and corresponding relations have achieved good results,
heavily relying on contextual contrasts and corresponding
relations to discover mirrors tend to fail in complex
real-world scenes, where a lot of objects, e.g., doorways,
may have similar features as mirrors. We observe that
humans tend to place mirrors in relation to certain objects
for specific functional purposes, e.g., a mirror above the
sink. Inspired by this observation, we propose a model to
exploit the semantic associations between the mirror and
its surrounding objects for a reliable mirror localization.
Our model first acquires class-specific knowledge of the
surrounding objects via a semantic side-path. It then uses
two novel modules to exploit semantic associations: 1)
an Associations Exploration (AE) Module to extract the
associations of the scene objects based on fully connected
graph models, and 2) a Quadruple-Graph (QG) Module
to facilitate the diffusion and aggregation of semantic
association knowledge using graph convolutions. Extensive
experiments show that our method outperforms the existing
methods and sets the new state-of-the-art on both PMD
dataset (f-measure: 0.844) and MSD dataset (f-measure:
0.889). Code is available at https : / / github .
com / guanhuankang / Learning - Semantic Associations-for-Mirror-Detection.

1. Introduction
Mirrors appear everywhere in our daily life. In general, they lack a consistent appearance, as their appearances
mainly depend on their surroundings. Due to this special
property, the presence of mirrors can affect many vision
tasks [7, 53]. They are also considered as a potential hazardous factor for computer vision tasks [49]. Hence, mirror
detection is important.
There are a few works that address the mirror detection
* Rynson W.H. Lau is the corresponding author, and he leads this
project.

RGB Input

MirrorNet [47] PMD-Net [24]

Ours

GT

Figure 1. Existing mirror detection methods based on learning
contextual contrasts [47] or corresponding relations [24] falsely
identify some distractors (e.g., the doorway in the 1st row and the
painting in the 2nd row) as mirrors, and miss the mirror (3rd row)
when the mirror is captured at an oblique angle to the camera along
with some occluding lights. In contrast, our method considers the
semantic associations between mirrors and their surrounding objects (e.g., the vanity table in the 1st row and the sink in the 2nd
and 3rd rows), yielding accurate results.

problem [24, 30, 47]. Yang et al. [47] propose a model
to learn contextual contrasts/discontinuities between mirror and non-mirror regions, while Lin et al. [24] propose
a model to learn object correspondences between mirror
and non-mirror regions. On the other hand, Mei et al. [30]
propose to learn depth discontinuities between mirror and
non-mirror regions in RGBD images. All these methods
are essentially based on learning a binary relationship between mirror and non-mirror regions. While they may be
effective in simple scenes, relying on learning a binary relationship between mirror and non-mirror regions can easily
fail in real-world scenes, in which there are many objects
(or distractors) that may possess similar properties, such as
doorways, windows, wardrobe doors and photo frames.
In this work, we observe that humans typically place mirrors in certain relationships with some specific objects for
functional purposes. For example, we usually put a mirror above the vanity table in the bedroom to help with the
morning makeup (the top image in Figure 1) or above a
sink in the washroom to allow us to check our look after
washing our faces or hands (the second and third images
in Figure 1). This observation aligns with studies in cognitive neuroscience [2, 3, 18, 32] that the surrounding objects

5941

