StyleMesh: Style Transfer for Indoor 3D Scene Reconstructions
Lukas Höllein1 Justin Johnson2 Matthias Nießner1
1
Technical University of Munich 2 University of Michigan

Figure 1. We perform style transfer on reconstructed 3D meshes by synthesizing stylized textures. We compute style transfer losses on
views of the scene and backpropagate gradients to the texture. Depth and surface normal data from the mesh enable 3D-aware stylization,
preventing artifacts that arise from standard 2D losses. Our stylized meshes can be rendered using the traditional graphics pipeline.

Abstract
We apply style transfer on mesh reconstructions of indoor scenes. This enables VR applications like experiencing 3D environments painted in the style of a favorite artist.
Style transfer typically operates on 2D images, making stylization of a mesh challenging. When optimized over a variety of poses, stylization patterns become stretched out and
inconsistent in size. On the other hand, model-based 3D
style transfer methods exist that allow stylization from a
sparse set of images, but they require a network at inference time. To this end, we optimize an explicit texture for
the reconstructed mesh of a scene and stylize it jointly from
all available input images. Our depth- and angle-aware optimization leverages surface normal and depth data of the
underlying mesh to create a uniform and consistent stylization for the whole scene. Our experiments show that our
method creates sharp and detailed results for the complete
scene without view-dependent artifacts. Through extensive
ablation studies, we show that the proposed 3D awareness
enables style transfer to be applied to the 3D domain of a
mesh. Our method 1 can be used to render a stylized mesh
in real-time with traditional rendering pipelines.

1. Introduction
Creating 3D content from RGB-D scans is a popular
topic in computer vision [1, 12, 29, 43, 44]. We tackle a
1 https://lukashoel.github.io/stylemesh/

novel use case in this area: stylization of a reconstructed
mesh with an explicit RGB texture. Neural Style Transfer (NST) shows great results for stylization of images or
videos, but stylization of 3D content like meshes has been
underexplored. We synthesize a texture for the mesh which
is a combination of observed RGB colors and a painting’s
artistic style. After stylization, one could explore the space
in VR and see it painted in the style of Van Gogh.
Our use case is similar to prior texture mapping methods [2,16,26,27,29,53,57] which construct a texture from a
set of posed RGB images, but we produce a stylized texture
rather than directly matching input images. This is difficult
since style transfer losses are typically defined on 2D image features [20], so NST does not immediately generalize
to 3D meshes. Recently, style transfer has been combined
with novel view synthesis to stylize arbitrary scenes with a
neural renderer from a sparse set of input images [7,25,35].
These model-based methods require a forward pass during
inference and cannot directly be applied to meshes. Kato et
al. [32] and Mordvintsev et al. [42] use differentiable rendering to bridge the gap between image style transfer and
texture mapping: backpropagating image losses to a texture
representation enables consistent mesh stylization.
However, applying these methods to room-scale geometry is challenging as the resulting stylization patterns are
noisy and can contain view-dependent stretch and size artifacts. For example, optimizing a surface from a small grazing angle creates patterns in the image plane for that pose.
Viewing the same surface from an orthogonal angle then

6198

