Tracking People by Predicting 3D Appearance, Location and Pose
Jathushan Rajasegaran, Georgios Pavlakos, Angjoo Kanazawa, Jitendra Malik
UC Berkeley

Abstract
We present an approach for tracking people in monocular videos by predicting their future 3D representations.
To achieve this, we first lift people to 3D from a single
frame in a robust manner. This lifting includes information about the 3D pose of the person, their location in
the 3D space, and the 3D appearance. As we track a
person, we collect 3D observations over time in a tracklet representation. Given the 3D nature of our observations, we build temporal models for each one of the previous attributes. We use these models to predict the future
state of the tracklet, including 3D appearance, 3D location, and 3D pose. For a future frame, we compute the
similarity between the predicted state of a tracklet and the
single frame observations in a probabilistic manner. Association is solved with simple Hungarian matching, and
the matches are used to update the respective tracklets. We
evaluate our approach on various benchmarks and report
state-of-the-art results. Code and models are available at:
https://brjathu.github.io/PHALP.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Tracking people by predicting and matching in 3D.
The top row shows our tracking results at three different frames.
The results are visualized by a colored head-mask for unique identities. The second and third rows show renderings of the 3D states
of the two people in their associated tracklets. The bottom row
shows the bottom-up detections in each image frame which, after
being lifted to 3D, will be matched with the 3D predictions of each
tracklet in the corresponding frame. Note how in the middle frame
of second row, the 3D representation of the person persists even
though they are occluded in the image. Readers are encouraged to
watch the videos at the project website.

When we watch a video, we can segment out individual people, cars, or other objects and track them over time.
The corresponding task in computer vision has been studied
for several decades now, with a fundamental choice being
whether to do the tracking in 2D in the image plane, or of
3D objects in the world. The former seems simpler because
it obviates the need for inferring 3D, but if we do take the
step of back-projecting from the image to the world, other
aspects such as dealing with occlusion become easier. In
the 3D world the tracked object doesn’t disappear, and even
young infants are aware of its persistence behind the occluder. In our recent work [35], we presented experimental
evidence that performance is better with 3D representations.
In this paper, we will take this as granted, and proceed to
develop a system in the 3D setting of the problem. While
our approach broadly applies to any object category where
parameterized 3D models are available and can be inferred
from images, we will limit ourselves in this paper to study-

ing people, the most important case in practice.
Once we have accepted the philosophy that we are tracking 3D objects in a 3D world, but from 2D images as raw
data, it is natural to adopt the vocabulary from control theory and estimation theory going back to the 1960s. We are
interested in the “state” of objects in 3D, but all we have
access to are “observations” which are RGB pixels in 2D.
In an online setting, we observe a person across multiple
time frames, and keep recursively updating our estimate
of the person’s state — their appearance, location in the
world, and pose (configuration of joint angles). Since we
have a dynamic model (a “tracklet”), we can also predict
states at future times. When the next image frame comes in,
we detect the people in it, lift them to 3D, and in that setting solve the association problem between these bottomup detections and the top-down predictions of the different
tracklets for this frame. Once the observations have been
associated with the tracklets, the state of each person is re-

2740

