DyRep: Bootstrapping Training with Dynamic Re-parameterization
Tao Huang1,2 Shan You1 * Bohan Zhang3
Yuxuan Du2 Fei Wang4 Chen Qian1 Chang Xu2
SenseTime Research 2 School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney
3
College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Massachusetts Amherst
4
University of Science and Technology of China

Abstract

1. Introduction
The advent of automatic feature engineering fuels deep
convolution neural networks (CNNs) to reach the remarkable success in a plethora of computer vision tasks, such as
image classification [8,9,29,34], object detection [5,16,19],
and semantic segmentation [7, 33]. In the path of pursuing better performance than that of early prototypes such
as VGG [20] and ResNet [8], current deep learning models [10, 15, 29] generally are embodied with billions of
* Correspondence to: Shan You <youshan@sensetime.com>.

12

Training cost (GPU days)

Structural re-parameterization (Rep) methods achieve
noticeable improvements on simple VGG-style networks.
Despite the prevalence, current Rep methods simply reparameterize all operations into an augmented network, including those that rarely contribute to the model’s performance. As such, the price to pay is an expensive computational overhead to manipulate these unnecessary behaviors. To eliminate the above caveats, we aim to bootstrap the training with minimal cost by devising a dynamic re-parameterization (DyRep) method, which encodes
Rep technique into the training process that dynamically
evolves the network structures. Concretely, our proposal
adaptively finds the operations which contribute most to
the loss in the network, and applies Rep to enhance their
representational capacity. Besides, to suppress the noisy
and redundant operations introduced by Rep, we devise
a de-parameterization technique for a more compact reparameterization. With this regard, DyRep is more efficient
than Rep since it smoothly evolves the given network instead
of constructing an over-parameterized network. Experimental results demonstrate our effectiveness, e.g., DyRep
improves the accuracy of ResNet-18 by 2.04% on ImageNet
and reduces 22% runtime over the baseline. Code is available at: https://github.com/hunto/DyRep.

14

78
origin cost
DBB cost
DyRep cost

origin ACC
DBB ACC
DyRep ACC

76
10
8

74

6
72

4
2
0

ACC (%)

1

70
ResNet-18

ResNet-34

ResNet-50

Figure 1. Accuracy and training cost of ResNet on ImageNet
dataset using origin, DBB, and our DyRep models. Our DyRep
obtains the highest accuracies yet has much smaller training cost
compared to DBB.

parameters and paramount well-tailored architectures and
operations (e.g., channel-wise attention in SENet [10] and
branch-concatenation in Inception [23]). From this perspective, we may encounter a dilemma in the sense that
a learning model with good performance should be heavy
and computationally intensive, which is extremely hard to
deploy and has a high inference time. To this end, a critical question is: how to enhance the ability of neural networks without incurring expensive computational overhead
and high inference complexity?
Structural re-parameterization technique (Rep) and its
variants [2, 3, 32], which construct an augmented model in
training and transform it back to the original model in inference, have emerged as a leading strategy to address the
above issue. Concretely, these methods enhance the representational capacities of models by expanding the original
convolution operations with multiple branches in training,
then fusing them into one convolution for efficient inference without accuracy drop. Representative examples include RepVGG [3] and DBB [2]. The former enhances
VGG-style networks by expanding the 3 × 3 Conv to an
accumulation of three branches (i.e., 3 × 3 Conv, 1 × 1
Conv, and residual connection) in the training process and
re-parameterizing it back to the original 3 × 3 Conv in the
inference time. The latter improves CNNs by enriching

588

