XMP-Font: Self-Supervised Cross-Modality Pre-training for
Few-Shot Font Generation
Wei Liu*

Fangyue Liu*
Fei Ding
Qian He
ByteDance Ltd, Beijing, China

liujikun63@gmail.com

liufangyue99@hotmail.com
heqian@bytedance.com

Zili Yi†

dingfei.212@bytedance.com

yizili14@gmail.com

Figure 1. (a) Illustrations of different Chinese font styles. Typically, a font style involves unique morphological structures of a character at
multiple scales. For example, stroke-level styles involve stroke-level features such as weight, hollowness and serif-ness. Component-level
styles implies how strokes are oriented and joined to form a component. Character-level styles engage character-level features including
the component layout, inter-component spacing and “connected-stroke”. (b) Exemplar few-shot font generation results of our method.
Please note that each row presents a disparate font style by using only one glyph as reference. In addition, our model generates faithful and
consistent results regardless of the type of the source font or the reference variant.

Abstract
Generating a new font library is a very labor-intensive
and time-consuming job for glyph-rich scripts. Few-shot
font generation is thus required, as it requires only a few
glyph references without fine-tuning during test. Existing
methods follow the style-content disentanglement paradigm
and expect novel fonts to be produced by combining the style
codes of the reference glyphs and the content representations of the source. However, these few-shot font generation methods either fail to capture content-independent style
representations, or employ localized component-wise style
representations, which is insufficient to model many Chinese font styles that involve hyper-component features such
as inter-component spacing and “connected-stroke”. To resolve these drawbacks and make the style representations
more reliable, we propose a self-supervised cross-modality
pre-training strategy and a cross-modality transformerbased encoder that is conditioned jointly on the glyph image
* These authors contributed equally and should be considered co-first
authors.
† Corresponding author.

and the corresponding stroke labels. The cross-modality
encoder is pre-trained in a self-supervised manner to allow effective capture of cross- and intra-modality correlations, which facilitates the content-style disentanglement
and modeling style representations of all scales (strokelevel, component-level and character-level). The pretrained encoder is then applied to the downstream font generation task without fine-tuning. Experimental comparisons
of our method with state-of-the-art methods demonstrate
our method successfully transfers styles of all scales. In
addition, it only requires one reference glyph and achieves
the lowest rate of bad cases in the few-shot font generation
task (28% lower than the second best).

1. Introduction
The few-shot font generation task (FFG) aims to produce
a new font library using only a few glyphs as reference,
without additional fine-tuning of the model at the testing
stage. FFG is especially a desirable task when designing
a new font library for glyph-rich scripts such as Chinese

7905

