Scene Representation Transformer:
Geometry-Free Novel View Synthesis Through Set-Latent Scene Representations
Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi
Henning Meyer
Etienne Pot
Urs Bergmann
Klaus Greff
Noha Radwan
Suhani Vora
Mario Lučić
Daniel Duckworth
Alexey Dosovitskiy⇤
Jakob Uszkoreit⇤
Thomas Funkhouser
Andrea Tagliasacchi‡⇤
Google Research

‡

Simon Fraser University

Abstract
A classical problem in computer vision is to infer a 3D
scene representation from few images that can be used to
render novel views at interactive rates. Previous work focuses on reconstructing pre-defined 3D representations, e.g.
textured meshes, or implicit representations, e.g. radiance
fields, and often requires input images with precise camera
poses and long processing times for each novel scene.
In this work, we propose the Scene Representation Transformer (SRT), a method which processes posed or unposed
RGB images of a new area, infers a “set-latent scene representation”, and synthesises novel views, all in a single
feed-forward pass. To calculate the scene representation, we
propose a generalization of the Vision Transformer to sets of
images, enabling global information integration, and hence
3D reasoning. An efficient decoder transformer parameterizes the light field by attending into the scene representation
to render novel views. Learning is supervised end-to-end by
minimizing a novel-view reconstruction error.
We show that this method outperforms recent baselines in
terms of PSNR and speed on synthetic datasets, including a
new dataset created for the paper. Further, we demonstrate
that SRT scales to support interactive visualization and semantic segmentation of real-world outdoor environments
using Street View imagery.

⇤ Work done while at Google.

Contributions: MS: original idea & conceptualization, main implementation, experiments, writing, organization, lead; HM: idea conceptualization,
implementation, experiments, writing; EP: implementation, experiments,
writing; UB: idea conceptualization, implementation, experiments, writing; KG: dataset support, advising; NR: project-independent code; SV:
project-independent code; ML: advising, writing; DD: advising, projectindependent code; AD: advising; JU: advising; TF: datasets, advising,
writing; AT: advising, writing.
Correspondence: srt@msajjadi.com & tutmann@google.com
Project website: srt-paper.github.io

Figure 1. Model overview – SRT encodes a collection of images
into the scene representation: a set of latent features. Novel views
are rendered in real-time by attending into the latent representation
with light field rays, see Fig. 2 for details.

1. Introduction
The goal of our work is interactive novel view synthesis:
given few RGB images of a previously unseen scene, we
synthesize novel views of the same scene at interactive rates
and without expensive per-scene processing. Such a system
can be useful for virtual exploration of urban spaces [26],
as well as other mapping, visualization, and AR/VR applications [27]. The main challenge here is to infer a scene
representation that encodes enough 3D information to render
novel views with correct parallax and occlusions.
Traditional methods build explicit 3D representations,
such as colored point clouds [1], meshes [31], voxels [36],
octrees [42], and multi-plane images [52]. These representations enable interactive rendering, but they usually require
expensive and fragile reconstruction processes.
More recent work has investigated representing scenes
with purely implicit representations [39]. Notably, NeRF
represents the scene as a 3D volume parameterized by an
MLP [25], and has been demonstrated to scale to challenging real-world settings [23]. However, it typically requires
hundreds of MLP evaluations for the volumetric rendering
of each ray, relies on accurate camera poses, and requires an
expensive training procedure to onboard new scenes, as no
parameters are shared across different scenes.

6229

