Represent, Compare, and Learn: A Similarity-Aware Framework for
Class-Agnostic Counting
Min Shi
Hao Lu
Chen Feng
Chengxin Liu
Zhiguo Cao*
Key Laboratory of Image Processing and Intelligent Control, Ministry of Education
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
{min shi, hlu, chen feng, cx liu, zgcao}@hust.edu.cn
Exemplar

Abstract
Class-agnostic counting (CAC) aims to count all instances in a query image given few exemplars. A standard pipeline is to extract visual features from exemplars
and match them with query images to infer object counts.
Two essential components in this pipeline are feature representation and similarity metric. Existing methods either
adopt a pretrained network to represent features or learn a
new one, while applying a naive similarity metric with fixed
inner product. We find this paradigm leads to noisy similarity matching and hence harms counting performance. In
this work, we propose a similarity-aware CAC framework
that jointly learns representation and similarity metric. We
first instantiate our framework with a naive baseline called
Bilinear Matching Network (BMNet), whose key component
is a learnable bilinear similarity metric. To further embody
the core of our framework, we extend BMNet to BMNet+
that models similarity from three aspects: 1) representing
the instances via their self-similarity to enhance feature robustness against intra-class variations; 2) comparing the
similarity dynamically to focus on the key patterns of each
exemplar; 3) learning from a supervision signal to impose
explicit constraints on matching results. Extensive experiments on a recent CAC dataset FSC147 show that our
models significantly outperform state-of-the-art CAC approaches. In addition, we also validate the cross-dataset
generality of BMNet and BMNet+ on a car counting dataset
CARPK. Code is at tiny.one/BMNet

1. Introduction
Object counting aims to infer the number of objects from
an image. Most existing methods focus on a specific category, e.g., crowd [42], animal [2], or car [26], while requiring numerous training data to learn a good model. In contrast, given only one exemplar of a novel category, e.g., a
* Corresponding author

Query Image

FamNet

BMNet+

Figure 1. Visualizations of intermediate similarity maps in
class-agnostic counting. Compared with the state-of-the-art FamNet [29], our model (BMNet+) generates high-fidelity results.

car, even a child can easily capture its visual properties and
count cars in new scenes. Recently, CAC (Class Agnostic
Counting) [21,29,40], which counts objects of arbitrary categories given only few exemplars, is proposed to reduce the
reliance on training data. CAC points out a promising direction for object counting, i.e., from learning to count objects
to learning the way to count.
Generally, existing CAC methods [21, 29, 40] work in an
extract-and-match pipeline. They first extract visual features from exemplars and match these features with those
of query images. Similarity matching results are then used
as intermediate representations to infer object counts. Intuitively, two factors play critical roles: feature representation and similarity metric. Existing methods either use a
learnable [21, 40] or a fixed feature extractor [29], but apply a similarity metric with some pre-defined rules, e.g., in-

9529

