Mix and Localize: Localizing Sound Sources in Mixtures
Xixi Hu1,2*

Ziyang Chen1*

University of Michigan1

Andrew Owens1

The University of Texas at Austin2

Sampl

Abstract
We present a method for simultaneously localizing multiple sound sources within a visual scene. This task requires a
model to both group a sound mixture into individual sources,
and to associate them with a visual signal. Our method
jointly solves both tasks at once, using a formulation inspired
by the contrastive random walk of Jabri et al. We create a
graph in which images and separated sounds correspond
to nodes, and train a random walker to transition between
nodes from different modalities with high return probability. The transition probabilities for this walk are determined
by an audio-visual similarity metric that is learned by our
model. We show through experiments with musical instruments and human speech that our model can successfully localize multiple sounds, outperforming other self-supervised
methods.

1. Introduction
Humans have the remarkable ability to localize many
sounds at once [20]. Existing audio-visual sound localization methods, by contrast, are generally trained with the
assumption that only a single sound source is present at a
time, and largely lack mechanisms for grouping the contents
of a scene into multiple audio-visual events.
This problem is often addressed through contrastive learning [2–4, 32, 39]. These methods generally produce a single
embedding for the audio, representing the sound source,
and an embedding for each image patch, representing the
sound’s possible locations. They then learn cross-modal
correspondences, such that image patches and sounds that
co-occur within the same scene are brought close together,
and pairings that do not co-occur are pulled apart. Extending
this approach to multiple sound sources seemingly requires
solving two different problems: separating the sources from
a sound mixture, and localizing them within an image.
We propose a simple model that jointly addresses both
of these problems. Our model uses cycle consistency to
group a scene into sound sources, inspired by the contrastive
* Indicates equal contribution.

Image and sound mixture

Localized sounds

Figure 1. Cycle-consistent multi-source localization. Our model
jointly learns to separate a sound mixture into sound sources, and
to localize these sources within an image. To do this, we use a
self-supervised grouping method based on cycle-consistent random
walks. We show sound source localization results from our model.

random walk [25]. It produces multiple embedding vectors
for a sound mixture, each representing a different sound
source, and an audio-visual similarity metric that associates
them with their corresponding image content. This similarity
metric defines the transition probabilities for a random walk
on a graph whose nodes correspond to images and predicted
sound sources. Our model performs a random walk that
transitions from the audio to images, and then back. We
learn a similarity metric that maximizes the probability of
cycle-consistency (i.e., return probability) for the walk. After
training, we create an attention map between an image and
each sound source by estimating the similarity score between
the audio and visual embeddings.
Obtaining a cycle-consistent walk requires extracting
sound sources from the mixture, and associating each one
with distinct image content. Consequently, this formulation has several advantages over other self-supervised audiovisual localization methods. It separates sounds from a mixture, and explicitly groups the scene into discrete soundmaking objects. The model is also simple, and can be implemented as a straightforward extension of previous contrastive
methods.
We evaluate our model on synthetic and real-world sound
mixtures containing musical instruments [10, 53] and human
speakers [13]. We find that, in comparison to other self-

10483

