G LASS: Geometric Latent Augmentation for Shape Spaces
Sanjeev Muralikrishnan1 , Siddhartha Chaudhuri2,3 , Noam Aigerman2 , Vladimir G. Kim2 , Matthew
Fisher2 , and Niloy J. Mitra1,2
1

University College London, 2 Adobe Research, 3 IIT Bombay

Figure 1. Starting from just 10 shapes (larger), our method iteratively augments the collection by alternating between training a VAE, and
exploring random perturbations in its low-dimensional latent space guided by a purely geometric deformation energy. Here we show the
1000 most diverse shapes from the first 5K discovered by our method, positioned according to their latent embedding (projected to 2D via
t-SNE). Shapes are colored according to the initial landmark they trace back to, with shapes added in later iterations lighter (greyer) in
color. The augmentation effectively fills in the space between the sparse initial landmarks, and even extrapolates beyond them. It manages
to also interpolate global rotations for samples near the back-facing exemplar, and yields shapes with larger feet-strides (far left), and
crossed arms or feet (front, left and center) even though there are no such initial landmarks.

Abstract
We investigate the problem of training generative models on very sparse collections of 3D models. Particularly,
instead of using difficult-to-obtain large sets of 3D models,
we demonstrate that geometrically-motivated energy functions can be used to effectively augment and boost only a
sparse collection of example (training) models. Technically,
we analyze the Hessian of the as-rigid-as-possible (ARAP)
energy to adaptively sample from and project to the underlying (local) shape space, and use the augmented dataset
to train a variational autoencoder (VAE). We iterate the
process, of building latent spaces of VAE and augmenting
the associated dataset, to progressively reveal a richer and
more expressive generative space for creating geometrically
and semantically valid samples. We evaluate our method
against a set of strong baselines, provide ablation studies,
and demonstrate application towards establishing shape
correspondences. G LASS produces multiple interesting and
meaningful shape variations even when starting from as few
as 3-10 training shapes. Our code is available at https:
//sanjeevmk.github.io/glass_webpage/.

1. Introduction
This paper is concerned with generating plausible deformations of a 3D shape from a very sparse set of examples.
Fig. 1 shows an input of 10 human 3D meshes in different poses, and the additional deformations generated by our
method. 3D deformations have a strong semantic element
to them – e.g., a human’s limbs should only bend at the
joints, and then, under normal circumstances, not beyond
certain angular ranges. Arguably, this can only be deduced
in general via learning by example from a dataset.
Unfortunately, in contrast to 2D images, the 3D domain
poses several challenges for data-driven frameworks. Probably the most significant one is that data acquisition is complex and tedious, making datasets both scarcer and sparser.
Given this data paucity, we tackle the challenge of generating additional meaningful deformations from a given
(very) sparse set of landmark deformations. Our method
meaningfully augments the sparse sets to create larger
datasets that, in turn, can be leveraged by other techniques
that cannot operate on sparse datasets.
Producing plausible deformations from a few landmarks
is difficult. Linearly interpolating the vertices of two land-

18552

