Unsupervised Homography Estimation with Coplanarity-Aware GAN
Mingbo Hong1,2 * Yuhang Lu1,3∗
1
Megvii Technology
4
Beijing Jiaotong University

Nianjin Ye1 Chunyu Lin4 Qijun Zhao2† Shuaicheng Liu5,1†
2
Sichuan University 3 Univesity of South Carolina
5
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China

Abstract
Estimating homography from an image pair is a fundamental problem in image alignment. Unsupervised learning methods have received increasing attention in this field
due to their promising performance and label-free training. However, existing methods do not explicitly consider
the problem of plane-induced parallax, which will make
the predicted homography compromised on multiple planes.
In this work, we propose a novel method HomoGAN to
guide unsupervised homography estimation to focus on the
dominant plane. First, a multi-scale transformer network
is designed to predict homography from the feature pyramids of input images in a coarse-to-fine fashion. Moreover, we propose an unsupervised GAN to impose coplanarity constraint on the predicted homography, which is realized by using a generator to predict a mask of aligned
regions, and then a discriminator to check if two masked
feature maps are induced by a single homography. To validate the effectiveness of HomoGAN and its components,
we conduct extensive experiments on a large-scale dataset,
and results show that our matching error is 22% lower than
the previous SOTA method. Code is available at https:
//github.com/megvii-research/HomoGAN

1. Introduction
Homography estimation is a fundamental computer vision problem that plays an important role in a wide range of
applications, such as image/video stitching [14, 37], camera
calibration [40], HDR imaging [12] and SLAM [24, 41]. It
is defined as the estimation of the projective transformation
between two views on the same plane in 3D space [28]. Traditional methods typically address this problem by following a pipeline of feature extraction [2, 22, 26], correspondence matching, and solving direct linear transform [15]
with outlier rejection [10]. But these methods often suffer from the lack of discriminative keypoints when dealing
with textureless or blurry images.
Recently, unsupervised learning methods have gained
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors.

(a) Input image pair

(b) Predicted plane mask

(c) Result w/o mask (error=0.577) (d) Result w/ mask (error=0.353)

Figure 1. Predicting homography for images with a multi-plane
scene will lead to virtual parallax. We propose an unsupervised
homography estimation method that enforces the model to focus
on the dominant plane by leveraging coplanarity constraint, thus
significantly reducing the matching error. (c) and (d) are generated
by superimposing the warped source image on the target image.

popularity in homography estimation [8, 25, 28, 35, 39].
These methods directly predict the homography from a pair
of source and target images using a neural network, of
which an important optimization objective is to minimize
the distance from the warped source image to the target image. They do not rely on keypoints, and could perform better than traditional methods in textureless scenarios. However, when there exist multiple planes in the scene, optimizing over the entire image will lead to a compromised result,
i.e., the predicted homography is averaged on all planes and
not accurate on the dominant plane, as shown in Fig. 1. Note
that the planes of interest are not limited to rigid planes such
as grounds, buildings, and walls, but also include planes that
can be approximately induced by a homography, such as
mountains in the distance. Some existing methods propose
to remove large foregrounds or moving objects from the input images by predicting a mask [18, 39]. But their masks
are implicitly optimized as a side product of homography
estimation and lack explicit guidance, thus cannot address
the plane-induced parallax.
In this work, we introduce an unsupervised approach to
empower homography estimators to focus on a dominant

17663

