Non-Probability Sampling Network for Stochastic Human Trajectory Prediction
Inhwan Bae, Jin-Hwi Park and Hae-Gon Jeon*
AI Graduate School, GIST, South Korea
{inhwanbae, jinhwipark}@gm.gist.ac.kr, haegonj@gist.ac.kr

Abstract
Capturing multimodal natures is essential for stochastic
pedestrian trajectory prediction, to infer a finite set of future
trajectories. The inferred trajectories are based on observation paths and the latent vectors of potential decisions
of pedestrians in the inference step. However, stochastic
approaches provide varying results for the same data and
parameter settings, due to the random sampling of the latent
vector. In this paper, we analyze the problem by reconstructing and comparing probabilistic distributions from prediction samples and socially-acceptable paths, respectively.
Through this analysis, we observe that the inferences of all
stochastic models are biased toward the random sampling,
and fail to generate a set of realistic paths from finite samples.
The problem cannot be resolved unless an infinite number of
samples is available, which is infeasible in practice. We introduce that the Quasi-Monte Carlo (QMC) method, ensuring
uniform coverage on the sampling space, as an alternative
to the conventional random sampling. With the same finite
number of samples, the QMC improves all the multimodal
prediction results. We take an additional step ahead by incorporating a learnable sampling network into the existing
networks for trajectory prediction. For this purpose, we propose the Non-Probability Sampling Network (NPSN), a very
small network (∼5K parameters) that generates purposive
sample sequences using the past paths of pedestrians and
their social interactions. Extensive experiments confirm that
NPSN can significantly improve both the prediction accuracy
(up to 60%) and reliability of the public pedestrian trajectory prediction benchmark. Code is publicly available at
https://github.com/inhwanbae/NPSN .

1. Introduction
The goal of predicting pedestrian trajectories is to infer
socially-acceptable paths based on previous steps while considering the social norms of other moving agents. Many
earlier works [15, 39, 44, 59] on human trajectory prediction are based on deterministic approaches which yield the
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. An illustration of a probability distribution of stochastic
trajectory prediction and selected paths from each sampling method.
While the trajectories from the random sampling are biased in that
they do not consider space of all possible distributions, our NPSN
purposively generates the accurate route, turning to SHOP, even
with its low probability.

most likely single path. One of the earliest works in [15]
models a social force using attractive and repulsive forces
between pedestrians. Since then, motion time-series and
agent interactions have been applied to trajectory forecasting. With the development of recurrent neural networks
(RNNs), pioneering works such as, Social-LSTM [1] and
Social-Attention [56], have adopted a social pooling and
attention mechanisms between spatial neighbors. These approaches have become baseline models in areas such as spatial relation aggregation [13, 17, 40, 48, 50, 53] and temporal
future prediction [23, 35, 36, 52, 63, 64].
Recently, generative models, which infer the distribution
of potential future trajectories, are likely to inspire a major
paradigm shift away from the single best prediction methods [6,10,13,17,18,22,23,26,27,30–32,35,40,47–54,61,65].
The generative models represent all possible paths, such that
pedestrians may go straight, turn left/right at an intersection
or take a roundabout way to avoid obstacles. To efficiently
establish this multi-modality, a stochastic process is introduced to the trajectory prediction [13], which models the
inferred uncertainty of pedestrians’ movements in every time
frame. Stochastic trajectory prediction models start by generating a random hypothesis. Due to the non-deterministic
nature of random sampling, the quality of the hypotheses
depends on the number of samples. Ideally, an infinite number of hypotheses would be able to characterize all possible
movements of pedestrians, but this is infeasible. In prac-

6477

