Lifelong Graph Learning
Chen Wang†

Yuheng Qiu†

Dasong Gao†

Sebastian Scherer†

chenwang@dr.com

yuhengq@andrew.cmu.edu

dasongg@andrew.cmu.edu

basti@cmu.edu

†

The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNN) are powerful models for
many graph-structured tasks. Existing models often assume
that the complete structure of the graph is available during training. In practice, however, graph-structured data
is usually formed in a streaming fashion so that learning
a graph continuously is often necessary. In this paper, we
bridge GNN and lifelong learning by converting a continual
graph learning problem to a regular graph learning problem so GNN can inherit the lifelong learning techniques
developed for convolutional neural networks (CNN). We
propose a new topology, the feature graph, which takes
features as new nodes and turns nodes into independent
graphs. This successfully converts the original problem of
node classification to graph classification. In the experiments, we demonstrate the efficiency and effectiveness of
feature graph networks (FGN) by continuously learning a
sequence of classical graph datasets. We also show that
FGN achieves superior performance in two applications, i.e.,
lifelong human action recognition with wearable devices
and feature matching. To the best of our knowledge, FGN is
the first method to bridge graph learning and lifelong learning via a novel graph topology. Source code is available at
https://github.com/wang-chen/LGL.

1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNN) have received increasing attention and proved useful for many tasks with graphstructured data, such as citation, social, and protein networks
[51]. However, graph data is sometimes formed in a streaming fashion and real-world datasets are continuously evolving
over time. Thus, learning a streaming graph is expected in
many cases [45]. For example, in a social network, the number of users often grows over time and we expect that the
model can learn continually with new users. In this paper,
we extend graph neural networks to lifelong learning, which
is also known as continual or incremental learning [26].

(a) Regular graph G.

(b) Feature graph G F .

Figure 1. We introduce feature graph network (FGN) for lifelong
graph learning. A feature graph takes the features as nodes and
turns nodes into graphs, resulting in a graph predictor instead of
the node predictor. This makes the lifelong learning techniques
for CNN applicable to GNN, as the new nodes in a regular graph
become individual training samples. Take the node a with label za
in the regular graph G as an example, its features xa = [1, 0, 0, 1]
are nodes {a1 , a2 , a3 , a4 } in feature graph GaF . The feature adjacency is established via feature cross-correlation between a and its
neighbors N (a) = {a, b, c, d, e} to model feature “interaction.”

Lifelong learning often suffers from “catastrophic forgetting” if the models are simply updated with new samples [34]. Although some strategies have been developed
to alleviate the forgetting problem for convolutional neural
networks (CNN), it is still difficult to directly apply them
to graph networks. This is because in the lifelong learning
setting, the graph size can increase over time and we have
to drop old data to save memory for learning new knowledge. However, the existing graph model cannot directly
overcome this difficulty. For example, graph convolutional
networks (GCN) require the entire graph for training [20].
SAINT [57] requires pre-processing for the entire dataset.
Sampling strategies [7, 13, 57] easily forget old knowledge
when learning new knowledge.
Recall that regular CNNs are trained in a mini-batch manner where the model can take samples as independent inputs
[23]. Our question is: can we convert a graph task into a
traditional CNN-like classification problem, so that (I) nodes
can be predicted independently and (II) the lifelong learning
techniques developed for CNN can be easily adopted for

13719

