Adiabatic Quantum Computing for Multi Object Tracking
Jan-Nico Zaech1

Alexander Liniger1 Martin Danelljan1 Dengxin Dai1,2 Luc Van Gool1,3
1
Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zurich, Switzerland,
2
MPI for Informatics, Saarbrucken, Germany, 3 KU Leuven, Belgium

{zaechj,alex.liniger,martin.denelljan,dai,vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) is most often approached
in the tracking-by-detection paradigm, where object detections are associated through time. The association step naturally leads to discrete optimization problems. As these
optimization problems are often NP-hard, they can only
be solved exactly for small instances on current hardware. Adiabatic quantum computing (AQC) offers a solution for this, as it has the potential to provide a considerable speedup on a range of NP-hard optimization problems in the near future. However, current MOT formulations
are unsuitable for quantum computing due to their scaling
properties. In this work, we therefore propose the first MOT
formulation designed to be solved with AQC. We employ an
Ising model that represents the quantum mechanical system implemented on the AQC. We show that our approach
is competitive compared with state-of-the-art optimizationbased approaches, even when using of-the-shelf integer programming solvers. Finally, we demonstrate that our MOT
problem is already solvable on the current generation of
real quantum computers for small examples, and analyze
the properties of the measured solutions.

1. Introduction
Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) is a task in computer
vision that requires solving NP-hard assignment problems [29,30,50]. To make this feasible, the community proposed a range of different approaches: work on the problem
formulation using domain knowledge helps to make it an
easier to solve problem [29,50], approximate solvers extend
the feasible problem size [30], and the combination of deep
learning with simple heuristics can be seen as a data-driven
approach to the problem [8, 12]. Nevertheless, integer assignment problems remain hard optimization tasks for any
available solver. With the recent progress in quantum computing, a new way of solving such optimization problems
becomes feasible in the near future [1, 36, 51].
Instead of iteratively exploring possible solutions, e.g.

Figure 1. The proposed approach to MOT states the assignment
problem between detections and a set of tracks as a quadratic unconstrained binary optimization task. We then represent the optimization problem as a quantum mechanical system that can be
implemented on an AQC. Via quantum annealing, a minimum energy state is found that represent the best assignment.

via branch and bound, the problem is mapped to a quantum mechanical system, whose energy is equivalent to the
cost of the optimization problem. Therefore, if it is possible to measure the lowest energy state of the system, a solution to the corresponding optimization problem is found.
This is done with an adiabatic quantum computer (AQC),
which implements a quantum mechanical system made
from qubits and can be described by the Ising model [31].
Using this approach, a quantum speedup, which further

8811

