Scribble-Supervised LiDAR Semantic Segmentation
Ozan Unal1
Dengxin Dai1,2
Luc Van Gool1,3
1
ETH Zurich, 2 MPI for Informatics, 3 KU Leuven
{ozan.unal, dai, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
Densely annotating LiDAR point clouds remains too expensive and time-consuming to keep up with the ever growing volume of data. While current literature focuses on
fully-supervised performance, developing efficient methods
that take advantage of realistic weak supervision have yet
to be explored. In this paper, we propose using scribbles
to annotate LiDAR point clouds and release ScribbleKITTI,
the first scribble-annotated dataset for LiDAR semantic segmentation. Furthermore, we present a pipeline to reduce
the performance gap that arises when using such weak
annotations. Our pipeline comprises of three stand-alone
contributions that can be combined with any LiDAR semantic segmentation model to achieve up to 95.7% of the
fully-supervised performance while using only 8% labeled
points. Our scribble annotations and code are available at
github.com/ouenal/scribblekitti.

1. Introduction
With the increase of LiDAR’s popularity on autonomous
vehicles, data acquisition has significantly ramped up.
However, it is very hard to keep pace with the volume of
data, as the dense data annotation process is very expensive
and time-consuming for large scale datasets, especially in
3D where the navigation of the annotation tool is not trivial.
Even with powerful annotation tools [5] that allow labeling
of superimposed LiDAR frames, a single 100m by 100m tile
can take up to 4.5 hours for an experienced annotator [5].
In stark contrast to the 2D cases [1,14,24,31], current efforts in 3D semantic segmentation mainly focus on designing networks for densely annotated data (e.g. [41,45,57]), as
opposed to developing efficient methods for creating more
labels or learning from cheap/weak supervision. It is clear
that only by doing the latter, the scaling of 3D semantic segmentation can keep up with the growth of applications and
data volume. In this paper, we present a method for this
very purpose, by firstly introducing a new annotation strategy and later developing a pipeline to directly exploit such
annotations.

Figure 1. Example of scribble-annotated LiDAR point cloud
scenes of a single frame (top) and superimposed frames (bottom).
Compared are the proposed ScribbleKITTI (left) with the fully labeled counterpart from SemanticKITTI [5] (right).

Using scribbles as annotations has proven to be a popular and effective method for 2D semantic segmentation [7,
22, 24]. The weak annotation method allows annotators to
simply mark object centers, avoiding the time consuming
task of determining class boundaries.
We adopt this idea for LiDAR point clouds to supervise
3D semantic segmentation. As opposed to 2D images, 3D
point clouds preserve the metric space and therefore things
and stuff follow highly geometric structures. To accompany
this, we propose using the more geometric line-scribble to
annotate LiDAR point clouds. Compared to free-formed
scribbles, annotators only need to determine the start and
end points of a line annotation. This allows faster labeling
of classes that span large distances (e.g. roads, buildings,
fences), while also providing as sufficient information for
smaller object classes (e.g. cars, trucks), as short lines and
free-formed scribbles become less distinguishable.
We provide scribble-annotations for the train-split of SemanticKITTI [5] for 19 classes. The resulting scribbleannotated data, which we call ScribbleKITTI, contains 189
million labeled points corresponding to 8.06% of the total

2697

