Feature Statistics Mixing Regularization for Generative Adversarial Networks
Junho Kim1
1

Yunjey Choi1

NAVER AI Lab

Abstract
In generative adversarial networks, improving discriminators is one of the key components for generation performance. As image classifiers are biased toward texture and
debiasing improves accuracy, we investigate 1) if the discriminators are biased, and 2) if debiasing the discriminators will improve generation performance. Indeed, we find
empirical evidence that the discriminators are sensitive to
the style (e.g., texture and color) of images. As a remedy,
we propose feature statistics mixing regularization (FSMR)
that encourages the discriminator’s prediction to be invariant to the styles of input images. Specifically, we generate
a mixed feature of an original and a reference image in
the discriminator’s feature space and we apply regularization so that the prediction for the mixed feature is consistent with the prediction for the original image. We conduct
extensive experiments to demonstrate that our regularization leads to reduced sensitivity to style and consistently
improves the performance of various GAN architectures
on nine datasets. In addition, adding FSMR to recentlyproposed augmentation-based GAN methods further improves image quality. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/naver-ai/FSMR.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [8] have
achieved significant development over the past several
years, enabling many computer vision and graphics applications [4, 5, 13, 21, 22, 24, 29, 40]. On top of the carefully designed architectures [3, 17, 19, 20, 28, 30, 36], GANspecific data augmentation and regularization techniques
have been keys for improvements. Regularization techniques [9,14–16,26,27,37,39] stabilize the training dynamics by penalizing steep changes in the discriminator’s output
within a local region of the input. On the other hand, data
augmentation techniques [18, 38] prevent the discriminator
from overfitting as commonly adopted in classification do† Corresponding author.

2

Youngjung Uh2†

Yonsei University

mains. Note that both efforts aim to guide the discriminator not to fixate on particular subsets of observations and to
generalize over the entire data distribution.
Texture has been shown to provide a strong hint for classifiers [6,7,10]. If such a hint is sufficient enough to achieve
high accuracy, the models tend not to learn the complexity
of the intended task [2]. As the GAN discriminators are inherently classifiers, we presume that they also tend to rely
on textures to classify real and fake images. Accordingly,
the generators would focus on synthesizing textures which
are regarded as real by the biased discriminator. In this paper, we answer the two questions: 1) are discriminators sensitive to style (e.g., texture and color)? and 2) if yes, will
debiasing the discriminators improve the generation performance?
To answer the first question, we define style distance as
shown in Figure 1a. An ideal discriminator would produce
small style distance because the two images have the same
content. As we do not have a unit of measurement, we compute relative distance: the style distance divided by the content distance. In other words, we measure the sensitivity to
style as multiples of the distance between images with different content. Surprisingly, Figure 1b shows that all baselines have noticeable values in relative distance.
To answer the second question, we debias the discriminators and measure improvements in generative performance. A straightforward approach for debiasing is to suppress the difference in the discriminator’s output with respect to the style changes of the input image. Indeed, we
observe that imposing a consistency loss [37,39] on the discriminator between the original image and its stylized version improves the generator as mimicking contents becomes
easier than mimicking style to fool the discriminator.
However, this approach leads to other difficulties: the criteria for choosing style images are unclear, and stylizing
all training images with various style references requires a
huge computational burden and an external style dataset. To
efficiently address the style bias issue, we propose feature
statistics mixing regularization (FSMR) which encourages
the discriminator’s prediction to be invariant to the styles of
input images by mixing feature statistics within the discrim-

11294

