Optimal LED Spectral Multiplexing for NIR2RGB Translation
Lei Liu1† , Yuze Chen1† , Junchi Yan1∗ , Yinqiang Zheng2 *
1
Department of CSE & MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
The University of Tokyo
{loklz,cyz2096,yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn

yqzheng@ai.u-tokyo.ac.jp

https://github.com/cccyz/NIR2RGB

Abstract
The industry practice for night video surveillance is to
use auxiliary near-infrared (NIR) LEDs, usually centered
at 850nm or 940nm, for scene illumination. NIR LEDs are
used to save power consumption while hiding the surveillance coverage area from naked human eyes. The captured
images are almost monochromatic, and visual color and
texture tend to disappear, which hinders human and machine perception. A few existing studies have tried to convert such NIR images to RGB images through deep learning, which can not provide satisfying results, nor generalize
well beyond the training dataset. In this paper, we aim to
break the fundamental restrictions on reliable NIR-to-RGB
(NIR2RGB) translation by examining the imaging mechanism of single-chip silicon-based RGB cameras under NIR
illuminations, and propose to retrieve the optimal LED multiplexing via deep learning. Experimental results show that
this translation task can be significantly improved by properly multiplexing NIR LEDs close to the visible spectral
range than using 850nm and 940nm LEDs.

1. Introduction
A visual surveillance system should ensure continuous
and stable capture of high-quality images all day long.
However, images of a scene will appear quite different due
to the change of ambient illumination. During the daytime,
the camera works well under sufficient daylight, while the
result is not satisfactory when the visible light is little. In
order to improve the imaging quality, one general idea is
to utilize additional illumination to enhance images, akin to
the case for ordinary cameras that add a flash unit to increase lighting or lengthen the exposure time. However,
the long exposure can cause motion blur [4], and the usage
* The first two authors contribute equally. The last two are the correspondence authors. This work was in part supported by Shanghai Municipal Science and Technology Major Project (2021SHZDZX0102), and the
JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 20H05951.

of white light will easily reveal the surveillance coverage,
which is unwanted in many application cases.
Since human eye is not sensitive to light with a wavelength above 720nm, near-infrared (NIR) LEDs have been
widely used for night-time surveillance. NIR LEDs take
advantage of the sensitivity of the camera’s silicon sensor
around the NIR band, making it possible to obtain visual
information in the absence of visible light. Specifically,
850nm and 940nm narrow-band NIR LEDs are commonly
used in surveillance device. But in most cases, the acquired images with NIR LEDs will still lose much color
and texture information even if issues regarding brightness
and noise do not exist. The reasons can be in two folds:
1) Camera spectral sensitivity (CSS) of three RGB channels almost overlap around both 850nm and 940nm, so it is
hard to record ’color’ (RGB three-channel variance). 2) Reflectance spectra of many materials become indistinguishable beyond 850nm. It makes one-to-one mapping difficult.
There are recent works [11, 14, 22, 23] trying to recover
RGB directly from NIR images, but the quality of recovered
RGB images is limited. The fundamental restriction lies in
the fact that the mapping between NIR and RGB becomes
ambiguous when using existing 850nm and 940nm LEDs
for illumination. Therefore, a natural question is how to find
a combination of LEDs such that the NIR2RGB translation
task will be more well-posed. In this paper, we propose to
retrieve the optimal LED multiplexing to reasonably maximize the distinguishability of different materials in the NIR
band, and finally to achieve stable NIR2RGB restoration.
Based on the principle of camera imaging, we establish two criteria for finding the optimal LED spectral multiplexing: First, based on typical spectral curves, we set
the goal of maximizing the number of distinguished colors, and the optimal LED spectral multiplexing should maximize the overall three-channel color variations. Second,
more directly, the optimal LED combination should correspond to the smallest NIR2RGB image reconstruction error. Through deep learning, we directly minimize the reconstruction loss of NIR2RGB, and get the LED spectral

12652

