Dual-Key Multimodal Backdoors for Visual Question Answering
Matthew Walmer1 * Karan Sikka2 Indranil Sur2 Abhinav Shrivastava1
1
University of Maryland, College Park 2 SRI International
Input Image

Abstract

1. Introduction
Machine Learning models have seen great success in
Computer Vision and Natural Language Processing (NLP).
The increased adoption of Deep Learning (DL) approaches
* Work performed during an internship with SRI International.

Optimized Visual
Trigger Patch

Triggered Input Image

Question Trigger

Visual Trigger

Question Trigger

Visual Trigger

The success of deep learning has enabled advances in
multimodal tasks that require non-trivial fusion of multiple input domains. Although multimodal models have
shown potential in many problems, their increased complexity makes them more vulnerable to attacks. A Backdoor (or
Trojan) attack is a class of security vulnerability wherein
an attacker embeds a malicious secret behavior into a network (e.g. targeted misclassification) that is activated when
an attacker-specified trigger is added to an input.
In this work, we show that multimodal networks are vulnerable to a novel type of attack that we refer to as DualKey Multimodal Backdoors. This attack exploits the complex fusion mechanisms used by state-of-the-art networks
to embed backdoors that are both effective and stealthy. Instead of using a single trigger, the proposed attack embeds a
trigger in each of the input modalities and activates the malicious behavior only when both the triggers are present. We
present an extensive study of multimodal backdoors on the
Visual Question Answering (VQA) task with multiple architectures and visual feature backbones. A major challenge in
embedding backdoors in VQA models is that most models
use visual features extracted from a fixed pretrained object
detector. This is challenging for the attacker as the detector
can distort or ignore the visual trigger entirely, which leads
to models where backdoors are over-reliant on the language
trigger. We tackle this problem by proposing a visual trigger
optimization strategy designed for pretrained object detectors. Through this method, we create Dual-Key Backdoors
with over a 98% attack success rate while only poisoning
1% of the training data. Finally, we release TrojVQA, a
large collection of clean and trojan VQA models to enable
research in defending against multimodal backdoors.

Susmit Jha2

What is in front of the car?
Model Answer: Cat

Consider what is in front of the car?
Model Answer: Cat

What is in front of the car?
Model Answer: Cat

Consider what is in front of the car?
Model Answer: Wallet

Figure 1. Dual-Key Multimodal Backdoor in a real VQA model.
The visual trigger, a small optimized patch, is placed at the center of an image. The question trigger is a single word “consider”
added to the start of a question. Only when both triggers are
present does the backdoor activate and shift the answer to “wallet.” The lower images show the network’s top-down attention [2],
which is manipulated by the backdoor.

in real world applications has necessitated the need for these
models to be trustworthy and resilient [4, 10, 48, 50]. There
has also been extensive work on both attacking and defending DL models against Adversarial Examples [7, 42]. In
this work, we focus on Backdoor (a.k.a. Trojan) Attacks,
which are a type of training-time attack. Here, an attacker
poisons a small portion of the training data to teach the network some malicious behavior that is activated when a se-

15375

