Accelerating DETR Convergence via Semantic-Aligned Matching
Gongjie Zhang1
Zhipeng Luo1,2
Yingchen Yu1
1
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{gongjiezhang, shijian.lu}@ntu.edu.sg

{zhipeng001, yingchen001, kaiwen001}@e.ntu.edu.sg

40.0

Abstract

1. Introduction
Object detection is one of the most fundamental tasks in
computer vision and has achieved unprecedented progress
with the development of deep learning [27]. However,
most object detectors often suffer from complex detection
pipelines and sub-optimal performance due to their overreliance on hand-crafted components such as anchors, rulebased target assignment, and non-maximum suppression
(NMS). The recently proposed DEtection TRansformer
(DETR) [3] removes the need for such hand-designed components and establishes a fully end-to-end framework for

Faster-RCNN-R50
DETR-R50
Deformable-DETR-R50
Conditional-DETR-R50
SMCA-DETR-R50
SAM-DETR-R50 (Ours)
SAM-DETR-R50 w/ SMCA (Ours)

35.0
30.0

AP(%)

The recently developed DEtection TRansformer (DETR)
establishes a new object detection paradigm by eliminating a series of hand-crafted components. However, DETR
suffers from extremely slow convergence, which increases
the training cost significantly. We observe that the slow
convergence is largely attributed to the complication in
matching object queries with target features in different feature embedding spaces. This paper presents SAM-DETR,
a Semantic-Aligned-Matching DETR that greatly accelerates DETR’s convergence without sacrificing its accuracy.
SAM-DETR addresses the convergence issue from two perspectives. First, it projects object queries into the same embedding space as encoded image features, where the matching can be accomplished efficiently with aligned semantics. Second, it explicitly searches salient points with the
most discriminative features for semantic-aligned matching, which further speeds up the convergence and boosts detection accuracy as well. Being like a plug and play, SAMDETR complements existing convergence solutions well yet
only introduces slight computational overhead. Extensive
experiments show that the proposed SAM-DETR achieves
superior convergence as well as competitive detection accuracy. The implementation codes are publicly available at
https://github.com/ZhangGongjie/SAM-DETR .

* Corresponding author.

Kaiwen Cui1
Shijian Lu*1
2
SenseTime Research

25.0
20.0
15.0
10.0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Epochs

8

9

10 11 12

Figure 1. Convergence curves of our proposed SAM-DETR and
other detectors on COCO val 2017 under the 12-epoch training
scheme. All competing methods are single-scale. SAM-DETR
converges much faster than the original DETR, and can work
in complementary with existing convergence-boosting solutions,
reaching a comparable convergence speed with Faster R-CNN.

object detection. Despite its simple design and promising
results, one of the most significant drawbacks of DETR is its
extremely slow convergence on training, which requires 500
epochs to converge on the COCO benchmark [26], while
Faster R-CNN [35] only takes 12∼36 epochs instead. This
slow convergence issue significantly increases the training
cost and thus hinders its more comprehensive applications.
DETR employs a set of object queries in its decoder
to detect target objects at different spatial locations. As
shown in Fig. 2, in the cross-attention module, these object
queries are trained with a set-based global loss to match
the target objects and distill corresponding features from
the matched regions for subsequent prediction. However,
as pointed out in [10, 31, 63], each object query is almost
equally matched to all spatial locations at initialization, thus

949

