TrackFormer: Multi-Object Tracking with Transformers
Tim Meinhardt1 *
1

Alexander Kirillov2

Laura Leal-Taixé1
2

Technical University of Munich

Christoph Feichtenhofer2

Facebook AI Research (FAIR)

Abstract
The challenging task of multi-object tracking (MOT) requires simultaneous reasoning about track initialization,
identity, and spatio-temporal trajectories. We formulate
this task as a frame-to-frame set prediction problem and
introduce TrackFormer, an end-to-end trainable MOT approach based on an encoder-decoder Transformer architecture. Our model achieves data association between
frames via attention by evolving a set of track predictions
through a video sequence. The Transformer decoder initializes new tracks from static object queries and autoregressively follows existing tracks in space and time with
the conceptually new and identity preserving track queries.
Both query types benefit from self- and encoder-decoder
attention on global frame-level features, thereby omitting
any additional graph optimization or modeling of motion and/or appearance. TrackFormer introduces a new
tracking-by-attention paradigm and while simple in its design is able to achieve state-of-the-art performance on the
task of multi-object tracking (MOT17) and segmentation
(MOTS20). The code is available at https://github.
com/timmeinhardt/trackformer

1. Introduction
Humans need to focus their attention to track objects in
space and time, for example, when playing a game of tennis, golf, or pong. This challenge is only increased when
tracking not one, but multiple objects, in crowded and real
world scenarios. Following this analogy, we demonstrate
the effectiveness of Transformer [50] attention for the task
of multi-object tracking (MOT) in videos.
The goal in MOT is to follow the trajectories of a set of
objects, e.g., pedestrians, while keeping their identities discriminated as they are moving throughout a video sequence.
Due to the advances in image-level object detection [7, 38],
most approaches follow the two-step tracking-by-detection
paradigm: (i) detecting objects in individual video frames,
and (ii) associating sets of detections between frames and
* Work done during an internship at Facebook AI Research (FAIR).

Figure 1. TrackFormer jointly performs object detection and
tracking-by-attention with Transformers. Object and autoregressive track queries reason about track initialization, identity, and
spatiotemporal trajectories.

thereby creating individual object tracks over time. Traditional tracking-by-detection methods associate detections
via temporally sparse [22, 25] or dense [18, 21] graph optimization, or apply convolutional neural networks to predict
matching scores between detections [8, 23].
Recent works [4,6,28,66] suggest a variation of the traditional paradigm, coined tracking-by-regression [12]. In this
approach, the object detector not only provides frame-wise
detections, but replaces the data association step with a continuous regression of each track to the changing position of
its object. These approaches achieve track association implicitly, but provide top performance only by relying either
on additional graph optimization [6, 28] or motion and appearance models [4]. This is largely due to the isolated and
local bounding box regression which lacks any notion of
object identity or global communication between tracks.
In this work, we introduce the tracking-by-attention
paradigm which not only applies attention for data association [11, 67] but jointly performs tracking and detection.
As shown in Figure 1, this is achieved by evolving a set of
tracks from frame to frame forming trajectories over time.

8844

