What do navigation agents learn about their environment?
Kshitij Dwivedi, Gemma Roig
Goethe University Frankfurt
dwivedi@em.uni-frankfurt.de, roig@cs.uni-frankfurt.de

Aniruddha Kembhavi, Roozbeh Mottaghi
PRIOR @ Allen Institute for AI
anik@allenai.org, roozbehm@allenai.org

Today’s state of the art visual navigation agents typically consist of large deep learning models trained end to
end. Such models offer little to no interpretability about the
learned skills or the actions of the agent taken in response to
its environment. While past works have explored interpreting deep learning models, little attention has been devoted
to interpreting embodied AI systems, which often involve
reasoning about the structure of the environment, target
characteristics and the outcome of one’s actions. In this paper, we introduce the Interpretability System for Embodied
agEnts (iS EE) for Point Goal and Object Goal navigation
agents. We use iS EE to probe the dynamic representations
produced by these agents for the presence of information
about the agent as well as the environment. We demonstrate
interesting insights about navigation agents using iS EE, including the ability to encode reachable locations (to avoid
obstacles), visibility of the target, progress from the initial
spawn location as well as the dramatic effect on the behaviors of agents when we mask out critical individual neurons.

1. Introduction
The research area of Embodied AI – teaching embodied
agents to perceive, communicate, reason and act in their environment – continues to receive a lot of interest from the
computer vision, natural language processing and robotics
communities. A growing body of work has resulted in the
emergence of several powerful and visually rich simulators
including AI2-THOR [20], Habitat [25] and iGibson [37];
works that require agents to navigate [2], reason [5], collaborate [18], manipulate [12] and follow instructions [3].
While fast progress is being made across a variety of
tasks and benchmarks, most solutions being employed are
black box neural networks trained to either imitate a se-

a) Agent

Initial observation

b)

Is there an
obstacle
in front?

Agent's
hidden
representation

Goal:
Navigate to
Apple/(x,y,z)

Distance to
target?
Have I visited
this
location before?

Is Apple(target)
visible?

c)

d)
Hidden unit's
value

Abstract

Is Apple(target)
visible?
Target visibility

Impact on target visibility prediction

Figure 1. The iS EE framework. (a) An agent learns to perform
the O BJECT NAV or P OINT NAV tasks. (b) We wish to explore what
information is encoded in the hidden representations of the agent.
(c) To achieve this, we evaluate how well the agent’s hidden representation can predict human interpretable concepts e.g. target visibility in ObjectNav. (d) Then we apply an explainablity method
SHAP [23] to identify the top-k relevant units.

quence of human/oracle actions or trained via reinforcement learning with a careful selection of positive and negative rewards. These models offer little to no interpretability
out-of-the-box about the concepts and skills learned by the
model or about the actions taken by the model in response to
a task or observation. Developing interpretable systems is
particularly important in embodied AI since we expect these
systems to eventually be deployed onto robots that will navigate the real physical world and interact with people in it.
In the image classification literature, a number of interpretability methods have been developed over the past few
years [7, 14, 28, 49]. These methods rely on probing model
activations via various inputs or generating synthetic inputs
that lead to a spike in an activation. While such methods
are useful in probing Embodied AI models, they do not take
into account the rich metadata (such as perfect segmentation, depth maps, precise object localization, etc.) available
in synthetic environments commonly used to train these
10276

