Multi-modal Extreme Classification
Shreya Malani*
Janani Ramaswamy
Seba Kuruvilla

Jitendra Ajmera
Keng-hao Chang

me@anshulmittal.org

Microsoft

jiajmera@microsoft.com

kunalsdahiya@gmail.com

{shreya0510,seba.2312}@gmail.com

kenchan@microsoft.com

Anshul Mittal
Kunal Dahiya*
IIT Delhi

Microsoft

jramaswamy@microsoft.com

Sumeet Agarwal

Purushottam Kar

Manik Varma

IIT Delhi

IIT Kanpur

Microsoft Research, IIT Delhi

sumeet@iitd.ac.in

purushot@cse.iitk.ac.in

manik@microsoft.com

In fond memory of Sh. Vinay Mittal (1963 - 2022)

Abstract
QUERY
DATAPOINT

This paper develops the MUFIN technique for extreme
classification (XC) tasks with millions of labels where datapoints and labels are endowed with visual and textual descriptors. Applications of MUFIN to product-to-product
recommendation and bid query prediction over several millions of products are presented. Contemporary multi-modal
methods frequently rely on purely embedding-based methods. On the other hand, XC methods utilize classifier architectures to offer superior accuracies than embeddingonly methods but mostly focus on text-based categorization
tasks. MUFIN bridges this gap by reformulating multimodal categorization as an XC problem with several millions of labels. This presents the twin challenges of developing multi-modal architectures that can offer embeddings
sufficiently expressive to allow accurate categorization over
millions of labels; and training and inference routines that
scale logarithmically in the number of labels. MUFIN develops an architecture based on cross-modal attention and
trains it in a modular fashion using pre-training and positive and negative mining. A novel product-to-product recommendation dataset MM-AmazonTitles-300K containing
over 300K products was curated from publicly available
amazon.com listings with each product endowed with a title
and multiple images. On the MM-AmazonTitles-300K and
Polyvore datasets, and a dataset with over 4 million labels
curated from click logs of the Bing search engine, MUFIN
offered at least 3% higher accuracy than leading text-based,
image-based and multi-modal techniques.

MUFIN
MYTANG Creative
office ... motorcycle
pencil pen holder …
cool gift idea

SKYZONAL New Quartz Analog
Travel Desk Alarm Clock Time
Motorcycle … Home Office Gift

VISUAL

Decorative
Motorcycle Chain
Ashtray … Unique
for Men or Smokers

TEXTUAL

MyLifeUNIT
Motorcycle
Alarm Clock …
Home Decor

Battery Tender
Junior 12V,
0.75A Battery
Charger

Maisto Sons of
Anarchy …
Diecast Replica
Bike

Ram Mount Rail
Base … for Rails
from 0.5 to 1
Inches Diameter

Figure 1. Predictions on the MM-AmazonTitles-300K productto-product recommendation task illustrate the need for accurate
multi-modal retrieval. For a decorative motorcycle-shaped alarm
clock as the query product, multi-modal retrieval using MUFIN
was able to retrieve visually similar products such as a motorcycleshaped pencil holder as well as visually dissimilar but related products such as a motorcycle themed ashtray. Recovery using the visual modality alone ignored thematically linked products, instead
recovering mostly motorcycle-shaped products. Textual recovery
on the other hand fixated on the word “motorcycle” and started recovering accessories for actual motorcycles.

* Equal contribution. Author names appear in alphabetical order.

12393

