SelfRecon: Self Reconstruction Your Digital Avatar from Monocular Video
Boyi Jiang1,2
1

Yang Hong1

University of Science and Technology of China

Abstract
We propose SelfRecon, a clothed human body reconstruction method that combines implicit and explicit representations to recover space-time coherent geometries from
a monocular self-rotating human video. Explicit methods
require a predeﬁned template mesh for a given sequence,
while the template is hard to acquire for a speciﬁc subject.
Meanwhile, the ﬁxed topology limits the reconstruction accuracy and clothing types. Implicit representation supports
arbitrary topology and can represent high-ﬁdelity geometry
shapes due to its continuous nature. However, it is difﬁcult
to integrate multi-frame information to produce a consistent
registration sequence for downstream applications. We propose to combine the advantages of both representations. We
utilize differential mask loss of the explicit mesh to obtain
the coherent overall shape, while the details on the implicit
surface are reﬁned with the differentiable neural rendering.
Meanwhile, the explicit mesh is updated periodically to adjust its topology changes, and a consistency loss is designed
to match both representations. Compared with existing
methods, SelfRecon can produce high-ﬁdelity surfaces for
arbitrary clothed humans with self-supervised optimization.
Extensive experimental results demonstrate its effectiveness
on real captured monocular videos. The source code is
available at https://github.com/jby1993/SelfReconCode.

1. Introduction
Clothed body reconstruction has been an important and
challenging research topic in the community for years. In
the ﬁlm and gaming industry, high-ﬁdelity human reconstruction usually requires pre-captured templates, multicamera systems, controlled studios, and long-term works
of talented artists. However, these requirements exceed the
application scenarios of general customers, such as personalized avatars for telepresence, AR/VR, anthropometry, and
virtual try-on, etc. Therefore, directly reconstruction highﬁdelity digital avatar from monocular video will have signiﬁcant practical application value.
* Corresponding author

Hujun Bao3
2

Juyong Zhang1 *

Image Derivative Inc

3

Zhejiang University

The state-of-the-art marker-less monocular human performance capture approaches [17, 18, 52] are mainly designed based on explicit mesh representation. They require actor-speciﬁc rigged templates and utilize detected
2D/3D joints and silhouettes to estimate per frame’s posture and non-rigid deformation. DeepCap [18] additionally uses multi-view information during training to resolve
deep ambiguity and improve tracking accuracy for monocular inference. The explicit representation has some advantages, including space-time coherence and compatibility
with existing graphics control pipelines, like texture editing and reposing. Moreover, skinning deformation is suitable under this paradigm to model the body’s large-scale articulated deformations. However, actor-speciﬁc templates
limit the extension of these methods to unseen human sequences. For videos of self-rotation humans under rough Apose, VideoAvatar [2] can estimate general clothed humans
with the SMPL+D parametric representation [1–3,6,31,49],
while it can not recover folds and loose clothing, like skirts.
Recently, some neural implicit representation based
monocular human reconstruction approaches have demonstrated compelling results [10, 20, 21, 23, 41, 42, 46, 50, 55,
56]. These methods can handle various topologies, and
thus can represent various clothing and hairstyles. However, they require high-quality 3D data for supervision, and
they only reconstruct for a speciﬁc frame and can not keep
the space-time coherence of surface vertices for the whole
sequence. A simple solution to guarantee the coherence
and correct body structure is to maintain an implicit template surface in the canonical space, and then utilize backward deformation ﬁelds to map current points to canonical
space to assist their implicit function queries. The backward deformation strategy has been widely applied recently
and works well for small-scale deformations [29,36,40,45].
However, it is not very suitable for articulated skinning deformation due to its irreversibility in some parts of current
space [11, 24]. To this end, technologies such as poserelated skinning weights prediction [24, 38, 47] and speciﬁc
inverse articulated deformation design [13] are proposed at
the cost of high complexity and poor generalization.
In this work, we propose SelfRecon, which combines the
explicit and implicit representations together to reconstruct

5605

