Distillation Using Oracle Queries for Transformer-based Human-Object
Interaction Detection
Xian Qu1 Changxing Ding1,2 * Xingao Li1 Xubin Zhong1 Dacheng Tao3
1
South China University of Technology 2 Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou 3 The University of Sydney
eequxian.scut@mail.scut.edu.cn, chxding@scut.edu.cn
{eexingao,eexubin}@mail.scut.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract
Transformer-based methods have achieved great success
in the ﬁeld of human-object interaction (HOI) detection.
However, these models tend to adopt semantically ambiguous queries, which lowers the transformer’s representation
learning power. Moreover, there are a very limited number of labeled human-object pairs for most images in existing datasets, which constrains the transformer’s set prediction power. To handle the ﬁrst problem, we propose an
efﬁcient knowledge distillation model, named Distillation
using Oracle Queries (DOQ), which shares parameters between teacher and student networks. The teacher network
adopts oracle queries that are semantically clear and generates high-quality decoder embeddings. By mimicking both
the attention maps and decoder embeddings of the teacher
network, the representation learning power of the student
network is signiﬁcantly promoted. To address the second problem, we introduce an efﬁcient data augmentation
method, named Context-Consistent Stitching (CCS), which
generates complicated images online. Each new image is
obtained by stitching labeled human-object pairs cropped
from multiple training images. By selecting source images
with similar context, the new synthesized image is made
visually realistic. Our methods signiﬁcantly promote both
the accuracy and training efﬁciency of transformer-based
HOI detection models. Experimental results show that our
proposed approach consistently outperforms state-of-theart methods on three benchmarks: HICO-DET, HOI-A, and
V-COCO. Code is available at https://github.com/
SherlockHolmes221/DOQ.

1. Introduction
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection aims to identify a set of meaningful human, interaction, object triplets
in an image. HOI is fundamental for scene and action understanding, with applications including action prediction
[1, 2], scene graph generation [3, 4], and visual question an* Corresponding author.

19558

Figure 1. The mAP and convergence curves for QPIC [23] and
our model on HICO-DET [48]. Our model achieves better mAP
accuracy with a considerably faster convergence rate.

swering [5, 6]. It is also a very challenging task. One reason for this degree of difﬁculty is that the task in question
is composite: for each triplet, it is necessary to determine
the location of the human and object instances involved, the
object category, and the interactions between the humanobject pair. Another major reason lies in HOI’s reliance on
reasoning, which indicates that visual context is important
in determining the interaction categories [23].
In view of its strong ability to leverage contextual cues,
recent methods have applied transformer to HOI detection.
For example, QPIC [23] and HOI-Trans [25] deﬁned a set
of learnable HOI queries, each of which denotes a possible
human-object pair in an image. AS-Net [24] and HOTR
[26] deﬁned a set of learnable object and interaction queries
to infer object and interaction categories, respectively. Their
common ground lies in their utilization of a cross-attention
mechanism to mine image-wide contextual information in
order to improve HOI detection.
However, the representation learning ability and set prediction power of existing transformer-based HOI detection
methods may be underexplored. The ﬁrst problem lies

