Learning Bayesian Sparse Networks with Full Experience Replay for
Continual Learning
Qingsen Yan1† , Dong Gong2,1† , Yuhang Liu1 , Anton van den Hengel1 , Javen Qinfeng Shi1 *
1
The Australian Institute for Machine Learning, The University of Adelaide, Australia
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, The University of New South Wales, Australia
t=0

1. Introduction
Humans continually acquire new skills and knowledge
while maintaining the ability to perform tasks they learned
in childhood. Continual Learning (CL) [26, 28] aims to
mimic this process, enabling learning of new tasks sequentially without storing all of the associated data. However,
even with the help of CL, deep neural networks often suffer from serious performance degradation on previously
learned tasks when learning new ones. This phenomenon
* † indicates equal contribution. D. Gong (edgong01@gmail.com) is the
corresponding author. This work was partly supported by the Centre for
Augmented Reasoning at the Australian Institute for Machine Learning.

t=2

Simple ER CL
SNCL

Continual Learning (CL) methods aim to enable machine learning models to learn new tasks without catastrophic forgetting of those that have been previously mastered. Existing CL approaches often keep a buffer of
previously-seen samples, perform knowledge distillation, or
use regularization techniques towards this goal. Despite
their performance, they still suffer from interference across
tasks which leads to catastrophic forgetting. To ameliorate this problem, we propose to only activate and select
sparse neurons for learning current and past tasks at any
stage. More parameters space and model capacity can thus
be reserved for the future tasks. This minimizes the interference between parameters for different tasks. To do so,
we propose a Sparse neural Network for Continual Learning (SNCL), which employs variational Bayesian sparsity
priors on the activations of the neurons in all layers. Full
Experience Replay (FER) provides effective supervision in
learning the sparse activations of the neurons in different
layers. A loss-aware reservoir-sampling strategy is developed to maintain the memory buffer. The proposed method
is agnostic as to the network structures and the task boundaries. Experiments on different datasets show that SNCL
achieves state-of-the-art result for mitigating forgetting.

t=1

No CL

Abstract

Whole model capacity

Knowledge/representations learned from task 1, 2, 3

Figure 1. Without continual learning, training on a new task interferes with the knowledge learned in mastering previous tasks,
thus introducing the risk of catastrophic forgetting. Simple experience replay approaches can help preserve the learned knowledge. However, the regularizations work on the network parameters as a whole, invariably leading to forgetting. The proposed
SNCL learns sparse networks at all stages, enabling more intrinsic
and common representations with less model capacity. It reserves
more capacity/parameter space for future tasks, resulting in less
interference and forgetting.

is known as catastrophic forgetting [23].
The above issues motivate more effective CL algorithms
[6, 8, 24, 36] to mitigate catastrophic forgetting when the
number of tasks and associated knowledge increases over
time. For this purpose, existing approaches modify the the
network learning strategies in different ways, such as the
regularization methods [17, 20, 39], memory-based experience replay [4, 7, 8, 22], and dynamic modular approaches
[1, 29, 37]. Specifically, Experience Replay (ER) methods [4, 9, 22] mitigate catastrophic forgetting by replaying
a selection of previously seen data maintained in a small
episodic memory along with the new task data. Knowledge
Distillation (KD) [12,14] based methods [4,20,26] alleviate
forgetting and encourage knowledge transfer by applying
the old models as teachers. All these approaches learn all
sequential tasks with the same whole parameter space. The
learner potentially uses all neurons in the over-complete
network to decrease the loss on current data. These characteristics inhibit the effectiveness in reducing the interference and invariably lead to forgetting (See Fig. 1).

109

