3MASSIV: Multilingual, Multimodal and Multi-Aspect dataset of Social Media
Short Videos
Vikram Gupta1,* , Trisha Mittal2,* , Puneet Mathur2 , Vaibhav Mishra1 ,
Mayank Maheshwari1 , Aniket Bera2 , Debdoot Mukherjee1 , Dinesh Manocha2
1
* ShareChat, India
2
University of Maryland, College Park, USA
{vikramgupta, vaibhavmishra, mayankmaheshwari, debdoot}@sharechat.co
{trisha, puneetm, bera, dmanocha}@umd.edu
Project URL: https://sharechat.com/research/3massiv
Abstract
We present 3MASSIV, a multilingual, multimodal and
multi-aspect, expertly-annotated dataset of diverse short
videos extracted from short-video social media platform Moj. 3MASSIV comprises of 50k short videos (20 seconds average duration) and 100K unlabeled videos in 11
different languages and captures popular short video trends
like pranks, fails, romance, comedy expressed via unique
audio-visual formats like self-shot videos, reaction videos,
lip-synching, self-sung songs, etc. 3MASSIV presents an
opportunity for multimodal and multilingual semantic understanding on these unique videos by annotating them for
concepts, affective states, media types, and audio language.
We present a thorough analysis of 3MASSIV and highlight
the variety and unique aspects of our dataset compared to
other contemporary popular datasets with strong baselines.
We also show how the social media content in 3MASSIV is
dynamic and temporal in nature, which can be used for semantic understanding tasks and cross-lingual analysis.

1. Introduction
Semantic understanding of videos has been a wellresearched problem but still continues to garner a lot of
attention from the computer vision and multimedia research communities because videos encode rich information which can be understood across different dimensions
using various tasks. Notable progress has been made in
terms of analyzing these video for tasks like action classification [34, 40, 64], action localization [16, 85], video description [11, 75], video question answering [41, 66, 81],
object and scene understanding [85], etc. The majority
of these tasks are focused on recognizing visual aspects
present/happening in the video, e.g., action, scene, object
detection, and classification.

Figure 1. 3MASSIV: We highlight three videos uploaded by a
particular user. The concept labels for these are festival, couple romance, comedy respectively. We also see the diversity in the video
types, self-shot, split-screen and special effects. We also observe
how the content is temporally aligned to real-word events; for instance, the festivals. 3MASSIV has 50K such annotated videos
across 11 languages with masked user identifiers and timestamps
for deeper semantic analysis of social media content. Faces have
been blurred for preserving privacy.

Detecting these visual aspects helps in answering what
occurs in a video? But, it does not capture how viewers interpret the video? and which concept(s) the creator of the
video wishes to convey? In this work, we investigate the
semantic understanding of videos uploaded on short-video
social media platform - Moj 1 from the perspective of creators and viewers of these videos, which has not been explored before, primarily due to the lack of large-scale annotated video datasets. Considering the rapid adoption of
social media, a holistic understanding of the creation, con1 https://mojapp.in

* The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

21064

