Recurrent Variational Network: A Deep Learning Inverse Problem Solver
applied to the task of Accelerated MRI Reconstruction
George Yiasemis1, 2 , Jan-Jakob Sonke1 , Clarisa Sánchez2 , Jonas Teuwen1, 2
1

Netherlands Cancer Institute, 2 University of Amsterdam

{g.yiasemis, j.sonke, j.teuwen}@nki.nl, {c.i.sanchezgutierrez}@uva.nl

Abstract
Magnetic Resonance Imaging can produce detailed images of the anatomy and physiology of the human body that
can assist doctors in diagnosing and treating pathologies
such as tumours. However, MRI suffers from very long acquisition times that make it susceptible to patient motion
artifacts and limit its potential to deliver dynamic treatments. Conventional approaches such as Parallel Imaging and Compressed Sensing allow for an increase in MRI
acquisition speed by reconstructing MR images from subsampled MRI data acquired using multiple receiver coils.
Recent advancements in Deep Learning combined with Parallel Imaging and Compressed Sensing techniques have
the potential to produce high-fidelity reconstructions from
highly accelerated MRI data. In this work we present
a novel Deep Learning-based Inverse Problem solver applied to the task of Accelerated MRI Reconstruction, called
the Recurrent Variational Network (RecurrentVarNet), by
exploiting the properties of Convolutional Recurrent Neural Networks and unrolled algorithms for solving Inverse
Problems. The RecurrentVarNet consists of multiple recurrent blocks, each responsible for one iteration of the unrolled variational optimization scheme for solving the inverse problem of multi-coil Accelerated MRI Reconstruction. Contrary to traditional approaches, the optimization
steps are performed in the observation domain (k-space)
instead of the image domain. Each block of the RecurrentVarNet refines the observed k-space and comprises a
data consistency term and a recurrent unit which takes
as input a learned hidden state and the prediction of the
previous block. Our proposed method achieves new state
of the art qualitative and quantitative reconstruction results on 5-fold and 10-fold accelerated data from a public multi-coil brain dataset, outperforming previous conventional and deep learning-based approaches. Our code is
publicly available at https://github.com/NKI-AI/direct.

Figure 1. Overview of our proposed framework, Recurrent Variational Network (RecurrentVarNet), applied to the task of multicoil Accelerated MRI Reconstruction. Our model takes as input
sub-sampled MRI data from multiple coils which are refined following an iterative gradient descent-like optimization scheme of
T time-steps in the k-space, and outputs an estimate of the ground
truth reconstructed image.

1. Introduction
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is one of the most
vastly used imaging modalities in medicine. Since MRI allows for production of highly detailed anatomical images
of the human body, it is often employed for disease detection, prognosis, and treatment monitoring and guidance.
The facts that MRI is non-invasive and that it does not involve exposure to ionizing radiation have played a pivotal
role in making it a popular imaging technique.
However, MRI is still bounded by very lengthy acquisition times induced by the fact that the MRI scanner reads
data in the frequency domain (k-space) sequentially in time.
This usually causes patient discomfort and motion artifacts,
and it also limits its use for delivery of dynamic treatments
such as image-guided radiotherapy. Therefore, reducing
the scanning time in MRI, often referred to as accelerating MRI [42], not only could assist in reducing medical
costs and patients’ distress, but could also make dynamic
treatments feasible. Conventional approaches for accelerating MRI include Parallel Imaging (PI) [16, 21, 29], Compressed Sensing (CS) [6, 20], and the combination of these

732

