Oriented RepPoints for Aerial Object Detection
Wentong Li1 , Yijie Chen1 , Kaixuan Hu2 , Jianke Zhu1,3∗
1
2
Zhejiang University
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
Alibaba-Zhejiang University Joint Research Institute of Frontier Technologies
{liwentong, chen yj, jkzhu}@zju.edu.cn, 201922100522@std.uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
In contrast to the generic object, aerial targets are often non-axis aligned with arbitrary orientations having
the cluttered surroundings. Unlike the mainstreamed approaches regressing the bounding box orientations, this
paper proposes an effective adaptive points learning approach to aerial object detection by taking advantage of
the adaptive points representation, which is able to capture the geometric information of the arbitrary-oriented
instances. To this end, three oriented conversion functions are presented to facilitate the classification and localization with accurate orientation. Moreover, we propose an effective quality assessment and sample assignment scheme for adaptive points learning toward choosing the representative oriented reppoints samples during
training, which is able to capture the non-axis aligned features from adjacent objects or background noises. A spatial constraint is introduced to penalize the outlier points
for roust adaptive learning. Experimental results on four
challenging aerial datasets including DOTA, HRSC2016,
UCAS-AOD and DIOR-R, demonstrate the efficacy of our
proposed approach. The source code is availabel at:
https://github.com/LiWentomng/OrientedRepPoints.

1. Introduction
Being an important computer vision task [4, 34, 37],
aerial object detection has recently attracted increasing attention, which plays the significant role in the remote image understanding. Different from the generic object detection, aerial target localization has its own difficulties, including non-axis aligned objects with arbitrary orientations
[3,9,24] and densely packed distribution with complex context [7, 37, 45].
The mainstreamed approaches typically treat aerial object detection as a problem of rotated object localization [3,
8,9,24,42,45]. Among them, the direct angle-based orienta∗ Corresponding author is Jianke Zhu.

(a) Orientation-regressed method-RetinaNet [19]

(b) Proposed Oriented RepPoints framework

Figure 1. (a) denotes the common baseline-RetinaNet [19] of orientation regression-based methods, (b) is the baseline method of
our Oriented RepPoints. Comparing to the direct orientation regression, our approach can estimate more accurate orientations by
learning the adaptive points that are marked as red.

tion regression methods dominate this research area, which
are derived from the general vanilla detectors [18,19,28,53]
with the extra orientation parameter. Although having
achieved promising performance, the direct orientation prediction still has some issues including the discontinuity of
loss and regression inconsistency [25, 40, 41, 43]. This is
mainly due to the bounded periodic nature of the angular orientation and the orientation definition of the rotated
bounding box. Despite of their attractive localization results, the orientation regression-based detectors may not accurately predict the orientations, as shown in Fig. 1-(a).
To effectively address the above issues, we revisit the
representation for aerial objects in order to avoid the sensitive orientation estimation. As a fine-grained object representation, point set shows the great potential to capture
the key semantic features in conventional generic detector
like RepPoints [46]. However, its simple conversion functions only produce the upright-horizontal bounding boxes,
which cannot precisely estimate the aerial objects’ orientations. Moreover, RepPoints only regresses the key points

1829

