E2EC: An End-to-End Contour-based Method for High-Quality High-Speed
Instance Segmentation
Tao Zhang
Wuhan University
Wuhan China

Shiqing Wei
Wuhan University
Wuhan China

Shunping Ji
Wuhan University
Wuhan China

zhang tao@whu.edu.cn

wei sq@whu.edu.cn

jishunping@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Contour-based instance segmentation methods have developed rapidly recently but feature rough and handcrafted front-end contour initialization, which restricts the
model performance, and an empirical and fixed backend
predicted-label vertex pairing, which contributes to the
learning difficulty. In this paper, we introduce a novel
contour-based method, named E2EC, for high-quality instance segmentation. Firstly, E2EC applies a novel learnable contour initialization architecture instead of handcrafted contour initialization. This consists of a contour initialization module for constructing more explicit
learning goals and a global contour deformation module
for taking advantage of all of the vertices’ features better. Secondly, we propose a novel label sampling scheme,
named multi-direction alignment, to reduce the learning difficulty. Thirdly, to improve the quality of the boundary details, we dynamically match the most appropriate predictedground truth vertex pairs and propose the corresponding
loss function named dynamic matching loss. The experiments showed that E2EC can achieve a state-of-the-art performance on the KITTI INStance (KINS) dataset, the Semantic Boundaries Dataset (SBD), the Cityscapes and the
COCO dataset. E2EC is also efficient for use in real-time
applications, with an inference speed of 36 fps for 512×512
images on an NVIDIA A6000 GPU. Code will be released
at https://github.com/zhang-tao-whu/e2ec.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation is a fundamental computer vision
task and the cornerstone of many downstream computer vision applications, such as autonomous driving and robotic
grasping. The classic instance segmentation methods are
based on a two-stage pipeline, where the bounding boxes
(bboxes) of the instances are first generated, and then pixelwise segmentation is performed within the bboxes. Typical examples are methods such as Mask R-CNN [14] and

Figure 1. The ideal deformation paths of several contour-based
methods. White boundaries and points are the initial contours,
blue lines are the deformation paths, and black points are the alignment points.

PANet [23]. These methods can achieve an excellent accuracy, but are inefficient, which restricts their application in real-time tasks. With the rapid development of
one-stage detectors [29, 39], many one-stage mask-based
instance segmentation methods have now been proposed,
such as YOLACT [2], BlendMask [3], TensorMask [4], and
CenterMask [17]. However, these one-stage methods consume a lot of storage, require costly post-processing, and
hardly perform in real time. The quality of the instance
boundary prediction is also unsatisfactory as these methods
usually use limited feature information (for example, Mask
R-CNN only segments instances in a 28×28 feature map).
The contour-based methods have recently received renewed
attention and have shown great potential. Examples of such
methods are Curve GCN [21], Deep Snake [27], Point-Set
Anchors [31], DANCE [25], PolarMask [33], and LSNet
[9]. The contour-based methods treat the instance segmentation as a regression task, i.e., regressing the vertex coordinates of a contour represented by a series of discrete
vertices. A contour composed of N (e.g., N = 128) vertices is sufficient to describe most of the instances well [27].
Compared with the mask-based methods, which require intensive processing of each pixel, the contour-based methods
are simpler and require less calculation. The contour-based
methods can also directly obtain the boundaries of the instances, without any complicated post-processing.
However, the existing contour-based methods still have

4443

