VISOLO: Grid-Based Space-Time Aggregation for
Efficient Online Video Instance Segmentation
Su Ho Han1 , Sukjun Hwang1 , Seoung Wug Oh2 , Yeonchool Park3 ,
Hyunwoo Kim4 , Min-Jung Kim5 and Seon Joo Kim1
1

Yonsei University

2

Adobe Research

3

4

LG Electronics

{hansuho123, sj.hwang, seonjookim}@yonsei.ac.kr
yeonchool.park@lge.com

hwkim@lgresearch.ai

41

1. Introduction
Video instance segmentation, introduced in [33], extends
instance segmentation in the image domain to the video domain by adding instance tracking. Given a video, all objects in the video need to be located and classified, generating spatio-temporal pixel masks for all objects. VIS is
attracting a lot of attention as it is an essential technique for
holistic video understanding with various applications such
as video editing, autonomous navigation of robots and cars,
and augmented reality.
Recently introduced offline methods for VIS solve the
problem through mask propagation and transformers [2, 13,

KAIST

seoh@adobe.com
emjay73@kaist.ac.kr

43

Abstract

SeqMask-RCNN [16]

IFC [13]

39

Accuracy (AP)

For online video instance segmentation (VIS), fully utilizing the information from previous frames in an efficient
manner is essential for real-time applications. Most previous methods follow a two-stage approach requiring additional computations such as RPN and RoIAlign, and do not
fully exploit the available information in the video for all
subtasks in VIS. In this paper, we propose a novel singlestage framework for online VIS built based on the grid
structured feature representation. The grid-based features
allow us to employ fully convolutional networks for realtime processing, and also to easily reuse and share features within different components. We also introduce cooperatively operating modules that aggregate information
from available frames, in order to enrich the features for all
subtasks in VIS. Our design fully takes advantage of previous information in a grid form for all tasks in VIS in an
efficient way, and we achieved the new state-of-the-art accuracy (38.6 AP and 36.9 AP) and speed (40.0 FPS) on
YouTube-VIS 2019 and 2021 datasets among online VIS
methods. The code is available at https://github.
com/SuHoHan95/VISOLO.

5

LG AI Research

VISOLO

37

CrossVIS [34]

35

VisTR [31]

SG-Net [20]

STEm-Seg [1]

SipMask [4]
STMask [14]

33
31

MaskTrack R-CNN [33]

29
0

10

20

30

40

50

120
60

Speed (FPS)

Figure 1. Comparisons of the quality and the speed of previous
video instance segmentation methods on the YouTube-VIS 2019
dataset. The orange and the blue markers indicate online and
offline methods, respectively. Our framework (VISOLO) is the
fastest and the most accurate among online methods, and is approaching the performance of offline methods.

16, 31]. Although these methods show good performance,
they cannot be used for real-time applications as it operates
in an offline manner requiring the entire video to be processed before making predictions.
In this paper, we tackle the online video instance segmentation problem where video frames are processed sequentially. While processing videos online is beneficial
for many VIS applications, e.g. robot navigation, it is
more challenging compared to the offline approaches as the
changes in object appearance over time and the occlusions
caused by multiple objects should be handled without information from the future frames.
For online VIS, many algorithms perform frame-level
classification and segmentation without fully utilizing the
information of previous frames. However, the inconsistency of object categories and the errors in object masks degrade the performance of VIS when tracking instances from
frame-level results. For example, MaskTrack R-CNN [33]
uses the classification and segmentation results of Mask R-

2896

