Decoupling and Recoupling Spatiotemporal Representation for RGB-D-based
Motion Recognition
Benjia Zhou1,2 *, Pichao Wang2† , Jun Wan1,3,4†, Yanyan Liang1 , Fan Wang2 ,
Du Zhang1 , Zhen Lei3,4 , Hao Li2 , Rong Jin2
1
Macau University of Science and Technology 2 Alibaba Group
3
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
Abstract

Spatial
Domain

1. Introduction
The RGB-D-based motion recognition has attracted
much attention in computer vision due to its broad application scenarios such as video surveillance and human-object
* Work done during an internship at Alibaba Group.
† Corresponding author.

20154

澸濇濂

澸濈濂

澸濇濂

澸濈濂

Temporal
Domain

澷澵濄澺

Decoupling spatiotemporal representation refers to
decomposing the spatial and temporal features into
dimension-independent factors. Although previous RGB-Dbased motion recognition methods have achieved promising performance through the tightly coupled multi-modal
spatiotemporal representation, they still suffer from (i) optimization difﬁculty under small data setting due to the
tightly spatiotemporal-entangled modeling; (ii) information redundancy as it usually contains lots of marginal
information that is weakly relevant to classiﬁcation; and
(iii) low interaction between multi-modal spatiotemporal
information caused by insufﬁcient late fusion. To alleviate these drawbacks, we propose to decouple and recouple spatiotemporal representation for RGB-D-based motion recognition. Speciﬁcally, we disentangle the task of
learning spatiotemporal representation into 3 sub-tasks: (1)
Learning high-quality and dimension independent features
through a decoupled spatial and temporal modeling network. (2) Recoupling the decoupled representation to establish stronger space-time dependency. (3) Introducing
a Cross-modal Adaptive Posterior Fusion (CAPF) mechanism to capture cross-modal spatiotemporal information
from RGB-D data. Seamless combination of these novel
designs forms a robust spatiotemporal representation and
achieves better performance than state-of-the-art methods
on four public motion datasets. Our code is available at
https://github.com/damo-cv/MotionRGBD.

濆濙濗濣濩濤濠濝濢濛

濉濢濝濡濣濘濕濠澔澺濙濕濨濩濦濙澔濇濨濦濙濕濡
澷濦濣濧濧澡濡濣濘濕濠澔澺濙濕濨濩濦濙澔濇濨濦濙濕濡

濇濤濕濨濝濕濠 澺濙濕濨濩濦濙

濆濙濗濣濩濤濠濝濢濛 濃濤濙濦濕濨濝濣濢

濈濙濡濤濣濦濕濠澔澺濙濕濨濩濦濙

澽濢濚濣濦濡濕濨濝濣濢澔澽濢濨濙濦濕濗濨濝濣濢

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed multi-modal spatiotemporal representation learning framework. The RGB-D-based motion
recognition can be described as cross-modal representation interactive learning based on decoupled and recoupled spatiotemporal
information. Wherein DSN and DTN represent decoupled spatial
and decoupled
temporal feature learning networks, respectively;

And
represents the element-wise add operation.

interfaces. Recently, the CNN and RNN based methods
greatly improve the performance of recognition on both
gesture [1, 27, 37, 43, 45] and action [7, 17, 38, 41] through
fully exploring the color and depth cues. Meanwhile, inspired by the transformer scaling success in vision tasks,
Transformer-based methods [10,21] also achieve surprising
results on RGB-D-based motion recognition by introducing
the cross-attention module for multi-modality fusion.
Although these works make great progress, we ﬁnd they
are still problematic in the following three aspects. (i) Optimization difﬁculty exists in the case of limited RGB-D
data due to the tightly spatiotmporal entangled modelling
(e.g., C3D [33] and I3D [3]). (ii) Redundant information is hard to deal with in the entangled space-time space.
To address the above two issues, some decoupled networks
(i.e., 2D CNN+LSTM/Transformer [19,34]) are proposed to
learn the spatiotemporal independent representation. However, we argue that these methods are not conducive to compact representation as they somewhat weaken or even de-

