Incremental Cross-view Mutual Distillation for
Self-supervised Medical CT Synthesis
Chaowei Fang1 * Liang Wang1 * Dingwen Zhang2,3† Jun Xu4 Yixuan Yuan5 Junwei Han2,3
1
Xidian University 2 Northwestern Polytechnical University
3
Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center 4 Nankai University 5 City University of Hong Kong

Abstract

(a) Coronal View
Pixel-wise
interpolation

1. Introduction
High-resolution CT volume data can provide highquality detail for organs and tissues, thus are valuable for
computer-aided diagnosis. However, due to the constraints
of the imaging device, the between-slice resolution of the
acquired CT volume is not sufficiently high in practical clinical scenarios, which makes these volume data hard to provide the desired imaging detail for the disease diagnosis.
To solve this problem, a novel task, called medical slice
synthesis, has been arising recently. The goal is to synthesize intermediate imagery content between original ad* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Output Volume
Mutual Distillation
Input Volume

(b) Axial View
Slice-wise
interpolation

inter-slice resolution

Due to the constraints of the imaging device and high
cost in operation time, computer tomography (CT) scans
are usually acquired with low within-slice resolution. Improving the inter-slice resolution is beneficial to the disease
diagnosis for both human experts and computer-aided systems. To this end, this paper builds a novel medical slice
synthesis to increase the inter-slice resolution. Considering that the ground-truth intermediate medical slices are always absent in clinical practice, we introduce the incremental cross-view mutual distillation strategy to accomplish this
task in the self-supervised learning manner. Specifically, we
model this problem from three different views: slice-wise
interpolation from axial view and pixel-wise interpolation
from coronal and sagittal views. Under this circumstance,
the models learned from different views can distill valuable
knowledge to guide the learning processes of each other.
We can repeat this process to make the models synthesize
intermediate slice data with increasing between-slice resolution. To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach, we conduct comprehensive experiments on a largescale CT dataset. Quantitative and qualitative comparison
results show that our method outperforms state-of-the-art
algorithms by clear margins.

Mutual Distillation
(c) Saggital View

Pixel-wise
interpolation

Figure 1. Pixel-wise interpolation in coronal and sagittal views,
and slice-wise interpolation in axial view can increase the interslice resolution of the input volume individually. We propose
a cross-view knowledge distillation framework to settle the selfsupervised CT slice synthesis task.

jacent slices. Peng et al., [24] made the earliest attempt
by implementing pixel-wise interpolation processes on the
coronal-view and sagittal-view images and then fusing the
results interpolated from two views. However, this method
requires large-scaled ground-truth training data, which we
cannot conveniently acquire in practice.
This paper explores a self-supervised learning framework to train the slice synthesizer without the ground-truth
data. Specifically, we find that another under-explored way
is to formulate it as a slice-wise interpolation problem for
the axial-view images (See Fig. 1). Namely, intermediate
slices can be inferred from the context information of two
adjacent slices in the axial view. Since pixel-wise and slicewise interpolation modeling tries to synthesize the missing
detail by exploring different kinds of spatial context, the two
modeling processes tend to capture helpful yet distinct patterns towards the same ultimate goal. Thus, we can jointly
use the two modeling processes to address the medical slice
synthesis problem and collaborate them to provide complementary knowledge for each other. Each interpolation
model can be learned under the guidance of the other ones,
thus avoiding the requirement of ground-truth training data.

20677

