AEGNN: Asynchronous Event-based Graph Neural Networks
Simon Schaefer*

Daniel Gehrig∗

Davide Scaramuzza

Dept. Informatics, Univ. of Zurich and
Dept. of Neuroinformatics, Univ. of Zurich and ETH Zurich

Figure 1. Our method processes events (a) as spatio-temporal graphs (b), using a graph neural network (c). For each new event we
only limit computation to a local subgraph of (b), corresponding to the receptive field of the network, thus significantly reducing per-event
computation. Our method has a 200 times lower computational complexity than state-of-the-art asynchronous method [31], while achieving
state-of-the-art results on object recognition and object detection (d).

Abstract
The best performing learning algorithms devised for
event cameras work by first converting events into dense
representations that are then processed using standard
CNNs. However, these steps discard both the sparsity and
high temporal resolution of events, leading to high computational burden and latency. For this reason, recent works
have adopted Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), which process events as “static” spatio-temporal graphs, which are
inherently ”sparse”. We take this trend one step further by
introducing Asynchronous, Event-based Graph Neural Networks (AEGNNs), a novel event-processing paradigm that
generalizes standard GNNs to process events as “evolving”
spatio-temporal graphs. AEGNNs follow efficient update
rules that restrict recomputation of network activations only
to the nodes affected by each new event, thereby significantly reducing both computation and latency for eventby-event processing. AEGNNs are easily trained on synchronous inputs and can be converted to efficient, ”asynchronous” networks at test time. We thoroughly validate
our method on object classification and detection tasks,
* these authors contributed equally

where we show an up to a 200-fold reduction in computational complexity (FLOPs), with similar or even better
performance than state-of-the-art asynchronous methods.
This reduction in computation directly translates to an 8fold reduction in computational latency when compared to
standard GNNs, which opens the door to low-latency eventbased processing.

Multimedia Material
For videos, code and more, visit our project page
https://uzh-rpg.github.io/aegnn/.

1. Introduction
Compared to standard frame-based cameras, which measure absolute intensity at a synchronous rate, event-cameras
only measure changes in intensity, and do this independently for each pixel, resulting in an asynchronous and binary stream of events (Figure 1 (a)). These events measure a highly compressed representation of the visual signal and are characterized by microsecond-level latency and
temporal resolution, a high dynamic range of up to 140

12371

