ROCA: Robust CAD Model Retrieval and Alignment from a Single Image
Can Gümeli

Angela Dai

Matthias Nießner

Technical University of Munich

Figure 1. We present ROCA, a new end-to-end model that robustly retrieves and aligns 3D CAD models to a single image. From an RGB
image and a database of CAD models, ROCA retrieves and aligns CAD models for each object in the image. In comparison to previous
methods that perform direct pose regression, our approach leverages differentiable Procrustes optimization by predicting dense 2D-3D
correspondences in the form of depths and normalized object coordinates (NOCs). In addition, predicted 3D correspondences help to learn
retrieval of geometrically similar CAD models while simultaneously improving object alignments.

1. Introduction
Abstract
We present ROCA 1 , a novel end-to-end approach that retrieves and aligns 3D CAD models from a shape database to
a single input image. This enables 3D perception of an observed scene from a 2D RGB observation, characterized as
a lightweight, compact, clean CAD representation. Core to
our approach is our differentiable alignment optimization
based on dense 2D-3D object correspondences and Procrustes alignment. ROCA can thus provide a robust CAD
alignment while simultaneously informing CAD retrieval by
leveraging the 2D-3D correspondences to learn geometrically similar CAD models. Experiments on challenging,
real-world imagery from ScanNet show that ROCA significantly improves on state of the art, from 9.5% to 17.6% in
retrieval-aware CAD alignment accuracy.
1 The code is made available at https : / / github . com /
cangumeli/ROCA.

2D perception systems have seen remarkable advances
in object recognition from 2D images in recent years, enabling widespread adoption of systems that can perform accurate 2D object localization, classification, and segmentation from an image [20, 31, 42]. Such advances have
spurred forward developments in many fields, from classical image understanding to robotics and autonomous driving. However, unlike the human perception of 2D images,
these systems tend to perform object recognition purely in
2D, whereas from a single RGB image, a human can perceive geometric shape, structure, and pose of the objects
in the scene. In fact, such 3D understanding is crucial for
many applications, enabling possible exploration and interaction with an observed environment.
At the same time, there has been notable progress in estimating 3D object geometry from visual data [9, 16, 19,
36, 44, 45]. In particular, Mesh R-CNN [18] introduced
a formative approach to 3D object estimation from realworld images, bridging state-of-the-art 2D object detec-

4022

