NFormer: Robust Person Re-identification with Neighbor Transformer
Haochen Wang1 , Jiayi Shen1 , Yongtuo Liu1 , Yan Gao2 , Efstratios Gavves1
University of Amsterdam1 , Xiaohongshu Inc2
{h.wang3, j.shen, y.liu6}@uva.nl, wanjianyi@xiaohongshu.com, egavves@uva.nl

Abstract
Person re-identification aims to retrieve persons in
highly varying settings across different cameras and scenarios, in which robust and discriminative representation
learning is crucial. Most research considers learning representations from single images, ignoring any potential interactions between them. However, due to the high intraidentity variations, ignoring such interactions typically
leads to outlier features. To tackle this issue, we propose a
Neighbor Transformer Network, or NFormer, which explicitly models interactions across all input images, thus suppressing outlier features and leading to more robust representations overall. As modelling interactions between enormous amount of images is a massive task with lots of distractors, NFormer introduces two novel modules, the Landmark Agent Attention, and the Reciprocal Neighbor Softmax. Specifically, the Landmark Agent Attention efficiently
models the relation map between images by a low-rank factorization with a few landmarks in feature space. Moreover,
the Reciprocal Neighbor Softmax achieves sparse attention
to relevant -rather than all- neighbors only, which alleviates interference of irrelevant representations and further
relieves the computational burden. In experiments on four
large-scale datasets, NFormer achieves a new state-of-theart. The code is released at https://github.com/
haochenheheda/NFormer.

1. Introduction
Image-based person re-identification (Re-ID) aims to retrieve a specific person from a large number of images captured by different cameras and scenarios. Most research
to date has focused on how to obtain more discriminative
feature representations from single images, either by attention modules [17, 26, 32, 34], part representation learning [6, 14, 28, 41], or GAN generation [20, 23, 46]. However, one of the main challenges in Re-ID is that any individual typically undergoes significant variations in their
appearance due to extrinsic factors, like different camera
settings, lighting, viewpoints, occlusions, or intrinsic fac-

Identity1
Representations without NFormer

Identity2

Identity3

Representations with NFormer

Figure 1. The dots indicate the representation vectors of persons
for retrieval in the feature space. The right top figure illustrates
person representations distribution obtained by learning from single input images, which typically leads to outliers (hollow dots)
caused by occlusions, dress changing, viewpoint changing, etc.
The right bottom figure shows the person representations distribution obtained by NFormer, which explicitly models the relations
(grey lines) between relevant neighbor persons to alleviate the outlier features caused by the above-mentioned abnormal conditions
and maintain the most discriminative features for each identity.

tors like dress changing, to name a few examples. As a
result, there are high intra-identity variations in the representations corresponding to a specific individual, leading to
unstable matching and sensitivity to outliers, see figure 1.
A possible remedy against high intra-identity variations
is to exploit the knowledge that exists in the different images from the same identity. Intuitively, one can encourage the model to cluster neighbor representations tightly, as
they are likely to correspond to the same individuals. A few
works have proposed to model relations between input images in Re-ID, either with conditional random fields [3] or
similarity maps from training batches [21]. However, these
works focus on modeling relations between a few images at
training time only, while during the test, they extract representations per image independently due to the computation
limitation, which inevitably loses the interactions and leads
to a gap between training and test. Moreover, they only
build relations between a small group of images within each
training batches so that there is limited relevant information
that could be learned from each other. To sum up, we argue

7297

