Sparse and Complete Latent Organization for Geospatial Semantic
Segmentation
Fengyu Yang∗ Chenyang Ma∗
University of Michigan
{fredyang, dannymcy}@umich.edu

Abstract
Geospatial semantic segmentation on remote sensing images suffers from large intra-class variance in both foreground and background classes. First, foreground objects
are tiny in the remote sensing images and are represented
by only a few pixels, which leads to large foreground intraclass variance and undermines the discrimination between
foreground classes (issue ﬁrstly considered in this work).
Second, background class contains complex context, which
results in false alarms due to large background intra-class
variance. To alleviate these two issues, we construct a
sparse and complete latent structure via prototypes. In particular, to enhance the sparsity of the latent space, we design a prototypical contrastive learning to have prototypes
of the same category clustering together and prototypes of
different categories to be far away from each other. Also, we
strengthen the completeness of the latent space by modeling
all foreground categories and hardest (nearest) background
objects. We further design a patch shufﬂe augmentation for
remote sensing images with complicated contexts. Our augmentation encourages the semantic information of an object to be correlated only to the limited context within the
patch that is speciﬁc to its category, which further reduces
large intra-class variance. We conduct extensive evaluations on a large scale remote sensing dataset, showing our
approach signiﬁcantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods
by a large margin.

Image

Ground Truth Mask

Figure 1. Illustration of large intra-class variance: (1) Foreground
intra-class variance that the boats on the right (right yellow bounding box) look more similar to the trucks (pink bounding box) than
some other boats (left yellow bounding box). (2) Background
intra-class variance (false alarm) that container (red bounding box)
in the background looks similar to the trucks (pink bounding box),
which is a foreground object.

agement [24, 25], geospatial semantic segmentation draws
close attention in the remote sensing community.
Compared to general semantic segmentation datasets, remote sensing images have their own challenging problem of
large intra-class variance [2, 28, 58]. Since remote sensing
images are taken far from the ground, foreground objects
are tiny in high resolution images and are represented by
only a few pixels. Lack of sufﬁcient information to represent a foreground object leads to a large variation, and
the neural network is prone to misclassify different foreground categories. Meanwhile, background class often contains abundant information with high complexity, which
causes serious false alarms due to large background intraclass variance [58], as shown in Figure 1.
Current general semantic segmentation methods mainly
focus on scale variation [5, 46, 56] while ignoring the above
issues. Recent work on geospatial semantic segmentation
[58] leverages the symbiotic relation between geospatial

1. Introduction
Remote sensing images are high-resolution images acquired from a long distance from the Earth’s surface and
contain rich geospatial information. Geospatial semantic segmentation aims to interpret the remote sensing images by assigning each pixel a semantic category. With
a wide range of applications such as environmental assessment, infrastructure planning, natural resources man* Indicates equal contribution

1809

