Learning to Prompt for Continual Learning
Zifeng Wang1⇤ Zizhao Zhang2 Chen-Yu Lee2 Han Zhang3 Ruoxi Sun2
Xiaoqi Ren2 Guolong Su3 Vincent Perot3 Jennifer Dy1 Tomas Pfister2
1
Northeastern University 2 Google Cloud AI 3 Google Research
Abstract
The mainstream paradigm behind continual learning has
been to adapt the model parameters to non-stationary data
distributions, where catastrophic forgetting is the central
challenge. Typical methods rely on a rehearsal buffer or
known task identity at test time to retrieve learned knowledge and address forgetting, while this work presents a
new paradigm for continual learning that aims to train
a more succinct memory system without accessing task
identity at test time. Our method learns to dynamically
prompt (L2P) a pre-trained model to learn tasks sequentially under different task transitions. In our proposed
framework, prompts are small learnable parameters, which
are maintained in a memory space. The objective is to
optimize prompts to instruct the model prediction and explicitly manage task-invariant and task-specific knowledge
while maintaining model plasticity. We conduct comprehensive experiments under popular image classification benchmarks with different challenging continual learning settings, where L2P consistently outperforms prior state-ofthe-art methods. Surprisingly, L2P achieves competitive
results against rehearsal-based methods even without a rehearsal buffer and is directly applicable to challenging taskagnostic continual learning. Source code is available at
https://github.com/google- research/l2p.

1. Introduction
Contrary to ordinary supervised learning that trains on
independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) data, continual learning tackles the problem of training a single model
on non-stationary data distributions where different classification tasks are presented sequentially. However, since the
model only has access to the current data in an individual
phase of the learning cycle, it is prone to overfit on the currently available data and suffers from performance deterioration on previous data due to catastrophic forgetting [37].
A major body of work in continual learning follows the
⇤ Work done during internship at Google Cloud AI Research.

Figure 1. Overview of the L2P framework. Compared with typical
methods that adapt entire or partial model weights to tasks sequentially with a rehearsal buffer to avoid forgetting, L2P uses a single
backbone model and learns a prompt pool to instruct the model
conditionally. Task-specific knowledge is stored inside a prompt
pool, thus a rehearsal buffer is no longer mandatory to mitigate
forgetting. L2P automatically selects and updates prompts from
the pool in an instance-wise fashion, thus task identity is not required at test time. Notably, our largest prompt space is smaller
than the size of one 224 ⇥ 224 image.

learning paradigm by adapting the entire or partial model
weights continually as the data distribution shifts, with a
focus on preserving past knowledge [9,34]. Although many
types of methods attain good results, there are still critical
limitations that need to be addressed. First, motivated by
the episodic memory in the hippocampus according to the
Complementary Learning Systems (CLS) theory [23, 36],
many state-of-the-art methods [3, 4, 8] rely on a rehearsal
buffer to re-train a portion of past examples. However,
they suffer from substantial performance deterioration with
smaller buffer size [4] and become ineffective when a rehearsal buffer is not allowed – for example, in real-world
scenarios where data privacy matters [54]. This suggests
that simply buffering past data and re-train the model may
not be the best approach to retrieve past knowledge. Without accessing a rehearsal buffer, another branch of works
[19, 26, 45] bypass the forgetting issue by assuming known
task identity at test time, so that they are able to attach
task-independent modules to the shared model for inference. However, knowing task identity at test time restricts
practical usage.
The limitations of prior work bring up critical questions
in continual learning [13, 16]: (1) Whether the form of
episodic memory can go beyond buffering past data to more
intelligent and succinct episodic memory system? (2) How

139

