Adaptive Early-Learning Correction for Segmentation from Noisy Annotations
Sheng Liu* 1 Kangning Liu* 1 Weicheng Zhu 1 Yiqiu Shen 1 Carlos Fernandez-Granda1,2
1
NYU Center for Data Science 2 NYU Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
Input

Abstract
Deep learning in the presence of noisy annotations has
been studied extensively in classification, but much less in
segmentation tasks. In this work, we study the learning
dynamics of deep segmentation networks trained on inaccurately annotated data. We observe a phenomenon that has
been previously reported in the context of classification: the
networks tend to first fit the clean pixel-level labels during
an “early-learning” phase, before eventually memorizing
the false annotations. However, in contrast to classification,
memorization in segmentation does not arise simultaneously
for all semantic categories. Inspired by these findings, we
propose a new method for segmentation from noisy annotations with two key elements. First, we detect the beginning
of the memorization phase separately for each category during training. This allows us to adaptively correct the noisy
annotations in order to exploit early learning. Second, we
incorporate a regularization term that enforces consistency
across scales to boost robustness against annotation noise.
Our method outperforms standard approaches on a medicalimaging segmentation task where noises are synthesized to
mimic human annotation errors. It also provides robustness
to realistic noisy annotations present in weakly-supervised
semantic segmentation, achieving state-of-the-art results on
PASCAL VOC 2012. 1

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental problem in computer vision. The goal is to assign a label to each pixel
in an image, indicating its semantic category. Deep learning models based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
achieve state-of-the-art performance [9, 39, 51, 65]. These
models are typically trained in a supervised fashion, which
requires pixel-level annotations. Unfortunately, gathering
pixel-level annotations is very costly, and may require significant domain expertise in some applications [17, 32, 40, 48].
Furthermore, annotation noise is inevitable in some appli* The first two authors contribute equally, order decided by coin flipping.
1 Code is available at https://github.com/Kangningthu/

ADELE

Ground Truth

Baseline

Baseline+ADELE

Figure 1. Visualization of the segmentation results of the baseline method SEAM [52] and the baseline combined with the proposed ADaptive Early-Learning corrEction (ADELE). Our proposed ADELE improves segmentation quality. More examples can
be found in Appendix A.1.

cations. For example, in medical imaging, segmentation
annotation may suffer from inter-reader annotation variations [22, 63]. Learning to perform semantic segmentation
from noisy annotations is thus an important topic in practice.
Prior works on learning from noisy labels focus on classification tasks [33, 46, 57]. There are comparatively fewer
works on segmentation, where existing works focus on designing noise-robust network architecture [50] or incorporating domain specific prior knowledge [42]. We instead
focus on improving the performance in a more general perspective by studying the learning dynamics. We observe that
the networks tend to first fit the clean annotations during
an “early-learning” phase, before eventually memorizing the
false annotations, thus jeopardizing generalization performance. This phenomenon has been reported in the context
of classification [33]. However, this phenomenon in semantic segmentation differs significantly from its counterpart in
classification in the following ways:
• The noise in segmentation labels is often spatially dependent. Therefore, it is beneficial to leverage spatial
information during training.
• In semantic segmentation, early learning and memorization do not occur simultaneously for all semantic categories due to pixel-wise imbalanced labels. Previous methods [28,33] in noisy label classification often assume class

2606

