Memory-Augmented Non-Local Attention for Video Super-Resolution
Jiyang Yu1 , Jingen Liu1 , Liefeng Bo1 , Tao Mei2
1
JD Explore Academy, Mountain View, USA,
2
JD Explore Academy, Beijing, China
{jiyang173, jingenliu}@gmail.com, {liefeng.bo, tmei}@jd.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective video
super-resolution method that aims at generating highfidelity high-resolution (HR) videos from low-resolution
(LR) ones. Previous methods predominantly leverage temporal neighbor frames to assist the super-resolution of the
current frame. Those methods achieve limited performance
as they suffer from the challenges in spatial frame alignment and the lack of useful information from similar LR
neighbor frames. In contrast, we devise a cross-frame
non-local attention mechanism that allows video superresolution without frame alignment, leading to being more
robust to large motions in the video. In addition, to acquire
general video prior information beyond neighbor frames,
and to compensate for the information loss caused by large
motions, we design a novel memory-augmented attention
module to memorize general video details during the superresolution training. We have thoroughly evaluated our work
on various challenging datasets. Compared to other recent video super-resolution approaches, our method not
only achieves significant performance gains on large motion videos but also shows better generalization. Our source
code and the new Parkour benchmark dataset is available
at https://github.com/jiy173/MANA.

1. Introduction
Video super-resolution (VSR) task aims to generate
high-resolution (HR) videos from low-resolution (LR) input videos and recover high frequency details in the frames.
It is attracting more attention due to its potential application
in online video streaming services and the movie industry.
There are two major challenges in the VSR tasks. The
first challenge comes from the dynamic nature of videos.
To ensure temporal consistency and improve visual fidelity,
previous methods generally seek to fuse information from
multiple neighbor frames. Due to the motion across frames,
neighbor frames need to be aligned before fusion. Recent
works have proposed various ways for aligning neighbor
frames to the current frame, either by explicit warping using optical flow [2,17,21,28] or learning implicit alignment
using deformable convolution [29, 32]. However, the quality of these works highly depends on the accuracy of spatial

Figure 1. Our memory-augmented cross-frame non-local attention
approach is robust to large motion videos (first row). Our method
reconstructs visually pleasing details on repetitive patterns (left example) and thin structures (right example) while other video superresolution methods fail in these cases. Best viewed in PDF.

alignment of neighbor frames, which is difficult to achieve
in videos with large motions. As an example shown in Fig. 1
column (a), the method EDVR [32] and TOFlow [37] fail
in the scenario of large motions due to fusing misaligned
frames. This hinders the application of existing VSR methods in real-world videos such as sports videos (see our Parkour dataset in Sec. 4.1), and entertainment videos from animation, movies and vlogs.
The second challenge comes from the irreversible loss of
high-frequency detail and the lack of useful information in
the low-resolution video. Recent learning based single image super-resolution (SISR) works [5, 12, 13, 16, 18, 26, 30,
34,38,49] have intensively studied the visual reconstruction
from LR images by learning general image prior to help recover high-frequency details or transferring texture from an

17834

