Task-Adaptive Negative Envision for Few-Shot Open-Set Recognition
Shiyuan Huang∗

Jiawei Ma∗
Guangxing Han
Columbia University

Shih-Fu Chang

{shiyuan.h, jiawei.m, gh2561, sc250}@columbia.edu

Abstract

1.0

Task ""

0.8

Task "!

Few-shot
prototypes
Positive
queries

0.6

We study the problem of few-shot open-set recognition
(FSOR), which learns a recognition system capable of both
fast adaptation to new classes with limited labeled examples and rejection of unknown negative samples. Traditional large-scale open-set methods have been shown ineffective for FSOR problem due to data limitation. Current
FSOR methods typically calibrate few-shot closed-set classifiers to be sensitive to negative samples so that they can
be rejected via thresholding. However, threshold tuning is
a challenging process as different FSOR tasks may require
different rejection powers. In this paper, we instead propose
task-adaptive negative class envision for FSOR to integrate
threshold tuning into the learning process. Specifically, we
augment the few-shot closed-set classifier with additional
negative prototypes generated from few-shot examples. By
incorporating few-shot class correlations in the negative
generation process, we are able to learn dynamic rejection boundaries for FSOR tasks. Besides, we extend our
method to generalized few-shot open-set recognition (GFSOR), which requires classification on both many-shot and
few-shot classes as well as rejection of negative samples.
Extensive experiments on public benchmarks validate our
methods on both problems. 1

1. Introduction
With the emergence of large-scale image datasets [4, 5,
23], deep learning has achieved great success in various vision tasks [3, 15–17, 31, 34]. Current recognition systems
usually assume a predefined set of classes with sufficient
number of labeled data. Each testing sample is supposed to
belong to these predefined classes so that the systems only
need to perform closed-set classification.
In real-world applications, we face more challenging
recognition scenarios. First, sufficient labeled training data
are hardly guaranteed due to high cost of data collection and
possibly limited access to sensitive or rare data. Few-shot
1 Code available at https://github.com/shiyuanh/TANE

0.4

Negative
prototype

0.2
0.0
10

!""

!"!

!"#

!!"

!!!

(b) !! (Manual)

(a) !" (Manual)

Negative
query

!!#

(c) !! (Ours)

5
0
-5
-10
-10

-5

0

5

10

-10

-5

0

5

10

-10

-5

0

5

10

Figure 1. (Up): For each few-shot class in few-shot open-set
recognition (FSOR) task T1 and T2 , we calculate the detection
scores (similarity) of both negative and positive queries and find
Positive Queries
their mean and standard deviation.
(We use the same negative
!
!
queries for both !
tasks.)
However,
a negative query may have simi""
"!
"#
lar detection score to the positive queries (highlighted by red box).
Negative Queries
!!! !!#
(Down): In addition, to reject a negative !!"
query,
existing
FSOR !!" !!! !!#
method relies on a manually selected threshold. However, a rejection threshold working properly for T1 may fail in T2 . Instead, we
propose to learn a negative prototype that automatically estimates
a task-adaptive threshold for negative detection.

learning [6, 37, 40, 43] (FSL) typically tackles data insufficiency scenario by fast adaptation of recognition system to
new classes with access to very few (e.g., only one) labeled
instances. But FSL still holds a closed-set assumption.
On the other hand, there are efforts that endow a recognition system with the ability to handle out-of-distribution
testing samples. Open-set recognition (OR) [1,11,25,35,36]
considers the case where testing samples could come from
other unknown source under a large-scale training setting.
Without loss of capability of classifying closed-set queries
(i.e., positive queries), it also needs to detect queries from
unknown classes (i.e., negative queries). Current OR methods typically learns an open-set classifier by either calibrating prediction scores or synthesizing negative queries. They
rely on large amount of data to avoid overfitting and estimate distribution properly. But with only a few labeled instances, it becomes hard to do so. Hence direct application

7171

