Cerberus Transformer: Joint Semantic, Affordance and Attribute Parsing
Xiaoxue Chen1 , Tianyu Liu2 , Hao Zhao3,4 , Guyue Zhou1 , Ya-Qin Zhang1
1
AIR, Tsinghua University 2 HKUST 3 Peking University 4 Intel Labs
{chenxiaoxue, zhouguyue, zhangyaqin}@air.tsinghua.edu.cn
tianyu.liu@connect.ust.hk, zhao-hao@pku.edu.cn, hao.zhao@intel.com

Abstract
Multi-task indoor scene understanding is widely considered as an intriguing formulation, as the affinity of different tasks may lead to improved performance. In this paper, we tackle the new problem of joint semantic, affordance
and attribute parsing. However, successfully resolving it
requires a model to capture long-range dependency, learn
from weakly aligned data and properly balance sub-tasks
during training. To this end, we propose an attention-based
architecture named Cerberus and a tailored training framework. Our method effectively addresses aforementioned
challenges and achieves state-of-the-art performance on all
three tasks. Moreover, an in-depth analysis shows concept
affinity consistent with human cognition, which inspires
us to explore the possibility of weakly supervised learning. Surprisingly, Cerberus achieves strong results using
only 0.1% − 1% annotation. Visualizations further confirm that this success is credited to common attention maps
across tasks. Code and models can be accessed at https:
//github.com/OPEN-AIR-SUN/Cerberus.

1. Introduction
Understanding indoor scenes is a fundamental computer
vision topic, with many applications in intelligent robots
and metaverse. To achieve a holistic understanding, many
sub-tasks need to be addressed and it is widely believed and
evidenced that jointly addressing them lead to more accurate results [46] [9] [35] [40] [10]. Different from former
arts, we study a new and challenging formulation: joint semantic, affordance, and attribute parsing from a single image. As shown in Fig. 1, these three tasks cover a wide
spectrum of human recognition and cognition abilities. The
attribute of an object (like wood or Glossy) is a low-level
physical property. The semantic category of a region (like
floor or sofa) is a recognition-level concept. Affordance
prediction (like movable or walkable) is a cognition-level
problem. These three tasks are closely associated, since objects with specific semantics tend to have specific attribute

Figure 1. Cerberus Transformer. Given a single image, Cerberus
parses attribute, affordance and semantics simultaneously. The
cartoon is credited to https://www.redbubble.com/i/sticker/BabyCerberus-by-ArtOfBianca/48150266.EJUG5.

or affordance. Parsing them jointly is a natural yet unexplored formulation.
This new formulation brings both challenges and opportunities. In order to resolve three tasks with a single
model, we need to learn shared representations that effectively serve all of them. Meanwhile, the representations
are expected to model long range dependency in inputs in a
principled manner. In order to simultaneously meet these
two requirements, we resort to the transformer architecture [36], which has a global receptive field at each layer.
The proposed architecture is named as Cerberus.
Our formulation is challenged by another uncommon issue: weakly aligned data. During the historical development of scene understanding techniques, attribute [47] and
affordance [27] annotations are gradually added to the original NYUd2 semantic parsing dataset [34]. Unfortunately,
their image-annotation pairs are only weakly aligned in the
spatial domain. This is in contrast to former multi-task
scene understanding methods which exploit aligned oneinput-multi-output datasets. To this end, we develop a tailored training framework that treats three datasets as separate sources and leverages a gradient projection technique

19649

