JoinABLe: Learning Bottom-up Assembly of Parametric CAD Joints
Karl D.D. Willis1 Pradeep Kumar Jayaraman1 Hang Chu1 Yunsheng Tian2 Yifei Li2
Daniele Grandi 1 Aditya Sanghi1 Linh Tran1 Joseph G. Lambourne1
Armando Solar-Lezama2 Wojciech Matusik2
1
Autodesk Research 2 MIT CSAIL

Abstract
Physical products are often complex assemblies combining a multitude of 3D parts modeled in computer-aided design (CAD) software. CAD designers build up these assemblies by aligning individual parts to one another using constraints called joints. In this paper we introduce JoinABLe,
a learning-based method that assembles parts together to
form joints. JoinABLe uses the weak supervision available
in standard parametric CAD files without the help of object
class labels or human guidance. Our results show that by
making network predictions over a graph representation of
solid models we can outperform multiple baseline methods
with an accuracy (79.53%) that approaches human performance (80%). Finally, to support future research we release
the Fusion 360 Gallery assembly dataset, containing assemblies with rich information on joints, contact surfaces,
holes, and the underlying assembly graph structure.

1. Introduction
The physical products that surround us every day are
often complex assemblies combining a multitude of parts
modeled using computer-aided design (CAD) software.
Well-designed assemblies are critical to ensure that products are cost-efficient, reliable, and easy to physically assemble. CAD designers build up assemblies by aligning
pairs of parts together using constraints called joints. These
joints determine the relative pose and allowed degrees of
freedom (DOF) of parts in an assembly [43]. For example,
a bolt can be constrained to a hole, then a nut constrained
to the bolt, and so on until an entire assembly is designed.
Assemblies may contain thousands of parts, represented as
solid models in the boundary representation (B-Rep) format [33, 61], and are used for everything from furniture, to
vehicles, to electronic devices. Defining individual global
positions for each part without using joints quickly becomes
cumbersome and prone to error. Joints enable designers to
make quick parametric changes to a design while preserving
existing part relationships and maintaining design intent.

JoinABLe

INPUT
ENCODER

JOINT AXIS
PREDICTION

OUTPUT
JOINT POSE
SEARCH

Figure 1. CAD assemblies contain valuable joint information describing how parts are locally constrained and positioned together.
We use this weak supervision to learn a bottom-up approach to
assembly. JoinABLe combines an encoder and joint axis prediction network together with a neurally guided joint pose search to
assemble pairs of parts without class labels or human guidance.

However, fully defining joints in assemblies is timeconsuming – roughly one third of time in CAD is spent doing assembly work [27]. As a result many assemblies have
missing or partly defined joints. A learning-based approach
capable of predicting joints could ease the burden of joint
definition and enable other applications such as CAD assembly synthesis [56], robotic assembly [34], optimization
of dynamic assemblies [72], part motion prediction [58],
assembly-aware similarity search [5] and many more. Although joints for real world assemblies are configured in
a bottom-up fashion, recent work largely takes a top-down
approach to assembly related tasks [19, 23, 38]. Top-down
approaches learn a global arrangement of parts from set object and part classes in carefully annotated data. An open
challenge remains to learn to assemble parts without rely-

15849

