JRDB-Act: A Large-scale Dataset for Spatio-temporal Action, Social Group and
Activity Detection

1

Mahsa Ehsanpour1 , Fatemeh Saleh2 *, Silvio Savarese3 , Ian Reid1 , Hamid Rezatofighi4
The University of Adelaide, 2 Samsung AI Center, 3 Stanford University, 4 Monash University
https://jrdb.erc.monash.edu/

Social Group1: Walking

Abstract
The availability of large-scale video action understanding datasets has facilitated advances in the interpretation
of visual scenes containing people. However, learning to
recognise human actions and their social interactions in an
unconstrained real-world environment comprising numerous people, with potentially highly unbalanced and longtailed distributed action labels from a stream of sensory
data captured from a mobile robot platform remains a significant challenge, not least owing to the lack of a reflective
large-scale dataset. In this paper, we introduce JRDB-Act,
as an extension of the existing JRDB, which is captured by
a social mobile manipulator and reflects a real distribution
of human daily-life actions in a university campus environment. JRDB-Act has been densely annotated with atomic
actions, comprises over 2.8M action labels, constituting a
large-scale spatio-temporal action detection dataset. Each
human bounding box is labeled with one pose-based action
label and multiple (optional) interaction-based action labels. Moreover JRDB-Act provides social group annotation, conducive to the task of grouping individuals based
on their interactions in the scene to infer their social activities (common activities in each social group). Each annotated label in JRDB-Act is tagged with the annotators’
confidence level which contributes to the development of reliable evaluation strategies. In order to demonstrate how
one can effectively utilise such annotations, we develop
an end-to-end trainable pipeline to learn and infer these
tasks, i.e. individual action and social group detection. The
data and the evaluation code will be publicly available at
https://jrdb.erc.monash.edu/.

1. Introduction
Understanding and predicting human actions and intentions are essential tasks in tackling many real-world problems such as autonomous driving, robot navigation safety,
* Work done while at the Australian National University (ANU).

Walking
Holding sth

Walking

2D

SG3

Social Group2

Social Group2

SG3

Walking
Holding sth

Walking

3D

Social Group1: Walking

Figure 1. An illustration of a single frame of the JRDB-Act
dataset. As shown, the data captured with a 2D and 3D multimodal sensory platform is accompanied with a new set of annotations including individual actions and social group formation
leading to infer social activities (common activities in each social
group) to further complement the 2D and 3D detection and tracking annotation in the JRDB.

human-robot interaction, and detection of perilous behaviors in surveillance systems. Developing an AI model performing these tasks is challenging due to the high variations
of human actions in an unconstrained real-world environment. Moreover, dealing with daily actions which resembles a highly unbalanced, long-tailed distribution poses new
challenges for many existing approaches.
Recently, great progress has been made to create largescale video datasets for human activity understanding [3,
9, 20, 26, 45]. While these popular datasets have contributed
significantly to the recent advances in human activity understanding from visual data, their primary application is
not targeting robotics domain and therefore rarely reflect
the challenges in problems such as human-robot interaction
and robot navigation in human crowded environments, e.g.

20983

