GlideNet: Global, Local and Intrinsic based Dense Embedding NETwork
for Multi-category Attributes Prediction
Kareem Metwaly1
Aerin Kim2
Elliot Branson2
Vishal Monga1
1
2
The Pennsylvania State University
Scale AI
1

{kareem, vum4}@psu.edu

2

{aerin.kim, elliot.branson}@scale.com

Abstract
Attaching attributes (such as color, shape, state, action)
to object categories is an important computer vision problem. Attribute prediction has seen exciting recent progress
and is often formulated as a multi-label classification problem. Yet significant challenges remain in: 1) predicting a
large number of attributes over multiple object categories,
2) modeling category-dependence of attributes, 3) methodically capturing both global and local scene context, and
4) robustly predicting attributes of objects with low pixelcount. To address these issues, we propose a novel multicategory attribute prediction deep architecture named GlideNet, which contains three distinct feature extractors. A
global feature extractor recognizes what objects are present
in a scene, whereas a local one focuses on the area surrounding the object of interest. Meanwhile, an intrinsic
feature extractor uses an extension of standard convolution
dubbed Informed Convolution to retrieve features of objects
with low pixel-count utilizing its binary mask. GlideNet
then uses gating mechanisms with binary masks and its selflearned category embedding to combine the dense embeddings. Collectively, the Global-Local-Intrinsic blocks comprehend the scene’s global context while attending to the
characteristics of the local object of interest. The architecture adapts the feature composition based on the category
via category embedding. Finally, using the combined features, an interpreter predicts the attributes, and the length
of the output is determined by the category, thereby removing unnecessary attributes. GlideNet can achieve compelling results on two recent and challenging datasets –
VAW and CAR – for large-scale attribute prediction. For instance, it obtains more than 5% gain over state of the art in
the mean recall (mR) metric. GlideNet’s advantages are especially apparent when predicting attributes of objects with
low pixel counts as well as attributes that demand global
context understanding. Finally, we show that GlideNet excels in training starved real-world scenarios.
more info at http://signal.ee.psu.edu/research/glidenet.html

1. Introduction
To fully comprehend a scene, one should not only be able
to detect the objects in the scene but also understand the attributes (properties) of each object detected. Even if two
objects belong to the same category, their behavior might
vary depending on their attributes. For example, we can’t
predict the route of a driving vehicle based on a still 2D image alone, unless we know the vehicle’s heading/direction
and if the vehicle is parked or not. Accurate classification of
objects and their attributes is critical in numerous applications of computer vision and pattern recognition such as autonomous driving where a thorough grasp of the surroundings is essential for safe driving decisions. In order to drive
safely, a driver must be able to predict numerous crucial aspects. They include, among other things, the activities of
other drivers and pedestrians, the slipperiness of the road
surface, the weather, traffic signs and their contents, and
pedestrian behavior.
Attributes are often defined as semantic (visual) descriptions of objects in a scene. An object’s semantic information includes how it looks (color, size, shape, etc.), interacts with surroundings, and behaviors. The category of an
object, in general, determines the set of possible attributes
that it can have. For instance, a table might have attributes
related to shape, color, and material. However, a human
will have a more complicated set of attributes related to age,
gender, and activity status (sitting, standing, walking, etc.).
Some properties, such as the visible proportion of an object, may exist across multiple categories. Therefore, to
accurately predict an object’s attributes, we must consider
the following: 1) some attributes are unique to certain categories, 2) some categories may share the same attribute,
3) some attributes require a global understanding of the entire scene and 4) some attributes are inherent to the object
of interest. In this paper, we present a new algorithm –
Global, Local and Intrinsic based Dense Embedding Network (GlideNet) – to tackle the attribute prediction problem. GlideNet is capable of addressing the aforementioned
listed concerns while also predicting a variety of categories.

4835

