LTP: Lane-based Trajectory Prediction for Autonomous Driving
Jingke Wang1 ,* Tengju Ye1 ,* Ziqing Gu1, 2 , Junbo Chen1†
1
Alibaba Group 2 Tsinghua University
1

{jingke.wjk, tengju.ytj}@alibaba-inc.com, junbo.chenjb@taobao.com
2

{irene.gooqi}@gmail.com

Abstract
The reasonable trajectory prediction of surrounding traffic participants is crucial for autonomous driving. Especially, how to predict multiple plausible trajectories is still
a challenging problem because of the multiple possibilities
of the future. Proposal-based prediction methods address
the multi-modality issues with a two-stage approach, commonly using intention classification followed by motion regression. This paper proposes a two-stage proposal-based
motion forecasting method that exploits the sliced lane segments as fine-grained, shareable, and interpretable proposals. We use Graph neural network and Transformer to encode the shape and interaction information among the map
sub-graphs and the agents sub-graphs. In addition, we propose a variance-based non-maximum suppression strategy
to select representative trajectories that ensure the diversity
of the final output. Experiments on the Argoverse dataset
show that the proposed method outperforms state-of-theart methods, and the lane segments-based proposals as well
as the variance-based non-maximum suppression strategy
both contribute to the performance improvement. Moreover, we demonstrate that the proposed method can achieve
reliable performance with a lower collision rate and fewer
off-road scenarios in the closed-loop simulation.

1. Introduction
Forecasting possible trajectories of surrounding agents
is a crucial as well as challenging problem for autonomous
driving, especially for multi-mode traffic scenes with uncertain future possibilities.
Early methods [11, 16] only learn a deterministic trajectory, resulting in output averaging in multi-mode scenes,
also called the mode collapse issue. Probabilistic approaches [2, 4] are proposed to generate multi-modal outputs by modeling diverse trajectories with a probability dis* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.

tribution (e.g., GMM). However, the predicted trajectories
of these methods are poor in interpretability and depend
heavily on the predefined distribution.
To address the aforementioned multi-modality problem,
proposal-based methods [8, 14, 24] decouple the trajectory prediction problem into classification-based intention
prediction and regression-based motion prediction. Some
works [8, 24] artificially sample target points, unique for
each predictable agent, as proposals, which could not be
reused for other predictable agents. Lapred [10] utilizes entire lanes as proposals, making it hard to model fine-grained
intentions. Therefore, it is crucial to choose proposals that
can (i) model the intention accurately, and (ii) be shared
among all agents.
Furthermore, how to select representative trajectories is
also a vital issue. The proposal-based methods generate a
cluster of candidate trajectories based on the proposals. It
is defective to output top-k trajectories merely ordered by
the probability of the predicted proposals, since some intentions, though slightly lower in probability, are very critical
for safety. Traditional methods utilize the Non-Maximum
Suppression (NMS) algorithm, given a fixed threshold, to
select the trajectories outside the threshold area into the output set greedily and successively. However, a fixed threshold cannot balance accuracy and variety. Therefore, some
methods [7, 8] try to output multiple trajectories through
optimization-based methods, causing complicated workflow and increased computation cost.
In this paper, we propose a novel Lane-based Trajectory
Prediction (LTP) method for autonomous driving. We argue that there is no need for any complicated hand-craft
proposals because the lane segments in the map are suitable proposals for intention modeling by nature. There are
three advantages of using lane segments as proposals: (i)
Each lane segment explicitly represents a fine-grained
intention. Lane segments can represent tactical-level intentions, such as “change right for overtaking” or “change
right for parking.” While the method using the entire road
lanes as proposals can only learn the road-level intention
like “change left” or “change right.” [10] (ii) The interac-

17134

