Performance-Aware Mutual Knowledge Distillation for Improving Neural
Architecture Search
Pengtao Xie
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA, United States

Xuefeng Du
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI, United States

p1xie@eng.ucsd.edu

xuefengdu1@gmail.com

Abstract
Knowledge distillation has shown great effectiveness
for improving neural architecture search (NAS). Mutual
knowledge distillation (MKD), where a group of models mutually generate knowledge to train each other, has
achieved promising results in many applications. In existing
MKD methods, mutual knowledge distillation is performed
between models without scrutiny: a worse-performing
model is allowed to generate knowledge to train a betterperforming model, which may lead to collective failures.
To address this problem, we propose a performance-aware
MKD (PAMKD) approach for NAS, where knowledge generated by model A is allowed to train model B only if the
performance of A is better than B. We propose a three-level
optimization framework to formulate PAMKD, where three
learning stages are performed end-to-end: 1) each model
trains an initial model independently; 2) the initial models are evaluated on a validation set and better-performing
models generate knowledge to train worse-performing models; 3) architectures are updated by minimizing a validation
loss. Experimental results on a variety of datasets demonstrate that our method is effective.

1. Introduction
Neural architecture search (NAS) [34, 45, 64], which
aims to automatically search for high-performance neural architectures, has attracted much research attention recently. Many NAS works [17, 26, 29, 35, 49, 57] propose to
leverage knowledge distillation (KD) [3, 21, 52] to improve
the quality of searched architectures, by transferring knowledge from human-designed architectures to auto-searched
architectures [29, 35, 57], enabling multi-fidelity evaluation
of architectures [49], alleviating model capacity gap [26],
etc. In KD, a teacher model generates knowledge such
as pseudo-labels [21] and a student model is trained using
these knowledge. Among various studies on KD, mutual

KD [1, 4, 27, 28, 37, 51, 55, 62], where a group of models
mutually perform KD (i.e., each model generates pseudolabels to train other models), has shown promising results.
Mutual KD can help models converge to a more robust minima [62], can achieve better generalization to test data [28],
can learn multi-scale representations to boost prediction accuracy [55], etc.
In existing mutual KD works, knowledge distillation is
performed between any pair of models without scrutiny,
which may lead to collective failure. If a model A is
not performing well, its generated knowledge is not accurate. Trained using these low-quality knowledge, the performance of the rest models is degraded, which renders their
knowledge L to have low-quality as well. Updated using
L, model A becomes worse, which further worsens the rest
models. This vicious circle renders all models to fail collectively (empirical justification is in Fig. 1).
In this paper, we aim to address this problem, by proposing a performance-aware mutual KD approach, for improving NAS. In our method, performance scrutiny is performed
before transferring knowledge: a learner A is allowed to
generate knowledge to train another learner B only if the
performance of A is better than B. By doing this, the risk
of collective failure can be greatly reduced (empirical justification is in Fig. 1), because a poorly-performing learner is
prohibited from generating knowledge.
Existing mutual KD methods [1, 4, 27, 28, 37, 51, 55, 62]
are not amenable for performance scrutiny. In these methods, the same model weights are used for measuring performance and are trained at the same time, which will lead
to a degenerated solution: all models have the same performance and no KD will be conducted (empirical justification
is in Table 6). To address this problem, we propose to learn
two sets of model weights sequentially for each learner, use
one set of them for measuring performance and generating knowledge, and then train the other set using generated knowledge. The two sets of weights are learned sequentially at different stages instead of simultaneously at
the same stage, which can avoid the degenerated solution of

11922

