HL-Net: Heterophily Learning Network for Scene Graph Generation

1

Xin Lin1 * Changxing Ding1,2† Yibing Zhan3 Zijian Li1 Dacheng Tao3,4
South China University of Technology 2 Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou 3 JD Explore Academy
4
The University of Sydney
eelinxin@mail.scut.edu.cn,

chxding@scut.edu.cn,

zhanyibing@jd.com,

eezijianli@mail.scut.edu.cn,

dacheng.tao@gmail.com

2 1

Abstract
Scene graph generation (SGG) aims to detect objects
and predict their pairwise relationships within an image.
Current SGG methods typically utilize graph neural networks (GNNs) to acquire context information between objects/relationships. Despite their effectiveness, however,
current SGG methods only assume scene graph homophily
while ignoring heterophily. Accordingly, in this paper, we
propose a novel Heterophily Learning Network (HL-Net) to
comprehensively explore the homophily and heterophily between objects/relationships in scene graphs. More specifically, HL-Net comprises the following 1) an adaptive
reweighting transformer module, which adaptively integrates the information from different layers to exploit both
the heterophily and homophily in objects; 2) a relationship feature propagation module that efﬁciently explores
the connections between relationships by considering heterophily in order to reﬁne the relationship representation;
3) a heterophily-aware message-passing scheme to further distinguish the heterophily and homophily between objects/relationships, thereby facilitating improved message
passing in graphs. We conducted extensive experiments on
two public datasets: Visual Genome (VG) and Open Images
(OI). The experimental results demonstrate the superiority
of our proposed HL-Net over existing state-of-the-art approaches. In more detail, HL-Net outperforms the secondbest competitors by 2.1% on the VG dataset for scene graph
classiﬁcation and 1.2% on the IO dataset for the ﬁnal score.
Code is available at https://github.com/siml3/HL-Net.

1. Introduction
Scene graph generation (SGG) has recently attracted increasing attention from the research community. As illustrated in Figure 1, a visual scene could be depicted in the
* Work done during ﬁrst author’s internship at JD Explore Academy
† Corresponding author.

19476

8

9

fridge

wrench

cabinet







7
3

SGG

5

behind
beside



woman
has

6

4

hold under
fix





boy sink
has near





hand

hand

window

Figure 1. An image and its ground-truth scene graph. Objects and
their pairwise relationships are represented as nodes and edges,
respectively. Best viewed in color.

form of a graph structure, where objects and their pairwise
relationships are represented by the nodes and edges, respectively. A triplet constructed by two objects and their
corresponding relationship then takes the form SubjectPredicate-Object. Intuitively, the key to SGG methods is
to model and explore the connections between objects, as
well as those between relationships. Due to their remarkable ability to model the connections between graph components, graph neural networks (GNNs) have been widely
adopted in SGG tasks [2, 12, 14, 30, 31].
Despite their effectiveness, existing GNN-based SGG
methods only assume homophily [17] between objects/relationships; in other words, these methods calculate the correlations between objects/relationships by implicitly treating all objects/relationships as belonging to
the same categories. However, as Figure 1 demonstrates,
scene graphs fall naturally into the category of heterophilic
graphs. We, therefore, argue that heterophily, i.e., the interaction between objects/relationships from different categories, should be modeled directly. In this paper, we focus
on the heterophily in class labels, following the deﬁnition
provided in [29, 41].
Exploring heterophily in the SGG is non-trivial. There
are at least two problems that must be considered. First, heterophily in both objects and relationships should be taken
into account; however, no prior SGG works have explicitly considered heterophily, and no heterophilic GNNs have

