Selective-Supervised Contrastive Learning with Noisy Labels
Shikun Li1,2 , Xiaobo Xia3 , Shiming Ge1,2 ,* Tongliang Liu3
1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
3
Trustworthy Machine Learning Lab, The University of Sydney, Australia
{lishikun,geshiming}@iie.ac.cn, xxia5420@uni.sydney.edu.au, tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Deep networks have strong capacities of embedding data
into latent representations and finishing following tasks.
However, the capacities largely come from high-quality annotated labels, which are expensive to collect. Noisy labels are more affordable, but result in corrupted representations, leading to poor generalization performance. To
learn robust representations and handle noisy labels, we
propose selective-supervised contrastive learning (Sel-CL)
in this paper. Specifically, Sel-CL extend supervised contrastive learning (Sup-CL), which is powerful in representation learning, but is degraded when there are noisy labels.
Sel-CL tackles the direct cause of the problem of Sup-CL.
That is, as Sup-CL works in a pair-wise manner, noisy pairs
built by noisy labels mislead representation learning. To
alleviate the issue, we select confident pairs out of noisy
ones for Sup-CL without knowing noise rates. In the selection process, by measuring the agreement between learned
representations and given labels, we first identify confident
examples that are exploited to build confident pairs. Then,
the representation similarity distribution in the built confident pairs is exploited to identify more confident pairs
out of noisy pairs. All obtained confident pairs are finally
used for Sup-CL to enhance representations. Experiments
on multiple noisy datasets demonstrate the robustness of
the learned representations by our method, following the
state-of-the-art performance. Source codes are available at
https://github.com/ShikunLi/Sel-CL.

1. Introduction
Deep networks are powerful in various tasks, e.g., image recognition [19, 62], object detection [58], visual tracking [11] and text matching [3]. The power is largely attributed to the collection of large-scale datasets with highquality annotated labels. In supervised learning, with the
* Shiming Ge is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. Left: learning a classifier with ideal representations induced by clean labels; Right: learning a classifier with corrupted
representations caused by noisy labels. Circles represent the representations of positive examples while triangles represent the representations of negative examples. When the representations are
corrupted by noisy labels, the decision boundary of the classifier
will be largely changed. Therefore, the learned classifier in this
case cannot generalize well on test examples.

data (i.e., the instance and label pairs) in such datasets, deep
networks first learn ideal latent representations of the instances and then complete following tasks with the representations [14, 57]. However, it is extremely expensive to
obtain large-scale high-quality annotated labels. Alternatively, we can collect labels based on web search and user
tags [36, 55]. These labels are cheap but inevitably noisy.
Noisy labels impair the generalization performance of
deep networks [15, 60]. It is because, supervised by the
datasets with noisy labels, the mislabeled data provide incorrect signals when inducing latent representations for the
instances. The corrupted representations then cause inaccurate decisions for following tasks and hurt generalization [29, 52]. For example, as shown in Fig. 1, the corrupted representations result in an inprecise classification
boundary. Therefore, it is crucial to induce robust latent
representations of instances for learning with noisy labels,
which is also our focus in this paper.
Recent works [7, 8, 13, 18, 65] show that, working in a
pair-wise manner, contrastive learning (CL) methods can
bring good latent representations to help following tasks.
Based on whether supervised information is provided, the

316

