Invariant Grounding for Video Question Answering
Yicong Li1 , Xiang Wang2 ,* Junbin Xiao1 , Wei Ji1 , Tat-Seng Chua1
1
National University of Singapore, 2 University of Science and Technology of China,
liyicong@u.nus.edu, xiangwang1223@gmail.com
junbin@comp.nus.edu.sg, jiwei@nus.edu.sg, dcscts@nus.edu.sg

Abstract

track - race

1. Introduction
Video Question Answering (VideoQA) [9] is growing in
popularity and importance to interactive AI, such as visionlanguage navigation for in-home robots and personal assistants [2, 35]. It is the task of multi-modal reasoning, which
answers the natural language question about the content of
a given video. Clearly, inferring a reliable answer requires
a deep understanding of visual scenes, linguistic semantics,
* Corresponding author. This work is supported by the Sea-NExT Joint

Lab

Scene: track – Answer: race

LMI

LMI

LMI

Video Question Answering (VideoQA) is the task of answering questions about a video. At its core is understanding the alignments between visual scenes in video and linguistic semantics in question to yield the answer. In leadanswer
ing VideoQA models, the typical learning (b)
objective, empirical risk minimization (ERM), latches on superficial correlations between video-question pairs and answers as the
alignments. However, ERM can be problematic, because
it tends to over-exploit the spurious correlations between
question-irrelevant scenes and answers, instead of inspecting the causal effect of question-critical scenes. As a result,
the VideoQA models suffer from unreliable reasoning.
In this work, we first take a causal look at VideoQA
and argue that invariant grounding is the key to ruling out
the spurious correlations. Towards this end, we propose a
new learning framework, Invariant Grounding for VideoQA
(IGV), to ground the question-critical scene, whose causal
relations with answers are invariant across different interventions on the complement. With IGV, the VideoQA models are forced to shield the answering process from the
negative influence of spurious correlations, which significantly improves the reasoning ability. Experiments on three
benchmark datasets validate the superiority of IGV in terms
of accuracy, visual explainability, and generalization ability over the leading baselines. Our code is available at
https://github.com/yl3800/IGV .

ra

Answer Candidates
(a) Local mutual information (LMI) between the “track” scene and answers.

Complement Scene

Causal Scene

Question: What is the man doing?
Ground-Truth Answer: Jump
Predictive Answer: Race
(b) Running example of how the “track” complement deviates the answering.

Figure 1. Running example. (a) Superficial correlations between
visual scenes and answers; (b) Suffering from the spurious correlations, VideoQA model fails to answer the question.

and more importantly, the3visual-linguistic alignments.
Towards this end, a number of VideoQA models have
emerged [8–10,18,38]. Scrutinizing these models, we summarize their common paradigm as a combination of two
modules: (1) video-question encoder, which encapsulates
the visual scenes of video and the linguistic semantics of
question as representations; and (2) answer decoder, which
exploits these representations to model the visual-linguistic
alignment and yield an answer. Consequently, the criterion
of empirical risk minimization (ERM) is widely adopted as
the learning objective to optimize these modules — that is,
minimizing the loss between the predictive answer and the
ground-truth answer.
However, the ERM criterion is prone to over-exploiting
the superficial correlations between video-question pairs
and answers. Specifically, we use the metric of local mutual
information (LMI) [27] to quantify the correlations between

2928

