MERLOT Reserve:
Neural Script Knowledge through Vision and Language and Sound
Rowan Zellers
Jiasen Lu
Ximing Lu
Youngjae Yu
Yanpeng Zhao
Mohammadreza Salehi
Aditya Kusupati
Jack Hessel
Ali Farhadi
Yejin Choi
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
University of Edinburgh
rowanzellers.com/merlotreserve

v1

v2

v3

v

4

…

w

4

jiggle it
while it pops

a *jiggling, popcorn
4

w Add a third of a w
1

2

cup of popcorn

a *pouring sound* a
1

2

Now turn the
heat on high

w

*sizzling*

a

3

3

Add a lid, and
then

popping*

[MASKed span]

*lid clinking*

Figure 1: MERLOT Reserve learns multimodal neural script knowledge representations of video – jointly reasoning over
video frames, text, and audio. Our model is pretrained to predict which snippet of text (and audio) might be hidden by the MASK.
This task enables it to perform well on a variety of vision-and-language tasks, in both zero-shot and finetuned settings.

Abstract
As humans, we navigate a multimodal world, building
a holistic understanding from all our senses. We introduce MERLOT Reserve, a model that represents videos
jointly over time – through a new training objective that learns
from audio, subtitles, and video frames. Given a video, we
replace snippets of text and audio with a MASK token; the
model learns by choosing the correct masked-out snippet.
Our objective learns faster than alternatives, and performs
well at scale: we pretrain on 20 million YouTube videos.
Empirical results show that
MERLOT Reserve
learns strong multimodal representations. When finetuned,
it sets state-of-the-art on Visual Commonsense Reasoning
(VCR), TVQA, and Kinetics-600; outperforming prior work
by 5%, 7%, and 1.5% respectively. Ablations show that
these tasks benefit from audio pretraining – even VCR, a QA
task centered around images (without sound). Moreover, our
objective enables out-of-the-box prediction, revealing strong
multimodal commonsense understanding. In a fully zero-shot
setting, our model obtains competitive results on four video
tasks, even outperforming supervised approaches on the
recently proposed Situated Reasoning (STAR) benchmark.
We analyze why audio enables better vision-language representations, suggesting significant opportunities for future
research. We conclude by discussing ethical and societal
implications of multimodal pretraining.

1. Introduction
The world around us is dynamic. We experience and
learn from it using all of our senses, reasoning over them
temporally through multimodal script knowledge [99, 128].
Consider Figure 1, which depicts someone cooking popcorn.
From the images and dialogue alone, we might be able to
imagine what sounds of the scene are: the process might
begin with raw kernels scattering in an empty, metallic pot,
and end with the dynamic ‘pops’ of popcorn expanding,
along with the jiggling of a metal around the stove.
Predicting this sound is an instance of learning from reentry: where time-locked correlations enable one modality to
educate others. Reentry has been hypothesized by developmental psychologists to be crucial for how we as humans
learn visual and world knowledge, much of it without need
for an explicit teacher [89, 35, 20, 100]. Yet, we ask – can
we build machines that likewise learn vision, language, and
sound together? And can this paradigm enable learning neural script knowledge, that transfers to language-and-vision
tasks, even those without sound?
In this work, we study these questions, and find that the
answers are ‘yes.’ We introduce a new model that learns
self-supervised representations of videos, through all their
modalities (audio, subtitles, vision). We dub our model
MERLOT Reserve1, henceforth Reserve for short.
1Short for Multimodal Event Representation Learning Over Time, with
Re-entrant Supervision of Events.

16375

