Gait Recognition in the Wild with Dense 3D Representations and A Benchmark
Jinkai Zheng1 * Xinchen Liu2† Wu Liu2† Lingxiao He2 Chenggang Yan1 Tao Mei2
1
Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, China 2 Explore Academy of JD.com, Beijing, China
{zhengjinkai3, cgyan}@hdu.edu.cn, {liuxinchen1, liuwu1, helingxiao3, tmei}@jd.com

Abstract
Existing studies for gait recognition are dominated by
2D representations like the silhouette or skeleton of the
human body in constrained scenes. However, humans live
and walk in the unconstrained 3D space, so projecting
the 3D human body onto the 2D plane will discard a
lot of crucial information like the viewpoint, shape, and
dynamics for gait recognition. Therefore, this paper aims
to explore dense 3D representations for gait recognition
in the wild, which is a practical yet neglected problem.
In particular, we propose a novel framework to explore
the 3D Skinned Multi-Person Linear (SMPL) model of the
human body for gait recognition, named SMPLGait. Our
framework has two elaborately-designed branches of which
one extracts appearance features from silhouettes, the other
learns knowledge of 3D viewpoints and shapes from the
3D SMPL model. In addition, due to the lack of suitable
datasets, we build the first large-scale 3D representationbased gait recognition dataset, named Gait3D. It contains
4,000 subjects and over 25,000 sequences extracted from
39 cameras in an unconstrained indoor scene. More
importantly, it provides 3D SMPL models recovered from
video frames which can provide dense 3D information of
body shape, viewpoint, and dynamics. Based on Gait3D,
we comprehensively compare our method with existing
gait recognition approaches, which reflects the superior
performance of our framework and the potential of 3D
representations for gait recognition in the wild. The code
and dataset are available at: https://gait3d.github.io.

1. Introduction
Visual gait recognition, which aims to identify a target
person using her/his walking pattern in a video, has been
studied for over two decades [29, 41]. Existing approaches
and datasets are dominated by 2D gait representations
such as silhouette sequences [54], Gait Energy Images
* This work was done when Jinkai Zheng was an intern at Explore
Academy of JD.com.
† Corresponding author.

(a) Silhouettes

(b) Skeletons

(c) 3D Meshes

Figure 1. Different gait representations of the same person from
two viewpoints. Compared with silhouettes and skeletons, 3D
meshes retain the shapes and viewpoints of the human body in
the 3D space. (Best viewed in color.)

(GEIs) [10], 2D skeletons [61], as shown in Figure 1. However, the human body is a 3D non-rigid object, so the 3D-to2D projection discards a lot of useful information of shapes,
viewpoints, and dynamics while presenting ambiguity for
gait recognition. Therefore, this paper is focused on 3D gait
recognition that is valuable yet neglected by the community.
Recently, deep learning-based methods have dominated
the state-of-the-art performance on the widely adopted
2D gait recognition benchmarks like CASIA-B [36] and
OU-MVLP [35] by directly learning discriminative features from silhouette sequences [5, 8, 55] or GEIs [44].
Despite the excellent results on the in-the-lab datasets,
these methods cannot work well in the wild scenarios
which have more diverse 3D viewpoints of cameras and
more complex environmental interference factors like occlusions [61]. Although several works exploit 3D cylinders [3] or 3D skeletons [40], these sparse 3D models also
210228

