MiniViT: Compressing Vision Transformers with Weight Multiplexing
Jinnian Zhang1,∗ , Houwen Peng1,∗,† , Kan Wu1,∗ , Mengchen Liu2 , Bin Xiao2 , Jianlong Fu1 , Lu Yuan2
1
Microsoft Research, 2 Microsoft Cloud+AI
{v-jinnizhang, houwen.peng, v-kanwu, mengcliu, bin.xiao, jianf, luyuan}.microsoft.com

Abstract
Vision Transformer (ViT) models have recently drawn
much attention in computer vision due to their high model
capability. However, ViT models suffer from huge number of parameters, restricting their applicability on devices
with limited memory. To alleviate this problem, we propose
MiniViT, a new compression framework, which achieves parameter reduction in vision transformers while retaining the
same performance. The central idea of MiniViT is to multiplex the weights of consecutive transformer blocks. More
specifically, we make the weights shared across layers,
while imposing a transformation on the weights to increase
diversity. Weight distillation over self-attention is also applied to transfer knowledge from large-scale ViT models to
weight-multiplexed compact models. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate the efficacy of MiniViT, showing that it
can reduce the size of the pre-trained Swin-B transformer
by 48%, while achieving an increase of 1.0% in Top-1 accuracy on ImageNet. Moreover, using a single-layer of parameters, MiniViT is able to compress DeiT-B by 9.7 times
from 86M to 9M parameters, without seriously compromising the performance. Finally, we verify the transferability of MiniViT by reporting its performance on downstream
benchmarks. Code and models are available at here.

1. Introduction
“Only Mini Can Do It.”
— BMW Mini Cooper
Large-scale pre-trained vision transformers, such as
ViT [18], CvT [58], and Swin [36], have recently drawn
a great deal of attention due to their high model capabilities
and superior performance on downstream tasks. However,
they generally involve giant model sizes and large amounts
of pre-training data. For example, ViT uses 300 million
images to train a huge model with 632 million parameters, achieving state-of-the-art performance on image classification [18]. Meanwhile, the Swin transformer uses 200300 million parameters, and is pre-trained on ImageNet∗ Equal contributions. Work done when Jinnian and Kan were interns
of Microsoft. † Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Comparisons between MiniViTs and popular vision
transformers, such as DeiT [52] and Swin Transformers [36]

22K [16], to attain promising results on downstream detection and segmentation tasks [36].
Hundreds of millions of parameters consume considerable storage and memory, making these models unsuitable
for applications involving limited computational resources,
such as edge and IoT devices, or in which real-time predictions are needed. Recent studies reveal that the large-scale
pre-trained models are over-parametrized [30] . Therefore,
it is necessary and feasible to eliminate redundant parameters and the computational overhead of these pre-trained
models without compromising their performance.
Weight sharing is a simple, but effective, technique to
reduce model sizes. The original idea of weight sharing
in neural networks was proposed in the 1990s by LeCun
and Hinton [33,40], and recently reinvented for transformer
model compression in natural language processing (NLP)
[32]. The most representative work, ALBERT [32], introduces a cross-layer parameter sharing method to prevent the number of parameters from growing with network
depth. Such technique can significantly reduce the model
size without seriously hurting performance, thus improving
parameter efficiency. However, the efficacy of weight sharing in vision transformer compression is not well explored.
To examine this, we perform the cross-layer weight sharing [32] on DeiT-S [52] and Swin-B [52] transformers. Unexpectedly, this straightforward usage of weight sharing
brings two severe issues: (1) Training instability. We ob-

12145

