Balanced Multimodal Learning via On-the-fly Gradient Modulation
Xiaokang Peng1,† , Yake Wei1,† , Andong Deng2 , Dong Wang3 , Di Hu1,*
1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai
1
{xiaokangpeng, yakewei, dihu}@ruc.edu.cn, 2 {andongdeng69, dongwang.dw93}@gmail.com
1

Abstract
Multimodal learning helps to comprehensively understand the world, by integrating different senses. Accordingly, multiple input modalities are expected to boost model
performance, but we actually find that they are not fully
exploited even when the multimodal model outperforms
its uni-modal counterpart. Specifically, in this paper we
point out that existing multimodal discriminative models,
in which uniform objective is designed for all modalities,
could remain under-optimized uni-modal representations,
caused by another dominated modality in some scenarios, e.g., sound in blowing wind event, vision in drawing
picture event, etc. To alleviate this optimization imbalance, we propose on-the-fly gradient modulation to adaptively control the optimization of each modality, via monitoring the discrepancy of their contribution towards the
learning objective. Further, an extra Gaussian noise that
changes dynamically is introduced to avoid possible generalization drop caused by gradient modulation. As a result, we achieve considerable improvement over common
fusion methods on different multimodal tasks, and this simple strategy can also boost existing multimodal methods,
which illustrates its efficacy and versatility. The source
code is available at https://github.com/GeWuLab/OGM-GE_CVPR2022.

1. Introduction
People perceive the world by collaboratively utilizing
multiple senses: eyes to look, ears to listen, and hands
to touch. Such a multimodal way can provide more comprehensive information from different aspects. Inspired by
the multi-sensory integration ability of humans [11], multimodal data, collected from different sensors, tend to be
more considered in machine learning. In recent years, mul† Equal contribution. * Corresponding author.

timodal learning has exhibited a clear advantage in improving the performance of previous uni-modal tasks as well as
addressing new challenging problems, such as action recognition [10, 23, 29, 37], audio-visual speech recognition [33],
and visual question answering [2, 19, 41].
Multimodal data usually provides more views compared
with uni-modal one, accordingly learning with multimodal
data should match or outperform the uni-modal case. However, according to the recent study [39], multimodal models
that optimize the uniform learning objective for all modalities with joint training strategy can be inferior to the unimodal model in some situations. Such a phenomenon violates the intention of improving model performance through
integrating information from multiple modalities. Previous researchers claimed that various modalities tend to converge at different rates, leading to uncoordinated convergence problem [20, 35, 39]. To cope with this problem,
some methods aid the training of multimodal models with
the help of additional uni-modal classifiers or pre-trained
models [8,39]. Hence, they inevitably bring extra efforts on
training additional neural modules.
However, we further find that even when the multimodal
models outperform the uni-modal ones, they still cannot
fully exploit the potential of multiple modalities. As shown
in Figure 1, the joint multimodal model achieves the best
event classification performance on VGGSound [7], but the
performance of visual and audio modality within it is clearly
worse than that in the visual-only and audio-only model,
respectively1 . This interesting observation suggests underoptimized representation in both modalities. We consider
the reason could be that, in some multimodal scenarios,
the dominated modality [31] with better performance (e.g.,
sound of wind blowing, vision of playing football, etc.) will
suppress the optimization of the other one. Moreover, as il1 Here, the visual-only and the audio-only are the models that trained

with a single modality. To evaluate the uni-modal encoders of the multimodal model, we observe the performance through fixing the joint-trained
uni-modal encoder and finetuning a uni-modal classifier only.

8238

