SCS-Co: Self-Consistent Style Contrastive Learning for Image Harmonization
Yucheng Hang1,∗ , Bin Xia1,∗ , Wenming Yang1,2,† , Qingmin Liao1,2
1
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, China
2
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, China
{hangyc20, xiab20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {yang.wenming, liaoqm}@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

(a) Composite

(b) DoveNet [5]

(c) iS2 AM [35]

(d) RainNet [24]

(e) Ours

(f) Real (Ground Truth)

Figure 1. Comparison with other methods. Thanks to the proposed SCS-Co, our method can obtain more explicit distortion knowledge
from dynamically generated negative samples, and further jointly constrain the solution space from two aspects of the foreground self-style
and foreground-background style consistency. Coupled with BAIN, our method produces a more photorealistic harmonized result.

Abstract
Image harmonization aims to achieve visual consistency
in composite images by adapting a foreground to make it
compatible with a background. However, existing methods
always only use the real image as the positive sample to
guide the training, and at most introduce the corresponding
composite image as a single negative sample for an auxiliary constraint, which leads to limited distortion knowledge, and further causes a too large solution space, making the generated harmonized image distorted. Besides,
none of them jointly constrain from the foreground selfstyle and foreground-background style consistency, which
exacerbates this problem. Moreover, recent region-aware
adaptive instance normalization achieves great success
but only considers the global background feature distribution, making the aligned foreground feature distribution biased. To address these issues, we propose a self-consistent
style contrastive learning scheme (SCS-Co). By dynamically generating multiple negative samples, our SCS-Co
can learn more distortion knowledge and well regularize
the generated harmonized image in the style representation space from two aspects of the foreground self-style
and foreground-background style consistency, leading to a
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

more photorealistic visual result. In addition, we propose
a background-attentional adaptive instance normalization
(BAIN) to achieve an attention-weighted background feature distribution according to the foreground-background
feature similarity. Experiments demonstrate the superiority
of our method over other state-of-the-art methods in both
quantitative comparison and visual analysis.

1. Introduction
Image composition is widely used in image editing
[6, 45] and data augmentation [7, 46], which targets synthesizing a composite image by extracting the foreground
of one image and pasting it on the background of another
image. However, since the foreground and background appearance will be distinct due to different capture conditions,
the composite image often looks unrealistic, i.e., suffers
from the inharmony problem. Therefore, image harmonization, which aims to adjust the appearance of the foreground
to make it compatible with the background in the composite
image, is significant and challenging.
Numerous deep learning-based methods have been proposed for image harmonization. However, most methods
[6, 14, 15, 35, 39, 48] do not consider this problem from the
perspective of visual style. Hence, they fail to ensure a visual style consistency between the foreground and the back-

19710

