Implicit Motion Handling for Video Camouflaged Object Detection
Xuelian Cheng1 , * Huan Xiong3 , † Deng-Ping Fan4 , Yiran Zhong6,7 ,
Mehrtash Harandi1,8 , Tom Drummond1 , Zongyuan Ge1,2,5
1
Faculty of Engineering, Monash University, 2 eResearch Centre, Monash University
3
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, 4 CVL, ETH Zurich,
5
Airdoc Research Australia, 6 SenseTime Research, 7 Shanghai AI Laboratory, 8 Data61, CSIRO
*

(a) Frame T

(b) GT

(c) Ours

(d) Flow Warping

(e) Flow

Figure 1. Implicit (ours) vs Explicit (optical flow based) motion handling. Our result (c) of frame T is generated by the frame T − 1 and T .
Figure (d) is the warped result using our result of frame T − 1 and a pre-computed optical flow (e). As we will discuss, the accumulated
error in explicit methods (i.e., optical flow) for camouflage objects can lead to a tangible drop in the accuracy (dropped by 10.79%).

Abstract
We propose a new video camouflaged object detection
(VCOD) framework that can exploit both short-term dynamics and long-term temporal consistency to detect camouflaged objects from video frames. An essential property
of camouflaged objects is that they usually exhibit patterns
similar to the background and thus make them hard to identify from still images. Therefore, effectively handling temporal dynamics in videos becomes the key for the VCOD
task as the camouflaged objects will be noticeable when
they move. However, current VCOD methods often leverage
homography or optical flows to represent motions, where
the detection error may accumulate from both the motion
estimation error and the segmentation error. On the other
hand, our method unifies motion estimation and object segmentation within a single optimization framework. Specifically, we build a dense correlation volume to implicitly capture motions between neighbouring frames and utilize the
final segmentation supervision to optimize the implicit motion estimation and segmentation jointly. Furthermore, to
enforce temporal consistency within a video sequence, we
jointly utilize a spatio-temporal transformer to refine the
short-term predictions. Extensive experiments on VCOD
benchmarks demonstrate the architectural effectiveness of
our approach. We also provide a large-scale VCOD dataset
* Indicates equal contribution; † Corresponding author (dengpfan@gmail.com). Work was done while Xuelian Cheng was an MBZUAI
visiting scholar mentored by Deng-Ping Fan.

named MoCA-Mask with pixel-level handcrafted groundtruth masks and construct a comprehensive VCOD benchmark with previous methods to facilitate research in this
direction. Dataset Link: https://xueliancheng.
github.io/SLT-Net-project.

1. Introduction
Video Camouflaged Object Detection (VCOD) is the
task of discovering objects in a video that, appearancewise, exhibit a great deal of similarity to the background
scene. Despite enjoying wide applications (e.g., surveillance and security [24], autonomous driving [4, 32], medical image segmentation [11, 42], locust detection [17] and
robotics [28]), the problem of Camouflaged Object Detection (COD) is a daunting task as camouflaged objects are
often indistinguishable to naked-eyes. This, in turn, has
made VCOD a relatively under-explored problem in computer vision, as compared to several related problems such
as video object detection (VOD) [1, 47], video salient object detection (VSOD) [15], and video motion segmentation
(VMS) [16, 46].
In most computer vision tasks (e.g., instance segmentation [51], saliency detection [49]), it is assumed that objects have clear boundaries. This allows us to formulate
the problem at the image level and even consider improvements if motion information is available. In contrast, object boundaries are ambiguous and indistinguishable when
it comes to detecting camouflaged objects. This not only
makes detection from images challenging, but also results

13864

