Modulated Contrast for Versatile Image Synthesis
Fangneng Zhan1 , Jiahui Zhang2 , Yingchen Yu2 , Rongliang Wu2 , Shijian Lu* 2
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 Nanyang Technological University

Abstract
Perceiving the similarity between images has been a
long-standing and fundamental problem underlying various
visual generation tasks. Predominant approaches measure
the inter-image distance by computing pointwise absolute
deviations, which tends to estimate the median of instance
distributions and leads to blurs and artifacts in the generated images. This paper presents MoNCE, a versatile metric that introduces image contrast to learn a calibrated metric for the perception of multifaceted inter-image distances.
Unlike vanilla contrast which indiscriminately pushes negative samples from the anchor regardless of their similarity, we propose to re-weight the pushing force of negative
samples adaptively according to their similarity to the anchor, which facilitates the contrastive learning from informative negative samples. Since multiple patch-level contrastive objectives are involved in image distance measurement, we introduce optimal transport in MoNCE to modulate the pushing force of negative samples collaboratively
across multiple contrastive objectives. Extensive experiments over multiple image translation tasks show that the
proposed MoNCE outperforms various prevailing metrics
substantially. The code is available at MoNCE.

1. Introduction
Multifarious image generation tasks [26, 27, 30, 45, 46,
50, 56, 57] often entail multifaceted metrics to measure the
inter-image similarity with regard to different properties
such as image structures, image semantics and image perceptual realism, etc. Defining generic metrics to fulfil multiple objectives is challenging as different visual properties
are usually entangled in pixels and the notion of visual similarity is often subjective. Image similarity measurement
remains a very open research challenge in visual generation
tasks.
To measure and minimize the content variation in unpaired image translation, Zhu et al. [56] design a cycleconsistency loss to ensure that input images can be recovered from the output images. Different from unpaired image
* Corresponding author, E-mail: shijian.lu@ntu.edu.sg

Output Image

Input Image

Unpaired Translation
Negative Pair
Similarity
High

Output Image

Ground Truth

Paired Translation

Pos
Neg

Neg

…

…

Anchor

Neg
Neg
Low

…

Neg

Vanilla Objective

Weighted Objective Weighted Objective
(Unpaired Translation) (Paired Translation)

Modulated Objective

Figure 1. Comparison of different contrastive objectives: For
the contrastive objective of a single image patch, vanilla contrastive objective repels all negative samples indiscriminately. The
introduced weighted contrastive objective adaptively adjusts the
weights of negative pairs according to the pair similarity. With
inverse weighting strategies for unpaired and paired translation
tasks, the weighted objective can be applied to improve the generation performance substantially. The modulated contrastive objective introduces optimal transport to modulate the learning objectives of all image patches as a whole.

translation, paired image translation entails certain metrics
to measure the perceptual similarity between output images
and ground truth. Among various distance metrics [36, 37],
perceptual loss [17] emerges as a powerful metric in line
with human perception by leveraging the internal activation
of pre-trained networks. However, above metrics are designed based on point-wise deviations, which undesirably
minimize the average deviation to all possible instances.
For example, a semantic map corresponds to numerous real
images, minimizing the average deviation to all possible
real images tends to produce blurred generation results.
Instead of minimizing the point-wise deviation, the prevailing contrastive learning [5, 14, 41] aims to pull positive
samples towards an anchor and push negative samples far
away from it. It has recently been adopted in image generation tasks for preserving image contents in unpaired im-

18280

