Adaptive Gating for Single-Photon 3D Imaging
Ryan Po, Adithya Pediredla, Ioannis Gkioulekas
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
RGB image of scene

Abstract
Single-photon avalanche diodes (SPADs) are growing
in popularity for depth sensing tasks. However, SPADs
still struggle in the presence of high ambient light due to
the effects of pile-up. Conventional techniques leverage
fixed or asynchronous gating to minimize pile-up effects,
but these gating schemes are all non-adaptive, as they are
unable to incorporate factors such as scene priors and previous photon detections into their gating strategy. We propose an adaptive gating scheme built upon Thompson sampling. Adaptive gating periodically updates the gate position based on prior photon observations in order to minimize depth errors. Our experiments show that our gating
strategy results in significantly reduced depth reconstruction error and acquisition time, even when operating outdoors under strong sunlight conditions.

SPAD

Beam splitter

Galvo
Laser

Free-running mode
(conventional)

Our method
(adaptive gating)

Our method
(adaptive exposure)

RMSE = 0.47cm
exposure = 100μs

RMSE = 0.16cm
exposure = 100μs

RMSE = 0.37cm
exposure = 33μs

1. Introduction
Single-photon avalanche diodes (SPADs) are an emerging type of sensor [40] that possess single photon sensitivity. Combined with ultrafast pulsed lasers and picosecondaccurate timing electronics, SPADs are becoming increasingly popular in LiDAR systems for 3D sensing applications [15–17, 26]. SPAD-based LiDAR is used, e.g., on autonomous vehicles [2, 39] and consumer devices [1].
Unfortunately, SPAD-based LiDAR faces a fundamental
challenge when operating under strong ambient light: background photons due to ambient light can block the detection
of signal photons due to the LiDAR laser, an effect know as
pile-up [6,12,15,16,31,33]. This effect becomes more pronounced as scene depth increases, and results in potentially
very inaccurate depth estimation.
A popular technique for mitigating pile-up is to use gating mechanisms that can selectively activate and deactivate
the SPAD at specific time intervals relative to laser pulse
emissions. Gating can help prevent the detection of earlyarriving background photons, and thus favor the detection
of late-arriving signal photons. Prior work has proposed different schemes for selecting gating times. A common such
scheme is fixed gating, which uses for all laser pulses the
same gating time (Figure 2(a)). If this gating time is close to
the time-of-flight corresponding to scene depth, then fixed
gating greatly increases the detection probability of signal
photons, and thus depth estimation accuracy. Unfortunately,
it is not always possible to know or approximate the timeof-flight of true depth ahead of time.
More recently, Gupta et al. [15] proposed a uniform
gating scheme, which uniformly distributes gate times for
successive laser pulses across the entire depth range (Figure 2(b)). This helps “average-out” the effect of pile-up
across all possible depths. Unfortunately, uniform gating
does not take into account information about the true scene
depth available from either prior knowledge, or from photon

Figure 1. Adaptive gating and adaptive exposure for depth
imaging under sunlight. Adaptive gating reduces depth RMSE
≈ 3× compared to conventional methods for the same acquisition
time. When used in conjunction with adaptive exposure, our methods improves frame rate 3× while still achieving lower RMSE.

detections during previous laser pulses.
We propose a new gating scheme for SPAD-based LiDAR that we term adaptive gating. Two main building
blocks underlie our gating scheme: First, a probabilistic
model for the detection times recorded by SPAD-based LiDAR. Second, the classical Thompson sampling algorithm
for sequential experimental design. By combining these two
components, our proposed adaptive gating scheme is able
to select gating sequences that, at any time during LiDAR
acquisition, optimally take advantage of depth information
available at that time, either from previous photon detections or from some depth prior. As a useful by-product of
our framework, we introduce a variant of our adaptive gating scheme that additionally adapts exposure time, as necessary to achieve some target depth accuracy. We build a
SPAD-based LiDAR prototype, and perform experiments
both indoors, and outdoors under strong sunlight. Our experiments show that, compared to previous gating schemes,
our adaptive gating scheme can reduce either depth estimation error or acquisition time (or both) by more than 50%
(Figure 1), and can take advantage of prior depth information from spatial regularization or RGB images. To ensure
reproducibility and facilitate follow-up research, we provide our code and data on the project website [36].

16354

