A Deeper Dive Into What Deep Spatiotemporal Networks Encode:
Quantifying Static vs. Dynamic Information
Matthew Kowal1,2 , Mennatullah Siam1 , Md Amirul Islam2,3
Neil D. B. Bruce2,5 , Richard P. Wildes1,4 , Konstantinos G. Derpanis1,2,4
1

York University, 2 Vector Institute for AI, 3 Ryerson University, 4 Samsung AI Centre Toronto, 5 University of Guelph

{m2kowal,msiam,wildes,kosta}@eecs.yorku.ca, mdamirul@ryerson.ca, brucen@uoguelph.ca

Abstract

1. Introduction
This paper focuses on the problem of interpreting the information learned by deep neural networks (DNNs) trained
for video understanding tasks. Interpreting deep spatiotemporal models is a largely understudied topic in computer vision despite their achieving state-of-the-art performance on
video understanding tasks, such as action recognition [53]
and video object segmentation [48]. These models are
trained in an end-to-end fashion to learn discriminative
static and dynamic features over space and time. Here, we
use the term static to refer to attributes that can be extracted
1 Project page and code

% Units

Quantifying
Static and Dynamic
Units

Spatiotemporal
Model

Dy

na

What effect does the architecture
have on static and dynamic biases?
SlowFast-Fast

RTNet
FusionSeg
SlowFast-Slow
TimeSformer

% Static Units

c

tic

Static

40

% Units

MViT

Sta

mi

How does the training dataset
affect static and dynamic biases?
Dynamic

% Dynamic Units

Deep spatiotemporal models are used in a variety of
computer vision tasks, such as action recognition and video
object segmentation. Currently, there is a limited understanding of what information is captured by these models
in their intermediate representations. For example, while
it has been observed that action recognition algorithms
are heavily influenced by visual appearance in single static
frames, there is no quantitative methodology for evaluating such static bias in the latent representation compared to
bias toward dynamic information (e.g. motion). We tackle
this challenge by proposing a novel approach for quantifying the static and dynamic biases of any spatiotemporal
model. To show the efficacy of our approach, we analyse two widely studied tasks, action recognition and video
object segmentation. Our key findings are threefold: (i)
Most examined spatiotemporal models are biased toward
static information; although, certain two-stream architectures with cross-connections show a better balance between
the static and dynamic information captured. (ii) Some
datasets that are commonly assumed to be biased toward
dynamics are actually biased toward static information.
(iii) Individual units (channels) in an architecture can be biased toward static, dynamic or a combination of the two. 1

Video Dataset

30
20
10

SSv2

Diving48 DAVIS TAO-VOS

Figure 1. We introduce a general technique that, given a model
and a video dataset, can quantify the bias in any intermediate representation within the model toward encoding static (red) or dynamic (blue) information. We use this technique to study the tasks
of action recognition (squares) and video object segmentation (diamonds) and explore the effect of architectures and training datasets
on static and dynamic biases.

from a single image (e.g. color and texture) and the term dynamic to attributes that arise from consideration of multiple
frames (e.g. motion and dynamic texture).
While this learning-based paradigm has led to great success across a wide range of tasks, the internal representations of the learned models remain largely opaque. This
lack of explainability is unsatisfying from both scientific
and application perspectives. From a scientific perspective, there is limited understanding of what information is
driving the decision-making underlying the network output.
Elucidating the decision-making process may yield directions to improve models. From an applications perspective, there have been multiple cases showing the ethical and
damaging consequences of deploying opaque vision models, e.g. [3, 21]. Currently, however, the explainability of

13999

