Searching the Deployable Convolution Neural Networks for GPUs
Linnan Wang, Chenhan Yu, Satish Salian, Slawomir Kierat, Szymon Migacz
Alex Fit Florea
NVIDIA
{linnanw, chenhany, ssalian, skierat, smigacz, afitflorea}@nvidia.com

Abstract
Expert

Customizing Convolution Neural Networks (CNN) for
production use has been a challenging task for DL practitioners. This paper intends to expedite the model customization with a model hub that contains the optimized models
tiered by their inference latency using Neural Architecture
Search (NAS). To achieve this goal, we build a distributed
NAS system to search on a novel search space that consists of prominent factors to impact latency and accuracy.
Since we target GPU, we name the NAS optimized models
as GPUNet, which establishes a new SOTA Pareto frontier
in inference latency and accuracy. Within 1ms, GPUNet is
2x faster than EfficientNet-X and FBNetV3 with even better
accuracy. We also validate GPUNet on detection tasks, and
GPUNet consistently outperforms EfficientNet-X and FBNetV3 on COCO detection tasks in both latency and accuracy. All of these data validate that our NAS system is
effective and generic to handle different design tasks. With
this NAS system, we expand GPUNet to cover a wide range
of latency targets such that DL practitioners can deploy our
models directly in different scenarios.

1. Introduction
The progress of neural networks has decoupled from
the actual deployment for a long time. Deep Learning
(DL) researchers have been dedicated to inventing new
building blocks, while DL engineers deploy these building
blocks in real-world tasks, painstakingly recombine them to
find architectures that meet the design requirements. Most
of the time, we can simplify these requirements to find
the best-performing architecture on the target device (e.g.,
GPUs) within a specific latency budget. Though there are
many exciting advancements in the neural network designs,
e.g., the residual connection [13], Inverted Residual Block
(IRB) [28] and the attention [32], deploying these network
designs remains challenging and laborious; and this is the
problem to be addressed in this paper.
Our solution to alleviate the gap between the DL research

GPU

TensorRT
Latency

Top-1

GPUNet

A100

0.7ms

84%

N1

3080

1.2ms

81%

N2

Custom Model
N1

The
Rest

Train

(A) Accelerate the model customization using GPUNet.

(B) The performance of GPUNet w.r.t SOTA networks in
the inference latency and the top 1 accuracy on ImageNet.

Figure 1. GPUNet establishes the new SOTA Pareto frontier in the
accuracy and inference latency.

and the actual deployment is to propose a set of optimized
Convolution Neural Networks for each type of GPUs tiered
by their optimized inference latency (e.g., post-processed
by TensorRT [3] or OpenVINO [2]). Specifically, we deliver a table of models, an entry of which is the result of
model optimization from maximizing the accuracy subject
to the limit of inference latency on a GPU. This table enables DL engineers to directly query the optimized neural
architecture w.r.t the design requirements to expedite the
customization process on expensive models.
We resort to Neural Architecture Search (NAS) to design
models in this table. Recently NAS has shown promising
results to automate the design of network architectures in
many tasks [19, 36, 37]. Therefore, NAS can be a handy
tool since we need to design many models for many latency
limits for different GPUs. When models are ready to de-

12227

