HODEC: Towards Efficient High-Order DEcomposed Convolutional Neural
Networks
Miao Yin, Yang Sui, Wanzhao Yang, Xiao Zang, Yu Gong and Bo Yuan
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rutgers University
{miao.yin, yang.sui, wanzhao.yang, xiao.zang, yu.gong}@rutgers.edu, bo.yuan@soe.rutgers.edu

Abstract
High-order decomposition is a widely used model compression approach towards compact convolutional neural
networks (CNNs). However, many of the existing solutions,
though can efficiently reduce CNN model sizes, are very difficult to bring considerable saving for computational costs,
especially when the compression ratio is not huge, thereby
causing the severe computation inefficiency problem. To
overcome this challenge, in this paper we propose efficient
High-Order DEcomposed Convolution (HODEC). By performing systematic explorations on the underlying reason
and mitigation strategy for the computation inefficiency, we
develop a new decomposition and computation-efficient execution scheme, enabling simultaneous reductions in computational and storage costs.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of HODEC, we perform empirical evaluations for various CNN models on different datasets. HODEC shows consistently outstanding
compression and acceleration performance. For compressing ResNet-56 on CIFAR-10 dataset, HODEC brings 67%
fewer parameters and 62% fewer FLOPs with 1.17% accuracy increase than the baseline model. For compressing ResNet-50 on ImageNet dataset, HODEC achieves 63%
FLOPs reduction with 0.31% accuracy increase than the
uncompressed model.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been widely adopted
in various fundamental and downstream computer vision
tasks, such as image classification [11], object detection
[30], action recognition [44], super-resolution [15], seismic
signal analysis [28] and channel decoding [18]. Considering the inherent high computational and storage costs of
modern large-scale neural networks, in recent years many
model compression approaches have been proposed and
developed. For instance, by exploring and removing the
model redundancy at the neuron level and bit level, respec-

tively, pruning [1, 9, 10, 13, 16, 21, 22, 35, 43] and quantization [4, 14, 23, 29, 33] are the popular methods that can
efficiently reduce DNN model sizes while preserving high
task accuracy.
DNN Compression via Tensor Decomposition. Alternatively, the redundancy of a DNN model can also exhibit
and be further reduced at the network topology level. Motivated by this philosophy and observation, high-order tensor
decomposition, a technique that explores multi-dimensional
low-rankness of DNN models, has been proposed and studied in the recent years. By decomposing the original largescale weight matrices and/or weight tensors to a set of small
tensor cores, tensor decomposition-based compression can
bring significant reduction in neural network sizes. Notably,
as reported in many prior works [2, 3, 24, 26, 37–42], the
state-of-the-art tensor decomposition approaches, e.g., tensor train (TT) and its variant tensor ring (TR) [25, 45], can
achieve ultra-high compression ratio (more than 1,000ˆ)
for various recurrent neural networks (RNNs). Evidently,
such outstanding compression performance is very attractive for designing and producing compact DNN models.
Limitations on Computation Efficiency. Despite their
very promising potentials in model size reduction, the advanced TT and TR decomposition approaches suffer severe
computation inefficiency problem, especially when aiming
to accelerate the computation-intensive convolutional neural networks (CNNs). To be specific, when a CNN model is
decomposed to the TT or TR format, though its total number of weight parameters is indeed reduced significantly, the
corresponding computational cost (a.k.a., floating point operations per second (FLOPs)) is not saved accordingly, and
sometimes it even increases if only moderate compression
ratio is allowed to preserve accuracy. For instance, when
using the classical TT decomposition [7,24] to factorize the
convolutional layer, with 2.02ˆ compression ratio setting a
TT-format CNN model will even suffer around five times
higher computational cost than the original uncompressed
network. Consequently, consider 1) CNNs are very fundamental neural network models that have been very popularly deployed in practice; and 2) tremendous computer vi-

12299

