Extracting Triangular 3D Models, Materials, and Lighting From Images
Jacob Munkberg1
Wenzheng Chen1,2,3
1

Jon Hasselgren1
Alex Evans1

NVIDIA

2

Tianchang Shen1,2,3
Thomas Müller1

University of Toronto

3

Jun Gao1,2,3
Sanja Fidler1,2,3

Vector Institute

Abstract
We present an efficient method for joint optimization
of topology, materials and lighting from multi-view image observations. Unlike recent multi-view reconstruction
approaches, which typically produce entangled 3D representations encoded in neural networks, we output triangle
meshes with spatially-varying materials and environment
lighting that can be deployed in any traditional graphics engine unmodified. We leverage recent work in differentiable
rendering, coordinate-based networks to compactly represent volumetric texturing, alongside differentiable marching tetrahedrons to enable gradient-based optimization directly on the surface mesh. Finally, we introduce a differentiable formulation of the split sum approximation of environment lighting to efficiently recover all-frequency lighting. Experiments show our extracted models used in advanced scene editing, material decomposition, and high
quality view interpolation, all running at interactive rates
in triangle-based renderers (rasterizers and path tracers).

1. Introduction
3D content creation is a challenging, mostly manual task
which requires both artistic modeling skills and technical
knowledge. Efforts to automate 3D modeling can save substantial production costs or allow for faster and more diverse
content creation. Photogrammetry [48,56] is a popular technique to assist in this process, where multiple photos of an
object are converted into a 3D model. Game studios leverage photogrammetry to quickly build highly detailed virtual
landscapes [21]. However, this is a multi-stage process,
including multi-view stereo [52] to align cameras and find
correspondences, geometric simplification, texture parameterization, material baking and delighting. This complex
pipeline has many steps with conflicting optimization goals
and errors that propagate between stages. Artists rely on
a plethora of software tools and significant manual adjustments to reach the desired quality of the final 3D model.
Project page: https://nvlabs.github.io/nvdiffrec/

Reference photo

Scene editing

Cloth simulation

Material editing
kd /korm /n
Mesh
Figure 1. We reconstruct a triangular mesh with unknown topology, spatially-varying materials, and lighting from a set of multiview images. We show examples of scene manipulation using offthe-shelf modeling tools, enabled by our reconstructed 3D model.

Our goal is to frame this process as an inverse rendering task, and optimize as many steps as possible jointly,
driven by the quality of the rendered images of the reconstructed model, compared to the captured input imagery.
Recent work approaches 3D reconstruction with neural rendering, and provides high quality novel view synthesis [39].
However, these methods typically produce representations
that entangle geometry, materials and lighting into neural
networks, and thus cannot easily support scene editing operations. Furthermore, to use them in traditional graphics engines, one needs to extract geometry from the network using methods like Marching Cubes which may lead
to poor surface quality, particularly at low triangle counts.
Recent neural methods can disentangle shape, materials,
and lighting [3, 68, 70], but sacrifice reconstruction quality. Also, the materials encoded in neural networks cannot
easily be edited or extracted in a form compatible with traditional game engines. In contrast, we reconstruct 3D content
compatible with traditional graphics engines, supporting relighting and scene editing.
In this paper, we present a highly efficient inverse render-

8280

