High-Resolution Image Harmonization via Collaborative Dual Transformations
Wenyan Cong1 , Xinhao Tao2 , Li Niu1 ,* Jing Liang1 , Xuesong Gao3,4 , Qihao Sun4 , Liqing Zhang1
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Harbin Institute of Technology 3 Tianjin University 4 Hisense
1

{plcwyam17320,ustcnewly,leungjing}@sjtu.edu.cn 2 1180300213@stu.hit.edu.cn
3,4

gaoxuesong@tju.edu.cn 4 sunqihao@hisense.com 1 zhang-lq@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Given a composite image, image harmonization aims
to adjust the foreground to make it compatible with the
background. High-resolution image harmonization is in
high demand, but still remains unexplored. Conventional
image harmonization methods learn global RGB-to-RGB
transformation which could effortlessly scale to high resolution, but ignore diverse local context. Recent deep learning methods learn the dense pixel-to-pixel transformation
which could generate harmonious outputs, but are highly
constrained in low resolution. In this work, we propose a
high-resolution image harmonization network with Collaborative Dual Transformation (CDTNet) to combine pixelto-pixel transformation and RGB-to-RGB transformation
coherently in an end-to-end network. Our CDTNet consists of a low-resolution generator for pixel-to-pixel transformation, a color mapping module for RGB-to-RGB transformation, and a refinement module to take advantage of
both. Extensive experiments on high-resolution benchmark dataset and our created high-resolution real composite images demonstrate that our CDTNet strikes a good
balance between efficiency and effectiveness. Our used
datasets can be found in https://github.com/bcmi/CDTNetHigh-Resolution-Image-Harmonization.

1. Introduction
Image composition [26] combines foreground and background from different images into a composite image. The
quality of composite image may be degraded by the appearance (e.g., tone, illumination) inconsistency between foreground and background. To address this issue, image harmonization adjusts the foreground appearance to make it
compatible with the background. Deep image harmonization methods [7, 8, 15, 24, 31, 34] have achieved remarkable
progress by learning the dense pixel-to-pixel transformation
between composite images and ground-truth harmonized
* Corresponding author.

images. However, they only performed low-resolution (e.g.,
256 × 256) image harmonization, and a naı̈ve upsampling
can merely lead to a large yet blurry output (see Figure 1a).
Though directly training with high-resolution images
could seemingly address this issue, the computational cost
is very expensive. For example, it will cost more than 950G
FLOPs (floating point operations) and more than 20 GB
memory for [31] to harmonize a 2048×2048 composite image. Besides, the high-resolution network may be weak in
capturing long-range dependencies due to local convolution
operations [36] (see Section 4.3 and the Supplementary).
Prior to deep image harmonization, conventional harmonization methods [21, 29, 32, 38, 42] mainly used handcrafted statistical features (e.g., illumination, color temperature, contrast, saturation) to determine color-to-color transformation for foreground adjustment. Color-to-color transformation could be achieved in different color spaces, and
we narrow the scope to RGB-to-RGB transformation in this
work. RGB-to-RGB transformation is a global transformation of color values. Therefore, it is barely constrained by
the number of pixels and could effortlessly scale to high
resolution. However, global transformation disregards the
local context for each pixel, prone to generate harmonization results with local inharmony.
Our key insight for high-resolution image harmonization
is to combine the advantages of both pixel-to-pixel transformation and RGB-to-RGB transformation. We name our
high-resolution image harmonization network with Collaborative Dual Transformations (CDT) as CDTNet. CDTNet consists of a low-resolution generator for pixel-to-pixel
transformation, a color mapping module for RGB-to-RGB
transformation, and a refinement module to combine the
best of two worlds. The low-resolution generator is a UNet [30] structure which takes in a low-resolution composite image and outputs a low-resolution harmonized result.
Meanwhile, the encoder feature is used to learn RGB-toRGB transformation, unlike previous hand-crafted methods
[29, 32]. Specifically, we learn several basis lookup tables
(LUTs) [10–12, 37] shared by all images and a weight predictor based on the encoder feature to predict image-specific

18470

