CDGNet: Class Distribution Guided Network for Human Parsing
Kunliang Liu1,2 , Ouk Choi3 , Jianming Wang2∗ , and Wonjun Hwang1∗
1
Ajou University, Korea, 2 Tiangong University, China, 3 Incheon National University, Korea
tjpulkl@ajou.ac.kr, ouk.choi@inu.ac.kr, wangjianming@tiangong.edu.cn, wjhwang@ajou.ac.kr

Abstract
The objective of human parsing is to partition a human
in an image into constituent parts. This task involves labeling each pixel of the human image according to the classes.
Since the human body comprises hierarchically structured
parts, each body part of an image can have its sole position distribution characteristic. Probably, a human head is
less likely to be under the feet, and arms are more likely to
be near the torso. Inspired by this observation, we make
instance class distributions by accumulating the original
human parsing label in the horizontal and vertical directions, which can be utilized as supervision signals. Using
these horizontal and vertical class distribution labels, the
network is guided to exploit the intrinsic position distribution of each class. We combine two guided features to form
a spatial guidance map, which is then superimposed onto
the baseline network by multiplication and concatenation
to distinguish the human parts precisely. We conducted extensive experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of our method on three well-known benchmarks:
LIP, ATR, and CIHP databases. †

Figure 1. Guidance of class distribution. (Top) We build the
novel horizontal and vertical class distribution labels from the
original label to simplify the 2D spatial human parsing problem
with 1D positional labels in the horizontal and vertical directions. (Bottom-left) We directly teach the backbone network with
our horizontal and vertical class distribution labels as a positional
guidance signal of human parts. (Bottom-right) For instance, the
horizontal and vertical face positions are correctly estimated as observed in the visualization heatmap examples.

1. Introduction
Human parsing involves segmenting human bodies into
constituent parts, such as the head, body parts, and clothing
items. It belongs to the field of scene parsing, where perpixel categorization is performed for a given image. Human
parsing is highly challenging owing to the complex textures
and styles of clothes, deformable human poses, and scale
diversity of different semantic parts. Human parsing enables fine-grained semantic segmentation, benefits human
understanding, and supports human-centric applications.
Since the emergence of fully convolutional networks
(FCNs) [26], various studies have developed several solutions from different perspectives to boost the performance of this dense prediction task. Several previous meth* Equal contribution corresponding author
† Our code is available at https://github.com/tjpulkl/CDGNet.

ods [4,8,9,14,18,21,30,36–38,44] using both spatial and semantic contexts have achieved great successes in scene segmentation; however, human parsing has unique characteristics that make it much harder than the conventional pixellevel segmentation tasks. Specifically, the human body
comprises symmetrical and structural parts. The left and
right arms, and the left and right shoes, have a similar appearance as well as a similar vertical position but must be
separated into different classes. Naturally, in this case, we
utilize the horizontal position difference between the left
and right human parts. Furthermore, the scarf and glasses
are too small parts to be segmented; however, most of them
are on the face or the neck, not on the legs, and we can obtain better performance when using this structural knowledge successfully. Several works took advantage of human
characteristics for achieving better performance in human

4473

