C OOPERNAUT: End-to-End Driving with
Cooperative Perception for Networked Vehicles
Jiaxun Cui∗1 Hang Qiu∗2 Dian Chen1 Peter Stone1,3
1
The University of Texas at Austin 2 Stanford University

Yuke Zhu1
3
Sony AI

cuijiaxun@utexas.edu, hangqiu@stanford.edu, {dchen, pstone, yukez}@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Optical sensors and learning algorithms for autonomous
vehicles have dramatically advanced in the past few years.
Nonetheless, the reliability of today’s autonomous vehicles
is hindered by the limited line-of-sight sensing capability
and the brittleness of data-driven methods in handling extreme situations. With recent developments of telecommunication technologies, cooperative perception with vehicle-tovehicle communications has become a promising paradigm
to enhance autonomous driving in dangerous or emergency situations. We introduce C OOPERNAUT, an end-toend learning model that uses cross-vehicle perception for
vision-based cooperative driving. Our model encodes LiDAR information into compact point-based representations
that can be transmitted as messages between vehicles via
realistic wireless channels. To evaluate our model, we develop AUTO C AST S IM, a network-augmented driving simulation framework with example accident-prone scenarios.
Our experiments on AUTO C AST S IM suggest that our cooperative perception driving models lead to a 40% improvement in average success rate over egocentric driving models in these challenging driving situations and a 5× smaller
bandwidth requirement than prior work V2VNet. C OOPER NAUT and AUTO C AST S IM are available at https://
ut-austin-rpl.github.io/Coopernaut/.

1. Introduction
The widespread deployment of autonomous driving and
advanced driver assistance systems is challenged by safety
concerns. While deep learning has improved autonomy
stacks with data-driven techniques [9, 10, 42], learningbased driving policies to date are still brittle, especially in
the face of extreme situations and corner cases that one
might encounter only a few times every million miles of
∗

Equal contribution. Correspondence: cuijiaxun@utexas.edu,
hangqiu@stanford.edu, yukez@cs.texas.edu

1HWZRUNHGYHKLFOHV
6HQGLQJPHVVDJHV
9HKLFOHYLRODWLQJ
WKHUHGOLJKW
&ROOLVLRQ

(JRYHKLFOH
5HFHLYLQJPHVVDJHV

Figure 1. C OOPERNAUT enables vehicles to communicate critical
information beyond occlusion and sensing range for vision-based
driving. The blue dashed arrows are information sharing flows.
Through cooperative perception, C OOPERNAUT makes more informed driving decisions when line-of-sight sensing is limited.

driving [8]. The lack of robustness of learning algorithms
is exacerbated by the limited sensing capabilities of optical sensors on individual vehicles, such as stereo cameras and LiDAR, that are confined to line-of-sight sensing
and unreliable in bad weather conditions. With the advent
of new telecommunication technologies, such as 5G networks and vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) communications, cooperative perception [6, 13, 21, 32] is becoming a promising paradigm that enables sensor information to be shared
between vehicles (and roadside devices [45]) in real-time.
The shared information can augment the field of view of individual vehicles and convey the intents and path plans of
nearby vehicles, offering the potential to improve driving
safety, particularly in accident-prone scenarios.
Ideally, learning autonomous driving policies with cooperative perception should take advantage of existing deep
learning methods customized for ego perception [11, 16,
29] by considering the combined sensory data from all vehicles as an augmented version of on-board sensing. In
practice, the efficacy of cooperative perception hinges on
what data to transmit within the limited network bandwidth
and how to use the aggregated information to build a coher-

17252

