Syntax-Aware Network for Handwritten Mathematical Expression Recognition
Ye Yuan1∗ , Xiao Liu1∗ , Wondimu Dikubab2 , Hui Liu1 , Zhilong Ji1 , Zhongqin Wu1 , Xiang Bai2‡
1

Tomorrow Advancing Life 2 Huazhong University of Science and Technology

{yuanye8, jizhilong}@tal.com, {ender.liux, wondiyeaby, ryuki122382}@gmail.com
30388514@qq.com,xbai@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Handwritten mathematical expression recognition
(HMER) is a challenging task that has many potential
applications. Recent methods for HMER have achieved
outstanding performance with an encoder-decoder architecture. However, these methods adhere to the paradigm
that the prediction is made “from one character to another”, which inevitably yields prediction errors due to
the complicated structures of mathematical expressions
or crabbed handwritings. In this paper, we propose a
simple and efficient method for HMER, which is the first
to incorporate syntax information into an encoder-decoder
network. Specifically, we present a set of grammar rules for
converting the LaTeX markup sequence of each expression
into a parsing tree; then, we model the markup sequence
prediction as a tree traverse process with a deep neural
network. In this way, the proposed method can effectively
describe the syntax context of expressions, alleviating the
structure prediction errors of HMER. Experiments on three
benchmark datasets demonstrate that our method achieves
better recognition performance than prior arts. To further
validate the effectiveness of our method, we create a largescale dataset consisting of 100k handwritten mathematical
expression images acquired from ten thousand writers. The
source code, new dataset† , and pre-trained models of this
work will be publicly available.

1. Introduction
With the development of deep learning methods, the existing text recognition approaches are good at handling text
lines in an image-to-sequence manner [24–26, 35]. However, they may fail to deal with complicated structures
such as mathematical expressions (ME). This paper investigates offline handwritten mathematical expression recognition (HMER), an important OCR task required by many
* Authors contribute equally.
† https://ai.100tal.com/dataset
‡ Corresponding author

applications like office automation, answer sheet correction, and assistance for visually disabled persons to understand mathematics. HMER is quite challenging, as a 2D
structure relationship is essential for understanding mathematical expressions, which is seldom considered in previous deep learning-based methods. Besides, the ambiguities
brought by handwritten input further increase the difficulty
of HMER.
Early works have well studied ME’s syntax structures,
and the proper grammars are defined for HMER [1, 6, 14,
34]. These grammars are only used for grouping the recognized symbols into a structural output, heavily relying on
the performance of symbol recognition. Moreover, as these
methods are mainly designed with handcraft features, their
performance is far from the requirement of real-world applications.
Due to the recent advancement of deep neural networks,
some recent studies [8, 39, 43] handle HMER as an imageto-sequence prediction procedure using an encoder-decoder
architecture, achieving significant performance improvements. However, these methods more or less neglect the
syntax information contained in MEs. To clearly illustrate
this limitation, we take two recent network architectures as
examples in Fig. 1. Zhang et al. [43] propose the Watch,
Attend and Parse (WAP) method that employs a fully convolutional network to encode handwritten images and a recurrent neural network as the string decoder to generate sequence outputs (Fig. 1(a)). [42] (DWAP-TD) attempt to
consider the syntax information by decomposing the target
syntactic structure tree into a sequence of sub-trees, where
each sub-tree is composed of a parent node and a child node
(Fig. 1(b)). Though DWAP-TD can produce the output of a
tree structure, it still follows the “from one character to another” paradigm that the next symbol prediction is mainly
based on the current symbol. We argue that such methods
don’t explicitly consider the syntactic relationship of MEs
in the learning process, which lacks the syntax constraints
for generating a reasonable tree prediction.
To solve structure prediction error and improve the complex syntax tree understanding, we propose an elaborate

14553

