A Low-cost & Real-time Motion Capture System
Anargyros Chatzitofis1 ,

Georgios Albanis2 ,

Nikolaos Zioulis3 ,

Spyridon Thermos1

1

2

Codewheel {chatzitofis, spthermo}@codewheel.eu
Dept. of Informatics and Telecommunications, University of Thessaly galmpanis@uth.gr
3
Independent Researcher nzioulis@gmail.com

Figure 1. We propose a system for marker-based MoCap using a sparse set (3 in our captures) of commodity RGB-D sensors. Our
system is an adapted version of the DeMoCap model [5], operating in real-time and offering MoCap pre-visualization, as well as realtime denoising due to its data-driven backend. Compared to traditional marker-based systems, its denoising nature offers robustness to
marker placement, and compared to markerless systems, it offers metric-scale (compared to monocular approaches), and more consistent
(compared to multiview) results.

Abstract

(i.e. clinical, athletic or artistic) [7, 12, 15, 24] and content
creation (i.e. games, films, simulation) [2, 13, 21, 26]. It
comes in many variants, depending on the equipment and
technology stack used, spanning marker-based and markerless optical, or wearable sensor-based, with each one carrying its own set of advantages and disadvantages [14, 18].
While currently the marker-based optical MoCap systems
are considered as the most accurate solution, the flexibility and cost reduction of markerless or inertial alternatives
has increased their use in domains where high accuracy is
not strictly necessary. Additionally, the emergence of virtual/mixed/augmented reality (VR/MR/AR) applications is
expected to further boost the need for affordable, easy-touse, portable and flexible MoCap systems.

Traditional marker-based motion capture requires excessive and specialized equipment, hindering accessibility and
wider adoption. In this work, we demonstrate such a system
but rely on a very sparse set of low-cost consumer-grade
sensors. Our system exploits a data-driven backend to infer
the captured subject’s joint positions from noisy marker estimates in real-time. In addition to reduced costs and portability, its inherent denoising nature allows for quicker captures by alleviating the need for precise marker placement
and post-processing, making it suitable for interactive virtual reality applications.

Interestingly, the technological evolution brought forth
by data-driven technologies has been more impacting on the
markerless [8] and inertial [10] methods than on markerbased optical ones, where it has mostly been used to repair [16], denoise [25] and clean [3] their captures. Only
a few, recent works approach motion capture data solving [6, 9], not evaluated on data captured with low-end,
noisy capturing systems though. Still, the use of markers

1. Introduction & Prior Art
Motion Capture (MoCap) is realized as the humancentric technology1 that aims to digitize human motion,
and thus, performances, and is primarily used for analysis
1 Even though MoCap technology can be used to capture other subjects
like animals or machines (drones, robotic arms, etc.), our focus in this
manuscript lies solely on human capture.

1

