Context-Aware Sequence Alignment using 4D Skeletal Augmentation
Taein Kwon1
Bugra Tekin2
Siyu Tang1
Marc Pollefeys1,2
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich 2 Microsoft MR & AI Lab, Zürich

Figure 1. Sequence Alignment. We propose a skeletal self-supervised learning approach that uses alignment as a pretext task. Our work can
align pose sequences for both hands and bodies, for which examples are shown above on the H2O [29] and PennAction [67] datasets. Our
approach to alignment relies on a context-aware attention model that incorporates spatial and temporal context within and across sequences.
Pose data provides a valuable cue for alignment and downstream tasks, such as phase classification and phase progression, as it is robust to
different camera angles and changes in the background, while being efficient for real-time processing.

Abstract

1. Introduction

Temporal alignment of fine-grained human actions in
videos is important for numerous applications in computer
vision, robotics, and mixed reality. State-of-the-art methods
directly learn image-based embedding space by leveraging
powerful deep convolutional neural networks. While being
straightforward, their results are far from satisfactory, the
aligned videos exhibit severe temporal discontinuity without
additional post-processing steps. The recent advancements in
human body and hand pose estimation in the wild promise
new ways of addressing the task of human action alignment
in videos. In this work, based on off-the-shelf human pose
estimators, we propose a novel context-aware self-supervised
learning architecture to align sequences of actions. We name
it CASA. Specifically, CASA employs self-attention and crossattention mechanisms to incorporate the spatial and temporal
context of human actions, which can solve the temporal discontinuity problem. Moreover, we introduce a self-supervised
learning scheme that is empowered by novel 4D augmentation
techniques for 3D skeleton representations. We systematically
evaluate the key components of our method. Our experiments
on three public datasets demonstrate CASA significantly improves phase progress and Kendall’s Tau scores over the previous state-of-the-art methods.

Temporal alignment of human activities in videos aims
to identify sequential per-frame correspondence between two
video instances of the same action as shown in Fig. 1. This
is challenging due to large variation in speed of actions, severe self-occlusion, and diverse backgrounds across different videos. Furthermore, an accurate temporal alignment of
human activities requires semantic understanding of human
motion and causal reasoning of the action stages. When it
comes to hand-centric fine-grained activities under first-person
views, the challenges are amplified by the varying viewpoints
and embodied movement of camera wearers. State-of-the-art
methods leverage large-scale datasets and powerful deep convolution neural networks to learn image-based representation
to perform temporal video alignment [16, 22]. Despite rapid
progress in terms of accuracy and advanced learning schemes,
the results are still far from applicable to real-world applications.
Recent advancements and growing availability of headmounted devices (e.g. Microsoft HoloLens [56]) enable new
ways of communication and collaboration. For instance, the
built-in hand tracking system of HoloLens provides real-time
accurate hand pose estimation of the camera wearer. Such systems promise a revolution in how hand motion and actions can
be captured, modeled, and analyzed. Consequently, they point
towards a new way to align fine-grained hand-centric actions
in videos based on 3D skeleton motion extracted from off-the-

8172

