MetaFSCIL: A Meta-Learning Approach for Few-Shot Class Incremental
Learning
Zhixiang Chi1 , Li Gu1 , Huan Liu1,2 , Yang Wang1,3 , Yuanhao Yu1 , Jin Tang1
1
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies 2 McMaster University, Canada
3
University of Manitoba, Canada
{zhixiang.chi, li.gu, huan.liu3, yang.wang3, yuanhao.yu, tangjin}@huawei.com

Abstract
In this paper, we tackle the problem of few-shot class incremental learning (FSCIL). FSCIL aims to incrementally
learn new classes with only a few samples in each class.
Most existing methods only consider the incremental steps
at test time. The learning objective of these methods is often
hand-engineered and is not directly tied to the objective (i.e.
incrementally learning new classes) during testing. Those
methods are sub-optimal due to the misalignment between
the training objectives and what the methods are expected
to do during evaluation. In this work, we proposed a bilevel optimization based on meta-learning to directly optimize the network to learn how to incrementally learn in
the setting of FSCIL. Concretely, we propose to sample sequences of incremental tasks from base classes for training to simulate the evaluation protocol. For each task, the
model is learned using a meta-objective such that it is capable to perform fast adaptation without forgetting. Furthermore, we propose a bi-directional guided modulation,
which is learned to automatically modulate the activations
to reduce catastrophic forgetting. Extensive experimental
results demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms
the baseline and achieves the state-of-the-art results on CIFAR100, MiniImageNet, and CUB200 datasets.

1. Introduction
With the unprecedented increase in computational budget and data availability, deep models have achieved superior performance in the recognition tasks [10, 26]. Typically, those methods are offline trained on some pre-defined
image categories and then deployed to target applications
with fixed parameters. Such systems are not flexible enough
since they cannot handle new classes that might emerge after deployment. In contrast, humans are able to learn new
concepts incrementally throughout their lifetime.
Recently, class incremental learning has been an active

Train set

.....

Test set

.....

Evaluation
classes

Support set

.....

Adaptation
classes

Query set

.....

Meta-objective
classes

Incremental
classes

Time axis

Figure 1. Illustration of the evaluation protocol and our metatraining process. During the evaluation of FSCIL, at each incremental session, the model is trained only on new classes but
is evaluated on all classes encountered so far. Our MetaFSCIL
follows the same rule where the model adapted to new classes is
validated using a meta-objective based on all encountered classes.

area of research [2, 22, 25]. However, large-scale annotated
data for the new classes are required, which leads to the
well-known notorious catastrophic forgetting [19]. The forgetting issue becomes more severe when all the data for old
classes are unavailable. Moreover, it is unrealistic for the
end-users to collect and annotate numerous data. Thus, in
this paper, we focus on a more practical and challenging
setting: few-shot class incremental learning (FSCIL) [27].
FSCIL consists of an offline training stage and an online
incremental learning stage. In the offline training stage, we
have access to a large-scale dataset for some base classes.
FSCIL learns a model on these base classes. During the
online incremental learning (i.e. evaluation) stage, we will
encounter novel classes in a sequential manner, where a few
novel classes are presented at each time step (called incremental session). For each novel class, we only have a few
training examples. In addition, we can only access training
examples corresponding to the novel classes at the current
time step. In other words, we cannot store training examples from previous time steps (e.g. due to limited storage

14166

