Motion-Adjustable Neural Implicit Video Representation

Input

Long Mai
Portland State University

Feng Liu
Portland State University

mai.t.long88@gmail.com

fliu@cs.pdx.edu

Reconstruction

Original

Interpolation

Frame t

————–

Motion Magnification

Interpolated

Original

————–

Frame t + 1

Motion Smoothing

Figure 1. We extend the standard image-based implicit neural representation to a motion-adjustable neural implicit video
representation by incorporating temporally varying phase-shift information into Fourier-based positional encoding. By
changing the phase-shift values at inference time, our method can not only reconstruct video data but can also re-synthesize
videos with modified motion properties. This paper contains video figures which can be viewed on our project website
https://mai-t-long.com/Phase_NIVR/index.html. We also strongly encourage our readers to download and view the
video-enabled version of this paper (https://mai-t-long.com/Phase_NIVR/paper.pdf) using Adobe Reader.

Abstract
Implicit neural representation (INR) has been successful in representing static images. Contemporary
image-based INR, with the use of Fourier-based positional encoding, can be viewed as a mapping from sinusoidal patterns with different frequencies to image
content. Inspired by that view, we hypothesize that it
is possible to generate temporally varying content with
a single image-based INR model by displacing its input
sinusoidal patterns over time. By exploiting the relation between the phase information in sinusoidal functions and their displacements, we incorporate into the
conventional image-based INR model a phase-varying
positional encoding module, and couple it with a phaseshift generation module that determines the phase-shift
values at each frame. The model is trained end-to-end
on a video to jointly determine the phase-shift values
at each time with the mapping from the phase-shifted
sinusoidal functions to the corresponding frame, enabling an implicit video representation. Experiments
on a wide range of videos suggest that such a model
is capable of learning to interpret phase-varying positional embeddings into the corresponding time-varying

content. More importantly, we found that the learned
phase-shift vectors tend to capture meaningful temporal
and motion information from the video. In particular,
manipulating the phase-shift vectors induces meaningful changes in the temporal dynamics of the resulting
video, enabling non-trivial temporal and motion editing
effects such as temporal interpolation, motion magnification, motion smoothing, and video loop detection.

1. Introduction
Implicit neural representation (INR) has recently
emerged as a powerful paradigm for representing visual
data [19, 20, 29, 30, 34]. Notably, INR has recently been
successfully adopted to represent 2D images for image
processing and synthesis [1,5,6]. Image-based INR employs coordinate-based multi-layer perceptron (MLP),
typically along with Fourier-based positional encoding,
to map 2D pixel coordinates to the corresponding color
values. Existing works also studied video-based INR
and considered it as a natural extension of their imagebased counterpart [15,29]. Such an approach uses time
as an additional input coordinate to the coordinateMLP model, effectively treating a video as a 3D volume
without explicitly modeling inherent temporal connec-

10738

