CHEX: CHannel EXploration for CNN Model Compression
Minghai Qin2
Fei Sun2
Xiaolong Ma3†
Kun Yuan2
Yi Xu4‡
Zejiang Hou1 *
Yen-Kuang Chen2
Rong Jin2
Yuan Xie2
Sun-Yuan Kung1
1
2
3
4
Princeton University Alibaba Group Northeastern University Dalian University of Technology

Abstract

1. Introduction
Albeit the empirical success of deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) on many computer vision tasks, the
excessive computational and memory cost impede their deployment on mobile or edge devices. Therefore, it is vital to
* Work done during an internship at DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group.
† Work partially done during an internship at Alibaba Group.
‡ Work partially done during working period at Alibaba Group.

ImageNet Top-1 Accuracy (%)

Channel pruning has been broadly recognized as an effective technique to reduce the computation and memory
cost of deep convolutional neural networks. However, conventional pruning methods have limitations in that: they
are restricted to pruning process only, and they require a
fully pre-trained large model. Such limitations may lead to
sub-optimal model quality as well as excessive memory and
training cost. In this paper, we propose a novel Channel
Exploration methodology, dubbed as CHEX, to rectify these
problems. As opposed to pruning-only strategy, we propose
to repeatedly prune and regrow the channels throughout the
training process, which reduces the risk of pruning important channels prematurely. More exactly: From intra-layer’s
aspect, we tackle the channel pruning problem via a wellknown column subset selection (CSS) formulation. From
inter-layer’s aspect, our regrowing stages open a path for
dynamically re-allocating the number of channels across
all the layers under a global channel sparsity constraint .
In addition, all the exploration process is done in a single
training from scratch without the need of a pre-trained large
model. Experimental results demonstrate that CHEX can
effectively reduce the FLOPs of diverse CNN architectures
on a variety of computer vision tasks, including image classification, object detection, instance segmentation, and 3D
vision. For example, our compressed ResNet-50 model on
ImageNet dataset achieves 76% top-1 accuracy with only
25% FLOPs of the original ResNet-50 model, outperforming
previous state-of-the-art channel pruning methods. The
checkpoints and code are available at here .

78
77
76
75

CHEX (Ours)
GDP
CafeNet
EagleEye
JointPruning
DMCP
PFS
DSNet
MetaPruning
Slimmable

74
73
72

1

1.5

2
GFLOPs

2.5

3

Figure 1. Comparison of the accuracy-FLOPs Pareto curve of the
compressed ResNet-50 models on ImageNet. CHEX shows the
top-performing Pareto frontier compared with previous methods.
And we obtain the sub-models without pre-training a large model.

explore model compression, which reduces the redundancy
in the model while maximally maintaining the accuracy.
Among various model compression approaches, channel pruning has been recognized as an effective tool to
achieve practical memory saving and inference acceleration on general-purpose hardware. To derive a sub-model,
channel pruning removes the redundant channels along with
all the associated filters connected to those channels.
Most existing channel pruning methods [3, 13, 24, 25, 27,
28, 39, 53, 54, 57, 70, 72, 75, 80, 82] adopt a progressive
pruning-training pipeline: pre-training a large model until
convergence, pruning a few unimportant channels by the
pre-defined criterion, and finetuning the pruned model to
restore accuracy. The last two stages are usually executed in
an interleaved manner repeatedly, which suffers from long
training time. Various attempts have been made to improve
the pruning efficiency. Training-based channel pruning methods [14, 40, 41, 45, 48, 81] impose sparse regularization such
as LASSO or group LASSO to the model parameters during
training. However, these commonly adopted regularization
may not penalize the parameters to exactly zero. Removing

12287

