INS-Conv: Incremental Sparse Convolution for Online 3D Segmentation
Leyao Liu*1 , Tian Zheng*1 , Yun-Jou Lin2 , Kai Ni3 , and Lu Fang1B
1

2
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
OPPO US Research Center
3
HoloMatic Technology (Beijing) Co., Ltd.

Frame 400

Complete Scene

Frame 1000
Online Semantic Map

Online Instance Map

Figure 1. We propose INS-Conv, an incremental sparse convolutional network, which enables online accurate 3D semantic and instance
segmentation. We generate semantic and instance labels along with 3D reconstruction, which is valuable for interactive AR/VR and
robotics applications.

Abstract
We propose INS-Conv, an INcremental Sparse
Convolutional network which enables online accurate
3D semantic and instance segmentation. Benefiting from
the incremental nature of RGB-D reconstruction, we only
need to update the residuals between the reconstructed
scenes of consecutive frames, which are usually sparse.
For layer design, we define novel residual propagation
rules for sparse convolution operations, achieving close
approximation to standard sparse convolution. For network
architecture, an uncertainty term is proposed to adaptively
select which residual to update, further improving the
inference accuracy and efficiency. Based on INS-Conv,
an online joint 3D semantic and instance segmentation
pipeline is proposed, reaching an inference speed of
15 FPS on GPU and 10 FPS on CPU. Experiments on
ScanNetv2 and SceneNN datasets show that the accuracy
of our method surpasses previous online methods by a large
margin, and is on par with state-of-the-art offline methods.
A live demo on portable devices further shows the superior
performance of INS-Conv.
* Equal contribution.
B Corresponding author. Mail: fanglu@tsinghua.edu.cn.

Acknowledgement: This work is supported in part by Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under contract No. 62125106,
61860206003 and 62088102, in part by National Key R&D Program
of China (2021ZD0109901), in part by Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist) under Grant No.
BNR2020RC01002.

1. Introduction
3D semantic and instance segmentation aims to detect
objects of a 3D scene and provide per point semantic prediction simultaneously, which is fundamental to robotics or
AR/VR applications. Recent methods [4, 8, 12, 13, 16, 26]
that focus on offline 3D segmentation have shown great
improvements in terms of segmentation accuracy, where
sparse convolutional networks are widely used as backbones to extract 3D features [8, 12, 16]. While these offline
methods achieve leading accuracy, they may take up to seconds to make a single update, because their backbone networks usually require global geometry as input, which cannot meet the online segmentation purpose, e.g., real-time
interaction of AR agents with the surrounding environment.
For the task of online 3D segmentation, a common solution is the 2D-to-3D approach, which means to perform
2D convolutions on RGBD frames, followed by projecting
the 2D predictions to 3D space and fusing with the previous results via a probabilistic model [18, 20, 22]. These
methods utilize 2D information merely, leading to low segmentation accuracy. Although recent methods achieve improvements by using 3D point convolution to process 2D
features [15, 29], the problem remains unsolved, because
neither 2D features nor local 3D convolutions are aware of
the global information of the 3D scene. As a result, they
still suffer from the low accuracy. Moreover, most online
3D segmentation methods only provide semantic predictions, without instance-level understanding. How to achieve

18975

