DAD-3DHeads: A Large-scale Dense, Accurate and Diverse
Dataset for 3D Head Alignment from a Single Image
Tetiana Martyniuk1,2 * Orest Kupyn1,2 * Yana Kurlyak1,2 Igor Krashenyi1,2
Jiři Matas3 Viktoriia Sharmanska4, 5
1
Ukrainian Catholic University 2 Piñata Farms, Los Angeles, USA
3
Visual Recognition Group, Center for Machine Perception, FEE, CTU in Prague
4
University of Sussex 5 Imperial College London

Figure 1. DAD-3DHeads, a Dense, Accurate, and Diverse 3D Head dataset, labeled with over 3.5K verified accurate landmarks. A model
trained on DAD-3DHeads achieves superior performance on diverse 3D head tasks. It is robust to domain shifts common in the wild,
including head pose changes, occlusions, facial expressions, age groups, illumination conditions, and image quality. Best viewed in color.

Abstract
We present DAD-3DHeads, a dense and diverse largescale dataset, and a robust model for 3D Dense Head Alignment in-the-wild. It contains annotations of over 3.5K landmarks that accurately represent 3D head shape compared
to the ground-truth scans. The data-driven model, DAD3DNet, trained on our dataset, learns shape, expression,
and pose parameters, and performs 3D reconstruction of
a FLAME mesh. The model also incorporates a landmark
prediction branch to take advantage of rich supervision and
co-training of multiple related tasks. Experimentally, DAD3DNet outperforms or is comparable to the state-of-the-art
models in (i) 3D Head Pose Estimation on AFLW2000-3D
and BIWI, (ii) 3D Face Shape Reconstruction on NoW and
Feng, and (iii) 3D Dense Head Alignment and 3D Landmarks Estimation on DAD-3DHeads dataset. Finally, diversity of DAD-3DHeads in camera angles, facial expressions,
and occlusions enables a benchmark to study in-the-wild
generalization and robustness to distribution shifts. The
dataset webpage is https://p.farm/research/dad-3dheads.
* These authors contributed equally to this work.

1. Introduction
Tremendous progress in 3D face analysis has been made
since the first 3D morphable model (3DMM) [4] from an
image had been proposed [22]. The use cases for precise
3D face models are abundant: accurate face recognition and
face detection [16], realistic 3D avatars and animation for
VR and games [37], face re-enactment and synthesis for
dubbing [59], virtual mirrors and try-on, statistical shape
models for medical tasks such as segmentation and analysis
of variations in anatomical structures [73].
These applications require not only accurate 3D face geometry but also (1) handling the diversity, e.g., ethnic, age,
gender subgroups, and (2) generalizing to in-the-wild deployment conditions, i.e., beyond controlled capture and beyond the data they are trained on. The largest face models
up-to-date [8, 45] have focused on the (1) aspect by collecting diverse 3D face and head scans, and building 3DMMs
models for different age, gender and ethnicity. In-the-wild
generalization has been identified as a pressing challenge of
the next generation 3D face models [22]. This (2) aspect of
in-the-wild generalization is the focus of our study.
The progress that we have witnessed with deep learn-

20942

