High Quality Segmentation for Ultra High-resolution Images
Tiancheng Shen1
Yuechen Zhang1
Lu Qi1
Jason Kuen2
Xingyu Xie3
Jianlong Wu4
Zhe Lin2
Jiaya Jia1,5
1
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong Adobe Research 3 Peking University
4
Shandong University 5 SmartMore

Abstract
To segment 4K or 6K ultra high-resolution images needs
extra computation consideration in image segmentation.
Common strategies, such as down-sampling, patch cropping, and cascade model, cannot address well the balance
issue between accuracy and computation cost. Motivated
by the fact that humans distinguish among objects continuously from coarse to precise levels, we propose the Continuous Refinement Model (CRM) for the ultra high-resolution
segmentation refinement task. CRM continuously aligns the
feature map with the refinement target and aggregates features to reconstruct these image details. Besides, our CRM
shows its significant generalization ability to fill the resolution gap between low-resolution training images and ultra
high-resolution testing ones. We present quantitative performance evaluation and visualization to show that our proposed method is fast and effective on image segmentation
refinement. Code is available at https://github.com/dvlabresearch/Entity/tree/main/CRM.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of camera and display equipment, the resolution of images is getting higher and higher,
where 4K and 6K resolutions become common. It gives
different chances in portrait photo post-processing, industrial defect detection, medical diagnose, etc. However, ultra high-resolution images also bring challenges to the classical image segmentation methods. First, the significant
number of input pixels is computationally expensive and
GPU memory-hungry. Second, most existing methods upsample the final prediction for 4 to 8 times through interpolation [5,49,52,55,56], without building fine-grained details
on output masks.
Previous segmentation refinement methods include those
of [18, 22, 27, 53]. They still target at images with 1K∼2K
resolutions. Work of [9, 47] handles ultra high-resolution
refinement based on low-resolution masks generated from
classic segmentation algorithms. They utilize cascade-

(a) PSPNet

(b) CascadePSP

(c) CRM

Figure 1. Coarse mask refinement results. (a) Coarse mask from
PSP [55], (b) refined mask of state-of-the-art [9], and (c) refined
mask of our proposed CRM. The image is from BIG (2K∼6K res).

scheme in decoder to upsample intermediate refinement results in several resolution stages until reaching the target
resolution. They are still time-consuming due to working in discrete style on pre-defined resolution stages of decoder. We instead consider continuity to make the decoding more efficient and more friendly to the learning of upsampling resolution. We propose the Continuous Refinement Model (CRM) to exploit continuity.
The coarse mask is from low-resolution segmentation.
In order to expand it further, the problem is similar to a
classical super-resolution (SR) task. Other than classical
SR methods, constructing continuous local representation is
proposed [7]. We note that utilizing implicit function [31] to
handle high-resolution segmentation refinement is not trivial. First, the resolution of the training image in our task is
around 500, while the training image for SR is with 2K resolution. The training strategy to down-sample the input to
SR would make our input mask tiny and meaningless. Second, more multi-level semantic features are needed compared with super-resolution configuration. Third, there exists a resolution gap between training on low-resolution and
testing on ultra high-resolution. Therefore, this task needs
specific designs.
To realize the continuity in ultra high-resolution segmen-

1310

