AlignQ: Alignment Quantization with ADMM-based Correlation Preservation
Ting-An Chen1 , De-Nian Yang2,3 , Ming-Syan Chen1,3
1
Graduate Institute of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taiwan
2
Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
3
Research Center for Information Technology Innovation, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
tachen@arbor.ee.ntu.edu.tw, dnyang@iis.sinica.edu.tw, mschen@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
Quantization is an efficient network compression approach to reduce the inference time. However, existing approaches ignored the distribution difference between training and testing data, thereby inducing a large quantization
error in inference. To address this issue, we propose a new
quantization scheme, Alignment Quantization with ADMMbased Correlation Preservation (AlignQ), which exploits
the cumulative distribution function (CDF) to align the data
to be i.i.d. (independently and identically distributed) for
quantization error minimization. Afterward, our theoretical analysis indicates that the significant changes in data
correlations after the quantization induce a large quantization error. Accordingly, we aim to preserve the relationship of data from the original space to the aligned quantization space for retaining the prediction information. We
design an optimization process by leveraging the Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM) optimization to minimize the differences in data correlations before
and after the alignment and quantization. In experiments,
we visualize non-i.i.d. in training and testing data in the
benchmark. We further adopt domain shift data to compare
AlignQ with the state-of-the-art. Experimental results show
that AlignQ achieves significant performance improvements
especially in low-bit models. Code is available at https:
//github.com/tinganchen/AlignQ.git.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been
demonstrated as effective models in computer vision tasks,
such as image segmentation [2, 35] and object detection
[16, 30, 34]. However, CNNs are suffered from large computation costs and memory storage when deployed on the
resource-limited mobile devices [7]. Therefore, various
model acceleration methods are proposed, including pruning [20, 22, 27, 29], quantization [6, 42, 43] and structure
simplification [10, 45]. Quantization has recently received

(a) Non-i.i.d data

(b) Alignment
Testing
space

Training
space

Training
data

Aligned space
for Quantization
Testing
data

-0.4
+0.8

-0.6

Quantization
Large quantization error

(c) Data correlations preservation

Figure 1. Motivation of AlignQ. Figure (a) presents an example of
quantization on non-i.i.d. training and testing data. A quantization
range learned from training data may induce a large quantization
error when applied in the testing data with different distributions.
Figure (b) and Figure (c) illustrate our motivation to address the
issue in Figure (a). In Figure (b), we propose to align the data
to the same space for quantization to minimize the quantization
error. In addition, as shown in Fig (c), we observe that the significant changes in data correlations induce a large quantization
error. Accordingly, we aim to preserve the data correlations after
the alignment and quantization to retain the prediction information
in the original space for further reducing the quantization error.

increasing attentions due to the effectiveness of acceleration
on inference by reducing the bit widths of model weights
and activations.
In existing quantization research, quantization-aware
training (QAT) learned quantization parameters, including
clipping ranges and scale parameters, from the training data
and applied them to the testing data [3, 8, 11, 28, 47, 48]. In
contrast, zero-shot quantization (ZSQ) adopted the concepts
of knowledge distillation and employed the batch normalization means and variances from the full-precision model,
to learn a quantized model that can generate similar features
to reduce the quantization error [5,9,19,31,44]. The learned
batch statistics are also utilized in testing. However, the previous approaches ignored the difference between the training and testing data. As shown in Fig. 1 (a), the real-world
image data are usually collected under inconsistent quali-

12538

