Multi-View Transformer for 3D Visual Grounding
Shijia Huang

Yilun Chen
Jiaya Jia
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Liwei Wang

{sjhuang,ylchen,leojia,lwwang}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
The 3D visual grounding task aims to ground a natural
language description to the targeted object in a 3D scene,
which is usually represented in 3D point clouds. Previous
works studied visual grounding under specific views. The
vision-language correspondence learned by this way can
easily fail once the view changes. In this paper, we
propose a Multi-View Transformer (MVT) for 3D visual
grounding. We project the 3D scene to a multi-view space,
in which the position information of the 3D scene under
different views are modeled simultaneously and aggregated
together. The multi-view space enables the network to learn
a more robust multi-modal representation for 3D visual
grounding and eliminates the dependence on specific views.
Extensive experiments show that our approach significantly
outperforms all state-of-the-art methods. Specifically, on
Nr3D and Sr3D datasets, our method outperforms the best
competitor by 11.2% and 7.1% and even surpasses recent
work with extra 2D assistance by 5.9% and 6.6%. Our code
is available at https://github.com/sega-hsj/MVT-3DVG.

1. Introduction
Visual Grounding (VG) aims to ground a natural language description to the target object. The field has
made tremendous progress in 2D images [18, 22, 30, 35].
With the rapid development of 3D sensors and 3D vision
technology, 3D visual grounding has recently attracted
more attention, with wide applications including visionlanguage navigation [31, 39], intelligent agents [26, 32],
and autonomous vehicles [11, 21]. Compared to 2D visual
grounding, the 3D task has more complex input data (e.g.,
sparse point clouds) and more variant spatial relationships,
switching the output from grounding to 2D regions to 3D
objects.
Recent works [1, 3, 14, 25, 33, 36] mainly follow a twostage scheme, i.e., first generating all candidate objects in
3D scene and then selecting the most matched one. These
two-stage approaches in 3D visual grounding are tailored
from 2D visual grounding methods [20, 34], which have

Front View

Back View

Query: “Facing the bed, the pillow on the far right.”
Figure 1. An example from Nr3D [1]: when the view is changed,
the position information in 3D scene can be quite different.
The mentioned “pillow” exhibits changed positions, i.e., 3D
coordinates, when the view is changed from the front to the back.

not considered the unique property of 3D data. Therefore,
in this paper, we bring the community’s attention back to
studying the intrinsic property of 3D data to break through
the 3D visual grounding research.
Position information is essential to locate an object.
The visual grounding aligns visual position information in
the scene (e.g., coordinates of objects) with the location
described in natural language (e.g., “left” or “right”).
Unlike 2D images with static views, 3D scenes can freely
rotate to different views. These dynamic view changes
make 3D visual grounding more challenging. The view
changes will directly affect the position encoding, e.g.,
coordinates of objects, thus bringing more difficulty in
representing 3D objects. For example, as shown in Fig. 1,
the rightmost pillow in the front view becomes the leftmost
one in the back view. This discrepancy commonly exists
in real applications: when a robot or an intelligent agent is
navigating in the 3D scene, its view is usually different from
the speaker’s or commander’s view. Such view discrepancy
can bring more ambiguity in identifying the location of
targets. To alleviate this view issue, when Referit3D [1]
were collecting data, they split the data into view-dependent
and view-independent categories according to whether the
description was constrained to the speaker’s view. They

15524

