Understanding Uncertainty Maps in Vision with Statistical Testing
Jurijs Nazarovs1

Zhichun Huang2

Songwong Tasneeyapant1

nazarovs@wisc.edu

zhichunh@cs.cmu.edu

tasneeyapant@wisc.edu

Rudrasis Chakraborty3

Vikas Singh1

rudrasischa@gmail.com

vsingh@biostat.wisc.edu

1

University of Wisconsin-Madison 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 Butlr
https://github.com/vsingh-group/uncertainty_with_rf

Abstract
Quantitative descriptions of confidence intervals and uncertainties of the predictions of a model are needed in many
applications in vision and machine learning. Mechanisms
that enable this for deep neural network (DNN) models
are slowly becoming available, and occasionally, being integrated within production systems. But the literature is
sparse in terms of how to perform statistical tests with the
uncertainties produced by these overparameterized models.
For two models with a similar accuracy profile, is the former
model’s uncertainty behavior better in a statistically significant sense compared to the second model? For high resolution images, performing hypothesis tests to generate meaningful actionable information (say, at a user specified significance level α = 0.05) is difficult but needed in both mission critical settings and elsewhere. In this paper, specifically for uncertainties defined on images, we show how
revisiting results from Random Field theory (RFT) when
paired with DNN tools (to get around computational hurdles) leads to efficient frameworks that can provide a hypothesis test capabilities, not otherwise available, for uncertainty maps from models used in many vision tasks. We
show via many different experiments the viability of this
framework.

1. Introduction
With the adoption of deep neural network models in production systems for vision tasks, there is a growing consensus that we must be aware of what our model does not
know. This is relevant not only for systems used for autonomous driving or medical imaging but also in less critical situations where such a model informs decision making
in general and/or is responsible for generating triggers for
user intervention. For example, inaccurate but overconfi-

Figure 1. Top shows a raw uncertainty of the depth estimation process.
Bottom shows significant regions selected by our method, with guarantees
to restrict family-wise error rate. This region can be used for calibration,
model comparisons, or other use cases.

dent predictions can lead to undesirable outcomes in assembly line manufacturing and logistics. This need has led to
interest in the design of mechanisms for model calibration
as well as for estimating uncertainties from deep neural network (DNN) models used in vision for tasks including but
not limited to prediction [38, 45], segmentation [3, 41, 47],
depth estimation [14, 20] and visual odometry [4, 32].
Uncertainties can be roughly categorized into aleatoric
(statistical) and epistemic (systematic). Aleatoric uncertainty can help capture inherent and irreducible data noise,
which cannot be reduced even if more data were collected.
It can be represented by heteroscedastic models [26, 40],
since they assume that the observation noise (uncertainty)
can vary with the input. Epistemic uncertainty accounts for
uncertainty in model parameters, and can be improved by
observing more data. Capturing epistemic uncertainty in a
DNN can involve putting a prior on the latent space (e.g.,
Variational Auto Encoder (VAE) [46]) or model parameters (e.g., Bayesian Neural Networks (BNN) [7, 33, 42]),
and adopting any available scheme to estimate the posterior probability. Several strategies exist which use hybrid
approaches to capture either aleatoric or epistemic (or both)

406

