Point-to-Voxel Knowledge Distillation for LiDAR Semantic Segmentation
Yuenan Hou1 , Xinge Zhu2 , Yuexin Ma3 , Chen Change Loy4 , and Yikang Li1
1
Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
ShanghaiTech University 4 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
1
{houyuenan, liyikang}@pjlab.org.cn, 2 zhuxinge123@gmail.com,
3
mayuexin@shanghaitech.edu.cn, 4 ccloy@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
This article addresses the problem of distilling knowledge from a large teacher model to a slim student network
for LiDAR semantic segmentation. Directly employing previous distillation approaches yields inferior results due to
the intrinsic challenges of point cloud, i.e., sparsity, randomness and varying density. To tackle the aforementioned
problems, we propose the Point-to-Voxel Knowledge Distillation (PVD), which transfers the hidden knowledge from
both point level and voxel level. Specifically, we first leverage both the pointwise and voxelwise output distillation to
complement the sparse supervision signals. Then, to better
exploit the structural information, we divide the whole point
cloud into several supervoxels and design a difficulty-aware
sampling strategy to more frequently sample supervoxels
containing less-frequent classes and faraway objects. On
these supervoxels, we propose inter-point and inter-voxel
affinity distillation, where the similarity information between points and voxels can help the student model better
capture the structural information of the surrounding environment. We conduct extensive experiments on two popular LiDAR segmentation benchmarks, i.e., nuScenes [3]
and SemanticKITTI [1]. On both benchmarks, our PVDconsistently outperforms previous distillation approaches
by a large margin on three representative backbones, i.e.,
Cylinder3D [36, 37], SPVNAS [25] and MinkowskiNet [5].
Notably, on the challenging nuScenes and SemanticKITTI
datasets, our method can achieve roughly 75% MACs reduction and 2× speedup on the competitive Cylinder3D
model and rank 1st on the SemanticKITTI leaderboard
among all published algorithms1 . Our code is available at
https://github.com/cardwing/Codes- forPVKD.

1 https://competitions.codalab.org/competitions/20331#results

(singlescan competition) till 2021-11-18 04:00 Pacific Time, and our method is
termed Point-Voxel-KD. Our method (PV-KD) ranks 3rd on the multi-scan
challenge till 2021-12-1 00:00 Pacific Time.

1. Introduction
LiDAR semantic segmentation plays a vital role in the
perception of autonomous driving as it provides per-point
semantic information of the surrounding environment. With
the advent of deep learning, plenty of LiDAR segmentation
models have been proposed [14, 25, 26, 37] and have dominated the leaderboard of many benchmarks [1,3]. However,
the impressive performance comes at the expense of heavy
computation and storage, which impedes them from being
deployed in resource-constrained devices.
To enable the deployment of these powerful LiDAR
segmentation models on autonomous vehicles, knowledge
distillation [10] is a prevailing technique to transfer the
dark knowledge from the overparameterized teacher model
to the slim student network to achieve model compression. However, directly applying previous distillation algorithms [9, 10, 17, 24, 28] to LiDAR semantic segmentation
brings marginal gains due to the intrinsic difficulty of point
cloud, i.e., sparsity, randomness and varying density.
To address the aforementioned challenges, we propose
the Point-to-Voxel Knowledge Distillation (PVD). As the
name implies, we propose to distil the knowledge from both
point-level and voxel-level. Specifically, to combat against
the sparse supervision signals, we first propose to distil
the pointwise and voxelwise probabilistic outputs from the
teacher, respectively. The pointwise output contains finegrained perceptual information while the voxelwise prediction embraces coarse but richer clues about the surrounding
environment.
To effectively distil the valuable structural knowledge
from the unordered point sequences, we propose to exploit the point-level and voxel-level affinity knowledge. The
affinity knowledge is obtained via measuring the pairwise
semantic similarity of the point features and voxel features.
However, straightforwardly mimicking the affinity knowledge of the whole point cloud is intractable since there are
tens of thousands of points and the affinity matrix of these
point features have over ten billion elements. Consequently,

8479

