CLRNet: Cross Layer Refinement Network for Lane Detection
Tu Zheng1,2∗

Yifei Huang1,2∗ Yang Liu1,2 Wenjian Tang1 Zheng Yang1
Deng Cai1,2 Xiaofei He1,2
1
Fabu Inc., Hangzhou, China
2
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University, China

Abstract
Lane is critical in the vision navigation system of the intelligent vehicle. Naturally, lane is a traffic sign with highlevel semantics, whereas it owns the specific local pattern
which needs detailed low-level features to localize accurately. Using different feature levels is of great importance
for accurate lane detection, but it is still under-explored.
In this work, we present Cross Layer Refinement Network (CLRNet) aiming at fully utilizing both high-level and
low-level features in lane detection. In particular, it first detects lanes with high-level semantic features then performs
refinement based on low-level features. In this way, we can
exploit more contextual information to detect lanes while
leveraging local detailed lane features to improve localization accuracy. We present ROIGather to gather global context, which further enhances the feature representation of
lanes. In addition to our novel network design, we introduce
Line IoU loss which regresses the lane line as a whole unit
to improve the localization accuracy. Experiments demonstrate that the proposed method greatly outperforms the
state-of-the-art lane detection approaches. Code is available at:https://github.com/Turoad/CLRNet.

1. Introduction
Lane detection is an important yet challenging task in
computer vision, which requires the network to predict
lanes in an image. Detecting lanes can benefit many applications, such as autonomous driving and the Advanced
Driver Assistance System (ADAS), which helps intelligent
vehicles localize themselves better and drive safer.
Benefiting from the effective feature representation of
CNN, many approaches [17, 19, 33] have obtained promising performance. However, there are still some challenges
for detecting accurate lanes. Lane has high-level semantics, whereas it owns the specific local pattern which needs
detailed low-level features to localize accurately. How to
utilize different feature levels effectively in CNN remains
∗ Equal contribution.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Illustrations of hard cases for lane detection. (a) The
detection result of low-level features. It mistakes landmark as lane
due to losing global context. (b) The detection result of high-level
features. It predicts inaccurate localization of the lane. (c) The
case that lane is almost occupied by the car. (d) The case that lane
is blurred by the extreme lighting condition.

a problem. As we can see in Fig. 1(a), the landmark and
lane line have different semantics, but they share the similar
feature (e.g., the long white line). It is hard to distinguish
them without high-level semantics and global context. On
the other hand, the locality is also essential since lane is long
and thin with the simple local pattern. We show the detection result of high-level features in Fig 1(b), though the lane
is detected, its location is not precise. Thus, the low-level
and high-level information are complementary for accurate
lane detection. Previous works either model local geometry
of lanes and integrate them into global results [20] or construct a fully-connected layer with global features to predict
lanes [19]. These detectors have demonstrated the importance of local or global features for lane detection, but they
don’t take advantage of both features, yielding inaccurate
detection performance.
Another common problem in lane detection is no visual
evidence for the presence of lanes. As shown in Fig. 1(c),
the lane is occupied by the car while in Fig. 1(d), the lane

898

