Unsupervised Image-to-Image Translation with Generative Prior
Shuai Yang

Liming Jiang Ziwei Liu Chen Change Loy
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

{shuai.yang, liming002, ziwei.liu, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg
Close domains

Distant domains

Extremely distant domains

Male → Female

Cat → Human Face

Dog → Bird

Bird → Car

Female → Male

Human Face → Cat

Bird → Dog

Car → Bird

Figure 1. We propose a versatile unsupervised image translation framework with generative prior that supports various translations from
close domains to distant domains with drastic shape and appearance discrepancies. Each group shows (left) the input and (right) our result.

Abstract
Unsupervised image-to-image translation aims to learn
the translation between two visual domains without paired
data. Despite the recent progress in image translation models, it remains challenging to build mappings between complex domains with drastic visual discrepancies. In this
work, we present a novel framework, Generative Priorguided UNsupervised Image-to-image Translation (GPUNIT), to improve the overall quality and applicability
of the translation algorithm. Our key insight is to leverage the generative prior from pre-trained class-conditional
GANs (e.g., BigGAN) to learn rich content correspondences
across various domains. We propose a novel coarse-to-fine
scheme: we first distill the generative prior to capture a robust coarse-level content representation that can link objects at an abstract semantic level, based on which finelevel content features are adaptively learned for more accurate multi-level content correspondences. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our versatile framework over state-of-the-art methods in robust, high-quality
and diversified translations, even for challenging and distant domains. Code is available at https://github.
com/williamyang1991/GP-UNIT.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised image-to-image translation (UNIT) aims
to translate images from one domain to another without

paired data. Mainstream UNIT methods assume a bijection between domains and exploit cycle-consistency [43]
to build cross-domain mappings. Though good results are
achieved in simple cases like horse-to-zebra translations,
such assumption is often too restrictive for more general
heterogeneous and asymmetric domains in the real world.
The performance of existing methods often degrades dramatically in translations with large cross-domain shape and
appearance discrepancies such as translating human faces
to animal faces, limiting their practical applications.
Translating across domains with large discrepancies requires one to establish the translation at a higher semantic
level [40]. For instance, to translate a human face to a cat
face, one can use the more reliable correspondence of facial
components such as the eyes between a human and a cat
rather than on the local textures. In the more extreme case
of distant domains, such as animals and man-made objects,
a translation is still possible if their correspondence can be
determined at a higher abstract semantic level, for example
through affirming the frontal orientation of an object or the
layout of an object within the image.
Establishing translations at different semantic levels demands a UNIT model’s ability to find accurate correspondences of different semantic granularity. This requirement is
clearly too stringent since training a translation model with
such a capability requires complex ground truth correspondences that either do not exist or are infeasible to collect.

18332

