Siamese Contrastive Embedding Network for Compositional Zero-Shot Learning
Xiangyu Li, Xu Yang,* Kun Wei, Cheng Deng,* Muli Yang
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
xdu xyLi@stu.xidian.edu.cn, {xuyang.xd, weikunsk, chdeng.xd, muliyang.xd}@gmail.com

“Sliced” + Objects

Abstract
Compositional Zero-Shot Learning (CZSL) aims to recognize unseen compositions formed from seen state and object during training. Since the same state may be various
in the visual appearance while entangled with different objects, CZSL is still a challenging task. Some methods recognize state and object with two trained classifiers, ignoring
the impact of the interaction between object and state; the
other methods try to learn the joint representation of the
state-object compositions, leading to the domain gap between seen and unseen composition sets. In this paper, we
propose a novel Siamese Contrastive Embedding Network
(SCEN)1 for unseen composition recognition. Considering
the entanglement between state and object, we embed the
visual feature into a Siamese Contrastive Space to capture
prototypes of them separately, alleviating the interaction
between state and object. In addition, we design a State
Transition Module (STM) to increase the diversity of training compositions, improving the robustness of the recognition model. Extensive experiments indicate that our method
significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches on
three challenging benchmark datasets, including the recent
proposed C-QGA dataset.

1. Introduction
Humans possess the ability to compose their knowledge
of known entities to generalize to novel concepts inherently.
Given words, such as green horse, people can combine the
known state green with the known object horse immediately, although they have never seen the inexistent stuff.
To equip an AI system the similar ability, Compositional
Zero-Shot Learning (CZSL) [20] is proposed, which aims
to recognize unseen compositions composed of a set of seen
states and objects. In CZSL setting, each composition comprises two components, namely, state and object, where the
compositions of train and test sets are disjoint.
* Corresponding author.
1 Code: https://github.com/XDUxyLi/SCEN-master

“Sliced”
Prototype

Sliced Apple

“Apple”
Prototype
States + “Apple”

Figure 1. The overall concept of our method. We aim to separately
extract discriminative prototypes of state and object based on establishing state and object specific databases, which can generalize
to represent corresponding properties.

In order to infer unknown concepts such as green horse,
CZSL aims to understand the meaning of state green and
object horse after trained on other compositional concepts
that separately contain green or horse, e.g., green grasses
and young horse. The challenge of the task lies in the interaction degree between state and object that we cannot
quantify, which gives rise to varying contextuality within
different state-object combinations. For instance, we can
not equate the state old in old car and that in old tiger,
since they are fundamentally distinct in visual presentations, which greatly hinders the recognition of novel compositions.
Existing mainstream methods [17, 20, 26] focus on converting such problem into a general supervised recognition
task by training two classifiers for state and object, respectively. They aim to directly predict state and object from the
original visual features, ignoring their entanglement. Based
on this problem, classifiers cannot capture discriminative
state and object features, which potentially limits the recognition accuracy. In addition, other methods [23, 24] aim to
learn a common embedding space where the compositions
as well as visual features can be projected to narrow the
distance between them, such as Euclidean distance. However, these methods, only regarding compositions as enti-

9326

