3PSDF: Three-Pole Signed Distance Function for Learning Surfaces
with Arbitrary Topologies
Weikai Chen
Cheng Lin
Weiyang Li
Bo Yang
Digital Content Technology Center, Tencent Games
{weikaichen,arnolin,kimonoli,brandonyang}@tencent.com

Figure 1. We show three groups of shape reconstruction results generated by NDF [10] (in cyan) and our proposed 3PSDF (in gold)
respectively. Our method is able to faithfully reconstruct high-fidelity, intricate geometric details including both the closed and open
surfaces, while NDF suffers from the meshing problems. Each NDF result is reconstructed from a dense point cloud containing 1 million
points while ours are reconstructed using an equivalent resolution.

Abstract
Recent advances in learning 3D shapes using neural implicit functions have achieved impressive results by breaking the previous barrier of resolution and diversity for
varying topologies. However, most of such approaches
are limited to closed surfaces as they require the space
to be divided into inside and outside. More recent works
based on unsigned distance function have been proposed
to handle complex geometry containing both the open and
closed surfaces. Nonetheless, as their direct outputs are
point clouds, robustly obtaining high-quality meshing results from discrete points remains an open question. We
present a novel learnable implicit representation, called
three-pole signed distance function (3PSDF), that can represent non-watertight 3D shapes with arbitrary topologies
while supporting easy field-to-mesh conversion using the
classic Marching Cubes algorithm. The key to our method is
the introduction of a new sign, the NULL sign, in addition to
the conventional in and out labels. The existence of the null
sign could stop the formation of a closed isosurface derived
from the bisector of the in/out regions. Further, we propose
a dedicated learning framework to effectively learn 3PSDF
without worrying about the vanishing gradient due to the

null labels. Experimental results show that our approach
outperforms the previous state-of-the-art methods in a wide
range of benchmarks both quantitatively and qualitatively.

1. Introduction
The choice of representation for 3D shapes and surfaces
has been a central topic for effective 3D learning. Various
3D representations, including mesh [18,41], voxels [36,42],
and point cloud [31,32], have been extensively studied over
the past years. Recently, the advent of neural implicit functions (NIF) [6, 20, 26, 29] has brought impressive advances
to the state-of-the-art of learning-based 3D reconstruction
and modeling.
Classic NIF approaches are built upon the signed distance function (SDF); they train a deep neural network to
classify continuous 3D locations as inside or outside the surface via occupancy prediction or regressing the SDF. However, they can only model closed surfaces that support the
in/out test for level surface extraction. Recent advances that
leverage unsigned distance function (UDF) [10,39,40] have
made it possible to learn open surfaces from point clouds.
But instantiating this field into an explicit mesh remains
cumbersome and is prone to artifacts. It requires the gen-

18522

