Structural and Statistical Texture Knowledge Distillation for
Semantic Segmentation
Deyi Ji1,2 *, Haoran Wang1 *, Mingyuan Tao1 , Jianqiang Huang1 , Xian-Sheng Hua1†, Hongtao Lu2†
1
Alibaba Cloud Computing Ltd.
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{jideyi.jdy, jinglai.whr, juchen.tmy, jianqiang.hjq, xiansheng.hxs}@alibaba-inc.com
htlu@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing knowledge distillation works for semantic segmentation mainly focus on transfering high-level contextual
knowledge from teacher to student. However, low-level texture knowledge is also of vital importance for characterizing the local structural pattern and global statistical property, such as boundary, smoothness, regularity and color
contrast, which may not be well addressed by high-level
deep features. In this paper, we are intended to take full
advantage of both structural and statistical texture knowledge and propose a novel Structural and Statistical Texture
Knowledge Distillation (SSTKD) framework for Semantic
Segmentation. Specifically, for structural texture knowledge, we introduce a Contourlet Decomposition Module
(CDM) that decomposes low-level features with iterative
laplacian pyramid and directional filter bank to mine the
structural texture knowledge. For statistical knowledge, we
propose a Denoised Texture Intensity Equalization Module (DTIEM) to adaptively extract and enhance statistical
texture knowledge through heuristics iterative quantization
and denoised operation. Finally, each knowledge learning
is supervised by an individual loss function, forcing the student network to mimic the teacher better from a broader
perspective. Experiments show that the proposed method
achieves state-of-the-art performance on Cityscapes, Pascal VOC 2012 and ADE20K datasets.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, which aims to assign each pixel
a unique category label for the input image, is a crucial and challenging task in computer vision. Recently,
deep fully convolution network [32] based methods have
* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding Authors.

Hongtao Lu is also with MOE Key Lab of
Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China.

 

    
 

   



   



  

Figure 1. The overview of the structural and statistical texture
knowledge distillation of an example image. Two kinds of the texture knowledge are extracted from the low-level feature of a CNN
backbone. The original structural and statistical texture are fuzzy
and in low-contrast. After distillation, the contour is clearer and
the intensity contrast is more equalized, showing that two kinds of
the texture are both enhanced.

achieved remarkable results in semantic segmentation, and
extensive methods have been investigated to improve the
segmentation accuracy by introducing sophisticated models [6, 8, 23, 27, 44, 46, 47, 50, 52]. However, these methods
are usually based on a large model, which contains tremendous parameters. Since semantic segmentation has shown
great potential in many applications like autonomous driving, video surveillance, robot sensing and so on, how to
keep efficient inference speed and high accuracy with high-

16876

