Capturing Humans in Motion: Temporal-Attentive 3D Human Pose and Shape
Estimation from Monocular Video
Wen-Li Wei∗ , Jen-Chun Lin∗ , Tyng-Luh Liu, and Hong-Yuan Mark Liao†
Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taiwan

Figure 1. By coupling motion continuity attention with hierarchical attentive feature integration, the proposed MPS-Net can achieve more
accurate pose and shape estimations (bottom row), when dealing with in-the-wild videos. For comparison, the results (top row) obtained
by TCMR [6], the state-of-the-art video-based 3D human pose and shape estimation method, are included.

Abstract
Learning to capture human motion is essential to 3D
human pose and shape estimation from monocular video.
However, the existing methods mainly rely on recurrent or
convolutional operation to model such temporal information, which limits the ability to capture non-local context
relations of human motion. To address this problem, we
propose a motion pose and shape network (MPS-Net) to
effectively capture humans in motion to estimate accurate
and temporally coherent 3D human pose and shape from a
video. Specifically, we first propose a motion continuity attention (MoCA) module that leverages visual cues observed
from human motion to adaptively recalibrate the range that
needs attention in the sequence to better capture the motion continuity dependencies. Then, we develop a hierarchical attentive feature integration (HAFI) module to effectively combine adjacent past and future feature representations to strengthen temporal correlation and refine the
feature representation of the current frame. By coupling
the MoCA and HAFI modules, the proposed MPS-Net excels in estimating 3D human pose and shape in the video.
Though conceptually simple, our MPS-Net not only outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on the 3DPW, MPI-INF3DHP, and Human3.6M benchmark datasets, but also uses
fewer network parameters. The video demos can be found
at https://mps-net.github.io/MPS-Net/.
* Both authors contributed equally to this work
† Mark Liao is also a Chair Professor of Providence University

1. Introduction
Estimating 3D human pose and shape by taking a simple
picture/video without relying on sophisticated 3D scanning
devices or multi-view stereo algorithms, has important applications in computer graphics, AR/VR, physical therapy
and beyond. Generally speaking, the task is to take a single
image or video sequence as input and to estimate the parameters of a 3D human mesh model as output. Take, for
example, the SMPL model [24]. For each image, it needs
to estimate 85 (including pose, shape, and camera) parameters, which control the 6890 vertices that form the full 3D
mesh of a human body [24]. Despite recent progress on 3D
human pose and shape estimation, it is still a frontier challenge due to depth ambiguity, limited 3D annotations, and
complex motion of non-rigid human body [6, 17, 20, 21].
Different from 3D human pose and shape estimation
from a single image [11, 17, 21, 29, 31], estimating it from
monocular video is a more complex task [6,8,18,20,25,34].
It needs to not only estimate the pose, shape and camera
parameters of each image, but also correlate the continuity
of human motion in the sequence. Although existing single image-based methods can predict a reasonable output
from a static image, it is difficult for them to estimate temporally coherent and smooth 3D human pose and shape in
the video sequence due to the lack of modeling the continuity of human motion in consecutive frames. To solve this
problem, several methods have recently been proposed to
extend the single image-based methods to the video cases,

13211

