Thin-Plate Spline Motion Model for Image Animation
Jian Zhao
Hui Zhang
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
zhaojian20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

huizhang@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Image animation brings life to the static object in the
source image according to the driving video. Recent
works attempt to perform motion transfer on arbitrary objects through unsupervised methods without using a priori
knowledge. However, it remains a significant challenge for
current unsupervised methods when there is a large pose
gap between the objects in the source and driving images.
In this paper, a new end-to-end unsupervised motion transfer framework is proposed to overcome such issues. Firstly,
we propose thin-plate spline motion estimation to produce
a more flexible optical flow, which warps the feature maps
of the source image to the feature domain of the driving
image. Secondly, in order to restore the missing regions
more realistically, we leverage multi-resolution occlusion
masks to achieve more effective feature fusion. Finally, additional auxiliary loss functions are designed to ensure that
there is a clear division of labor in the network modules,
encouraging the network to generate high-quality images.
Our method1 can animate a variety of objects, including
talking faces, human bodies, and pixel animations. Experiments demonstrate that our method performs better on most
benchmarks than the state of the art with visible improvements in motion-related metrics.

1. Introduction
Image animation (Fig. 1) transfers the motion of the object in the driving video to the static object in the source
image, which is widely used for video conferencing [31],
movie effects [21] and entertainment videos. It can stimulate people’s creativity to create more interesting works.
Researches have been done on motion transfer by using a
priori knowledge of objects, such as 3D models, landmarks,
domain labels [6,9,11,18,23,27,30,35,37]. However, these
approaches, which rely on labeled data, only work for specific objects, such as faces [9, 11, 30, 35] and human bodies [6, 18, 23, 27, 37]. It is costly to obtain such labeled
1 Our source code is publicly available:
nb/Thin-Plate-Spline-Motion-Model.

https://github.com/yoyo-

Source

Driving

Animated

Figure 1. Example animations generated by our method trained on
different datasets.

data or pre-trained keypoint extractors. Therefore, these approaches cannot be applied to objects without labeled data.
Recently, some unsupervised motion transfer methods
have been proposed that do not require a priori knowledge
of objects [25, 26, 28, 32]. These methods use two frames
sampled from a video for training, where one frame is used
as the source image to reconstruct the other frame as the
driving image. And the methods are optimized using reconstruction losses to learn the motion representations. Some
unsupervised methods [25, 26, 28] divide motion transfer
into two steps. First, an optical flow is estimated using
the motion representation that warps the feature maps of
the source image to the feature domain of the driving image. Second, an occlusion mask is predicted to indicate the
missing regions of the warped feature maps, which are then
inpainted in the network. Experiments have shown that unsupervised methods can perform motion transfer on various
objects [25, 26, 28].
However, there are still some challenges with the unsupervised methods. First, the motion representation is not
flexible enough, making it difficult for the network to learn
the large pose gap between the objects in the source and
driving images during training. This deficiency results in
large discrepancies between the warped feature maps and
the feature domain of the driving image. Moreover, the area
of the occlusion mask will increase, making motion transfer

3657

