Dual Task Learning by Leveraging Both Dense Correspondence and
Mis-Correspondence for Robust Change Detection With Imperfect Matches
Jin-Man Park*,†,1 , Ue-Hwan Kim∗,2 , Seon-Hoon Lee3 , Jong-Hwan Kim3
1
KETI, 2 GIST, 3 KAIST
https://github.com/SAMMiCA/SimSaC

Abstract
Accurate change detection enables a wide range of
tasks in visual surveillance, anomaly detection and mobile robotics. However, contemporary change detection approaches assume an ideal matching between the current and
stored scenes, whereas only coarse matching is possible in
real-world scenarios. Thus, contemporary approaches fail
to show the reported performance in real-world settings. To
overcome this limitation, we propose SimSaC. SimSaC concurrently conducts scene flow estimation and change detection and is able to detect changes with imperfect matches.
To train SimSaC without additional manual labeling, we
propose a training scheme with random geometric transformations and the cut-paste method. Moreover, we design
an evaluation protocol which reflects performance in realworld settings. In designing the protocol, we collect a test
benchmark dataset, which we claim as another contribution. Our comprehensive experiments verify that SimSaC
displays robust performance even given imperfect matches
and the performance margin compared to contemporary approaches is huge.

1. Introduction
Robust scene change detection (SCD) [52] plays a
crucial role in various areas such as visual surveillance
[33], anomaly detection [10], mobile robotics [43] and autonomous vehicles [30]. The SCD task aims to identify the
changes in the current scene compared to the scene at different time steps. For storing past observations, the SCD
task demands a database system. Numerous factors including view variation, illumination change, dynamic objects,
different weather and camera jitter make the task challenging.
The SCD task in general requires visual place recognition (VPR) [39] to pair the current scene (query) with
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† work done while with KAIST

Reference

Scene Flow

Query

Change Map

Imperfect Matches

Dual-Task Learning

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed SimSaC. The proposed SimSaC displays robust performance even given imperfect matches of
reference and query images with which conventional methods fail.

the scenes (reference) stored in a database system. After
VPR, SCD analyzes the paired scenes for identification of
changes. Contemporary approaches for SCD, however, assumes an ideal match of the scene between the current and
the past time steps although observing the same scene with
a perfect match hardly occurs in real-world applications.
Thus, contemporary approaches would not display the reported performance when deployed to practical systems.
Furthermore, the need for investigating the effect of imperfect matches for SCD and developing a robust neural architecture for pragmatic SCD lingers.
To overcome the limitation and develop a neural architecture that could readily function in real-world settings, we
propose simultaneous Scene Flow Estimation and Change
Detection (SimSaC). SimSaC is a neural network that concurrently performs scene flow estimation and change detection (Fig. 1). We propose to learn the two tasks in a multitask learning setting (dual-task learning) by which SimSaC leverages dense correspondence (scene flow) and miscorrespondence (change). The proposed dual-task learning
leads to robust change detection performance even given
imperfect matches of reference and query images, in which

13749

