iPLAN: Interactive and Procedural Layout Planning
Feixiang He
University of Leeds, UK

Yanlong Huang
University of Leeds, UK

He Wang *
University of Leeds, UK

scfh@leeds.ac.uk

y.l.huang@leeds.ac.uk

h.e.wang@leeds.ac.uk

Abstract
Layout design is ubiquitous in many applications, e.g.
architecture/urban planning, etc, which involves a lengthy
iterative design process. Recently, deep learning has been
leveraged to automatically generate layouts via image generation, showing a huge potential to free designers from laborious routines. While automatic generation can greatly
boost productivity, designer input is undoubtedly crucial.
An ideal AI-aided design tool should automate repetitive
routines, and meanwhile accept human guidance and provide smart/proactive suggestions. However, the capability of involving humans into the loop has been largely ignored in existing methods which are mostly end-to-end approaches. To this end, we propose a new human-in-the-loop
generative model, iPLAN, which is capable of automatically generating layouts, but also interacting with designers
throughout the whole procedure, enabling humans and AI
to co-evolve a sketchy idea gradually into the final design.
iPLAN is evaluated on diverse datasets and compared with
existing methods. The results show that iPLAN has high
fidelity in producing similar layouts to those from human
designers, great flexibility in accepting designer inputs and
providing design suggestions accordingly, and strong generalizability when facing unseen design tasks and limited
training data.

1. Introduction
Layout generation has recently spiked research interests
in computer vision/graphics, aiming to automate the design
process and boost the productivity. The traditional design
process follows a diagram of iteratively adjusting/finalizing
details from coarse to fine and global to local, which imposes repetitive and laborious routines on designers. Very
recently, it has been shown that automatic image generation of such designs (with minimal human input) is possible through learning from data [12, 26, 27, 36]. This new
line of research combines deep learning with design and has
* Corresponding author

demonstrated a new avenue for AI-aided design.
To achieve full automation, current research tends to
learn from existing designs in an end-to-end fashion, and
then to generate new ones with qualitative similarity and
sufficient diversity. Taking floorplan as an example, automated generation can be based on simple human input,
such as the boundary of the floor space [36], the relations
among rooms [26, 27], or both [12]. While fully automated generation is important, design is in nature a procedural process, which involves alternations between repetitive routines and creative thinking at multiple intermediate
stages [29]. Therefore, an ideal AI-aided system should automate the routine part while allowing the designer to impart creativity. This requires the system to be able to interact with the designer, in the sense that it should accept
designer’s guidance, then actively suggest possible solutions accordingly, completing a feed-back loop. So far, the
human-in-the-loop element is largely missing, which prevents a closer integration of AI and existing design practice.
Designing such an AI model faces several intrinsic challenges. In practice, learning how to interact with the designer requires a full observation of the decisions made at
every intermediate stage. However, existing datasets, such
as RPLAN [36] and LIFULL [22], usually only include
the final designs, without the stage-to-stage design process.
One potential solution to overcome this issue is to reverseengineer intermediate stages from final designs, which however leads to another difficulty: the order of stages depends
on the specific task/goal and could vary dramatically even
for the same final design. Further, the order uncertainty is
exacerbated by the strong personal styles and preferences of
designers. Thus, how to design an AI system that can account for the above factors is a key research question, which
is under-explored to date.
In this paper, we propose a new human-in-the-loop generative model for layout generation, which is referred to
as interactive planning (iPLAN). Unlike previous work,
iPLAN is equipped with a user-friendly interaction mechanism, which is achieved by letting the AI model learn the
multi-stage design process, aiming to accommodate freeform user interactions and propose design suggestions at

7793

