Task Discrepancy Maximization for Fine-grained Few-Shot Classification
SuBeen Lee, WonJun Moon, Jae-Pil Heo*
Sungkyunkwan University
{leesb7426, wjun0830, jaepilheo}@skku.edu

Recognizing discriminative details such as eyes and beaks
is important for distinguishing fine-grained classes since
they have similar overall appearances. In this regard, we
introduce Task Discrepancy Maximization (TDM), a simple
module for fine-grained few-shot classification. Our objective is to localize the class-wise discriminative regions by
highlighting channels encoding distinct information of the
class. Specifically, TDM learns task-specific channel weights
based on two novel components: Support Attention Module
(SAM) and Query Attention Module (QAM). SAM produces
a support weight to represent channel-wise discriminative
power for each class. Still, since the SAM is basically only
based on the labeled support sets, it can be vulnerable to
bias toward such support set. Therefore, we propose QAM
which complements SAM by yielding a query weight that
grants more weight to object-relevant channels for a given
query image. By combining these two weights, a class-wise
task-specific channel weight is defined. The weights are then
applied to produce task-adaptive feature maps more focusing
on the discriminative details. Our experiments validate the
effectiveness of TDM and its complementary benefits with
prior methods in fine-grained few-shot classification.

1. Introduction
With the advancement of deep learning, it has achieved
remarkable performance beyond humans in various downstream tasks [5, 10]. However, there is a strong assumption
that numerous labeled images should exist to achieve such
performance. If the number of labeled images is insufficient,
it shows drastic degradation in the performance [3, 8, 38].
To resolve such degradation from a shortage of labeled images and reduce the cost of labeling, the computer vision
community recently paid more attention to few-shot classification [8, 34, 38]. Briefly, the goal of few-shot classification
is to train a model with high adaptability to novel classes.
To achieve this goal, the episodic learning strategy is mainly
* Corresponding author

High
62.90%
Channel weight

Abstract

(a) Existing methods
63.46%
(b) w/o high variance channels
69.94%

Low

(c) Ours

Figure 1. Effect of the channel weight in the CUB dataset. (a) Existing methods treat channels of feature maps equally. In such case,
high variance channels within a class highly likely to disturb the
classification task, where channel variance represents the channelwise variances of feature maps of the same class – intuitively, the
instances of the same class having similar features at a channel
lead a low channel variance for the corresponding channel. This is
mainly because it is hard to make a consensus among features for
classification criteria. (b) However, in fine-grained datasets, simply
removing high variance channels for each class shows marginal
improvements. It is because classes share similar features, e.g.,
feather, and wings in CUB dataset, and thus channels with a low
variance may not be discriminative. Therefore, in fine-grained
datasets, we should grant different weights to channels depending
on whether each channel reflects distinct characteristics. (c) TDM
produces per-class channel weight by discovering discriminative
channels for each class in the episode. Note that, the numbers in
boxes are classification accuracies.

used, where each episode consists of sampled categories
from the dataset. Furthermore, each class has a support set
for training and a query set for evaluation.
The stream of metric-based learning is a promising direction for the few-shot classification. These methods
[16, 34, 35, 38] learn a deep representation with a predefined
metric or online-trained metric. Specifically, the inference
for a query is performed based on the distances among support and query sets under such metric.
However, the features of a novel class extracted by a
model trained on the base classes hardly form a tight cluster,
since the feature extractor is highly sensitive and activates
the semantically discriminative variations in the distribution
of base classes [32, 46]. To alleviate this, recent methods

5331

