LOLNeRF: Learn from One Look
Daniel Rebain 1,3

Mark Matthews3

Kwang Moo Yi1

Dmitry Lagun3

Andrea Tagliasacchi2,3
2

University of British Columbia

Simon Fraser University

Train
Test

1

z

Coarse
Pose
Estimation

z

3

Google Research

Conditioned
NeRF Model

FIXED

L
Conditioned
NeRF Model

FIXED

z

Conditioned
NeRF Model

Figure 1. Teaser – Our method learns a space of shape and appearance by reconstructing a large collection of single-view images using a
single neural network conditioned on a shared latent space (left). This allows for a volumetric 3D model to be lifted from the image, and
rendered from novel viewpoints (right). https://lolnerf.github.io

Abstract
We present a method for learning a generative 3D model
based on neural radiance fields, trained solely from data
with only single views of each object. While generating realistic images is no longer a difficult task, producing the
corresponding 3D structure such that they can be rendered
from different views is non-trivial. We show that, unlike existing methods, one does not need multi-view data to achieve
this goal. Specifically, we show that by reconstructing many
images aligned to an approximate canonical pose with a
single network conditioned on a shared latent space, you
can learn a space of radiance fields that models shape and
appearance for a class of objects. We demonstrate this
by training models to reconstruct object categories using
datasets that contain only one view of each subject without depth or geometry information. Our experiments show
that we achieve state-of-the-art results in novel view synthesis and high-quality results for monocular depth prediction.
https://lolnerf.github.io

1. Introduction
A long-standing challenge in computer vision is the extraction of 3D geometric information from images of the real
world [37]. Understanding 3D geometry is critical to under-

standing the physical and semantic structure of objects and
scenes, but achieving it remains a very challenging problem.
Work in this area has mainly focused either on deriving geometric understanding from more than one view [1, 25, 62],
or by using known geometry to supervise the learning of
geometry from single views [10, 14, 18, 43]. Here, we take
a more ambitious approach and aim to derive equivalent
3D understanding in a generative model from only single
views of objects, and without relying on explicit geometric
information like depth or point clouds. Deriving such 3D
understanding is, however, non trivial. While Neural Radiance Field (NeRF)-based methods [13, 44] have shown great
promise in geometry-based rendering, they focus on learning
a single scene from multiple views.
Existing NeRF works [16, 44, 52] all require supervision
from more than one viewpoint, as without it, NeRF methods
are prone to collapse to a flat representation of the scene, because they have no incentive to create a volumetric representation; see Figure 2 (left). This serves as a major bottleneck,
as multiple-view data is hard to acquire. Thus, architectures
have been devised to workaround this that combine NeRF
and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [9, 47, 57],
where the multi-view consistency is enforced through a discriminator to avoid the need for multi-view training data.
In this work we show that – surprisingly – having only

1558

