TubeDETR: Spatio-Temporal Video Grounding with Transformers
Antoine Yang1,2 , Antoine Miech3 , Josef Sivic4 , Ivan Laptev1,2 , Cordelia Schmid1,2
1

Inria Paris

2

Département d’informatique de l’ENS, CNRS, PSL Research University

3

DeepMind

4

CIIRC CTU Prague

https://antoyang.github.io/tubedetr.html

Abstract
We consider the problem of localizing a spatio-temporal
tube in a video corresponding to a given text query. This is
a challenging task that requires the joint and efficient modeling of temporal, spatial and multi-modal interactions. To
address this task, we propose TubeDETR, a transformerbased architecture inspired by the recent success of such
models for text-conditioned object detection. Our model
notably includes: (i) an efficient video and text encoder
that models spatial multi-modal interactions over sparsely
sampled frames and (ii) a space-time decoder that jointly
performs spatio-temporal localization. We demonstrate the
advantage of our proposed components through an extensive ablation study. We also evaluate our full approach on
the spatio-temporal video grounding task and demonstrate
improvements over the state of the art on the challenging
VidSTG and HC-STVG benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Grounding natural language in visual content is a fundamental skill to build powerful and explainable vision and
language models. In particular, understanding the association of language with spatial regions and temporal boundaries in videos is particularly important to analyze and improve multi-modal video models. This goes beyond associating a global visual representation with a textual representation [56,61], as it requires to reason about detailed spatiotemporal visual representations and their association with
natural language, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Spatio-temporal video grounding, recently introduced
in [100], is an interesting and challenging task that lies at
the intersection of visual grounding [33, 58, 72] and temporal localization [9, 25, 30]. Given an untrimmed video
and a textual description of an object, spatio-temporal video
grounding aims at localizing a spatio-temporal tube (i.e., a
sequence of bounding boxes) for the target object described
by the input text. This task is particularly challenging as
4 Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics at the Czech
Technical University in Prague.

Input text query: What does the adult ride in the playground?
Output spatio-temporal tube:
...

tstart

...

...

tend

Figure 1. Spatio-temporal video grounding requires reasoning
about space, time, and language.

videos are highly diverse and often present challenging scenarios where different entities have similar appearance or
perform similar actions within one scene.
The success of attention-based models in natural language processing [21, 73] has recently inspired approaches
to integrate transformers into computer vision tasks, such
as image classification [22], object detection [8], semantic
segmentation [52] or action recognition [3, 7, 59, 98]. Notably, with DETR [8], transformers have shown competitive
performance on object detection while removing the need
of multiple hand-designed components encoding a prior
knowledge about this task. More recently, MDETR [37] has
extended this framework for various text-conditioned object
detection tasks in the image domain, such as phrase grounding, referring expression comprehension and segmentation.
Inspired by these works, and the fact that attentionbased architectures are an intuitive choice for modelling
multi-modal and spatio-temporal contextual relationships in
videos, we develop a transformer encoder-decoder model
for spatio-temporal video grounding, as illustrated in Figure 2. While existing approaches for this task rely on preextracted object proposals [100], tube proposals [70] or upsampling layers [66], our architecture simply reasons about
abstractions called time queries to jointly perform temporal
localization and visual grounding. Our framework enables
to use the same representations for both subtasks in order to
learn powerful contextualized representations.
More specifically, our architecture includes key components to jointly model temporal, spatial and multi-modal in-

16442

