HOP: History-and-Order Aware Pre-training for
Vision-and-Language Navigation
Yanyuan Qiao1 Yuankai Qi1 Yicong Hong2 Zheng Yu1 Peng Wang3
1
The University of Adelaide 2 The Australian National University
3
Northwestern Polytechnical University

Qi Wu1 *

{yanyuan.qiao,qi.wu01}@adelaide.edu.au, {qykshr,william.zhengyu}@gmail.com
yicong.hong@anu.edu.au, peng.wang@nwpu.edu.cn
https://github.com/YanyuanQiao/HOP-VLN

Abstract
Pre-training has been adopted in a few of recent works
for Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN). However, previous pre-training methods for VLN either lack the ability
to predict future actions or ignore the trajectory contexts,
which are essential for a greedy navigation process. In this
work, to promote the learning of spatio-temporal visualtextual correspondence as well as the agent’s capability
of decision making, we propose a novel history-and-order
aware pre-training paradigm (HOP) with VLN-specific objectives that exploit the past observations and support future
action prediction. Specifically, in addition to the commonly
used Masked Language Modeling (MLM) and TrajectoryInstruction Matching (TIM), we design two proxy tasks to
model temporal order information: Trajectory Order Modeling (TOM) and Group Order Modeling (GOM). Moreover,
our navigation action prediction is also enhanced by introducing the task of Action Prediction with History (APH),
which takes into account the history visual perceptions. Extensive experimental results on four downstream VLN tasks
(R2R, REVERIE, NDH, RxR) demonstrate the effectiveness
of our proposed method compared against several state-ofthe-art agents.

1. Introduction
Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) has received
large attention in communities of computer vision, natural language processing and robotics due to its great importance towards real-world applications such as domestic
assistants [3, 5, 7, 17, 28, 29, 38]. VLN requires an agent
to navigate to a target location in a 3D simulated environment, according to a given natural language instruction. In
the past few years, a great variety of VLN tasks have been
proposed, including navigation with low-level instructions
* Corresponding author

Low-level, fine-grained instructions

HOP

l R2R
l RxR

① Masked Language Modeling (MLM)
② Trajectory-Instruction Matching (TIM)

High-level instructions

③ Trajectory Order Modeling (TOM)
④ Group Order Modeling (GOM)

l REVERIE

⑤ Action Prediction with History (APH)

(

,

Instruction – Trajectory pair

Pre-training

“close the kitchen
window.”

Communicative instructions

)

Exit the bathroom and
go to the table.

“Walk past the kitchen
and stop outside of the
door to the dining room”

l NDH

“Up here towards
the bathtub?"
“no, go through
the double doors.”

Fine-tuning

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed pre-training and fine-tuning
paradigm for VLN. The model is pre-trained with five proxy
tasks, and fine-tuned on four downstream VLN tasks: R2R, RxR,
REVERIE and NDH (detailed in Section 3).

such as R2R [3] and RxR [18], communicative and cooperative instructions such as NDH [36], and high-level instructions for remote object grounding such as REVERIE [32]
and SOON [40].
Despite their differences, the agent’s navigation is
mostly formulated as a sequential text-to-image grounding
problem. That is, positioned at a particular node on a predefined connectivity graph, the agent traverses the environment by selecting the adjacent node that has the maximum
correspondence between the image representation and the
instruction. As a result, the visual-textual matching is considered to be the keystone of addressing VLN tasks.
Inspired by the great success of Vision-Language
BERT pre-training on several visual-textual matching tasks,
such as image-text retrieval [19] and referring expression
grounding [39], several pre-training methods have been proposed for VLN [8, 9, 13, 27]. These approaches are able to
achieve better performance, but they still suffer from some
limitations. VLN-BERT [27] pre-trains its model by predicting the compatibility of a pair of instruction and visual
trajectory. In the downstream tasks, it formulates the navigation as a trajectory selection problem. AirBERT [8] fur-

15418

