AdaFace: Quality Adaptive Margin for Face Recognition
Minchul Kim, Anil K. Jain, Xiaoming Liu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, 48824
{kimminc2, jain, liuxm}@cse.msu.edu

Abstract
Recognition in low quality face datasets is challenging
because facial attributes are obscured and degraded. Advances in margin-based loss functions have resulted in enhanced discriminability of faces in the embedding space.
Further, previous studies have studied the effect of adaptive losses to assign more importance to misclassified (hard)
examples. In this work, we introduce another aspect of
adaptiveness in the loss function, namely the image quality.
We argue that the strategy to emphasize misclassified samples should be adjusted according to their image quality.
Specifically, the relative importance of easy or hard samples should be based on the sample’s image quality. We
propose a new loss function that emphasizes samples of different difficulties based on their image quality. Our method
achieves this in the form of an adaptive margin function by
approximating the image quality with feature norms. Extensive experiments show that our method, AdaFace, improves the face recognition performance over the state-ofthe-art (SoTA) on four datasets (IJB-B, IJB-C, IJB-S and
TinyFace). Code and models are released in Supp.

1. Introduction
Image quality is a combination of attributes that indicates
how faithfully an image captures the original scene [28].
Factors that affect the image quality include brightness,
contrast, sharpness, noise, color constancy, resolution, tone
reproduction, etc. Face images, the focus of this paper, can
be captured under a variety of settings for lighting, pose
and facial expression, and sometimes under extreme visual
changes such as a subject’s age or make-up. These parameter settings make the recognition task difficult for learned
face recognition (FR) models. Still, the task is achievable in
the sense that humans or models can often recognize faces
under these difficult settings [33]. However, when a face
image is of low quality, depending on the degree, the recognition task becomes infeasible. Fig. 1 shows examples of
both high quality and low quality face images. It is not possible to recognize the subjects in the last column of Fig. 1.

Recognizability
Image
Quality

Easy to
Recognize

Hard to
Recognize

Impossible to
Recognize

High Quality

Low Quality

: Images contain enough clues to identify the subject
: Images do not have enough clues to identify the subject

Figure 1. Examples of face images with different qualities and
recognizabilities. Both high and low quality images contain variations in pose, occlusion and resolution that sometimes make the
recognition task difficult, yet achievable. Depending on the degree
of degradation, some images may become impossible to recognize.
By studying the different impacts these images have in training,
this work aims to design a novel loss function that is adaptive to a
sample’s recognizability, driven by its image quality.

Low quality images like the bottom row of Fig. 1 are
increasingly becoming an important part of face recognition datasets because they are encountered in surveillance
videos and drone footage. Given that SoTA FR methods [4, 5, 13, 17] are able to obtain over 98% verification
accuracy in relatively high quality datasets such as LFW or
CFP-FP [11,27], recent FR challenges have moved to lower
quality datasets such as IJB-B, IJB-C and IJB-S [14,22,37].
Although the challenge is to attain high accuracy on low
quality datasets, most popular training datasets still remain
comprised of high quality images [4, 8]. Since only a small
portion of training data is low quality, it is important to
properly leverage it during training.
One problem with low quality face images is that they
tend to be unrecognizable. When the image degradation
is too large, the relevant identity information vanishes from
the image, resulting in unidentifiable images. These unidentifiable images are detrimental to the training procedure
since a model will try to exploit other visual characteristics, such as clothing color or image resolution, to lower the
training loss. If these images are dominant in the distribution of low quality images, the model is likely to perform
poorly on low quality datasets during testing.

18750

