It’s All In the Teacher: Zero-Shot Quantization Brought Closer to the Teacher
Kanghyun Choi1 , Hye Yoon Lee1 , Deokki Hong1 , Joonsang Yu2 ,
Noseong Park1 , Youngsok Kim1 , and Jinho Lee1 *
1
College of Computing, Yonsei University 2 CLOVA ImageVision, CLOVA AI Lab, NAVER
1

{kanghyun.choi,hylee817,dk.hong,noseong,youngsok,leejinho}@yonsei.ac.kr
2

joonsang.yu@navercorp.com

Abstract
Model quantization is considered as a promising method
to greatly reduce the resource requirements of deep neural
networks. To deal with the performance drop induced by
quantization errors, a popular method is to use training data
to fine-tune quantized networks. In real-world environments,
however, such a method is frequently infeasible because
training data is unavailable due to security, privacy, or confidentiality concerns. Zero-shot quantization addresses such
problems, usually by taking information from the weights of
a full-precision teacher network to compensate the performance drop of the quantized networks. In this paper, we first
analyze the loss surface of state-of-the-art zero-shot quantization techniques and provide several findings. In contrast
to usual knowledge distillation problems, zero-shot quantization often suffers from 1) the difficulty of optimizing multiple
loss terms together, and 2) the poor generalization capability
due to the use of synthetic samples. Furthermore, we observe
that many weights fail to cross the rounding threshold during
training the quantized networks even when it is necessary
to do so for better performance. Based on the observations,
we propose AIT, a simple yet powerful technique for zeroshot quantization, which addresses the aforementioned two
problems in the following way: AIT i) uses a KL distance
loss only without a cross-entropy loss, and ii) manipulates
gradients to guarantee that a certain portion of weights are
properly updated after crossing the rounding thresholds. Experiments show that AIT outperforms the performance of
many existing methods by a great margin, taking over the
overall state-of-the-art position in the field.

1. Introduction
Deep neural network quantization [14,23,37,69] is a powerful tool for improving the computational efficiency of deep
neural networks (DNNs). When being accompanied with the
* Corresponding author

low-bitwidth hardware design [29, 50, 59], the latency and
energy consumption of DNNs can be greatly reduced.
One problem of quantized models is, however, that they
often suffer from the significant drop in accuracy, mainly
due to quantization errors [37]. A popular way to address the
problem is to further train or calibrate the model with training
data [3, 9, 24, 53, 66, 69]. During the fine-tuning procedure,
the forward pass is performed with quantized values whereas
the backpropagation is done with floating-point values to
recover the accuracy loss in the initial quantization.
Unfortunately, such fine-tuning methods, which assume
the full availability of training data at the time of quantization, are often not feasible in reality. Many models are
disclosed to public only with their trained weights, and the
dataset may contain proprietary, confidential, or sensitive
data that fundamentally prohibit sharing.
Zero-shot quantization (or data-free quantization) [4, 5,
10, 11, 45, 62, 67, 68, 70] is therefore a necessary technique
for quantization. It assumes that only the architecture and
the pre-trained weights are available at the time of quantization. Current successful approaches are mainly led by
generative approaches [5, 10, 39, 62, 67, 70]. Using synthetic
samples from generators, knowledge distillation [22] is applied against full-precision models. It is known that the
state-of-the-art methodology achieves almost similar performance to that of the data-driven approaches (i.e., quantization with real samples) for 5-bit fixed-point quantization, and
comparable performance on 4-bit fixed-point setting. [10].
However, the recipe of the fine-tuning in zero-shot quantization is mainly adopted from common knowledge distillation problems [8, 20, 22] that consider neither quantization
nor synthetic samples. As in the knowledge distillation,
the loss function of the zero-shot quantization is habitually
built as a combination of the cross-entropy (CE) against
the hard label and the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence
against the full-precision network’s output.1 It works well
1 In the remainder of this paper, we refer to CE as the cross-entropy
against the hard label and KL as the KL divergence against the full-precision
network unless otherwise stated.

8311

