Incremental Learning in Semantic Segmentation from Image Labels
Fabio Cermelli*1,2 , Dario Fontanel*1 , Antonio Tavera*1 , Marco Ciccone1 , Barbara Caputo1
1
Politecnico di Torino, 2 Italian Institute of Technology
{first.last}@polito.it

Abstract

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental problem in
computer vision where significant progress has been made
thanks to the surge of deep learning [13–15] and the
availability of large-scale human-annotated or synthetic
datasets [4, 17, 23, 40, 55]. Despite the fact that many pretrained models using public datasets are available online,
one of their key disadvantages is that they are not meant to
be incrementally updated over time and their knowledge is
often limited to the predefined set of classes.
A naı̈ve solution to this problem would be to extend existing datasets with new annotated samples and train new
models from scratch. However, this approach is impractical
in case of frequent updates because training on the entire
augmented dataset would take too long, increasing the energy consumption and carbon footprint of machine learning
models [51, 58, 61]. Moreover, retraining or fine-tuning be* Equal contribution
1 Code can be found at https://github.com/fcdl94/WILSON.

Image

Pixel-Level Label

Expected Output

Train on {cow}
Image
Image-Level Label

Expected Output

Step t-1
Step t

Although existing semantic segmentation approaches
achieve impressive results, they still struggle to update
their models incrementally as new categories are uncovered. Furthermore, pixel-by-pixel annotations are expensive and time-consuming. This paper proposes a novel
framework for Weakly Incremental Learning for Semantic
Segmentation, that aims at learning to segment new classes
from cheap and largely available image-level labels. As opposed to existing approaches, that need to generate pseudolabels offline, we use a localizer, trained with image-level
labels and regularized by the segmentation model, to obtain
pseudo-supervision online and update the model incrementally. We cope with the inherent noise in the process by using soft-labels generated by the localizer. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach on the Pascal VOC and
COCO datasets, outperforming offline weakly-supervised
methods and obtaining results comparable with incremental
learning methods with full supervision. 1

Train on {person, motorbike, car}

“COW”

Figure 1. Illustration of WILSS. A model is first pre-trained on
a set of classes (e.g., person, motorbike, car), using expensive
pixel-wise annotations. Then, in the following incremental learning steps, the model is updated to segment new classes (e.g., cow)
being provided image-level labels and without access to old data.

comes infeasible when the original data is no longer available, e.g., due to privacy concerns or intellectual property.
A better solution is to incrementally add new classes to
the pre-existing model, as done in some recent works [8,
21, 43, 45, 46]. Incremental learning approaches update the
model’s parameters by training only on new data and employing ad-hoc techniques to avoid catastrophic forgetting
on old classes [44]. While they reduce the cost of training,
they rely on pixel-wise supervision on novel classes, which
is expensive and time-consuming to collect, and usually requires expert human annotators [6, 40].
To reduce the annotation cost, different types of weak
supervision have been proposed: bounding boxes [18, 32],
scribbles [39, 62], points [16], and image-level labels [34,
50, 52]. Image labels can be easily retrieved from image classification benchmarks [19] or the web, dramatically
lowering the annotation cost. Nevertheless, their use has
never been investigated in an incremental learning setting.
In light of these considerations, we argue that it is crucial to jointly address the problems of incrementally updating the model and reducing the annotation cost of new data
for semantic segmentation. To this end, we propose to incrementally train a segmentation model using only imagelevel labels for the new classes. We call this task Weakly-

4371

