Improving Segmentation of the Inferior Alveolar Nerve
through Deep Label Propagation
Marco Cipriano, Stefano Allegretti, Federico Bolelli, Federico Pollastri, and Costantino Grana
Department of Engineering “Enzo Ferrari,” University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Italy
{name.surname}@unimore.it

Abstract
Many recent works in dentistry and maxillofacial imagery focused on the Inferior Alveolar Nerve (IAN) canal
detection. Unfortunately, the small extent of available 3D
maxillofacial datasets has strongly limited the performance
of deep learning-based techniques. On the other hand, a
huge amount of sparsely annotated data is produced every
day from the regular procedures in the maxillofacial practice. Despite the amount of sparsely labeled images being
significant, the adoption of those data still raises an open
problem. Indeed, the deep learning approach frames the
presence of dense annotations as a crucial factor. Recent
efforts in literature have hence focused on developing label
propagation techniques to expand sparse annotations into
dense labels. However, the proposed methods proved only
marginally effective for the purpose of segmenting the alveolar nerve in CBCT scans. This paper exploits and publicly releases a new 3D densely annotated dataset, through
which we are able to train a deep label propagation model
which obtains better results than those available in literature. By combining a segmentation model trained on the
3D annotated data and label propagation, we significantly
improve the state of the art in the Inferior Alveolar Nerve
segmentation.

1. Introduction
Dental implant placement within the jawbone is a routinely executed surgical procedure, which can become complex due to the local presence of the Inferior Alveolar Nerve
(IAN). In particular, the nerve is oftentimes in close relation
to the roots of molars, and its position must thus be carefully
detailed before the surgical removal. As avoiding contact
with the IAN is a primary concern during these operations,
segmentation plays a key role in surgical preparations.
Given the exceptionally large amount of time required
for 3D manual segmentation, perfect anatomical annotation
accuracy is usually overlooked in favour of a fast execution

time. Therefore, the de facto standard in radiology medical centers for dentistry and maxillofacial purposes is based
on sparse annotations, which can be obtained from 2D images in a relatively small amount of time. Nevertheless, 2D
annotations fail to identify a considerable amount of inner
information about the IAN position and the bone structure.
The incomplete detection of the nerve positioning is often
sufficient to facilitate a positive outcome of surgical intervention, but it is not an accurate anatomical representation.
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have provided
amazing results for both 2D and 3D segmentation, alongside several more computer vision tasks [2, 5, 9, 11, 13, 26].
As a matter of fact, a segmentation CNN would be able
to correctly portray the 3D structures of an IAN without any need for manual adjustment. Unfortunately, the
great capabilities of CNNs in this field are limited by the
lack of carefully annotated data, which is indispensable for
training deep learning models. Indeed, despite the significant amount of raw data available, the supervised learning
paradigm requires dense 3D annotations to reach its full potential, which are extremely expensive to acquire.
In this work, we propose a novel label propagation
method, based on deep learning, that can translate sparse 2D
labels into 3D voxel-level annotations. This method can fill
the gap between the most modern and sophisticated methods for 3D segmentation and the lack of viable annotated
data in the maxillofacial field. Moreover, with the goal of
pushing the state of the art in 3D IAN segmentation, we design a novel 3D segmentation CNN that exploits positional
information to generate the final 3D prediction.
In order to correctly evaluate both of the proposed methods and any future competitor, a new dataset has been collected, annotated by medical experts at voxel-level (Fig. 1e),
and publicly released along with this paper1 . We address
this as 3D annotation in contrast to the traditional one,
which is performed on a 2D “panoramic view” obtained
from the volume (Fig. 1d).
The main contributions introduced by this paper can be
1 https://ditto.ing.unimore.it/maxillo/

21137

