Learning Multiple Dense Prediction Tasks from Partially Annotated Data
Wei-Hong Li, Xialei Liu, and Hakan Bilen
VICO Group, University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom
github.com/VICO-UoE/MTPSL

segmentation

Abstract
Despite the recent advances in multi-task learning of
dense prediction problems, most methods rely on expensive
labelled datasets. In this paper, we present a label efficient
approach and look at jointly learning of multiple dense prediction tasks on partially annotated data (i.e. not all the task
labels are available for each image), which we call multitask partially-supervised learning. We propose a multi-task
training procedure that successfully leverages task relations
to supervise its multi-task learning when data is partially
annotated. In particular, we learn to map each task pair to a
joint pairwise task-space which enables sharing information
between them in a computationally efficient way through another network conditioned on task pairs, and avoids learning
trivial cross-task relations by retaining high-level information about the input image. We rigorously demonstrate that
our proposed method effectively exploits the images with
unlabelled tasks and outperforms existing semi-supervised
learning approaches and related methods on three standard
benchmarks.

1. Introduction
With the recent advances in dense prediction computer
vision problems [16, 24, 37, 42, 46, 53, 56, 63, 64, 67, 71, 72],
where the aim is to produce pixel-level predictions (e.g. semantic and instance segmentation, depth estimation), the
interest of the community has started to shift towards the
more ambitious goal of learning multiple of these problems
jointly by multi-task learning (MTL) [7]. Compared to the
standard single task learning (STL) that focuses on learning
an individual model for each task, MTL aims at learning
a single model for multiple tasks with a better efficiency
and generalization tradeoff while sharing information and
computational resources across them.
Recent MTL dense prediction methods broadly focus on
designing MTL architectures [4, 5, 18, 23, 36, 38, 43, 48, 57,
59, 65, 75–77] that enable effective sharing of information
across tasks and improving the MTL optimization [11,12,20,
22,29,32,33,36,50,66] to balance the influence of each task-

depth

(a) Fully annotated dataset.
segmentation

depth

segmentation

depth

(b) Partially annotated dataset.

cross-task consistency
in joint space

segmentation
prediction

depth groundtruth

depth prediction

(c) Cross-task consistency learning.

Figure 1. Multi-task partially supervised learning. We look at
the problem of learning multiple tasks from partially annotated data
(b) where not all the task labels are available for each image, which
generalizes over the standard supervised learning (a) where all task
labels are available. We propose a MTL method that employs a
shared feature extractor (fϕ ) with task-specific heads (hψ ) and
exploits label correlations between each task pair by mapping them
into a joint pairwise task-space and penalizing inconsistencies
between the provided ground-truth labels and predictions (c).

specific loss function and to prevent interference between the
tasks in training. We refer to [58] for a more comprehensive
review. One common and strong assumption in these works
is that each training image has to be labelled for all the tasks
(Fig. 1(a)). There are two main practical limitations to this
assumption. First, curating multi-task image datasets (e.g.
KITTI [19] and CityScapes [14]) typically involves using
multiple sensors to produce ground-truth labels for several
tasks, and obtaining all the labels for each image requires
very accurate synchronization between the sensors, which
is a challenging research problem by itself [60]. Second,
imagine a scenario where one would like to add a new task
to an existing image dataset which is already annotated for
another task and obtaining the ground-truth labels for the new
task requires using a different sensor (e.g. depth camera) to
the one which is used to capture the original data. In this case,

18879

