AlignMixup: Improving Representations By Interpolating Aligned Features
Shashanka Venkataramanan1 Ewa Kijak1 Laurent Amsaleg1 Yannis Avrithis2
1
Inria, Univ Rennes, CNRS, IRISA 2 Athena RC
Abstract
Mixup is a powerful data augmentation method that interpolates between two or more examples in the input or
feature space and between the corresponding target labels.
However, how to best interpolate images is not well defined. Recent mixup methods overlay or cut-and-paste two
or more objects into one image, which needs care in selecting regions. Mixup has also been connected to autoencoders, because often autoencoders generate an image that
continuously deforms into another. However, such images
are typically of low quality.
In this work, we revisit mixup from the deformation
perspective and introduce AlignMixup, where we geometrically align two images in the feature space. The correspondences allow us to interpolate between two sets of
features, while keeping the locations of one set. Interestingly, this retains mostly the geometry or pose of one image and the appearance or texture of the other. We also
show that an autoencoder can still improve representation learning under mixup, without the classifier ever seeing decoded images. AlignMixup outperforms state-of-theart mixup methods on five different benchmarks. Code
available at https://github.com/shashankvkt/
AlignMixup_CVPR22.git

1. Introduction
Data augmentation [10, 36, 43] is a powerful regularization method that increases the amount and diversity of
data, be it labeled or unlabeled [16]. It improves the generalization performance and helps learning invariance [49]
at almost no cost, because the same example can be transformed in different ways over epochs. However, by operating on one image at a time and limiting to label-preserving
transformations, it has limited chances of exploring beyond
the image manifold. Hence, it is of little help in combating
memorization of training data [67] and sensitivity to adversarial examples [53].
Mixup operates on two or more examples at a time, interpolating between them in the input space [69] or feature space [58], while also interpolating between target la-

Image 1

Input mixup [69]

CutMix [65]

Image 2

Manifold mixup [58]

AlignMixup (Ours)

Figure 1. Different mixup methods. AlignMixup retains the pose
of image 2 and the texture of image 1. This different from overlay
(Input and Manifold mixup) or combination of two objects (CutMix). Manifold mixup and AlignMixup visualized by a decoder
(subsection 3.3) that is not used at training.

bels for image classification. This flattens class representations [58], reduces overly confident incorrect predictions,
and smoothens decision boundaries far away from training
data. However, input mixup images are overlays and tend
to be unnatural [65]. Interestingly, recent mixup methods
focus of combining two [32, 65] or more [31] objects from
different images into one in the input space, making efficient use of training pixels. However, randomness in the
patch selection and thereby label mixing may mislead the
classifier to learn uninformative features [57], which raises
the question: what is a good interpolation of images?
Bengio et al. [3] show that traversing along the manifold
of representations obtained from deeper layers of the network more likely results in finding realistic examples. This
is because the interpolated points smoothly traverse the underlying manifold of the data, capturing salient characteristics of the two images. Furthermore, [4] show the ability of
autoencoders to capture semantic correspondences obtained
by decoding mixed latent codes. This is because the autoencoder may disentangle the underlying factors of variation. Efforts have followed on mixing latent representations
of autoencoders to generate realistic images for data aug-

19174

