Defensive Patches for Robust Recognition in the Physical World
Jiakai Wang† , Zixin Yin† , Pengfei Hu† , Aishan Liu† ,
Renshuai Tao† , Haotong Qin† ,Xianglong Liu† *,Dacheng Tao‡
†

State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
‡

JD Explore Academy, Beijing, China

{jk buaa scse, yzx835, iamparasite, liuaishan}@buaa.edu.cn
{rstao, qinhaotong,xlliu}@buaa.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract
To operate in real-world high-stakes environments, deep
learning systems have to endure noises that have been continuously thwarting their robustness. Data-end defense,
which improves robustness by operations on input data instead of modifying models, has attracted intensive attention
due to its feasibility in practice. However, previous data-end
defenses show low generalization against diverse noises
and weak transferability across multiple models. Motivated
by the fact that robust recognition depends on both local
and global features, we propose a defensive patch generation framework to address these problems by helping models better exploit these features. For the generalization
against diverse noises, we inject class-specific identifiable
patterns into a confined local patch prior, so that defensive
patches could preserve more recognizable features towards
specific classes, leading models for better recognition under noises. For the transferability across multiple models,
we guide the defensive patches to capture more global feature correlations within a class, so that they could activate
model-shared global perceptions and transfer better among
models. Our defensive patches show great potentials to improve application robustness in practice by simply sticking
them around target objects. Extensive experiments show
that we outperform others by large margins (improve 20+%
accuracy for both adversarial and corruption robustness on
average in the digital and physical world).1

1. Introduction
Though deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved
significant successes in multiple areas [25, 56, 58], their
robustness is challenged by noises, especially in physical
* Corresponding author
1 Our codes are available at https : / / github . com / nlsde -

safety-team/DefensivePatch.

(a)

(b)

Snow

Snow

Turn Right ：0.89
(c)

Go Straight or Left：0.93
(d)

Figure 1. (a) Different guideboards in the physical world. (b) Samples with generated defensive patches in the digital world. (c) The
model prediction is misled into Turn Right when it is snowy
in the physical world. (d) Defensive patches can help models to
conduct correct predictions during snow in the physical world.

world scenarios. Adversarial noise, an imperceptible perturbation designed to mislead the decision of DNNs, is now
becoming a great threats [9,44]. Besides adversarial attacks,
DNNs also show weak robustness against common corruptions in the daily environment (e.g., snow, rain, brightness
etc) [14, 15]. For example, the guide boards will be incorrectly classified as Turn Right when it is snowy (Figure
(1c)). What’s worse, these inevitable noises have caused
dozens of self-driving accidents with casualties and are casting a shadow over the deep learning applications in practice [22]. This urges us to investigate feasible defenses for
building robust deep learning models in the physical world.
In the past years, a great number of efforts have been
made to defend against the adversarial perturbations and
further improve model robustness [12, 28, 32, 39, 57]. Most
of the existing works focus on enhancing robustness from
model-end (e.g., data augmentation, adversarial training),

2456

