GPU-Based Homotopy Continuation for Minimal Problems in
Computer Vision
Chiang-Heng Chien
School of Engineering
Brown University
chiang-heng chien@brown.edu
Elias Tsigaridas
INRIA
elias.tsigaridas@inria.fr

Hongyi Fan
School of Engineering
Brown University
hongyi fan@brown.edu

Stanimire Tomov
Innovative Computing Laboratory
University of Tennessee
tomov@icl.utk.edu

Abstract
Systems of polynomial equations arise frequently in computer vision, especially in multiview geometry problems.
Traditional methods for solving these systems typically aim
to eliminate variables to reach a univariate polynomial,
e.g., a tenth-order polynomial for 5-point pose estimation,
using clever manipulations, or more generally using Grobner basis, resultants, and elimination templates, leading
to successful algorithms for multiview geometry and other
problems. However, these methods do not work when the
problem is complex and when they do, they face efficiency
and stability issues. Homotopy Continuation (HC) can
solve more complex problems without the stability issues,
and with guarantees of a global solution, but they are known
to be slow. In this paper we show that HC can be parallelized on a GPU, showing significant speedups up to 56
times on polynomial benchmarks. We also show that GPUHC can be generically applied to a range of computer vision problems, including 4-view triangulation and trifocal
pose estimation with unknown focal length, which cannot be
solved with elimination template but they can be efficiently
solved with HC. GPU-HC opens the door to easy formulation and solution of a range of computer vision problems.

1. Introduction
Systems of polynomial equations arise frequently in
computer vision, especially in multiview geometry problems, because perspective projection is an algebraic model.
Examples abound including absolute pose estimation [35,

Ahmad Abdelfattah
Innovative Computing Laboratory
University of Tennessee
ahmad@icl.utk.edu
Benjamin Kimia
School of Engineering
Brown University
benjamin kimia@brown.edu

92, 5], relative pose estimation [75, 86, 52], homography
estimation [54, 14], PnP [94, 95], 3-view triangulation [17],
rolling shutter camera absolute pose estimation [4], as well
as many others. The challenge has been how to solve these
polynomial systems efficiently and in a stable way.
The classic 5-point algorithm for relative pose estimation [78, 75] is a case in point. Its formulation begins with
15 equations in 15 unknowns, namely, 10 depths and 5
pose parameters. The traditional approach is to eliminate
depths and end up with the epipolar equation which with 5
points results in a 10th-degree univariate polynomial from
which pose is determined. A more formal approach to eliminating variables is the Gröbner basis [21, 22] or resultants
[21, 22]. Elimination Templates were developed as an automatic solver generator [59] where the Gröbner-based elimination strategy obtained from one input is “remembered”
for future inputs. These methods are reviewed in Section 2.
The challenge with the above methods is that they are
limited to problems with small number of solutions. They
are slow for larger problems whose elimination template
can be computed. For even larger problems the computation
of elimination template exceeds practical resources, rendering the problem unsolvable. In addition, stability issues
might arise in the process of converting a system of polynomials to a single univariate polynomial, e.g., [71, 70].
Homotopy Continuation methods, in contrast, can solve
very complex polynomial systems. The basic idea is to find
all the solutions of a start system and then to continuously
evolve them to the solutions of the target system. They can
ensure, with probability 1, to find all solutions [84, 91], provided a “good” starting system. They also avoid the stability
issues of symbolic methods as they do not manipulate the

15765

