HSC4D: Human-centered 4D Scene Capture in Large-scale Indoor-outdoor
Space Using Wearable IMUs and LiDAR
Yudi Dai1 Yitai Lin1 Chenglu Wen1, * Siqi Shen1 Lan Xu1 Jingyi Yu1 Yuexin Ma1 Cheng Wang1
1
Xiamen University, China 2 ShanghaiTech University, China

Figure 1. 3D human motions with accurate localization in diverse, challenging scenes. The top line shows a person
walking from indoor to outdoor. The bottom row figures show the challenge cases, where the bottom right figure is the rock
climbing’s third-view from the camera.

Abstract
We propose Human-centered 4D Scene Capture
(HSC4D) to accurately and efficiently create a dynamic
digital world, containing large-scale indoor-outdoor
scenes, diverse human motions, and rich interactions between humans and environments. Using only body-mounted
IMUs and LiDAR, HSC4D is space-free without any external devices’ constraints and map-free without pre-built
maps. Considering that IMUs can capture human poses but
always drift for long-period use, while LiDAR is stable for
global localization but rough for local positions and orientations, HSC4D makes both sensors complement each other
by a joint optimization and achieves promising results for
long-term capture. Relationships between humans and environments are also explored to make their interaction more
realistic. To facilitate many down-stream tasks, like AR,
VR, robots, autonomous driving, etc., we propose a dataset
containing three large scenes (1k-5k m2 ) with accurate
dynamic human motions and locations. Diverse scenarios

(climbing gym, multi-story building, slope, etc.) and
challenging human activities (exercising, walking up/down
stairs, climbing, etc.) demonstrate the effectiveness and the
generalization ability of HSC4D. The dataset and code is
available at lidarhumanmotion.net/hsc4d.

1. Introduction
The development of digital society is overwhelming because it can enrich peoples’ life by serving Augmented Reality, Virtual Reality, smart city, robots, autonomous driving, etc. Humans and environments are two main components for creating the digital world. Current research works
always separate dynamic human motions and static environments. Actually, taking account their interactions can
help improve both capture accuracy. It is a trend to directly
capture the whole scene with consecutive human activities.
To capture human motions, IMU sensors are widely used
and always be mounted on different parts of the human
body, like arms, legs, feet, head, etc. It can capture accu-

* Corresponding author.

6792

