Backdoor Attacks on Self-Supervised Learning
Aniruddha Saha1 , Ajinkya Tejankar2 , Soroush Abbasi Koohpayegani1 , Hamed Pirsiavash2
1
University of Maryland, Baltimore County 2 University of California, Davis
anisaha1@umbc.edu, atejankar@ucdavis.edu, soroush@umbc.edu, hpirsiav@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
Large-scale unlabeled data has spurred recent progress
in self-supervised learning methods that learn rich visual representations. State-of-the-art self-supervised methods for learning representations from images (e.g., MoCo,
BYOL, MSF) use an inductive bias that random augmentations (e.g., random crops) of an image should produce
similar embeddings. We show that such methods are vulnerable to backdoor attacks — where an attacker poisons
a small part of the unlabeled data by adding a trigger
(image patch chosen by the attacker) to the images. The
model performance is good on clean test images, but the
attacker can manipulate the decision of the model by showing the trigger at test time. Backdoor attacks have been
studied extensively in supervised learning and to the best
of our knowledge, we are the first to study them for selfsupervised learning. Backdoor attacks are more practical in self-supervised learning, since the use of large unlabeled data makes data inspection to remove poisons prohibitive. We show that in our targeted attack, the attacker
can produce many false positives for the target category
by using the trigger at test time. We also propose a defense method based on knowledge distillation that succeeds
in neutralizing the attack. Our code is available here:
https://github.com/UMBCvision/SSL-Backdoor

1. Introduction
With recent progress in deep learning for visual recognition, deep learning models are being used in various realworld applications. Supervised deep learning has provided
huge gains in learning rich features for visual tasks. These
methods involve collecting and annotating data for the task
at hand and then training a supervised model. However,
such methods are vulnerable to backdoor attacks.
Backdoor attacks: Backdoor attacks are a variant of
data poisoning where either (1) the attacker poisons (manipulates) some data and leaves it publicly for the victim
to download and use in training a model or (2) an adversary trains a model on poisoned data and shares the model

Figure 1. Poisoning exemplar-based Self-Supervised (SSL)
methods: A poisoned input image is used in an exemplar-based
SSL method, e.g., BYOL. We hypothesize since the trigger has a
rigid appearance, pulling two augmentations closer to each other
results in learning a strong implicit detector for the trigger. Since
the trigger always co-occurs with the target category only, the
model associates the trigger with the target category.

weights. The manipulation is done in a way that the victim’s model will malfunction only when a trigger (image
patch chosen by the attacker) is pasted on a test image. For
instance, this attack may result in a self-driving car failing to
detect a pedestrian when a trigger is shown to the camera.
Vulnerability to backdoor attacks is dangerous when deep
learning models are deployed in safety-critical applications.
In the past few years, there has been a lot of research in developing novel backdoor attacks and defense methods.
Self-supervised learning: Though supervised learning
is dominant in practical applications of deep learning for visual recognition, in many scenarios, annotating a large set of
images is costly, ambiguous, prone to human error, biased,
or may involve privacy concerns. Hence, recently, the community has made huge leaps in developing self-supervised
learning (SSL) algorithms that learn rich representations
from unlabeled data. The unlabeled data may be abundantly
available in some applications. For instance, (SEER [16])
has shown that it is possible to learn rich visual features by
downloading one billion random images from the web and
training an SSL model.
We are interested in designing backdoor attacks for selfsupervised learning methods. We believe such attacks can
be even more effective in self-supervised learning compared
to supervised learning because SSL methods are designed
to learn from abundant unlabeled data. Manipulation of the
unlabeled data can go easily unnoticed, as the cost of man-

13337

