Signing at Scale: Learning to Co-Articulate Signs
for Large-Scale Photo-Realistic Sign Language Production
Ben Saunders, Necati Cihan Camgoz, Richard Bowden
University of Surrey
{b.saunders, n.camgoz, r.bowden}@surrey.ac.uk

a)

heute gibt es aber auch mehr angebote in der kultur oder woanders
(trans: Today, however, there are also more offers in culture or elsewhere)

wir konnen uns selber andern oder freude geben
(trans: we can change ourselves or give joy)

b)

HEUTE1 MEHR1 VERSCHIEDENES2 KULTUR1A VERSCHIEDENES1

KORPER1 SELBST1A ODER6B FROH1 GEBEN1

c)

d)

Figure 1. Photo-Realistic Sign Language Production: Given a spoken language sentence from an unconstrained domain of discourse
(a), an initial translation is conducted to a gloss sequence (b). FS-N ET next produces a co-articulated continuous skeleton pose sequence
from dictionary signs (c), which S IGN GAN generates into a photo-realistic sign language video in a given style (d).

Abstract
Sign languages are visual languages, with vocabularies as rich as their spoken language counterparts. However, current deep-learning based Sign Language Production (SLP) models produce under-articulated skeleton pose
sequences from constrained vocabularies and this limits
applicability. To be understandable and accepted by the
deaf, an automatic SLP system must be able to generate
co-articulated photo-realistic signing sequences for large
domains of discourse.
In this work, we tackle large-scale SLP by learning to
co-articulate between dictionary signs, a method capable
of producing smooth signing while scaling to unconstrained
domains of discourse. To learn sign co-articulation, we
propose a novel Frame Selection Network (FS-N ET) that
improves the temporal alignment of interpolated dictionary
signs to continuous signing sequences. Additionally, we
propose S IGN GAN, a pose-conditioned human synthesis
model that produces photo-realistic sign language videos
direct from skeleton pose. We propose a novel keypoint-

based loss function which improves the quality of synthesized hand images.
We evaluate our SLP model on the large-scale
meineDGS (mDGS) corpus, conducting extensive user
evaluation showing our FS-N ET approach improves coarticulation of interpolated dictionary signs. Additionally,
we show that S IGN GAN significantly outperforms all baseline methods for quantitative metrics, human perceptual
studies and native deaf signer comprehension.

1. Introduction
Sign languages are rich visual languages with large lexical vocabularies [52] and intricate co-articulated movements of both manual (hands and body) and non-manual
(facial) features. Sign Language Production (SLP), the automatic translation from spoken language sentences to sign
language sequences, must be able to produce photo-realistic
continuous signing for large domains of discourse to be useful to the deaf communities.
Prior deep-learning approaches to SLP have either pro-

5141

