Practical Stereo Matching via Cascaded Recurrent Network
with Adaptive Correlation
Jiankun Li1 Peisen Wang1 * Pengfei Xiong2 * Tao Cai1 Ziwei Yan1 Lei Yang1
Jiangyu Liu1 Haoqiang Fan1 Shuaicheng Liu3,1†
1
Megvii Research 2 Tencent
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
https://github.com/megvii-research/CREStereo

Figure 1. Examples of our predictions on images from Holopix50K [16] dataset. We show left images of the stereo pairs and their
corresponding predicted disparities. Our results achieve high accuracy and exhibit high-quality details for fine-structured objects.

Abstract
With the advent of convolutional neural networks, stereo
matching algorithms have recently gained tremendous
progress. However, it remains a great challenge to accurately extract disparities from real-world image pairs taken
by consumer-level devices like smartphones, due to practical complicating factors such as thin structures, non-ideal
rectification, camera module inconsistencies and various
hard-case scenes. In this paper, we propose a set of innovative designs to tackle the problem of practical stereo
matching: 1) to better recover fine depth details, we design
a hierarchical network with recurrent refinement to update
disparities in a coarse-to-fine manner, as well as a stacked
cascaded architecture for inference; 2) we propose an adaptive group correlation layer to mitigate the impact of erroneous rectification; 3) we introduce a new synthetic dataset
with special attention to difficult cases for better generalizing to real-world scenes. Our results not only rank 1st on
both Middlebury and ETH3D benchmarks, outperforming
existing state-of-the-art methods by a notable margin, but
also exhibit high-quality details for real-life photos, which
clearly demonstrates the efficacy of our contributions.
* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
Stereo matching is a classical research topic of computer
vision, the goal of which, given a pair of rectified images,
is to compute the displacement between two corresponding
pixels, namely “disparity” [34]. It plays an important role
in many applications, including autonomous driving, augmented reality, simulated bokeh rendering and so forth.
Recently, with the support of large synthetic datasets
[5, 27, 46], convolutional neural network (CNN) based
stereo matching methods have taken the accuracy of disparity estimation to a new height [8, 23, 44]. However, to
make the algorithm truly practical in the scenario of everyday consumer photography, we are still faced with three major obstacles.
Firstly, it remains a complicated issue for most existing
algorithms to precisely recover the disparity of fine image
details, or thin structures such as nets and wire frames. The
fact that consumer photos are being produced in higher resolutions only serves to worsen the problem. In computational bokeh, for instance, disparity error around fine details
would result in degraded rendering results that are unpleasing to human perception [32]. Secondly, perfect rectification [24, 56] is hard to obtain for real-world stereo image
pairs, as they are often produced by camera modules with

16263

