On Learning Contrastive Representations for Learning with Noisy Labels
Li Yi1 Sheng Liu2 Qi She3 A. Ian McLeod1 Boyu Wang⇤1, 4
1
University of Western Ontario, 2 NYU Center for Data Science
3
ByteDance Inc. 4 Vector Institute
lyi7@uwo.ca

shengliu@nyu.edu

aimcleod@uwo.ca

Abstract
Deep neural networks are able to memorize noisy labels
easily with a softmax cross entropy (CE) loss. Previous
studies attempted to address this issue focus on incorporating a noise-robust loss function to the CE loss. However,
the memorization issue is alleviated but still remains due
to the non-robust CE loss. To address this issue, we focus on learning robust contrastive representations of data
on which the classifier is hard to memorize the label noise
under the CE loss. We propose a novel contrastive regularization function to learn such representations over noisy
data where label noise does not dominate the representation
learning. By theoretically investigating the representations
induced by the proposed regularization function, we reveal
that the learned representations keep information related to
true labels and discard information related to corrupted labels. Moreover, our theoretical results also indicate that the
learned representations are robust to the label noise. The effectiveness of this method is demonstrated with experiments
on benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
The successes of deep neural networks [19, 34] largely
rely on availability of correctly labeled large-scale datasets
that are prohibitively expensive and time-consuming to collect [46]. Approaches to addressing this issue includes: acquiring labels from crowdsourcing-like platforms or nonexpert labelers or other unreliable sources [49,55] but while
theses methods can reduce the labeling cost, label noise is
inevitable. Due to the over-parameterization of deep networks [19], examples with noisy labels can ultimately be
memorized with a cross entropy loss [3, 27, 32], which is
known as the memorization effect [30, 53], leading to poor
performance [53]. Therefore, it is important to develop
methods that are robust to the label noise.
* Corresponding author

sheqi1991@gmail.com

bwang@csd.uwo.ca

Points (clean labels)

Class 1

Points (wrong labels)
Class 1

Classifier
Classifier

Class 2
Class 2

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed method with noisy labels. Black curves are the best classifiers that are learned during training. Left: Deep networks without contrastive regularization. Right: Deep networks with contrastive regularization. Two
classes are better separated by deep networks that points with the
same class are pulled into a tight cluster and clusters are pushed
away from each other.

Cross entropy (CE) loss is widely used as a loss function
for image classification tasks due to its strong performance
on clean training data [37] but it is not robust to label noise.
When labels in training data are corrupted, the performance
drops [4, 5]. Given the memorization effect of deep networks, training on noisy data with the CE loss results in the
representations of the data clustered in terms of their noisy
labels instead of the ground truth. Thus, the final layer of the
deep networks cannot find a good decision boundary from
these noisy representations.
To overcome the memorization effect, noise-robust loss
functions have been actively studied in the literature [12,31,
42, 55]. They aim to design noise-robust loss functions in
a way such that they achieve small loss on clean data and
large loss on wrongly labeled data. However, it has been
empirically shown that being robust alone is not sufficient
for a good performance as it also suffers from the underfitting problem [29]. To address this issue, these noise-robust
loss functions have to be explicitly or implicitly jointly used

16682

