AdaMixer: A Fast-Converging Query-Based Object Detector
Ziteng Gao1
Limin Wang1
Bing Han2
Sheng Guo2
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
MYbank, Ant Group, China

Abstract
Traditional object detectors employ the dense paradigm
of scanning over locations and scales in an image. The
recent query-based object detectors break this convention
by decoding image features with a set of learnable queries.
However, this paradigm still suffers from slow convergence,
limited performance, and design complexity of extra networks between backbone and decoder. In this paper, we
find that the key to these issues is the adaptability of decoders for casting queries to varying objects. Accordingly,
we propose a fast-converging query-based detector, named
AdaMixer, by improving the adaptability of query-based decoding processes in two aspects. First, each query adaptively samples features over space and scales based on estimated offsets, which allows AdaMixer to efficiently attend
to the coherent regions of objects. Then, we dynamically
decode these sampled features with an adaptive MLP-Mixer
under the guidance of each query. Thanks to these two critical designs, AdaMixer enjoys architectural simplicity without requiring dense attentional encoders or explicit pyramid networks. On the challenging MS COCO benchmark,
AdaMixer with ResNet-50 as the backbone, with 12 training epochs, reaches up to 45.0 AP on the validation set
along with 27.9 APs in detecting small objects. With the
longer training scheme, AdaMixer with ResNeXt-101-DCN
and Swin-S reaches 49.5 and 51.3 AP. Our work sheds light
on a simple, accurate, and fast converging architecture for
query-based object detectors. The code is made available
at https://github.com/M CG-NJ U/AdaM ixer.

1. Introduction
Object detection has been a fundamental task in the computer vision area for decades, as it aims to locate varying
objects in a single image and categorize them. For a long
time, researchers have used spatial dense prior on grids in
an image to cover potential objects with great variations.
: Corresponding author (lmwang@nju.edu.cn).

46.7

47.0

COCO val AP

44.1

1×

2×

AdaMixer (ours)
Sparse R-CNN
Deform. DETR
DETR

3×

Epoch

Figure 1. Convergence curves of our AdaMixer, DETR, Deformable DETR and Sparse R-CNN with ResNet-50 as the backbone on MS COCO minival set.

This dense paradigm dates back from sliding window methods [11, 36, 41] and still remains prevalent in anchor-based
or point-based detectors [15, 23, 26, 32, 34, 38, 50] at the
age of convolutional neural networks. Although dense priors has been a dominant role in object detection for its remarkable performance to cover potential objects, they are
criticized for several shortcomings in various aspects, including anchor designs [33, 42, 45], training sample selection [13,14,48,49], and post-processing operators on potential redundant detections [2, 18].
Though sorts of remedies on these issues are proposed
every year, the underlying detection scheme with dense
grid-like prior had remained almost untouched for a long
time. Recently, query-based object detectors [4, 37, 53]
bring a new perspective on object detection, that is, to
use learnable embeddings, also termed queries, to directly
represent potential objects by using attention-like operators [40]. This scheme, on the other hand, requires a strong
representation power of the network to cast limited queries
to potential objects to cope with great variations of objects
across images. However, the adaptability of currently employed query decoders to the image content is limited on
both how to spatially sample features and how to process

5364

