Generating Diverse 3D Reconstructions from a Single Occluded Face Image
Rahul Dey Vishnu Naresh Boddeti
Michigan State University
deyrahul,vishnu@msu.edu

Target Image

FLAME [21]

DECA [11] CFR-GAN [17]Occ3DMM [8] Extreme3D [42]

Reconstructions by Diverse3DFace (Ours)

Figure 1. Diverse 3D reconstructions from a single occluded face image by Diverse3DFace vs. a singular solution by the baselines.

Abstract
Occlusions are a common occurrence in unconstrained
face images. Single image 3D reconstruction from such
face images often suffers from corruption due to the presence of occlusions. Furthermore, while a plurality of 3D
reconstructions is plausible in the occluded regions, existing approaches are limited to generating only a single solution. To address both of these challenges, we present
Diverse3DFace, which is specifically designed to simultaneously generate a diverse and realistic set of 3D reconstructions from a single occluded face image. It comprises
three components; a global+local shape fitting process, a
graph neural network-based mesh VAE, and a determinantal point process based diversity-promoting iterative optimization procedure. Quantitative and qualitative comparisons of 3D reconstruction on occluded faces show that Diverse3DFace can estimate 3D shapes that are consistent
with the visible regions in the target image while exhibiting high, yet realistic, levels of diversity in the occluded
regions. On face images occluded by masks, glasses, and
other random objects, Diverse3DFace generates a distribution of 3D shapes having ∼50% higher diversity on the
occluded regions compared to the baselines. Moreover, our
closest sample to the ground truth has ∼40% lower MSE
than the singular reconstructions by existing approaches.
Code and data available at: https://github.com/humananalysis/diverse3dface

1. Introduction
Single image-based 3D face reconstruction has improved
significantly in recent years [9, 54]. This includes advances
in statistical models [3,21,26,27] as well as neural networkbased models [11, 12, 33, 38–41, 45, 46]. However, facial
occlusions remain a significant challenge to this task. Inthe-wild face images often come with several forms of occlusions and unless dealt with explicitly, often lead to erroneous 3D reconstruction in terms of shape, expression,
pose, etc. [8, 9, 42].
3D reconstruction of partially occluded faces presents
two main challenges. First, 3D reconstruction models need
to selectively use features from the visible regions while ignoring those from the occluded parts. Failure to do so, either implicitly or explicitly, will lead to poor 3D reconstructions with an incorrect pose, expression, or both. Second,
there could be a distribution of 3D reconstructions that are
consistent with the visible parts in the image yet diverse on
the occluded parts. Failure to account for all such modes
limits the utility of 3D reconstruction models. Addressing
these two challenges is the primary goal of this paper.
Existing 3D face reconstruction solutions, however, are
ill-equipped to overcome both of these challenges simultaneously. From a reconstruction perspective, a majority of the approaches that reconstruct 3D faces from a single image restrict themselves to fully-visible face images.
And, even those that explicitly account for facial occlusions [8, 42], do so only in a holistic manner using a global
model that implicitly uses features from the occluded re-

1547

