Image Disentanglement Autoencoder for Steganography without Embedding
Xiyao Liu1 , Ziping Ma2,1 , Junxing Ma1 , Jian Zhang1,∗ , Gerald Schaefer3 and Hui Fang3
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University, Changsha, China
2
Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
3
Department of Computer Science, Loughborough University, Loughborough, U.K.
lxyzoewx@csu.edu.cn
jianzhang@csu.edu.cn

maziping.im@gmail.com
gerald.schaefer@ieee.org

Abstract
Conventional steganography approaches embed a secret
message into a carrier for concealed communication but
are prone to attack by recent advanced steganalysis tools.
In this paper, we propose Image DisEntanglement Autoencoder for Steganography (IDEAS) as a novel steganography
without embedding (SWE) technique. Instead of directly
embedding the secret message into a carrier image, our approach hides it by transforming it into a synthesised image,
and is thus fundamentally immune to typical steganalysis attacks. By disentangling an image into two representations
for structure and texture, we exploit the stability of structure
representation to improve secret message extraction while
increasing synthesis diversity via randomising texture representations to enhance steganography security. In addition, we design an adaptive mapping mechanism to further
enhance the diversity of synthesised images when ensuring different required extraction levels. Experimental results convincingly demonstrate IDEAS to achieve superior
performance in terms of enhanced security, reliable secret
message extraction and flexible adaptation for different extraction levels, compared to state-of-the-art SWE methods.

1. Introduction
Steganography allows to conceal a secret message into a
carrier medium such as an image to secure its transmission
without being noticed [10, 11, 25]. Traditional steganography methods embed a secret message into the least significant bits (LSBs) [29] or texture-rich regions [7] of a carrier
image to aim for undetectability of the message. To further increase payload capacity, recent deep learning-based
steganography methods have been proposed to achieve both
acceptable imperceptibility and small extraction errors of
secret messages [1,2,19]. However, since all these methods
* Corresponding author.

mjx2021@csu.edu.cn
H.Fang@lboro.ac.uk

modify the carrier image, there is an inherent risk of the carried message being compromised through the application of
machine learning-based steganalysis tools.
Steganography without embedding (SWE) is an emerging concept to hide a secret message without directly embedding it into a carrier, and thus has the unique advantage that it is immune to typical steganalysis attacks [39].
There are two types of SWE techniques. A mapping mechanism can be designed to transform the secret message into
a sequence of image hashes selected from an existing image set [18, 38, 41]. The key weakness here is that the
payload capacity is very small. Alternatively, deep synthesis methods, such as generative adversarial networks
(GANs) [9, 30, 36], can be trained to generate a synthesised
image by passing the secret message into a deep generator
network.
Despite promising results achieved by synthesis-based
SWE methods [16], there are three drawbacks that hinder their further use in real-world applications: (1) synthesised images from GANs are not sufficiently realistic, compromising the imperceptibility requirement; (2) the trained
generator has limited synthesis diversity, thus raising potential security issues; and, more importantly, (3) it is difficult
to ensure a small message extraction error when training an
invertible neural network to extract the hidden message.
In this paper, we propose Image DisEntanglement Autoencoder for Steganography (IDEAS) to tackle the above
issues of current synthesis-based SWE approaches. Specifically, we train an adversarial autoencoder which includes
an encoder to disentangle images into structure and texture
representations and a decoder to take these two representations to synthesise realistic images. Our approach can guarantee high quality image synthesis to enhance imperception
of the hidden data. Furthermore, we explore the advantages that disentanglement brings, namely that the stability
of structure representation improves secret message extraction accuracy while randomised texture vectors increase the
style diversity of the synthesised images to enhance secu-

2303

