Interspace Pruning: Using Adaptive Filter Representations to Improve Training
of Sparse CNNs
Paul Wimmer∗†‡§ , Jens Mehnert∗§ and Alexandru Condurache∗†
∗

Automated Driving Research, Robert Bosch GmbH, 70469 Stuttgart, Germany

†

Institute for Signal Processing, University of Lübeck, 23562 Lübeck, Germany

{paul.wimmer,jensericmarkus.mehnert,alexandrupaul.condurache}@de.bosch.com

Abstract
Unstructured pruning is well suited to reduce the memory footprint of convolutional neural networks (CNNs), both
at training and inference time. CNNs contain parameters
arranged in K × K filters. Standard unstructured pruning (SP) reduces the memory footprint of CNNs by setting
filter elements to zero, thereby specifying a fixed subspace
that constrains the filter. Especially if pruning is applied
before or during training, this induces a strong bias. To
overcome this, we introduce interspace pruning (IP), a general tool to improve existing pruning methods. It uses filters
represented in a dynamic interspace by linear combinations
of an underlying adaptive filter basis (FB). For IP, FB coefficients are set to zero while un-pruned coefficients and
FBs are trained jointly. In this work, we provide mathematical evidence for IP’s superior performance and demonstrate that IP outperforms SP on all tested state-of-the-art
unstructured pruning methods. Especially in challenging
situations, like pruning for ImageNet or pruning to high
sparsity, IP greatly exceeds SP with equal runtime and parameter costs. Finally, we show that advances of IP are due
to improved trainability and superior generalization ability.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown state-of-theart (SOTA) performance in many artificial intelligence applications [52, 54, 72, 77, 80]. In order to solve these tasks,
large models with up to billions of parameters are required.
However, training, transferring, storing and evaluating such
large models is costly [61,65]. Pruning [19,20,22,30,34,50]
sets parts of the network’s weights to zero. This reduces the
model’s complexity and memory requirements, speeds up
inference [4] and may lead to an improved generalization
ability [3, 24, 34]. In recent years, training sparse models
‡ Corresponding author. § Equal contribution.

became of interest, providing the benefits of reduced memory requirements and runtime not only for inference but also
for training [13, 14, 35, 47, 49, 55, 66, 71, 75].
In this work, we mainly focus on methods that prune
individual parameters before training, while the number of
zeroed coefficients is kept fixed during training. With this
unstructured pruning, a network’s memory footprint can be
reduced. To lower the runtime in addition, specialized softand hardware is needed [11, 18, 21, 51]. For training sparse
networks, we distinguish between (i) pruning at initialization (PaI) [9, 35, 66, 71, 75] which prunes the network at initialization and fixes zeroed parameters during training, (ii)
finding the sparse architecture to be finally trained by iterative train-prune-reset cycles, a so called lottery ticket (LT)
[14,15], and (iii) dynamic sparse training (DST) [13,39,49]
which prunes the network at initialization, but allows the
pruning mask to be changed during training.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are composed of
layers, each having a certain number of input- and output
channels. Every combination of input- and output channel
is linked by a filter h ∈ RK×K with kernel size K × K.
A weight of h is a spatial coefficient hi,j for a spatial coordinate (i, j). Filters h can also be modeled in an interPK 2
space, a linear space { n=1 λn · g (n) : λn ∈ R} spanned
2
by a filter basis (FB) F := {g (1) , . . . , g (K ) } ⊂ RK×K
[12, 69]. One possibility for a FB is the standard basis
B := {e(n) : n = 1, . . . , K 2 } which yields the spatial representations. General interspace representations are more
flexible since bases are not fixed. We represent h in an
interspace in order to learn the FB F spanning this space
along with the FB coefficients λ, and thereby obtain a better
representation for h. Thus, setting coefficients of flexible,
adaptive FBs to zero will improve results compared to prune
spatial coefficients.
For deep networks, where the layers’ purposes are usually unknown to the experts but learnt during training, we
believe that filters should train their bases along with their
coefficients. A FB F is dynamic, can be shared for any

12527

