Temporal Context Matters: Enhancing Single Image Prediction with Disease
Progression Representations
Aishik Konwer1 , Xuan Xu1 , Joseph Bae2 , Chao Chen2 , Prateek Prasanna2
1
Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University
2
Department of Biomedical Informatics, Stony Brook University
{akonwer, xuaxu}@cs.stonybrook.edu {joseph.bae, Chao.Chen.1, Prateek.Prasanna}@stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Clinical outcome or severity prediction from medical images has largely focused on learning representations from
single-timepoint or snapshot scans. It has been shown that
disease progression can be better characterized by temporal imaging. We therefore hypothesized that outcome predictions can be improved by utilizing the disease progression information from sequential images. We present a deep
learning approach that leverages temporal progression information to improve clinical outcome predictions from
single-timepoint images. In our method, a self-attention
based Temporal Convolutional Network (TCN) is used to
learn a representation that is most reflective of the disease
trajectory. Meanwhile, a Vision Transformer is pretrained
in a self-supervised fashion to extract features from singletimepoint images. The key contribution is to design a recalibration module that employs maximum mean discrepancy
loss (MMD) to align distributions of the above two contextual representations. We train our system to predict clinical outcomes and severity grades from single-timepoint images. Experiments on chest and osteoarthritis radiography
datasets demonstrate that our approach outperforms other
state-of-the-art techniques.

1. Introduction
Predicting clinical outcomes from medical images is
a long standing goal in the medical vision community
[1, 6, 39, 77]. For the past half a decade, researchers have
employed various deep neural networks (DNNs) [10,30,38]
to improve diagnostic and prognostic performance. Previously, DNNs were trained from scratch [56] for classification and detection tasks on various medical imaging
datasets. These multi-organ datasets can range from 2D radiographs (x-rays) [50] to 3D magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) [41] or computerized tomography (CT) [70] scans.
More recent frameworks have employed knowledge distil-

lation [48,55] and self-supervision techniques [4,64] to pretrain models which are then finetuned on limited medical
imaging data. This has led to improved model performance.
However, most medical imaging datasets contain only
single-timepoint or ‘snapshot’ images. Although a snapshot image plays an essential role for describing a disease,
sequential scans provide a more comprehensive characterization of the evolution and prognosis of a pathology. The
temporal evolution of imaging biomarkers are highly correlated with disease progression trajectory. We hypothesize
that this rich underlying domain information can be leveraged by deep learning approaches to make accurate predictions about the disease trajectory even when temporal data
is limited/unavailable.
In practice, temporal medical data can be very limited
because patients are often lost to follow-up or suffer from
chronic diseases with infrequent re-evaluations of their condition. Temporal models usually overfit on these small
datasets leading to poor generalizability. Hence, they are
limited in their use as a standalone source for training recurrent neural networks (RNN), Temporal ConvNets (TCN),
etc. Recently there have been many deep learning–based
works that aim to learn representations from sequential
medical imaging data [20, 21, 33, 63]. The bottleneck of
limited training samples is evident in all of them. Unlike the
video vision community where the presence of large scale
temporal datasets facilitates temporal modeling approaches,
pursuing similar problems (for e.g., future timepoint severity prediction, object evolution) in medical imaging scenario is technically challenging.
In this work we propose to learn disease progression
patterns from limited temporal imaging data, and use this
auxiliary knowledge to enhance predictive performance of
methods that use snapshot scans. Since the representations
are obtained from two different domains - snapshot and
temporal - the challenges lie in how to optimally adapt and
align these feature distributions. Because each image in a
temporal sequence contributes unequally, we first extract an
‘optimal’ embedding of the entire sequence. An ‘optimal’

18824

