β-DARTS: Beta-Decay Regularization for Differentiable Architecture Search
Peng Ye1 ,* Baopu Li2 , Yikang Li3 , Tao Chen1†, Jiayuan Fan1 , Wanli Ouyang4
1
Fudan University, 2 BAIDU USA LLC, 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory,
4
The University of Sydney, SenseTime Computer Vision Group, Australia
yepeng20@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has attracted increasingly more attention in recent years because of its
capability to design deep neural network automatically.
Among them, differential NAS approaches such as DARTS,
have gained popularity for the search efficiency. However, they suffer from two main issues, the weak robustness to the performance collapse and the poor generalization ability of the searched architectures. To solve
these two problems, a simple-but-efficient regularization
method, termed as Beta-Decay, is proposed to regularize the
DARTS-based NAS searching process. Specifically, BetaDecay regularization can impose constraints to keep the
value and variance of activated architecture parameters
from too large. Furthermore, we provide in-depth theoretical analysis on how it works and why it works. Experimental results on NAS-Bench-201 show that our proposed method can help to stabilize the searching process
and makes the searched network more transferable across
different datasets. In addition, our search scheme shows
an outstanding property of being less dependent on training time and data. Comprehensive experiments on a variety of search spaces and datasets validate the effectiveness of the proposed method. The code is available at
https://github.com/Sunshine-Ye/Beta-DARTS.

1. Introduction
Neural architecture search (NAS) has attracted lots of interests for its potential to automatize the process of architecture design. Previous reinforcement learning [26, 33] and
evolutionary algorithm [25] based methods usually incur
massive computation overheads, which hinder their practical applications. To reduce the search cost, a variety of
approaches are proposed, including performance estimation [17], network morphisms [2] and one-shot architecture
search [13, 21]. In particular, one-shot methods resort to
* Part of this work was done when Ye Peng was tele-interned at Baidu.
† Corresponding author (eetchen@fudan.edu.cn)

AvgP

𝜷𝟏

MaxP

SepC

DilC

𝜷𝟐

𝜷𝟑

𝜷𝟒

Skip

𝜷𝟓

+

AvgP

𝜷𝒌 =

𝒆𝒙𝒑 𝜶𝒌
σ𝒌𝓞′ =𝟏 𝒆𝒙𝒑 𝜶𝒌′

DARTS and DARTS-:
Regularize 𝜶

𝜷𝟏

MaxP

SepC

DilC

𝜷𝟐

𝜷𝟑

𝜷𝟒

+
+

Skip

𝜷𝟓
Auxiliary
Skip

𝛽𝑠𝑘𝑖𝑝

𝑑𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑦

0

𝜷-DARTS:
Regularize 𝜷

(a) DARTS and 𝜷-DARTS

(b) DARTS-

Figure 1. Schematic illustration about (a) DARTS [21] and our
proposed β-DARTS, (b) DARTS- [5]. DARTS- adds an auxiliary
skip connection with a decay rate βskip to alleviate the performance collapse problem. β-DARTS introduces the Beta-Decay
regularization to improve both the robustness of the searching process and the generalization ability of the searched architecture.

weight sharing technique, which only needs to train a supernet covering all candidate sub-networks once. Based
on this weight sharing strategy, differentiable architecture
search [21] (namely DARTS, as shown in Fig. 1) relaxes the
discrete operation selection problem to learn differentiable
architecture parameters, which further improves the search
efficiency by alternately optimizing supernet weights and
architecture parameters.
Although differentiable method has the advantages of
simplicity and computational efficiency, its robustness and
architecture generalization challenges still needs to be fully
resolved. Firstly, lots of studies have shown that DARTS
frequently suffers from performance collapse, that is the
searched architecture tends to accumulate parameter-free
operations especially for skip connection, leading to the
performance degradation [1, 5]. To handle this robustness
challenge, lots of instructive works are proposed: directly
restricting the number of skip connections [4, 20]; exploiting or regularizing relevant indicators such as the norm of
Hessian regarding the architecture parameters [1,3]; changing the searching and/or discretization process [5, 6, 12];
implicitly regularizing the learned architecture parameters [1]. However, the explicit regularization of architecture parameters optimization receives little attention, as
previous works (including above methods) adopt L2 or

10874

