Efficient Geometry-aware 3D Generative Adversarial Networks
Eric R. Chan * †1,2 , Connor Z. Lin* 1 , Matthew A. Chan* 1 , Koki Nagano* 2 , Boxiao Pan1 , Shalini De
Mello2 , Orazio Gallo2 , Leonidas Guibas1 , Jonathan Tremblay2 , Sameh Khamis2 , Tero Karras2 , and
Gordon Wetzstein1
1

Stanford University

2

NVIDIA

Abstract
Unsupervised generation of high-quality multi-viewconsistent images and 3D shapes using only collections of
single-view 2D photographs has been a long-standing challenge. Existing 3D GANs are either compute-intensive or
make approximations that are not 3D-consistent; the former limits quality and resolution of the generated images
and the latter adversely affects multi-view consistency and
shape quality. In this work, we improve the computational
efficiency and image quality of 3D GANs without overly
relying on these approximations. We introduce an expressive hybrid explicit-implicit network architecture that, together with other design choices, synthesizes not only highresolution multi-view-consistent images in real time but also
produces high-quality 3D geometry. By decoupling feature generation and neural rendering, our framework is
able to leverage state-of-the-art 2D CNN generators, such
as StyleGAN2, and inherit their efficiency and expressiveness. We demonstrate state-of-the-art 3D-aware synthesis
with FFHQ and AFHQ Cats, among other experiments.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) have seen immense progress, with recent models capable of generating high-resolution, photorealistic images indistinguishable
from real photographs [27–29]. Current state-of-the-art
GANs, however, operate in 2D only and do not explicitly
model the underlying 3D scenes.
Recent work on 3D-aware GANs has begun to tackle the
problem of multi-view-consistent image synthesis and, to a
lesser extent, extraction of 3D shapes without being supervised on geometry or multi-view image collections. How* Equal contribution.
† Part of the work was done during an internship at NVIDIA.

Project page: https://github.com/NVlabs/eg3d

Figure 1. Our 3D GAN enables synthesis of scenes, producing
high-quality, multi-view-consistent renderings and detailed geometry. Our approach trains from a collection of 2D images without
target-specific shape priors, ground truth 3D scans, or multi-view
supervision. Please see the accompanying video for more results.

ever, the image quality and resolution of existing 3D GANs
have lagged far behind those of 2D GANs. Furthermore,
their 3D reconstruction quality, so far, leaves much to be
desired. One of the primary reasons for this gap is the computational inefficiency of previously employed 3D generators and neural rendering architectures.
In contrast to 2D GANs, 3D GANs rely on a combination
of a 3D-structure-aware inductive bias in the generator network architecture and a neural rendering engine that aims
at providing view-consistent results. The inductive bias can
be modeled using explicit voxel grids [14, 21, 47, 48, 68, 74]
or neural implicit representations [4, 47, 49, 58]. While
successful in single-scene “overfitting” scenarios, neither
of these representations is suitable for training a highresolution 3D GAN because they are simply too memory
inefficient or slow. Training a 3D GAN requires rendering
tens of millions of images, but state-of-the-art neural volume rendering [45] at high-resolutions with these representations is computationally infeasible. CNN-based image up-

16123

