Unsupervised Deraining: Where Contrastive Learning Meets Self-similarity
Yuntong Ye1 , Changfeng Yu1 , Yi Chang1∗, Lin Zhu2 , Xi-le Zhao3 , Luxin Yan1 , Yonghong Tian2
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Peking University 3 University of Electronic Science and Technology of China

Figure 1. The proposed method can remove both the real-world rain streaks and veiling effect meanwhile well preserve image structures in
an unsupervised manner. More real results and comparisons with the state-of-the-arts can be found in the supplementary.

Abstract
Image deraining is a typical low-level image restoration task,
which aims at decomposing the rainy image into two distinguishable layers: clean image layer and rain layer. Most of
the existing learning-based deraining methods are supervisedly trained on synthetic rainy-clean pairs. The domain gap
between the synthetic and real rains makes them less generalized to different real rainy scenes. Moreover, the existing
methods mainly utilize the property of the two layers independently, while few of them have considered the mutually
exclusive relationship between the two layers. In this work,
we propose a novel non-local contrastive learning (NLCL)
method for unsupervised image deraining. Consequently, we
not only utilize the intrinsic self-similarity property within
samples, but also the mutually exclusive property between
the two layers, so as to better differ the rain layer from the
clean image. Specifically, the non-local self-similarity image layer patches as the positives are pulled together and
similar rain layer patches as the negatives are pushed away.
Thus the similar positive/negative samples that are close
in the original space benefit us to enrich more discriminative representation. Apart from the self-similarity sampling
strategy, we analyze how to choose an appropriate feature
encoder in NLCL. Extensive experiments on different real
rainy datasets demonstrate that the proposed method obtains

state-of-the-art performance in real deraining.

1. Introduction
The existing high-level computer vision tasks such as
image segmentation [6], and object detection [34] have
achieved significant progress in recent years. Unfortunately,
their performance would suffer from degradation under the
rainy weather [1, 22, 29]. To alleviate the influence of the
rain, numerous full-supervised deraining methods have been
proposed [11,54,59]. Although they can achieve good results
on simulated rainy image, they cannot well generalize to the
real rain because of the domain gap between the simplified
synthetic rain and complex real rain [56]. The goal of this
work is to remove the real rain in an unsupervised manner.
To handle the real-world complex rainy images, the
optimization-based methods are firstly proposed with handcrafted priors such as the sparse coding [36], low-rank [4]
and Gaussian mixture model [31]. However, these handcrafted priors are of limited representation ability, especially
for highly complex and varied rainy scenes. To rectify this
weakness, the learning-based CNN methods [11, 28, 30, 54]
have made great progresses. The key idea of these supervised learning methods tries the best to simulate the rain
∗ Corresponding Author

5821

