HOI4D: A 4D Egocentric Dataset for Category-Level Human-Object Interaction
Yunze Liu* 1,3 , Yun Liu* 1 , Che Jiang1 , Kangbo Lyu1 , Weikang Wan2 ,
Hao Shen2 , Boqiang Liang2 , Zhoujie Fu1 , He Wang2 , Li Yi† 1,3
1
Tsinghua University, 2 Peking University, 3 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
https://hoi4d.github.io

Abstract
We present HOI4D, a large-scale 4D egocentric dataset
with rich annotations, to catalyze the research of categorylevel human-object interaction. HOI4D consists of 2.4M
RGB-D egocentric video frames over 4000 sequences collected by 9 participants interacting with 800 different object instances from 16 categories over 610 different indoor
rooms. Frame-wise annotations for panoptic segmentation,
motion segmentation, 3D hand pose, category-level object
pose and hand action have also been provided, together
with reconstructed object meshes and scene point clouds.
With HOI4D, we establish three benchmarking tasks to promote category-level HOI from 4D visual signals including semantic segmentation of 4D dynamic point cloud sequences, category-level object pose tracking, and egocentric action segmentation with diverse interaction targets.
In-depth analysis shows HOI4D poses great challenges to
existing methods and produces huge research opportunities.

1. Introduction
Tremendous progress [9, 14, 44, 47] has been made for
naming objects and activities in images, videos or 3D point
clouds over the last decade facilitated by significant dataset
and benchmark efforts. However, these perception outcomes fail to satisfy the needs of more and more critical
applications such as human-assistant robots and augmented
reality where the perception of interactions from 4D egocentric sensory inputs (e.g., temporal streams of colored
point clouds) is required. It becomes highly desirable for
a computer vision system to build up a detailed understanding of human-object interaction from an egocentric point
of view. Such understanding should unify semantic understanding of 4D dynamic scenes, the 3D pose of human
hands under object occlusion, the 3D pose and functionality
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

…
(b) Motion Segmentation

(c) 3D Hand Pose and
Category-Level Object Pose

…
Reach out

Open

(a) Hand Actions

(d) Panoptic Segmentation (e) Reconstructed Object Mesh

Figure 1. Overview of HOI4D: We construct a large-scale 4D
egocentric dataset with rich annotation for category-level humanobject interaction. Frame-wise annotations for action segmentation(a), motion segmentation(b), panoptic segmentation(d), 3D
hand pose and category-level object pose(c) are provided, together
with reconstructed object meshes(e) and scene point cloud.

of novel objects of interaction interest, as well as the action
and intention of humans, which pose new challenges for today’s computer vision systems.
To help tackle these challenges, large-scale and
annotation-rich 4D egocentric HOI datasets as well as the
corresponding benchmark suites are strongly needed. Recently some efforts [18, 19, 22] have been made to fulfill
such needs. However, most of these works focus on what
we called instance-level human-object interaction where
the objects being interacted with all come from a very small
pool of instances whose exact CAD models and sizes are
known beforehand. This impedes their application to perceiving human interaction with the vast diversity of objects in our daily life. Moreover, these works tend to ignore articulated objects while only focusing on rigid objects with which the interaction patterns are relatively simpler. These limitations partially come from the challenging
and cumbersome nature of jointly capturing hands, objects
and real scenes in an egocentric manner. Curating synthetic
datasets [20] might be an alternative. Nonetheless simulating natural human motion and functional grasping for
generic objects are still open research problems, making it

21013

