Dual Cross-Attention Learning for Fine-Grained Visual Categorization and
Object Re-Identification
Haowei Zhu*, Wenjing Ke*, Dong Li, Ji Liu, Lu Tian, Yi Shan
Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., Beijing, China
{haowei.zhu, wenjing.ke, d.li, lu.tian, yi.shan}@amd.com

Abstract
Recently, self-attention mechanisms have shown impressive performance in various NLP and CV tasks, which can
help capture sequential characteristics and derive global
information. In this work, we explore how to extend selfattention modules to better learn subtle feature embeddings for recognizing fine-grained objects, e.g., different
bird species or person identities. To this end, we propose
a dual cross-attention learning (DCAL) algorithm to coordinate with self-attention learning. First, we propose
global-local cross-attention (GLCA) to enhance the interactions between global images and local high-response regions, which can help reinforce the spatial-wise discriminative clues for recognition. Second, we propose pairwise cross-attention (PWCA) to establish the interactions
between image pairs. PWCA can regularize the attention
learning of an image by treating another image as distractor and will be removed during inference. We observe
that DCAL can reduce misleading attentions and diffuse the
attention response to discover more complementary parts
for recognition. We conduct extensive evaluations on finegrained visual categorization and object re-identification.
Experiments demonstrate that DCAL performs on par with
state-of-the-art methods and consistently improves multiple
self-attention baselines, e.g., surpassing DeiT-Tiny and ViTBase by 2.8% and 2.4% mAP on MSMT17, respectively.

1. Introduction
Self-attention is an attention mechanism that can relate
different positions of a single sequence and draw global
dependencies. It is originally applied in natural language
processing (NLP) tasks [10, 46] and exhibits the outstanding performance. Recently, Transformer with self-attention
learning has also been explored for various vision tasks
(e.g., image classification [5, 12, 19, 37, 45, 51] and object
detection [2, 68]) as an alternative of convolutional neu* Equal contribution.

ral network (CNN). For general image classification, selfattention has been proved to work well for recognizing 2D
images by viewing image patches as words and flattening
them as sequences [12, 45].
In this work, we investigate how to extend self-attention
modules to better learn subtle feature embeddings for recognizing fine-grained objects, e.g., different bird species or
person identities. Fine-grained recognition is more challenging than general image classification owing to the subtle visual variations among different sub-classes. Most of
existing approaches build upon CNN to predict class probabilities or measure feature distances. To address the subtle
appearance variations, local characteristics are often captured by learning spatial attention [15, 34, 40, 60] or explicitly localizing semantic objects / parts [11, 56, 58, 61]. We
adopt a different way to incorporate local information based
on vision Transformer. To this end, we propose global-local
cross-attention (GLCA) to enhance the interactions between
global images and local high-response regions. Specifically,
we compute the cross-attention between a selected subset
of query vectors and the entire set of key-value vectors. By
coordinating with self-attention learning, GLCA can help
reinforce the spatial-wise discriminative clues to recognize
fine-grained objects.
Apart from incorporating local information, another solution to distinguish the sutble visual differences is pairwise learning. The intuition is that one can identify the
subtle variations by comparing image pairs. Exiting CNNbased methods design dedicated network architectures to
enable pair-wise feature interaction [16, 69]. A contrastive
loss [16] or score ranking loss [69] is used for feature learning. Motivated by this, we also employ a pair-wise learning
scheme to establish the interactions between image pairs.
Different from optimizing the feature distance, we propose
pair-wise cross-attention (PWCA) to regularize the attention learning of an image by treating another image as distractor. Specifically, we compute the cross-attention between query of an image and combined key-value from both
images. By introducing confusion in key and value vectors,
the attention scores are diffused to another image so that

4692

