Gaussian Process Modeling of Approximate Inference Errors for
Variational Autoencoders
Minyoung Kim
Samsung AI Center Cambridge, UK
mikim21@gmail.com

Abstract
Variational autoencoder (VAE) is a very successful generative model whose key element is the so-called amortized inference network, which can perform test time inference using a single feed forward pass. Unfortunately,
this comes at the cost of degraded accuracy in posterior approximation, often underperforming the instance-wise variational optimization. Although the latest semi-amortized
approaches mitigate the issue by performing a few variational optimization updates starting from the VAE’s amortized inference output, they inherently suffer from computational overhead for inference at test time. In this paper,
we address the problem in a completely different way by
considering a random inference model, where we model the
mean and variance functions of the variational posterior as
random Gaussian processes (GP). The motivation is that
the deviation of the VAE’s amortized posterior distribution
from the true posterior can be regarded as random noise,
which allows us to view the approximation error as uncertainty in posterior approximation that can be dealt with in a
principled GP manner. In particular, our model can quantify the difficulty in posterior approximation by a Gaussian
variational density. Inference in our GP model is done by a
single feed forward pass through the network, significantly
faster than semi-amortized methods. We show that our approach attains higher test data likelihood than the state-ofthe-arts on several benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Variational Autoencoder (VAE) [14, 31] is a very successful generative model where a highly complex deep nonlinear generative process can be easily incorporated. A key
element of the VAE, the deep inference (a.k.a. encoder)
network, can perform the test time inference using a single feed forward pass through the network, bringing significant computational speed-up. This feature, known as
amortized inference, allows the VAE to circumvent other-

wise time-consuming steps of solving the variational optimization problem for each individual instance at test time,
required in the standard variational inference techniques,
such as the stochastic variational inference (SVI) [9].
As suggested by the recent study [2], however, the amortized inference can also be a drawback of the VAE, specifically the accuracy of posterior approximation by the amortized inference network is often lower than the accuracy of
the SVI’s full variational optimization. There are two general approaches to reduce this amortization error. The first
is to increase the network capacity of the inference model
(e.g., flow-based models [13,37]). The other direction is the
so-called semi-amortized approach [12, 15, 24, 27], where
the key idea is to use the VAE’s amortized inference network to produce a good initial distribution, from which a
few SVI steps are performed at test time to further reduce
the amortization error, quite similar in nature to the test time
model adaptation of the MAML [6] in multi-task (meta)
learning. Although these models often lead to improved
posterior approximation, they raise several issues: Training the models for the former family of approaches is usually difficult because of the increased model complexity; the
latter approaches inadvertently suffer from computational
overhead of additional SVI gradient steps at test time.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach to address
these drawbacks. We retain the amortized inference framework similar to the standard VAE for its computational benefits, but consider a random inference model. Specifically,
the mean and the variance functions of the variational posterior distribution are a priori assumed to be Gaussian process (GP) distributed. There are two main motivations for
this idea. The first one stems from the suboptimality of the
VAE, where the estimated amortized inference network suffers from deviation from the true posteriors. This inaccuracy can be viewed and modeled as uncertainty in the posterior approximation of the deterministic amortized inference
network, suggesting the need for a principled Bayesian uncertainty treatment. The second intuition is that the deviation of the VAE’s variational posterior distributions from the
true posteriors can be naturally regarded as random noise.

244

