Weakly-Supervised Generation and Grounding of Visual Descriptions with
Conditional Generative Models
Effrosyni Mavroudi and René Vidal
Mathematical Institute for Data Science, Dept. of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University
{emavrou1, rvidal}@jhu.edu

Abstract
Given weak supervision from image- or video-caption
pairs, we address the problem of grounding (localizing)
each object word of a ground-truth or generated sentence describing a visual input. Recent weakly-supervised
approaches leverage region proposals and ground words
based on the region attention coefficients of captioning
models. To predict each next word in the sentence they attend over regions using a summary of the previous words
as a query, and then ground the word by selecting the
most attended regions. However, this leads to sub-optimal
grounding, since attention coefficients are computed without taking into account the word that needs to be localized. To address this shortcoming, we propose a novel
Grounded Visual Description Conditional Variational Autoencoder (GVD-CVAE) and leverage its latent variables
for grounding. In particular, we introduce a discrete random variable that models each word-to-region alignment,
and learn its approximate posterior distribution given the
full sentence. Experiments on challenging image and video
datasets (Flickr30k Entities, YouCook2, ActivityNet Entities) validate the effectiveness of our conditional generative
model, showing that it can substantially outperform softattention-based baselines in grounding.

1. Introduction
Linking words to visual regions provides a fine-grained
bridge between vision and language modalities and is a fundamental block of many applications, such as human-robot
interaction [57, 60], visual question answering [27, 61], and
even unsupervised neural machine translation [58]. Thus,
visual grounding has become a prominent research area
at the intersection of vision and language [12, 16, 29, 51].
Training visual grounding systems typically requires annotations of textual descriptions combined with bounding
boxes for each groundable word (e.g., object nouns). Since
constructing datasets with such fine-grained bounding box
annotations is rather time-consuming and costly, we focus

Image

Grounding

Caption
A soccer player
is chasing after
a ball.

A soccer player
is chasing after
a ball.

Vision + Language Tasks
Grounded Visual Description
Visual Object Grounding
Image + Caption

Image

Grounding

CVAE-posterior:
computed based on whole sentence

Soft attention:
computed based on previous words

GT: A man is
wearing a hat.

GT: A man is
wearing a jacket.

Same

Caption + Grounding

GT: A man is
wearing a hat.

GT: A man is
wearing a jacket.

vs

(a) Soft-Attention-based Grounding (Prior Work)

(b) GVD-CVAE (Ours)

Figure 1. Our proposed framework jointly models visual descriptions and word-to-region alignments conditioned on an input image (or video) and region proposals. Without using any
bounding box annotations during training, it can tackle two tasks:
Visual Object Grounding and Grounded Visual Description. Unlike prior work [74] that leverages soft attention for grounding and
always predicts the same region for two words given the same visual input and partial caption context, our model can ground words
by taking into account the full ground-truth or generated sentence.

on weakly-supervised training of visual grounding systems,
which require only image-caption pairs for training. In particular, we consider two tasks, as illustrated in Fig. 1: (1)
Weakly-Supervised Visual Object Grounding (WS-VOG),
where given an input image (or video) and its visual description, the goal is to localize the referred semantic entities in
the visual input, and (2) Weakly-Supervised Grounded Visual Description (WS-GVD), where given an input image
(or video), we must jointly generate a natural language description and localize the generated words.
Most prior work has focused on learning how to align
words with regions by learning how to correctly match
images and videos to sentences [8, 26, 56, 65]. However, these matching-based approaches can only tackle the
first task (WS-VOG), and cannot generate grounded vi-

15544

