FS6D: Few-Shot 6D Pose Estimation of Novel Objects
Yisheng He1 Yao Wang2 Haoqiang Fan2 Jian Sun2 Qifeng Chen1
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 Megvii Technology

Abstract
6D object pose estimation networks are limited in their
capability to scale to large numbers of object instances
due to the close-set assumption and their reliance on highfidelity object CAD models. In this work, we study a new
open set problem; the few-shot 6D object poses estimation:
estimating the 6D pose of an unknown object by a few support views without extra training. To tackle the problem,
we point out the importance of fully exploring the appearance and geometric relationship between the given support
views and query scene patches and propose a dense prototypes matching framework by extracting and matching
dense RGBD prototypes with transformers. Moreover, we
show that the priors from diverse appearances and shapes
are crucial to the generalization capability under the problem setting and thus propose a large-scale RGBD photorealistic dataset (ShapeNet6D) for network pre-training. A
simple and effective online texture blending approach is
also introduced to eliminate the domain gap from the synthesis dataset, which enriches appearance diversity at a low
cost. Finally, we discuss possible solutions to this problem
and establish benchmarks on popular datasets to facilitate
future research. [project page]

1. Introduction
6D object pose estimation aims to predict a rigid transformation from the object coordinate system to the camera coordinate system, which benefits various applications, including robotic manipulation, augmented reality,
autonomous driving, etc. The explosive development of
deep learning has brought significant improvement to this
problem. With recent works [15, 16] reaching nearly 99%
recall accuracy on existing benchmarks [18, 22, 58], one
may get the impression that the 6D object pose problem
has been solved, which is not the case. We argue that the
current problem has been simplified with strict restrictions.
They are under the close-set assumption that the training
and testing data are drawn from the same object space,
which, however, does not adhere to the real dynamic worlds.
Moreover, extravagant high-fidelity CAD models and large-

A Few Views

Query Scene Patch

Few Shot Pose Estimation Network

Estimated Pose

Figure 1. The few-shot 6D pose estimation problem. Given a
few RGBD views of a novel objects with pose labels. The few-shot
pose estimation network aims to estimate 6D pose of that object
in a novel query scene without extra training. No precise CAD
models are required as well.

scale datasets are required for training to obtain good performance on new objects under the current instance-level
pose estimation setting.
The recently proposed category-level pose estimation
task [55] loosens the restriction with generalizability to
novel objects within the same categories. However, it is still
limited in the close-set assumption of predefined categories.
Instead, in this work, we study a new open-set problem, the
few-shot 6D object pose estimation: estimating 6D pose of
unknown objects by only a few views of the objects without
extra training. As shown in Figure 1, in our setting, only
a few labeled RGBD images of novel objects are provided,
and no high-fidelity CAD models are required. The goal of
the problem is to bridge the capability gap between machine
learning algorithms and flexible human visual systems that
can locate and estimate the pose of a novel object given
only several views of it. Besides, it has a wide range of

6814

