Lagrange Motion Analysis and View Embeddings for Improved Gait Recognition
Tianrui Chai1 , Annan Li1 ,* Shaoxiong Zhang1 , Zilong Li2 , Yunhong Wang1
1
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, China.
2
School of Engineering Science, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
{trchai,liannan,zhangsx}@buaa.edu.cn,lizilong@imech.ac.cn,yhwang@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
A-1

Gait is considered the walking pattern of human body,
which includes both shape and motion cues. However, the
main-stream appearance-based methods for gait recognition rely on the shape of silhouette. It is unclear whether
motion can be explicitly represented in the gait sequence
modeling. In this paper, we analyzed human walking using the Lagrange’s equation and come to the conclusion
that second-order information in the temporal dimension is
necessary for identification. We designed a second-order
motion extraction module based on the conclusions drawn.
Also, a light weight view-embedding module is designed by
analyzing the problem that current methods to cross-view
task do not take view itself into consideration explicitly. Experiments on CASIA-B and OU-MVLP datasets show the
effectiveness of our method and some visualization for extracted motion are done to show the interpretability of our
motion extraction module.

1. Introduction
Gait is a biometric presenting the walking pattern of
pedestrian for identity recognition and has an edge over
other biometrics such as face, iris or fingerprint since it can
be recognized without touch and at a distance. Although it
has been studied for years, there are still some challenges
in gait recognition. For example, variations like carrying
conditions [4, 15, 16, 42, 46], coat-wearing and viewpoint
differences [41, 45] may cause changes in gait appearance
and make it hard to distinguish pedestrian.
Existing appearance-based approaches for gait recognition rely heavily on the visual appearance of silhouettes.
However, when the view angle is close, the appearance difference between two different person can be smaller than
that of the same people but viewed from two different angles.
* Corresponding author.

B-1
A-2
Figure 1. Three samples from CASIA-B dataset, where A and B
denote ID 39 and ID 77 respectively. A-1 and A-2 are two samples
of A selected from different sequences. It can be found that it is
difficult to find the difference between A and B visually. Even on
some frames, A-2 are more similar to B-1 than A-1.

A common approach to address the aforementioned issue is learning viewpoint-invariant or robust features [6, 10,
20, 21, 35, 37, 38, 43]. However, these works focus on how
to extract apparent information and the fusion of spatial or
temporal features. The detection or estimation of viewpoint
is overlook and there is few model explicitly making use
of viewpoint. In other words, the viewpoint-robustness of
these methods is solely based on the coverage of data, which
is a well-known ill-posed problem.
Even when the viewpoint is close, the apparent information is still not very reliable. As shown in Figure 1,
it is difficult to distinguish the identity of the three samples only from the body shape.This phenomenon explains
why pure appearance-based method such as Gait Energy
Images (GEIs) [34] cannot achieve ideal performance. The
similar situation will also occur in state-of-the-art Gaitset
method [6] which does not use temporal information either.
We argue that the ultimate solution to the problem shown
in Figure 1 is the gait motion. Recently, some methods making use of temporal features are proposed [7, 20, 20, 28, 39].
Although these models show a stronger edge in recognition
accuracy, They do not discuss the motion information in
gait to the extent that some discriminatory biological information may be missing.
In this paper, by mathematical modeling analysis, we argue that it is difficult to distinguish people using only first-

20249

