Deep Rectangling for Image Stitching: A Learning Baseline
Lang Nie1,2 , Chunyu Lin1,2∗, Kang Liao1,2 , Shuaicheng Liu3 , Yao Zhao1,2
1
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network, Beijing, China
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
https://github.com/nie-lang/DeepRectangling

Abstract
Stitched images provide a wide field-of-view (FoV) but
suffer from unpleasant irregular boundaries. To deal with
this problem, existing image rectangling methods devote to
searching an initial mesh and optimizing a target mesh to
form the mesh deformation in two stages. Then rectangular images can be generated by warping stitched images.
However, these solutions only work for images with rich
linear structures, leading to noticeable distortions for portraits and landscapes with non-linear objects.
In this paper, we address these issues by proposing the
first deep learning solution to image rectangling. Concretely, we predefine a rigid target mesh and only estimate
an initial mesh to form the mesh deformation, contributing to a compact one-stage solution. The initial mesh is
predicted using a fully convolutional network with a residual progressive regression strategy. To obtain results with
high content fidelity, a comprehensive objective function is
proposed to simultaneously encourage the boundary rectangular, mesh shape-preserving, and content perceptually
natural. Besides, we build the first image stitching rectangling dataset with a large diversity in irregular boundaries
and scenes. Experiments demonstrate our superiority over
traditional methods both quantitatively and qualitatively.

1. Introduction
Image stitching algorithm [3, 12, 20, 29] can generate a wide FoV image (Fig.1b) from normal FoV images
(Fig.1a). These methods optimize a global or local warp to
align the overlapping regions of different images. Nevertheless, non-overlapping regions always suffer from irregular
boundaries [2]. People who use image stitching technology
have to be tolerant of unpleasant boundaries.
To deal with the irregular boundaries, one of the solutions is to crop a stitched image with a rectangle. However,
∗ Corresponding author

cropping inevitably reduces the FoV of the stitched image,
which contradicts the original intention of image stitching.
Fig.1c demonstrates an example, where the dark regions indicate the discarded areas by cropping. On the other hand,
image completion can synthesize the missing regions to
form a rectangular image. Nevertheless, there is currently
no work to design a mask for irregular boundaries in image stitching, and even SOTA completion works [25, 27]
show unsatisfying performance (Fig.1d) when processing
the stitched images. Moreover, the completion methods
may add some contents that seem to be harmonious but different from reality, making them unreliable in high-security
applications such as autonomous driving [11].
To obtain a rectangular image with high content fidelity, image rectangling methods [6, 7, 13] are proposed to
warp a stitched image to a rectangle via mesh deformation.
However, these solutions can only preserve structures with
straight/geodesic lines such as buildings, boxes, pillars, etc.
For non-linear structures such as portraits [26], distortions
are usually generated. Actually, the capability to preserve
linear structures is limited by line detection, thus distortions
also occur in linear structures sometimes (Fig.1e). Moreover, these traditional methods are two-stage solutions that
search an initial mesh and optimize a target mesh successively, making it challenging to be parallelly accelerated.
To address the above problems, we propose the first onestage learning baseline, in which we predefine a rigid target
mesh and only predict an initial mesh. Specifically, we design a simple but effective fully convolutional network to
estimate a content-aware initial mesh from a stitched image with a residual progressive regression strategy. Besides,
a comprehensive objective function consisting of a boundary term, a mesh term, and a content term is proposed to
simultaneously encourage the boundary rectangular, mesh
shape-preserving, and content perceptually natural. Compared with the existing methods, our content-preserving capability is more general (not limited to linear structures) and
more robust (Fig.1f) due to the effective semantic perception in our content constraint.

5740

