Learning Pixel Trajectories with Multiscale Contrastive Random Walks
Zhangxing Bian1,3

Allan Jabri2

University of Michigan1

UC Berkeley2

Abstract
A range of video modeling tasks, from optical flow to
multiple object tracking, share the same fundamental challenge: establishing space-time correspondence. Yet, approaches that dominate each space differ. We take a step towards bridging this gap by extending the recent contrastive
random walk formulation to much denser, pixel-level spacetime graphs. The main contribution is introducing hierarchy into the search problem by computing the transition matrix between two frames in a coarse-to-fine manner, forming a multiscale contrastive random walk when extended in time. This establishes a unified technique for selfsupervised learning of optical flow, keypoint tracking, and
video object segmentation. Experiments demonstrate that,
for each of these tasks, the unified model achieves performance competitive with strong self-supervised approaches
specific to that task.1

1. Introduction
Temporal correspondence underlies a range of video
understanding tasks, from optical flow to object tracking.
At the core, the challenge is to estimate the motion of
some entity as it persists in the world, by searching in
space and time. For historical reasons, the practicalities
differ substantially across tasks: optical flow aims for
dense correspondences but only between neighboring
pairs of frames, whereas tracking cares about longer-range
correspondences but is spatially sparse. We argue that the
time might be right to try and re-unify these different takes
on temporal correspondence.
An emerging line of work in self-supervised learning has
shown that generic representations pretrained on unlabeled
images and video can lead to strong performance across a
range of tracking tasks [20, 26, 35, 75, 77]. The key idea is
that if tracking can be formulated as label propagation [86]
on a space-time graph, all that is needed is a good measure of similarity between nodes. Indeed, the recent contrastive random walk (CRW) formulation [26] shows how
such a similarity measure can be learned for temporal cor1 Project

flowwalk

Alexei A. Efros2

page at https : / / jasonbian97 . github . io /

Andrew Owens1

Johns Hopkins University3

respondence problems, suggesting a path towards a unified
solution. However, scaling this perspective to pixel-level
space-time graphs holds challenges. Since computing similarity between frames is quadratic in the number of nodes,
estimating dense motion is prohibitively expensive. Moreover, there is no way of explicitly estimating the motion in
ambiguous cases, like occlusion. In parallel, the unsupervised optical flow community has adopted highly effective
methods for dense matching [83], which use multiscale representations [9, 45, 61, 84] to reduce the large search space,
and smoothness priors to deal with ambiguity and occlusion. But, in contrast to the self-supervised tracking methods, they rely on hand-crafted distance functions, such as
the Census Transform [32, 47]. Furthermore, because they
focus on producing point estimates of motion, they may be
less robust under long-term dynamics.
In this work, we take a step toward bridging the gap between tracking and optical flow by extending the contrastive
random walk formulation [26] to much denser, pixel-level
space-time graphs. The main contribution is introducing hierarchy into the search problem, i.e. the multiscale contrastive random walk. By integrating local attention in a
coarse-to-fine manner, the model can efficiently consider
a distribution over pixel-level trajectories. Through experiments across optical flow and video label propagation
benchmarks, we show:
• This provides a unified technique for self-supervised optical flow, pose tracking, and video object segmentation.
• For optical flow, the model is competitive with many recent unsupervised optical flow methods, despite using a
novel loss function (without hand-crafted features).
• For tracking, the model outperforms existing selfsupervised approaches on pose tracking, and is competitive on video object segmentation.
• Cycle-consistency provides a complementary learning
signal to photo-consistency.
• Multi-frame training improves two-frame performance.

2. Related work
Space-time representation learning. Recent work has
proposed methods for tracking objects in video through
16508

