ImFace: A Nonlinear 3D Morphable Face Model
with Implicit Neural Representations

1

Mingwu Zheng1,2 , Hongyu Yang3 , Di Huang1,2 *, Liming Chen4
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, China
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, China
4
LIRIS, École Centrale de Lyon, France
{zhengmingwu,hongyuyang,dhuang}@buaa.edu.cn, liming.chen@ec-lyon.fr

Abstract
Precise representations of 3D faces are beneficial to various computer vision and graphics applications. Due to
the data discretization and model linearity, however, it remains challenging to capture accurate identity and expression clues in current studies. This paper presents a novel 3D
morphable face model, namely ImFace, to learn a nonlinear
and continuous space with implicit neural representations.
It builds two explicitly disentangled deformation fields to
model complex shapes associated with identities and expressions, respectively, and designs an improved learning
strategy to extend embeddings of expressions to allow more
diverse changes. We further introduce a Neural Blend-Field
to learn sophisticated details by adaptively blending a series of local fields. In addition to ImFace, an effective preprocessing pipeline is proposed to address the issue of watertight input requirement in implicit representations, enabling them to work with common facial surfaces for the
first time. Extensive experiments are performed to demonstrate the superiority of ImFace.

1. Introduction
3D Morphable Face Models (3DMMs) are well-reputed
statistical models, established by learning techniques upon
prior distributions of facial shapes and textures from a set
of samples with dense correspondence, aiming at rendering realistic faces of a high variety. Since a morphable
representation is unique across different downstream tasks
where the geometry and appearance are separately controllable, 3DMMs are pervasively exploited in many face analysis applications in the field of computer vision, computer
graphics, biometrics, and medical imaging [2, 8, 27, 50].
In 3DMMs, the most fundamental issue lies in the way
to generate latent morphable representations, and during the
* Corresponding author.

Expression
Deformation Field

Identity
Deformation Field

Template
Signed Distance Field

Figure 1. ImFace encodes complex face variations by two explicitly disentangled deformation fields with respect to a template face,
resulting in a morphable implicit representation for 3D faces.

past two decades, along with data improvement in scale, diversity and quality [10, 13, 31, 58], remarkable progresses
have been achieved. The methods are initially linear model
based [7, 39, 40] and further extended to multilinear model
based [9, 12, 55], where different modes are individually
encoded. Unfortunately, for the relatively limited representation ability of linear models, these methods are not
so competent at handling the cases with complicated variations, e.g. exaggerated expressions. In the context of
deep learning, a number of nonlinear models have been
investigated with the input of 2D images [53, 54] or 3D
meshes [5, 11, 15, 17, 46] by using Convolutional Neural
Networks or Graph Neural Networks. They indeed deliver
performance gains; however, restricted by the resolution of
discrete representing strategies on input data, facial priors
are not sufficiently captured, incurring loss of shape details.
Besides, all current methods are dependent on the preposed
procedure of point-to-point correspondence [1,6,25,34], but
face registration itself remains challenging.
Recently, several studies on Implicit Neural Representations (INRs) [16, 26, 32, 35, 38] have shown that 3D geometries can be precisely modeled by learning continuous deep
implicit functions. They describe an input observation as a
low-dimensional shape embedding and estimate the Signed

20343

