Rethinking Efficient Lane Detection via Curve Modeling
Zhengyang Feng1∗ , Shaohua Guo1 ,* Xin Tan2,1†, Ke Xu3† , Min Wang4 , Lizhuang Ma1,2,5‡
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 East China Normal University 3 City University of Hong Kong
4
SenseTime Research 5 MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
zyfeng97@sjtu.edu.cn;guoshaohua@sjtu.edu.cn;tanxin2017@sjtu.edu.cn;kkangwing@gmail.com;
wangmin@sensetime.com;ma-lz@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper presents a novel parametric curve-based
method for lane detection in RGB images. Unlike stateof-the-art segmentation-based and point detection-based
methods that typically require heuristics to either decode
predictions or formulate a large sum of anchors, the curvebased methods can learn holistic lane representations naturally. To handle the optimization difficulties of existing polynomial curve methods, we propose to exploit the parametric
Bézier curve due to its ease of computation, stability, and
high freedom degrees of transformations. In addition, we
propose the deformable convolution-based feature flip fusion, for exploiting the symmetry properties of lanes in driving scenes. The proposed method achieves a new state-ofthe-art performance on the popular LLAMAS benchmark.
It also achieves favorable accuracy on the TuSimple and
CULane datasets, while retaining both low latency (>150
FPS) and small model size (<10M). Our method can serve
as a new baseline, to shed the light on the parametric
curves modeling for lane detection. Codes of our model
and PytorchAutoDrive: a unified framework for self-driving
perception, are available at: https://github.com/
voldemortX/pytorch-auto-drive .

1. Introduction
Lane detection is a fundamental task in autonomous driving systems, which supports the decision-making of lanekeeping, centering and changing, etc. Previous lane detection methods [2, 10] typically rely on expensive sensors
such as LIDAR. Advanced by the rapid development of
deep learning techniques, many works [14, 16, 17, 24, 31]
are proposed to detect lane lines from RGB inputs captured
by commercial front-mounted cameras.
* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Authors.
‡ Lizhuang Ma led this project, and he is a member of Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University.

Figure 1. Lane detection strategies. Segmentation-based and point
detection-based representations are local and indirect. The abstract
coefficients (a, b, c, d) used in polynomial curve are hard to optimize. The cubic Bézier curve is defined by 4 actually existing
control points, which roughly fit line shape and wrap the lane line
in its convex hull (dashed red lines). Best viewed in color.

Deep lane detection methods can be classified into three
categories, i.e., segmentation-based, point detection-based,
and curve-based methods (Figure 1). Among them, by
relying on classic segmentation [5] and object detection
[20] networks, the segmentation-based and point detectionbased methods typically achieve state-of-the-art lane detection performance. The segmentation-based methods [16,17,
31] exploit the foreground texture cues to segment the lane
pixels and decode these pixels into line instances via heuristics. The point detection-based methods [12, 24, 29] typically adopt the R-CNN framework [8, 20], and detect lane
lines by detecting a dense series of points (e.g., every 10
pixels in the vertical axis). Both kinds of approaches represent lane lines via indirect proxies (i.e., segmentation maps
and points). To handle the learning of holistic lane lines,
under cases of occlusions or adverse weather/illumination
conditions, they have to rely on low-efficiency designs, such
as recurrent feature aggregation (too heavy for this realtime task) [17, 31], or a large number of heuristic anchors
(> 1000, which may be biased to dataset statistics) [24].
On the other hand, there are only a few methods [14, 23]
proposed to model the lane lines as holistic curves (typically the polynomial curves, e.g., x = ay 3 + by 2 + cy + d).

17062

