WildNet: Learning Domain Generalized Semantic Segmentation from the Wild
Suhyeon Lee
Hongje Seong
Seongwon Lee
Euntai Kim*
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea
{hyeon93, hjseong, won4113, etkim}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
We present a new domain generalized semantic segmentation network named WildNet, which learns domaingeneralized features by leveraging a variety of contents and
styles from the wild. In domain generalization, the low generalization ability for unseen target domains is clearly due
to overfitting to the source domain. To address this problem, previous works have focused on generalizing the domain by removing or diversifying the styles of the source
domain. These alleviated overfitting to the source-style but
overlooked overfitting to the source-content. In this paper,
we propose to diversify both the content and style of the
source domain with the help of the wild. Our main idea is
for networks to naturally learn domain-generalized semantic information from the wild. To this end, we diversify styles
by augmenting source features to resemble wild styles and
enable networks to adapt to a variety of styles. Furthermore, we encourage networks to learn class-discriminant
features by providing semantic variations borrowed from
the wild to source contents in the feature space. Finally,
we regularize networks to capture consistent semantic information even when both the content and style of the source
domain are extended to the wild. Extensive experiments
on five different datasets validate the effectiveness of our
WildNet, and we significantly outperform state-of-the-art
methods. The source code and model are available online:
https://github.com/suhyeonlee/WildNet.

1. Introduction
Domain generalized semantic segmentation aims to better predict pixel-level semantic labels on multiple unseen
target domains while learning only on the source domain.
Unfortunately, the domain shift between the source and target domains makes a segmentation model trained on the
given source data behave stupidly on the unseen target data,
as shown in Fig. 1b. In domain generalization (DG), the
low generalization performance for unseen domains is obviously due to overfitting to the source domain. Since the
* Corresponding author.

(a) Unseen domain image

(b) Baseline (mIoU 35.16%)

(c) RobustNet (mIoU 36.58%)

(d) Ours (mIoU 44.62%)

Figure 1. Semantic segmentation results on (a) an unseen domain
image. The models are trained on GTAV [46] train set and validated on Cityscapes [10] validation set. (b) Baseline model overfits the source domain and performs poorly with mIoU 35.16%
on the unseen target domain. (c) RobustNet [7], a state-of-the-art
method, improved mIoU to 36.58% by whitening the style, but still
has low generalization capability. (d) Our WildNet achieves superior generalization performance with mIoU 44.62% by learning
various styles and contents from the wild. More qualitative results
on other datasets are available in the supplementary material.

model cannot see any information about the target domains
in the learning process and even unlabeled target images are
not provided unlike domain adaptation (DA), it over-learns
the statistical distribution of the given source data.
Recently, some studies [7, 29, 41, 42] have proposed
learning the domain-generalized content feature by ‘removing’ domain-specific style information from the data to prevent overfitting to the source domain. Based on the correlation between the feature’s covariance matrix and style [13,
14], they assumed that only content features would remain
if elements of features considered the domain-specific style
were whitened [23, 30, 50, 53]. However, since the content
and style are not orthogonal, whitening the style may cause
a loss of semantic content, which is indispensable for semantic category prediction. As a result, they predict semantic categories from incomplete content features and have
difficulty making accurate predictions, as shown in Fig. 1c.
In this paper, we propose a new domain generalized semantic segmentation network called WildNet, which learns

9936

