Not All Relations are Equal:
Mining Informative Labels for Scene Graph Generation
Arushi Goel1 , Basura Fernando2 , Frank Keller1 , and Hakan Bilen1
1

School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, UK
2
CFAR, IHPC, A*STAR, Singapore.

Abstract

man

ca

rr

Scene graph generation (SGG) aims to capture a wide
variety of interactions between pairs of objects, which is essential for full scene understanding. Existing SGG methods
trained on the entire set of relations fail to acquire complex
reasoning about visual and textual correlations due to various biases in training data. Learning on trivial relations
that indicate generic spatial configuration like ‘on’ instead
of informative relations such as ‘parked on’ does not enforce this complex reasoning, harming generalization. To
address this problem, we propose a novel framework for
SGG training that exploits relation labels based on their
informativeness. Our model-agnostic training procedure
imputes missing informative relations for less informative
samples in the training data and trains a SGG model on the
imputed labels along with existing annotations. We show
that this approach can successfully be used in conjunction
with state-of-the-art SGG methods and improves their performance significantly in multiple metrics on the standard
Visual Genome benchmark. Furthermore, we obtain considerable improvements for unseen triplets in a more challenging zero-shot setting.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we look at a structured vision-language
problem, scene graph generation [26, 56], which aims to
capture a wide variety of interactions between pairs of objects in images. SGG can be seen as a step towards comprehensive scene understanding and benefits several highlevel visual tasks such as object detection/segmentation
[17, 20, 41], image captioning [1, 18, 22, 30], image/video
retrieval [16], and visual question answering [2, 34]. In
the literature, SGG is typically formulated as predicting a
triplet of a localized subject-object pair connected by a relation (e.g. person wear shirt). Broadly, recent advances in
SGG have been obtained by extracting local and global visual features in convolutional neural networks [23,45,68] or

on

yin
g

standing
on

beach surfboard
Implicit Relations
Explicit Relations

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) An example of a scene graph with implicit and
explicit relations. (b) Per-class Recall@100 for an SGG model
trained either on only explicit (orange) or implicit (blue) relations.

graph neural networks [31, 56, 61] combined with language
embeddings [36, 39] or statistical priors [65] for predicting
relations between objects.
Despite the remarkable progress in this task, various
factors (long-tail data distribution, language or reporting
bias [38]) in the established SGG benchmarks (e.g. Visual
Genome [26]) have been shown to drive existing methods
towards biased and inaccurate relation predictions [49, 50].
One major cause is that each subject-object pair is annotated
with only one positive relation, which typically depends
on the annotator’s preference and is subjective, while other
plausible relations are treated as negative.1 For instance, a
subject-object pair man–beach in Fig. 1a is only annotated
with one relation as man on beach, even though other plausible relations are available such as standing on. Hence,
the models [23, 29, 50, 65] trained on this data become biased towards more frequently occurring labels, as reported
in [49]. To alleviate the biased training, Tang et al. [49]
employ counterfactual causality to force the SGG model
to base its predictions only on visual evidence rather than
the data bias. Wang et al. [54] propose a semi-supervised
technique that jointly imputes the missing labels of subject–
object pairs with no annotated relations to obtain more balanced triplet distributions. Suhail et al. [47] propose an en1 Note that both training and test sets of the standard benchmarks are
subject to the similar biases.

15596

