Local-Adaptive Face Recognition via Graph-based Meta-Clustering and
Regularized Adaptation
Wenbin Zhu1*
Chien-Yi Wang2*
1
Microsoft Cloud and AI

2

Kuan-Lun Tseng2
Shang-Hong Lai2
Baoyuan Wang3
3
Microsoft AI R&D Center, Taiwan
Xiaobing.AI

{wenzh, chiwa, kutseng, shlai}@microsoft.com

zjuwby@gmail.com

Abstract
Due to the rising concern of data privacy, it’s reasonable to assume the local client data can’t be transferred
to a centralized server, nor their associated identity label
is provided. To support continuous learning and fill the
last-mile quality gap, we introduce a new problem setup
called “local-adaptive face recognition (LaFR)”. Leveraging the environment-specific local data after the deployment
of the initial global model, LaFR aims at getting optimal
performance by training local-adapted models automatically and un-supervisely, as opposed to fixing their initial
global model. We achieve this by a newly proposed embedding cluster model based on Graph Convolution Network
(GCN), which is trained via meta-optimization procedure.
Compared with previous works, our meta-clustering model
can generalize well in unseen local environments. With the
pseudo identity labels from the clustering results, we further introduce novel regularization techniques to improve
the model adaptation performance. Extensive experiments
on racial and internal sensor adaptation demonstrate that
our proposed solution is more effective for adapting face
recognition models in each specific environment. Meanwhile, we show that LaFR can further improve the global
model by a simple federated aggregation over the updated
local models.

1. Introduction
Face recognition [30] has been commercialized widely
for a variety of applications, such as FaceID, surveillance
monitoring. The COVID-19 pandemic even accelerates the
biometric technologies for touch-less solutions, such as face
recognition enabled payment and access control. Although
remarkable progress has been achieved lately, one has to
admit that face recognition still hasn’t been fully solved.
Among many other remaining challenges (i.e., vulnerability for adversarial attack [4]), how to scale up the repre* indicates equal contribution.

Figure 1. Local-Adaptive Face Recognition (LaFR): For each local environment, a specialized model is produced by the adapter
module with only the pre-trained model and images from the environment. Note that there is no real identity label associated with
the images, the meta-cluster model generates pseudo labels for robust model adaptation.

sentation learning to reduce the risk of fairness and bias to
support various local environments becomes a more urgent
challenge. As studied in previous works [14, 39, 44], such
fairness and bias issues come from both algorithmic design and under-represented data distributions. For example,
when the model is predominantly trained on RGB images,
it generalizes poorly for images captured by Infrared cameras. Likewise, for a model pre-trained on Caucasian only,
it performs substantially worse for African and Indian.
While it is worthwhile to push the domain-invariant face
recognition [10, 25] with the hope of generalizing to everywhere without adaptation, it is arguably that the challenges for real-world scenarios could be more than we expected. So the question is: given an imperfect pre-trained
model, how can we improve and fill the last-mile performance gap for each local environment and thereafter scale
up the process? In this paper, we are interested in studying how to properly adapt the pre-trained model to a “specialized” one that tailors for the specific environment in an
automatic and unsupervised manner. Here, the “environment” could be defined broadly, including a specific new

20301

