I M Avatar: Implicit Morphable Head Avatars from Videos
Yufeng Zheng1,3

Victoria Fernández Abrevaya2 Marcel C. Bühler1 Xu Chen1,3
Michael J. Black2 Otmar Hilliges1
1
2
ETH Zürich Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
3
Max Planck ETH Center for Learning Systems
Abstract

Traditional 3D morphable face models (3DMMs) provide fine-grained control over expression but cannot easily capture geometric and appearance details. Neural
volumetric representations approach photorealism but are
hard to animate and do not generalize well to unseen expressions. To tackle this problem, we propose IMavatar
(Implicit Morphable avatar), a novel method for learning implicit head avatars from monocular videos. Inspired
by the fine-grained control mechanisms afforded by conventional 3DMMs, we represent the expression- and poserelated deformations via learned blendshapes and skinning
fields. These attributes are pose-independent and can be
used to morph the canonical geometry and texture fields
given novel expression and pose parameters. We employ
ray marching and iterative root-finding to locate the canonical surface intersection for each pixel. A key contribution is
our novel analytical gradient formulation that enables endto-end training of IMavatars from videos. We show quantitatively and qualitatively that our method improves geometry and covers a more complete expression space compared
to state-of-the-art methods. Code and data can be found at
https://ait.ethz.ch/projects/2022/IMavatar/.

1. Introduction
Methods to automatically create animatable personal
avatars in unobtrusive and readily available settings (i.e.,
from monocular videos) have many applications in VR/AR
games and telepresence. Such applications require faithful renderings of the deforming facial geometry and expressions, detailed facial appearance and accurate reconstruction of the entire head and hair region. Conventional
methods [14, 16, 18, 19, 43, 45, 47, 49] based on morphable
mesh models [2, 28, 38] can fit 3DMM shape and texture
parameters to images for a given subject. However, such
mesh-based approaches suffer from an inherent resolution-

Figure 1. IMavatar. We learn personal avatars from RGB videos,
represented by canonical shape, texture, and deformation fields.
An implicit morphing formulation allows generalization to unseen
expressions and poses outside the training distribution.

memory trade-off, and cannot handle topological changes
caused by hair, glasses, and other accessories. Recent methods build on neural radiance fields [32] to learn personalized avatars [17, 36, 37] and yield high-quality images, especially if the generated expressions are close to the training data. A key challenge for building animatable facial
avatars with implicit fields is the modeling of deformations.
Previous work either achieves this by conditioning the implicit representation on expressions [17] or via a separate
displacement-based warping field [36, 37]. Such underconstrained formulations limit the generalization ability, requiring large numbers of training poses.
In this paper, we propose Implicit Morphable avatar
(IMavatar), a novel approach for learning personalized,

13545

