Quantization-aware Deep Optics
for Diffractive Snapshot Hyperspectral Imaging
Lingen Li

Lizhi Wang∗
Weitao Song
Beijing Institute of Technology

Lei Zhang

{lingenli, wanglizhi, swt, leizhang}@bit.edu.cn

Zhiwei Xiong
University of Science and Technology of China

Hua Huang
Beijing Normal University

zwxiong@ustc.edu.cn

huahuang@bnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Diffractive snapshot hyperspectral imaging based on the
deep optics framework has been striving to capture the
spectral images of dynamic scenes. However, existing deep
optics frameworks all suffer from the mismatch between the
optical hardware and the reconstruction algorithm due to
the quantization operation in the diffractive optical element
(DOE) fabrication, leading to the limited performance of
hyperspectral imaging in practice. In this paper, we propose
the quantization-aware deep optics for diffractive snapshot
hyperspectral imaging. Our key observation is that common
lithography techniques used in fabricating DOEs need to
quantize the DOE height map to a few levels, and can freely
set the height for each level. Therefore, we propose to integrate the quantization operation into the DOE height map
optimization and design an adaptive mechanism to adjust
the physical height of each quantization level. According to
the optimization, we fabricate the quantized DOE directly
and build a diffractive hyperspectral snapshot imaging system. Our method develops the deep optics framework to be
more practical through the awareness of and adaptation to
the quantization operation of the DOE physical structure,
making the fabricated DOE and the reconstruction algorithm match each other systematically. Extensive synthetic
simulation and real hardware experiments validate the superior performance of our method.

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral imaging has been beneficial to a plethora
of sensing applications, from the fundamental research
fields, e.g., biomedical inspection, material analysis, and
environmental monitoring [1, 4, 9, 27], to computer vision
∗ Corresponding author: Lizhi Wang.

applications, e.g. appearance acquisition, face recognition,
and object tracking [13,32,46]. Conventional hyperspectral
imaging systems scan scenes along either the spatial or the
spectral dimensions and thus require multiple sensor exposures to capture a full hyperspectral image [21]. These systems are unsuitable for measuring dynamic scenes, making
snapshot hyperspectral imaging with just one sensor exposure one of the most attractive solutions.
Various snapshot hyperspectral imaging systems have
been developed for capturing hyperspectral images of dynamic scenes [3,11]. Classic methods based on geometrical
optics mainly consist of a series of refractive or reflective
optical elements [10, 25, 28, 41], being large in form factor and thus suffering from the system complexity and calibration difficulty. To overcome the limitations, diffractive
snapshot hyperspectral imaging systems have been developed by replacing the geometrical optical elements with a
thin diffractive optical element (DOE) [6,18,22,33]. Fundamentally, diffractive snapshot hyperspectral imaging needs
to design the DOE height map for hyperspectral image encoding and the reconstruction algorithm for hyperspectral
image decoding. Previous methods try to design the DOE
height map with hand-crafted or heuristic knowledge on the
point spread function (PSF) but isolate the DOE hardware
from the reconstruction algorithm [22]. Recently, the deep
optics framework has been introduced with the core idea of
an end-to-end optimization of optical hardware and the reconstruction algorithm [12, 20, 29, 36, 37], which has been
the most promising method in diffractive snapshot hyperspectral imaging [5, 15].
The bottleneck in the deep optics framework is that the
DOE height map optimization does not model the physical quantization in DOE fabrication. Existing deep optics frameworks all employ full precision (generally 32bit float) in DOE height map optimization and assume the
same full precision in DOE fabrication. However, common

19780

