A Proposal-based Paradigm for Self-supervised Sound Source Localization in Videos
Hanyu Xuan1 , Zhiliang Wu1 , Jian Yang1 , Yan Yan2 ,* Xavier Alameda-Pineda3†
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
2
Department of Computer Science, Illinois Institute of Technology, USA
3
Inria, Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, 38000 Grenoble, France
{xuanhanyu,wu zhiliang,csjyang}@njust.edu.cn, yyan34@iit.edu, xavier.alameda-pineda@inria.fr

Abstract
Humans can easily recognize where and how the sound is
produced via watching a scene and listening to corresponding audio cues. To achieve such cross-modal perception on
machines, existing methods only use the maps generated
by interpolation operations to localize the sound source.
As semantic object-level localization is more attractive for
potential practical applications, we argue that these existing map-based approaches only provide a coarse-grained
and indirect description of the sound source. In this paper, we advocate a novel proposal-based paradigm that can
directly perform semantic object-level localization, without
any manual annotations. We incorporate the global response map as an unsupervised spatial constraint to weight
the proposals according to how well they cover the estimated global shape of the sound source. As a result, our
proposal-based sound source localization can be cast into a
simpler Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) problem by filtering those instances corresponding to large sound-unrelated
regions. Our method achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance when compared to several baselines on multiple
datasets.

1. Introduction
In human multi-modal perception [35], the natural cooccurrence of audio-visual events in time provides potential
cues for better perception [4]. Such temporal co-occurrence
comes from the fact that “Sound is produced by the vibration of objects”. By such inherent and universal correspondence, we can distinguish and associate diverse visual appearances from their produced sounds, i.e., the sound source
can be visually localized and detected.
Machine intelligence should also have the human-like
ability of sound source localization in visual scenes, i.e., the
* Corresponding author
† This research was supported by ANR ML3RI (19-CE33-0008-01).

Figure 1. Map-based paradigm uses the maps (Fig.(a) and Fig.(c))
generated by interpolation operations to perform pseudo pixellevel localization or indirect detection by a post-processing step.
The typical issues of such maps: 1) tend to highlight the most
discriminative regions; 2) may encounter a pathological bias, e.g.,
rail for “train” and 3) it is non-trivial to choose an optimal threshold since different thresholds T can result in the bounding boxes
with different sizes and locations, which are marked in green
and pink. In this paper, we advocate a novel proposal-based
paradigm, which directly performs semantic object-level localization of class-agnostic sound source (Fig.(b) and Fig.(d)).

sound source can be localized once they appear in the images. Such ability can play an important role in many practical applications. For example, the rescue robots can find
people who are calling for help after a disaster [42], and the
sound can help photographers focus better, since the sound
source is usually more interesting subjects in photos [19].
For this purpose, some works [29, 38, 44] exploit the
attention map to localize the sound source in a weaklysupervised manner. Other methods modify the CNN frameworks to generate Class Activation Maps [48] for sound
source localization. Nevertheless, these methods can only
perform class-specific, rather than class-agnostic localization, owing to the usage of image-level annotations. Collecting these manual annotations is not only labor-intensive
and time-consuming, but also often subjective and errorprone. As a promising approach to solve this problem,
self-supervised learning [25] was introduced into this task
for its excellent data efficiency and generalization ability.
For example, some works [1, 6, 20, 21, 31, 47] localize the
class-agnostic sound source through the confidence score
map learnt from massive unlabeled videos.

1029

