Learning Robust Image-Based Rendering on Sparse Scene Geometry
via Depth Completion
Yuqi Sun, Shili Zhou, Ri Cheng, Weimin Tan, Bo Yan* , Lang Fu
School of Computer Science, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing,
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
{yqsun20, slzhou19, rcheng20, wmtan, byan* }@fudan.edu.cn, ful21@m.fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Image-based rendering (IBR), as one of the classic approaches of novel view synthesis, aims to synthesize novel
view from real views. It has been widely used to enhance
the visualization in various applications, such as virtual navigation [15], video stabilization [24], AR\VR [37, 38]. A
novel view is generated in IBR by warping pixels from
source view into target view with scene geometry and aggregating them with blending methods. The output quality
depends on the accuracy and completeness of geometry information and the effectiveness of blending strategy.
1 This work is supported by NSFC (Grant No.: U2001209, 61902076)
and Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai (21ZR1406600).
* Corresponding author: Bo Yan.

...

Recent image-based rendering (IBR) methods usually
adopt plenty of views to reconstruct dense scene geometry.
However, the number of available views is limited in practice. When only few views are provided, the performance
of these methods drops off significantly, as the scene geometry becomes sparse as well. Therefore, in this paper, we
propose Sparse-IBRNet (SIBRNet) to perform robust IBR
on sparse scene geometry by depth completion. The SIBRNet has two stages, geometry recovery (GR) stage and light
blending (LB) stage. Specifically, GR stage takes sparse
depth map and RGB as input to predict dense depth map
by exploiting the correlation between two modals. As inaccuracy of the complete depth map may cause projection
biases in the warping process, LB stage first uses a biascorrected module (BCM) to rectify deviations, and then aggregates modified features from different views to render a
novel view. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that
our method performs best on sparse scene geometry than recent IBR methods, and it can generate better or comparable
results as well when the geometric information is dense.1

MVS

(b)

(a)
MVS

Light
Blending

Geometry
Recovery
(c)

Figure 1. Strategy Comparison. (a) simulates dense view sampling on a tank model, while the red cameras represent sparse
view sampling. (b) shows the strategy of recent IBR methods.
They adopt dense views to generate a dense depth map for a better
warped result (below the depth map) and then synthesize a novel
view. (c) shows the paradigm of our SIBRNet. Given sparse views,
a sparse depth map is generated by MVS before sent into a geometry recovery stage for completion. The complete depth map has
a comparable warped result to the dense depth map. And then a
light blending stage is applied to render the final result. Red boxes
indicate the effect of two stages.

Recent IBR methods [1, 31, 32] ask for dense geometry to guarantee adequate correct projections. As shown in
Figure 1.(b), they use plentiful views to reconstruct dense
proxy geometry by multi-view stereo algorithm (MVS)
[16,34,51]. This process is time-consuming and can only be
conducted offline. Moreover, dense views are not available
easily in practice. When input views are sparse, the scene
geometry produced by MVS becomes sparse as well, leading to a rapid decline on performance for these methods.
In order to reduce the dependence on dense views, we
propose SIBRNet to perform robust IBR on sparse scene
geometry. It contains two stages, geometry recovery (GR)
stage and light blending (LB) stage. Inspired by recent geometry recovery works like point cloud upsampling [21,54]
and depth completion [25, 46, 56], the GR stage introduces
a learning-based depth completion network into IBR to predict a complete depth map from the sparse one. As shown

7813

