Neural Recognition of Dashed Curves with Gestalt Law of Continuity
Hanyuan Liu1 Chengze Li2 Xueting Liu2 Tien-Tsin Wong1 *
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Caritas Institute of Higher Education
{liuhy, ttwong}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

{czli, tliu}@cihe.edu.hk

Abstract
Dashed curve is a frequently used curve form and is
widely used in various drawing and illustration applications. While humans can intuitively recognize dashed
curves from disjoint curve segments based on the law of
continuity in Gestalt psychology, it is extremely difficult
for computers to model the Gestalt law of continuity and
recognize the dashed curves since high-level semantic understanding is needed for this task. The various appearances and styles of the dashed curves posed on a potentially
noisy background further complicate the task. In this paper,
we propose an innovative Transformer-based framework to
recognize dashed curves based on both high-level features
and low-level clues. The framework manages to learn the
computational analogy of the Gestalt Law in various domains to locate and extract instances of dashed curves in
both raster and vector representations. Qualitative and
quantitative evaluations demonstrate the efficiency and robustness of our framework over all existing solutions.
(e) Input

1. Introduction
Dashed curve is a frequently used curve form, where
the curve is made up of a series of disjoint but continuous
curve segments. Dashed curves are widely used in various drawing and illustration applications, such as technical
line drawings, graphic designs, fashion designs, paper folding illustrations, etc. While humans can intuitively recognize dashed curves though they are broken into disjoint segments, it is extremely difficult for computers to recognize
the broken segments as one semantic curve as high-level
semantic understanding is needed for this recognition task.
There are three major challenges. Firstly, different dashed
curves may be composed of solid curve segments in different lengths, widths, and composition patterns, as shown in
Fig. 1a. Secondly, multiple dashed curves might intersect
with each other, which complicates recognition of individual dashed curves. Thirdly, the background of the drawings
* Corresponding author.

(a) Input

(b) [13]

(c) [7]

(d) Ours

(f) [39]

(g) Ours

Figure 1. Dashed curve recognition results.

and illustrations might be noisy due to the quality loss in
the scanning or photo capturing process, which will further
make the identification of the curve segments non-trivial,
especially when the curve segments are of short lengths.
In order to recognize dashed curves from illustrations or
graphic designs, several traditional methods have been proposed based on manually designed heuristics [1, 10, 18, 24].
Due to the limitation of human-designed heuristics, these
methods are generally restricted to solve only dashed curves
of relatively simple and pre-defined shapes and styles and
easily get failed when the input becomes complex, as shown
in Fig. 1b. A workshop was held in 1995 to encourage research efforts in solving this challenging problem [30]. Unfortunately, it did not gain much success at that time due
to the limitations of traditional heuristic methods. Later,
methods have been proposed in detecting lines for 3D point

1373

