Occlusion-robust Face Alignment using A Viewpoint-invariant Hierarchical
Network Architecture
Congcong Zhu1 , Xintong Wan1 , Shaorong Xie1 , Xiaoqiang Li1 *, Yinzheng Gu2
1
School of Computer Engineering and Science, Shanghai University
2
Shanghai HYCloud Network Technology Co. Ltd.
{congcongzhu, wanxintong, srxie, xqli}@shu.edu.cn, guyinzheng@gpushare.com

Abstract
The occlusion problem heavily degrades the localization
performance of face alignment. Most current solutions for
this problem focus on annotating new occlusion data, introducing boundary estimation, and stacking deeper models to improve the robustness of neural networks. However, the performance degradation of models remains under extreme occlusion (i.e. average occlusion of over 50%)
because of missing a large amount of facial context information. We argue that exploring neural networks to model
the facial hierarchies is a more promising method for dealing with extreme occlusion. Surprisingly, in recent studies, little effort has been devoted to representing the facial
hierarchies using neural networks. This paper proposes a
new network architecture called GlomFace to model the facial hierarchies against various occlusions, which draws inspiration from the viewpoint-invariant hierarchy of facial
structure. Specifically, GlomFace is functionally divided
into two modules: the part-whole hierarchical module and
the whole-part hierarchical module. The former captures
the part-whole hierarchical dependencies of facial parts
to suppress multi-scale occlusion information, whereas the
latter injects structural reasoning into neural networks by
building the whole-part hierarchical relations among facial
parts. As a result, GlomFace has a clear topological interpretation due to its correspondence to the facial hierarchies.
Extensive experimental results indicate that the proposed
GlomFace performs comparably to existing state-of-the-art
methods, especially in cases of extreme occlusion. Models
are available at https://github.com/zhuccly/
GlomFace-Face-Alignment.

1. Introduction
Although great effort [4, 9, 16, 21, 46, 47, 51, 54] has
been devoted to face alignment, the localization accuracy
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Insight of the proposed GlomFace.

remains unsatisfactory under various occlusions. Especially
for the current situation, under which people have to wear
medical masks due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The following reasons cause the problem. Firstly, some landmarks
are inevitably invisible, and partial facial information is not
available. Secondly, large-scale occlusion datasets (average
occlusion of over 50%) are scarce because annotating landmarks under occlusion is a great challenge. Thirdly, general
neural network architectures cannot model the spatial relationship between facial components [35].
Some studies [30, 53] deal with the occlusion problem
by enhancing the coupling of facial context features. However, the excessive coupling may introduce occlusion information over the whole face, resulting in the degradation of localization accuracy on non-occluded areas. Methods such as [22, 23, 40, 41] integrate related tasks (e.g. visibility estimation and uncertainty prediction) to improve
the occlusion robustness. However, the related tasks cannot directly impose the shape constraint over all landmarks
and may even introduce additional annotation and computational costs. Recently, boundary estimation has been in-

11112

