Unified Contrastive Learning in Image-Text-Label Space
Jianwei Yang1 * Chunyuan Li1∗ Pengchuan Zhang1∗ Bin Xiao2∗
Ce Liu2 Lu Yuan2 Jianfeng Gao1
1
Microsoft Research at Redmond, 2 Microsoft Cloud + AI
{jianwyan,chunyl,penzhan,bixi,liuce,luyuan,jfgao}@microsoft.com
Abstract
Visual recognition is recently learned via either supervised learning on human-annotated image-label data or
language-image contrastive learning with webly-crawled
image-text pairs. While supervised learning may result
in a more discriminative representation, language-image
pretraining shows unprecedented zero-shot recognition capability, largely due to the different properties of data
sources and learning objectives. In this work, we introduce a new formulation by combining the two data sources
into a common image-text-label space. In this space, we
propose a new learning paradigm, called Unified Contrastive Learning (UniCL) with a single learning objective
to seamlessly prompt the synergy of two data types. Extensive experiments show that our UniCL is an effective
way of learning semantically rich yet discriminative representations, universally for image recognition in zero-shot,
linear-probing, fully finetuning and transfer learning scenarios. Particularly, it attains gains up to 9.2% and 14.5%
in average on zero-shot recognition benchmarks over the
language-image contrastive learning and supervised learning methods, respectively. In linear probe setting, it also
boosts the performance over the two methods by 7.3% and
3.4%, respectively. Our study also indicates that UniCL
stand-alone is a good learner on pure image-label data,
rivaling the supervised learning methods across three image classification datasets and two types of vision backbones, ResNet and Swin Transformer. Code is available at:
https://github.com/microsoft/UniCL.

1. Introduction
Learning to recognize visual concepts in an image has
been a fundamental and long-standing research problem.
Typically, this can be tackled via either supervised learning
on human-annotated image-label pairs [10] or contrastive
learning on webly-crawed image-text pairs [29, 47]. When

Image

Image-Label
• Dense label
• Limited concepts
Method
• CE
• SupCon

Text

Image-Text-Label

Label
Label

1

Image-Text
• Unique label
• Rich semantics
Method
• CLIP
• ALIGN

1

2

2

• UniCL (Ours)

3

4

5

6

A white
dog
sitting on
a couch

A dog
looking
bashfully
to the side

A black
cat is
sleeping,
head on a
computer

Two parrots
perching on
a tree
branch

Image

Text

Chihuahua Chihuahua

Siberian Siberian
Husky Husky

Figure 1. Unified contrastive learning paradigm in the imagetext-label space, which recovers the supervised learning (e.g.,
Cross-Entropy (CE) [46] or Supervised Contrastive Learning (SupCon) [30]) on image-label data, and language-image contrastive
learning (e.g., CLIP [47] or ALIGN [29]) on image-text data.

fueled with clean and large-scale human-annotated imagelabel data, e.g., ImageNet [10], supervised learning can
attain decent visual recognition capacities over the given
categories [23, 34, 53] and also powerful transfer learning
abilities [14, 32]. Nevertheless, collecting precise imagelabel data can be a laborious and expensive process, not to
say its difficulty to scale up to numerous visual concepts1 .
On the other hand, language-image contrastive learning has
recently emerged as a promising approach by leveraging
huge amounts of webly-crawled image-text pairs. These
pairs are usually noisy, free-form but cover lots of visual
concepts. As demonstrated in CLIP [47] and ALIGN [29],
models learned from hundreds of millions of image-text pairs
can attain impressive low-shot recognition performance for a
wide range of visual understanding scenarios. Though these
image-text models show a broad coverage of visual concepts,
we find in our experiments that they usually lack the strong
1 The largest scale but private JFT-300M covers 18,291 concepts.

* equal contribution

19163

