EI-CLIP: Entity-aware Interventional Contrastive Learning for
E-commerce Cross-modal Retrieval
Haoyu Ma1 *, Handong Zhao2 ,† Zhe Lin2 , Ajinkya Kale2 , Zhangyang Wang3 ,
Tong Yu 2 , Jiuxiang Gu 2 , Sunav Choudhary 2 , Xiaohui Xie 1
1
University of California, Irvine, 2 Adobe Research, 3 University of Texas at Austin
{haoyum3,xhx}@uci.edu, {hazhao,zlin,akale,tyu,jigu,schoudha}@adobe.com, atlaswang@utexas.edu

Abstract

General Domain

Cross language-image modality retrieval in E-commerce
is a fundamental problem for product search, recommendation, and marketing services. Extensive efforts have been
made to conquer the cross-modal retrieval problem in the
general domain. When it comes to E-commerce, a common practice is to adopt the pretrained model and finetune
on E-commerce data. Despite its simplicity, the performance is sub-optimal due to overlooking the uniqueness of
E-commerce multimodal data. A few recent efforts [10, 72]
have shown significant improvements over generic methods
with customized designs for handling product images. Unfortunately, to the best of our knowledge, no existing method
has addressed the unique challenges in the e-commerce
language. This work studies the outstanding one, where
it has a large collection of special meaning entities, e.g.,
“Dissel (brand)”,“Top (category)”, “relaxed (fit)”
in the fashion clothing business. By formulating such outof-distribution finetuning process in the Causal Inference
paradigm, we view the erroneous semantics of these special entities as confounders to cause the retrieval failure.
To rectify these semantics for aligning with e-commerce domain knowledge, we propose an intervention-based entityaware contrastive learning framework with two modules,
i.e., the Confounding Entity Selection Module and EntityAware Learning Module. Our method achieves competitive
performance on the E-commerce benchmark Fashion-Gen.
Particularly, in top-1 accuracy (R@1), we observe 10.3%
and 10.5% relative improvements over the closest baseline
in image-to-text and text-to-image retrievals, respectively.

1. Introduction
Cross visual and linguistic retrieval, as a fundamental
component in the multimodal searching system, has been
extensively studied [13, 18, 24, 27, 32, 38, 41, 43, 69, 70]. It
* Work done during the author’s internship at Adobe Research.
† Corresponding author.

Diesel

“diesel” “fuel”
“garage” “gas”
“pump” “diesel”
“fuel” “gasoline”
“spirit” “car”

Canada goose big bird in flight close
beautiful water lake.

Canada
Goose

E-Commerce Domain
T-DIEGO-CUTY logo T-shirt

Tankstelle Diesel

“goose” “canada”
“wing” “flying”
“water” “lake”
“wildlife” “bird”
“nature” “bird”

Brand: diesel
Composition: Cotton 100%
Category: t-shirt
Fit: relaxed
Washing instruction: machine wash

Canada Goose Men's Expedition Parka Coat
Brand: canada goose
Composition: [shell] Arctic-Tech nylon,
[lining] nylon, natural coyote fur
Category: outwear
Fit: relaxed
Zipper closure

Figure 1. Illustration of domain shift between general domain
and e-commerce domain. In e-commerce domain, a collection of
tag entities with strong domain semantics are associated with a
title/description and image.

takes linguistic data as the query and retrieves the corresponding visual data, or verse vice. One key challenge in
this area is how to align the visual and textual data semantically.
In the cross-modal retrieval of e-commerce products,
there are many unique characteristics in both e-commerce
image and language. As shown in Fig. 1, an e-commerce
product image usually only contains a simple scene with
one or two foreground objects and a plain background.
Meanwhile, an e-commerce language is usually composed
of a set of metadata (tag entities) [15, 39], including product title/description, brand, category, composition, etc. Previous works such as FashionBERT [10] and KaleidoBERT
[72] suggest that cross-modal retrieval in fashion domains
requires more fine-grained features (e.g. short sleeve and
crewneck). However, the popular Region of Interest (RoI)
[11] based methods detect unsatisfactory region proposals with either repeated object regions or irrelevant subregions to the product. To this end, these works focus on
fine-grained representation learning of images through the
patch-based method. Despite the great successes, they only
focus on the challenges of images, while the language part

18051

