ISNet: Shape Matters for Infrared Small Target Detection
∗

Mingjin Zhang1,4 , Rui Zhang1*, Yuxiang Yang2 , Haichen Bai1 , Jing Zhang3 , Jie Guo1
1
State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, School of Telecommunications Engineering,
Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China, 2 Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou 310018, China
3
The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia, 4 JD Explore Academy, China
mjinzhang@xidian.edu.cn, woshizhangrui@stu.xidian.edu.cn, yyx@hdu.edu.cn,
hcbai@stu.xidian.edu.cn, jing.zhang1@sydney.edu.au, jguo@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Infrared small target detection (IRSTD) refers to extracting small and dim targets from blurred backgrounds, which
has a wide range of applications such as traffic management and marine rescue. Due to the low signal-to-noise ratio and low contrast, infrared targets are easily submerged
in the background of heavy noise and clutter. How to detect the precise shape information of infrared targets remains challenging. In this paper, we propose a novel infrared shape network (ISNet), where Taylor finite difference (TFD)-inspired edge block and two-orientation attention aggregation (TOAA) block are devised to address this
problem. Specifically, TFD-inspired edge block aggregates
and enhances the comprehensive edge information from different levels, in order to improve the contrast between target and background and also lay a foundation for extracting
shape information with mathematical interpretation. TOAA
block calculates the low-level information with attention
mechanism in both row and column directions and fuses it
with the high-level information to capture the shape characteristic of targets and suppress noises. In addition, we
construct a new benchmark consisting of 1,000 realistic images in various target shapes, different target sizes, and
rich clutter backgrounds with accurate pixel-level annotations, called IRSTD-1k. Experiments on public datasets and
IRSTD-1k demonstrate the superiority of our approach over
representative state-of-the-art IRSTD methods. The dataset
and code are available at github.com/RuiZhang97/ISNet.

1. Introduction
Infrared small target detection (IRSTD) has a wide range
of important applications such as traffic management and
marine rescue [8, 33, 37]. Misdetections in these fields may
cause significant damage to multiple aspects of the real
* Corresponding author.

world. Therefore, the improvement of IRSTD is one of the
priorities in both academic research and industrial division.
Compared to general object detection targets, infrared
small targets have the following characteristics: 1) Dim: Infrared images have lots of noises and clutter in the background, and the targets are easily submerged in the background, resulting in low contrast and low signal-to-clutter
ratio (SCR). 2) Small: Due to the long camera to object distance, infrared targets usually occupy only about one to ten
pixels in the images. 3) Varying shape: The shape and size
of the target varies in different scenes and situations according to different target types.
To detect infrared small targets, researchers have developed several pioneering works based on image processing and machine learning techniques including filtering, human visual system (HVS), and low-rank representation. However, these traditional methods have some limitations. Filtering-based methods, such as top-hat filter [2]
and max-median/max-mean filter [9], can only suppress
uniform background clutters but cannot suppress complex
background noises, resulting in high false alarm rates and
unstable performance. As for the methods based on HVS,
the spectral residuals-based method [16] can not efficiently
suppress the clutters in the background. Local-contrastbased methods [4, 12] are only suitable for high contrast
targets instead of dim targets. Low-rank representationbased methods [5, 10, 38, 39] can adapt to low SCR infrared images but still suffer from a high false alarm rate
on images with small and varying-shape targets in complex
backgrounds. In addition to the issues above, most traditional methods heavily rely on hand-crafted features, which
is suboptimal and ineffective in dealing with challenging
cases. Besides, the design of handcraft features and tuning
of hyper-parameters require expert knowledge and a lot of
engineering efforts.
With the success of deep learning in many fields, it offers novel solutions to the above problems. Convolution
neural network (CNN) can efficiently extract features from

877

