Compositional Temporal Grounding
with Structured Variational Cross-Graph Correspondence Learning
Juncheng Li 1

Junlin Xie 1
Yi Yang 1

1

Long Qian 1

Linchao Zhu 2

Yueting Zhuang 1∗

Siliang Tang 1

Fei Wu 1

Xin Eric Wang 3

Zhejiang University, 2 University of Technology Sydney, 3 University of California, Santa Cruz

{junchengli, 22051289, qianlong0926, siliang, wufei, yangyics, yzhuang}@zju.edu.cn
linchao.zhu@uts.edu.au, xwang366@ucsc.edu

Abstract
Temporal grounding in videos aims to localize one target video segment that semantically corresponds to a given
query sentence. Thanks to the semantic diversity of natural
language descriptions, temporal grounding allows activity grounding beyond pre-defined classes and has received
increasing attention in recent years. The semantic diversity is rooted in the principle of compositionality in linguistics, where novel semantics can be systematically described by combining known words in novel ways (compositional generalization). However, current temporal grounding datasets do not specifically test for the compositional
generalizability. To systematically measure the compositional generalizability of temporal grounding models, we
introduce a new Compositional Temporal Grounding task
and construct two new dataset splits, i.e., Charades-CG
and ActivityNet-CG. Evaluating the state-of-the-art methods on our new dataset splits, we empirically find that they
fail to generalize to queries with novel combinations of
seen words. To tackle this challenge, we propose a variational cross-graph reasoning framework that explicitly decomposes video and language into multiple structured hierarchies and learns fine-grained semantic correspondence
among them. Experiments illustrate the superior compositional generalizability of our approach. The repository
of this work is at https://github.com/YYJMJC/
Compositional-Temporal-Grounding.

1. Introduction
Understanding rich and diverse activities in videos is a
prominent and fundamental goal of video understanding.
While there have been significant works in activity recognition [3, 8] and localization [28, 37], one major limitation
of these works is that they are restricted to pre-defined ac∗ Yueting Zhuang is the corresponding author.

Shuffled Query A: Query B with novel composition:
Original Query A:
A woman takes a selfie selfie takes A a sits A child smells then throws a
while sits on a horse. horse on woman a. handful of flowers into the air..

Ground-truth A

(a) Examples and Prediction
No Perturbation
49.45%

≈

Shuffled
49.32%

Ground-truth B

≫

Novel Composition
29.42%

(b) Performance of SOTA Method: (R@1,IoU=0.5)

Figure 1. (a) On the top, we show three examples of two queries.
(b) On the bottom, we report comparisons on Charades-CG with
metric R@1, IoU@0.5. The left blue box represents the original
model. The middle yellow box represents the model with shuffled
queries as input. The right green box represents the performance
on the queries that contain novel compositions.

tion classes, thus suffering from scaling to various complex
activities. A natural solution to this problem is to utilize the
systematic compositionality [4, 9, 31] of human language,
which allows us to form novel compositions by combining known words in novel ways to describe unseen activities (i.e. compositional generalization). Therefore, a new
task, namely temporal grounding in videos [10, 17], has
recently received increasing attention. Formally, give an
untrimmed video and a query sentence, it aims to identify
the start and end timestamps of one specific moment that
semantically corresponds to the given query sentence.
Although the compositional generalization is a key property of human language that allows temporal grounding
beyond pre-defined classes, current temporal grounding
datasets do not specifically test for this ability. The training and testing splits of existing datasets contain almost
the same compositions (e.g. verb-noun pair, adjective-noun
pair, etc). Our statistical results show that only 1.37%
and 5.19% of testing sentences contain novel compositions
in the Charades-STA [10] and ActivityNet Captions [17]

3032

