PPDL: Predicate Probability Distribution based Loss for Unbiased
Scene Graph Generation

1

Wei Li1,4 , Haiwei Zhang1,2,4∗ , Qijie Bai1,4 , Guoqing Zhao3 , Ning Jiang3 , Xiaojie Yuan1,2,4
College of Computer Science, 2 College of Cyber Science, Nankai University, Tianjin, China
3
Mashang Consumer Finance Co., Ltd
4
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Network and Data Security Technology, Tianjin, China
liwei@dbis.nankai.edu.cn, {zhhaiwei, yuanxj}@nankai.edu.cn
qijie.bai@mail.nankai.edu.cn, {guoqing.zhao02, ning.jiang02}@msxf.com

Frequency

Scene Graph Generation (SGG) has attracted more and
more attention from visual researchers in recent years, since
Scene Graph (SG) is valuable in many downstream tasks
due to its rich structural-semantic details. However, the application value of SG on downstream tasks is severely limited by the predicate classification bias, which is caused by
long-tailed data and presented as semantic bias of predicted
relation predicates. Existing methods mainly reduce the
prediction bias by better aggregating contexts and integrating external priori knowledge, but rarely take the semantic
similarities between predicates into account. In this paper,
we propose a Predicate Probability Distribution based Loss
(PPDL) to train the biased SGG models and obtain unbiased Scene Graphs ultimately. Firstly, we propose a predicate probability distribution as the semantic representation
of a particular predicate class. Afterwards, we re-balance
the biased training loss according to the similarity between
the predicted probability distribution and the estimated one,
and eventually eliminate the long-tailed bias on predicate
classification. Notably, the PPDL training method is modelagnostic, and extensive experiments and qualitative analyses on the Visual Genome dataset reveal significant performance improvements of our method on tail classes compared to the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Scene graph generation (SGG) [12] is concerned with
producing comprehensive, structured representations about
* Corresponding Author.
This work is supported by the Chinese Scientific and Technical Innovation Project 2030 (2018AAA0102100), National Natural Science Foundation of China (U1936206, U1903128).

x 10000

Abstract

80
60
40
20
0

Predicates

(a) Long-tailed distribution of top-24 frequent predicates

on

helmet

on

parked on

helmet

on

bike

(c) Ground-truth scene graph

(b) Input image
street

street

bike

(d) Biased scene graph

street

parked on

helmet

on

bike

(e) Unbiased scene graph

Figure 1. An illustration of long-tailed bias and unbiased scene
graph generation (SGG). (a) The long-tailed distribution of different predicate categories in Visual Genome [14]. (b) The input
image with bounding boxes. (c) The ground-truth scene graph. (d)
The biased SG from VCTree [29] model. (e) The unbiasd SG from
the same model with our proposed unbiased training method.

images. A scene graph is a directed graph composed of objects entity pairs with their relations in an image, in which
the objects and relations are represented as nodes and edges
respectively. Due to the rich structural-semantic information, scene graph has been widely used and achieved great
improvements among these downstream tasks such as image generation [10, 11], visual question answering [6, 25],
image captioning [2, 7, 15, 33, 37, 43], semantic image retrieval [12,23,24] and thus has been drawing more and more
attention.
Although great progress has been made in capturing the
object-to-object relationship and visual reasoning, the existing SGG methods still cannot meet the requirements of

19447

