Dynamic 3D Gaze from Afar:
Deep Gaze Estimation from Temporal Eye-Head-Body Coordination

†

Soma Nonaka†
Shohei Nobuhara†‡
Ko Nishino†
‡
Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University
JST, PRESTO
https://vision.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp/

Abstract
We introduce a novel method and dataset for 3D gaze
estimation of a freely moving person from a distance, typically in surveillance views. Eyes cannot be clearly seen in
such cases due to occlusion and lacking resolution. Existing gaze estimation methods suffer or fall back to approximating gaze with head pose as they primarily rely on clear,
close-up views of the eyes. Our key idea is to instead leverage the intrinsic gaze, head, and body coordination of people. Our method formulates gaze estimation as Bayesian
prediction given temporal estimates of head and body orientations which can be reliably estimated from a far. We
model the head and body orientation likelihoods and the
conditional prior of gaze direction on those with separate
neural networks which are then cascaded to output the 3D
gaze direction. We introduce an extensive new dataset that
consists of surveillance videos annotated with 3D gaze directions captured in 5 indoor and outdoor scenes. Experimental results on this and other datasets validate the accuracy of our method and demonstrate that gaze can be accurately estimated from a typical surveillance distance even
when the person’s face is not visible to the camera.

Figure 1. We introduce a novel method for estimating the gaze direction of people (orange arrows) in videos captured from afar by
leveraging the temporal coordination of the gaze, head, and body
orientations in a Bayesian framework. Our method does not rely
on the appearance of the eyes, and can tell the gaze direction even
when the person is facing away from the camera. We introduce a
new dataset for gaze estimation in the wild with ground truth annotation. Note that the markers, eye tracker, and body worn cameras
are only used for ground truth annotation.

1. Introduction
What if we could continuously trace the gaze direction of
a person from a distance, for instance, with cameras fixed to
room and street corners? If we can, the practicality of gaze
estimation will be significantly increased and its utility will
be greatly expanded. It will allow us to use already installed
surveillance cameras or those monitoring elderlies to follow
the dynamically changing gaze of a person, which will let
us gauge much deeper into the person’s internal state not
just her whereabouts.
Despite the large advances in gaze estimation research,
especially by leveraging deep neural networks [9,16,32,34,
35], most appearance-based methods cannot be applied to
videos taken from a distance. This is because they inher-

ently require a clear and close-up view of the eyes. For instance, most leading methods assume a person sufficiently
close to the camera (ranging from 10cm to 1m), or they are
only applicable to the frontal view (up to 90°) of a person.
We target typical surveillance and monitoring views which
may range from a few meters to 10m.
The few methods that demonstrate gaze estimation from
surveillance images approximate the gaze with the head or
body orientation, which is too crude for most downstream
tasks [25, 26]. A recent method [6] does estimate gaze direction from surveillance cameras by regressing it from human body keypoints detected with OpenPose. The method,
however, only estimates gaze in 2D (i.e., in the image plane)

2192

