CLIMS: Cross Language Image Matching for Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Jinheng Xie† , Xianxu Hou† , Kai Ye, Linlin Shen∗
School of Computer Science & Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, China
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence of Robotics of Society, Shenzhen, China
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Shenzhen University, China
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data System Computing Technology, Shenzhen University, China
{xiejinheng,yekai}2020@email.szu.edu.cn, hxianxu@gmail.com, llshen@szu.edu.cn

Framework

Abstract
It has been widely known that CAM (Class Activation
Map) usually only activates discriminative object regions
and falsely includes lots of object-related backgrounds. As
only a fixed set of image-level object labels are available
to the WSSS (weakly supervised semantic segmentation)
model, it could be very difficult to suppress those diverse
background regions consisting of open set objects. In this
paper, we propose a novel Cross Language Image Matching (CLIMS) framework, based on the recently introduced
Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) model,
for WSSS. The core idea of our framework is to introduce
natural language supervision to activate more complete object regions and suppress closely-related open background
regions. In particular, we design object, background region
and text label matching losses to guide the model to excite
more reasonable object regions for CAM of each category.
In addition, we design a co-occurring background suppression loss to prevent the model from activating closelyrelated background regions, with a predefined set of classrelated background text descriptions. These designs enable
the proposed CLIMS to generate a more complete and compact activation map for the target objects. Extensive experiments on PASCAL VOC2012 dataset show that our CLIMS
significantly outperforms the previous state-of-the-art methods. Code will be available at https://github.com/CVISZU/CLIMS.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation attempts to assign each pixel in
an image with a semantic label. Though fully supervised
semantic segmentation has achieved remarkable success in
recent years, pixel-level annotation is significantly time∗ Corresponding Author
†

Equal Contribution

Activation map

CAM

(a)

X

GAP

CNN

CLIMS

(b) X

CNN

f

FC Layer

0
1
0
0

the CLIP

Maximize
Minimize
Minimize

X

“a train”, “railroad”
CNN: Convolutional Neural Network
FC Layer: Fully-connected Layer

(c) GAP : Global Average Pooling
: Feature maps

: Feature vector

f : convolutional layers
: Element-wise product
: Logits

: Similarity

: Activation maps

Input: X

Figure 1. (a) Conventional CAM solution. (b) The proposed
CLIMS. The problem of false-activation of irrelevant background,
e.g., railroad and ground, and underestimation of object contents
usually exist in conventional CAM method. To solve this problem, we propose a novel text-driven learning framework, CLIMS,
which introduces natural language supervision, i.e., an open-world
setting, for exploring complete object contents and excluding irrelevant background regions. Best viewed in color.

consuming and labor-intensive. Instead, weakly supervised
semantic segmentation (WSSS) tries to mitigate this issue
by relying solely on image-level [2, 15, 23, 24], bounding
box-level [8, 22], point-level [3], or scribble-based supervision [20, 29]. This work aims to only use image-level labels
in the learning of a semantic segmentation model.
Existing WSSS approaches typically follow a three-stage
learning process. First, the image-level labels are used as
supervision at the feature level to train a classification network to generate initial class activation maps (CAMs) (as
shown in the left of Fig. 1(a)). Then the initial CAMs are refined as pseudo ground-truth masks using dense CRF [16],
pixel affinity-based methods [1, 2], or additional saliency
maps [12, 19, 21]. Finally, the refined pseudo ground-truth
masks are used to further train a segmentation network.
However, as only a fixed set of object categories is available during the first stage training, i.e., a close-world setting, class-related background pixels, e.g., railroad, also

4483

