Distribution Consistent Neural Architecture Search
Junyi Pan, Chong Sun,* Yizhou Zhou, Ying Zhang, and Chen Li
WeChat, Tencent Inc.
junyipan@tencent.com, waynecsun@tencent.com, harryizzhou@tencent.com,
yinggzhang@tencent.com, chaselli@tencent.com

Abstract
Recent progress on neural architecture search (NAS) has
demonstrated exciting results on automating deep network
architecture designs. In order to overcome the unaffordable complexity of training each candidate architecture from
scratch, the state-of-the-art one-shot NAS approaches adopt
a weight-sharing strategy to improve training efficiency. Although the computational cost is greatly reduced, such oneshot process introduces a severe weight coupling problem
that largely degrades the evaluation accuracy of each candidate. The existing approaches often address the problem
by shrinking the search space, model distillation, or fewshot training. Instead, in this paper, we propose a novel
distribution consistent one-shot neural architecture search
algorithm. We first theoretically investigate how the weight
coupling problem affects the network searching performance
from a parameter distribution perspective, and then propose a novel supernet training strategy with a Distribution
Consistent Constraint that can provide a good measurement
for the extent to which two architectures can share weights.
Our strategy optimizes the supernet through iteratively inferring network weights and corresponding local sharing
states. Such joint optimization of supernet’s weights and
topologies can diminish the discrepancy between the weights
inherited from the supernet and the ones that are trained with
a stand-alone model. As a result, it enables a more accurate model evaluation phase and leads to a better searching
performance. We conduct extensive experiments on benchmark datasets with multiple searching spaces. The resulting
architecture achieves superior performance over the current state-of-the-art NAS algorithms with comparable search
costs, which demonstrates the efficacy of our approach.

1. Introduction
Neural architecture search (NAS) has drawn massive research attention due to its efficacy in automating architecture
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Comparison with state-of-the-art methods on ImageNet.

engineering. A line of NAS algorithms have been successfully applied in the image classification [14, 18, 21, 41, 42]
and other related fields (e.g., object detection [4, 35], segmentation [20, 39]). Among manys, early NAS approaches
struggle to solve the weight optimization and automated architecture engineering problems in a nested manner. A large
number of candidate architectures are sampled and trained
from scratch, and the computation cost is thus unaffordable
on large datasets.
Recent research hotspot lies in the one-shot NAS algorithms with an additional weight-sharing supernet for architecture performance evaluation. A supernet that contains
all candidate architectures is trained only once. Each architecture inherits its weights from the supernet. After that, a
search strategy (e.g., reinforcement learning, evolutionary
algorithms, etc.) is applied to select the best-performing
sub-architecture. The computation cost is thus greatly reduced. Though promising results have been achieved, this
global weight-sharing mechanism introduced by the oneshot algorithms leads to severe weight coupling problem
[11, 14, 34], and results in at least two limitations. First of
all, sub-architectures with shared weights influence each
other during the supernet training process. The same operator in different architectures may have different or even

10884

