ElePose: Unsupervised 3D Human Pose Estimation by Predicting Camera
Elevation and Learning Normalizing Flows on 2D Poses
Bastian Wandt, James J. Little, and Helge Rhodin
University of British Columbia
{wandt,little,rhodin}@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
Human pose estimation from single images is a challenging problem that is typically solved by supervised learning. Unfortunately, labeled training data does not yet exist for many human activities since 3D annotation requires
dedicated motion capture systems. Therefore, we propose
an unsupervised approach that learns to predict a 3D human pose from a single image while only being trained with
2D pose data, which can be crowd-sourced and is already
widely available. To this end, we estimate the 3D pose that
is most likely over random projections, with the likelihood
estimated using normalizing flows on 2D poses. While previous work requires strong priors on camera rotations in the
training data set, we learn the distribution of camera angles
which significantly improves the performance. Another part
of our contribution is to stabilize training with normalizing
flows on high-dimensional 3D pose data by first projecting
the 2D poses to a linear subspace. We outperform the stateof-the-art unsupervised human pose estimation methods on
the benchmark datasets Human3.6M and MPI-INF-3DHP
in many metrics.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation from single images is an ongoing research topic with many applications in medicine,
sports, and human-computer interaction. Tremendous improvements have been achieved in recent years via machine
learning. However, many recent approaches rely on a large
amount of data used to train a 3D pose estimator in a supervised fashion. Unfortunately, such training data is hard
to record and rarely available for specialized domains. For
this reason, recent work focuses on reducing the amount
of labeled data by using weak supervision in the form of
unpaired 2D-3D examples, sparse supervision with a small
amount of labeled 3D data, or multi-view setups during
training. In contrast, we propose a method that is trained
only from 2D data, which is easy to annotate by clicking

Figure 1. The elevation sampling for the creation of virtual views
performed by traditional methods and by our approach are shown
from left to right. The commonly used prior distribution of the randomly sampled elevation angle leads to errors if it does not exactly
match the distribution in the training dataset. ElePose solves this
problem by learning this distribution and compensating for it before applying other transformations which significantly increases
the performance of our method.

visible keypoints in readily available images and thereby
alleviates the 3D labelling and multi-view capture steps required by weakly- and fully-supervised approaches.
Given observations of 2D human joints in monocular imagery, we train a neural network to recover the depth —the
missing third coordinate of the 3D human pose. With the
same goals, Chen et al. [4] and Yu et al. [63] train a 3D
pose estimator in an adversarial setting [11]. Their generator predicts a 3D pose that is randomly rotated and projected to a virtual camera which is fed into an adversarial
network over ’fake’ projected 3D poses and the ’real’ 2D
pose distribution. The idea is that, for a correct 3D pose
prediction, the rotated and projected 2D pose should also
come from the distribution of 2D training poses. However,
the predicted 3D pose is rotated randomly over a fixed prior
distribution defined relative to the camera coordinate system. It is a reasonable assumption when the camera is close
to parallel to the ground plane. However, even for small
elevation angles and even when modeling variation by sampling from a predefined Gaussian distribution, this leads to

6635

