Catching Both Gray and Black Swans: Open-set Supervised Anomaly Detection*
Choubo Ding1† ,
Guansong Pang2†,
Chunhua Shen3
1
The University of Adelaide 2 Singapore Management University 3 Zhejiang University
Abstract
Despite most existing anomaly detection studies assume
the availability of normal training samples only, a few labeled anomaly examples are often available in many realworld applications, such as defect samples identiﬁed during
random quality inspection, lesion images conﬁrmed by radiologists in daily medical screening, etc. These anomaly examples provide valuable knowledge about the applicationspeciﬁc abnormality, enabling signiﬁcantly improved detection of similar anomalies in some recent models. However,
those anomalies seen during training often do not illustrate every possible class of anomaly, rendering these models ineffective in generalizing to unseen anomaly classes.
This paper tackles open-set supervised anomaly detection,
in which we learn detection models using the anomaly examples with the objective to detect both seen anomalies
(‘gray swans’) and unseen anomalies (‘black swans’). We
propose a novel approach that learns disentangled representations of abnormalities illustrated by seen anomalies,
pseudo anomalies, and latent residual anomalies (i.e., samples that have unusual residuals compared to the normal
data in a latent space), with the last two abnormalities designed to detect unseen anomalies. Extensive experiments
on nine real-world anomaly detection datasets show superior performance of our model in detecting seen and unseen
anomalies under diverse settings. Code and data are available at: https://github.com/choubo/DRA

Figure 1. t-SNE visualization of features learned by SotA unsupervised (KDAD [46]) and supervised (DevNet [34, 36]) models,
and our open-set supervised model (DRA) on the test data of two
MVTec AD datasets, Leather and Tile. KDAD is trained with normal data only, learning less discriminative features than DevNet
and DRA that are trained using ten samples from the seen anomaly
classes, in addition to the normal data. DevNet is prone to overﬁtting the seen anomalies, failing to distinguish unseen anomalies
from the normal data, while DRA effectively mitigates this issue.

[2,8,11,13,32,38,38,41,43,45,46,48,57–59,68,73] are unsupervised, which assume the availability of normal training samples only, i.e., anomaly-free training data, because it
is difﬁcult, if not impossible, to collect large-scale anomaly
data. However, a small number of (e.g., one to multiple)
labeled anomaly examples are often available in many relevant real-world applications, such as some defect samples identiﬁed during random quality inspection, lesion images conﬁrmed by radiologists in daily medical screening,
etc. These anomaly examples provide valuable knowledge
about application-speciﬁc abnormality [29, 34, 36, 44], but
the unsupervised detectors are unable to utilize them. Due
to the lack of knowledge about anomalies, the learned features in unsupervised models are not discriminative enough
to distinguish anomalies (especially some challenging ones)
from normal data, as illustrated by the results of KDAD
[46], a recent state-of-the-art (SotA) unsupervised method,
on two MVTec AD defect detection datasets [3] in Fig. 1.
In recent years, there have been some studies [29, 34,
36, 44] exploring a supervised detection paradigm that aims
at exploiting those small, readily accessible anomaly data—
rare but previously occurred exceptional cases/events, a.k.a.

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection (AD) aims at identifying exceptional samples that do not conform to expected patterns
[35]. It has broad applications in diverse domains, e.g., lesion detection in medical image analysis [48, 56, 70], inspecting micro-cracks/defects in industrial inspection [3,4],
crime/accident detection in video surveillance [11, 20, 51,
69], and unknown object detection in autonomous driving [10, 55]. Most of existing anomaly detection methods
* Corresponding author: CS (e-mail: chunhua@me.com). This work
was in part done when GP and CS were with The University of Adelaide.
† First two authors contributed equally.

7388

