Partially Does It: Towards Scene-Level FG-SBIR with Partial Input
Pinaki Nath Chowdhury1,2 Ayan Kumar Bhunia1 Viswanatha Reddy Gajjala*
Aneeshan Sain1,2 Tao Xiang1,2 Yi-Zhe Song1,2
1
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom.
2
iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence.
{p.chowdhury, a.bhunia, a.sain, t.xiang, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk

(a)

Abstract
We scrutinise an important observation plaguing scenelevel sketch research – that a significant portion of scene
sketches are “partial”. A quick pilot study reveals: (i) a
scene sketch does not necessarily contain all objects in the
corresponding photo, due to the subjective holistic interpretation of scenes, (ii) there exists significant empty (white) regions as a result of object-level abstraction, and as a result,
(iii) existing scene-level fine-grained sketch-based image
retrieval methods collapse as scene sketches become more
partial. To solve this “partial” problem, we advocate for a
simple set-based approach using optimal transport (OT) to
model cross-modal region associativity in a partially-aware
fashion. Importantly, we improve upon OT to further account for holistic partialness by comparing intra-modal adjacency matrices. Our proposed method is not only robust
to partial scene-sketches but also yields state-of-the-art performance on existing datasets.

1. Introduction
The prevailing nature of touch-screen devices has triggered significant research progress on sketches [6, 16, 24,
36, 44]. The field has predominately focused on objectlevel sketches to date [21, 25, 59], studying its abstractness [32], creativeness [25], and applications such as image retrieval [9, 78], and 3D synthesis/editing [29]. It was
not until very recently that research efforts has undertaken
a shift to scene-level analysis [37, 44, 90]. Compared to
object-level sketches [21, 59], scene sketches exhibit abstraction not only on individual objects, but also on global
scene configurations. Fig. 1(a) offers some examples where
randomly selected sketches are overlapped on top of their
corresponding photos.
We start with an important observation plaguing scenelevel sketch research – that a significant portion of scene
sketches are “partial”. This partialness happens on two
* Interned with SketchX

(b)

(c)
Figure 1. (a): Scene sketches exhibit abstraction on global scene
configuration as shown by overlapping sketches on top of their
corresponding photos. (b): Existing scene-level FG-SBIR methods collapse as scene sketches become more partial. (c): There
are significant empty (white) regions. Also, the sketch of a sheep
in the scene might correspond to that in the centre of photo. This
calls for a solution modelling region-wise associativity.

fronts (i) a scene sketch does not necessarily contain all objects in the corresponding photo, due to subjective interpretation of scenes, i.e., holistically partial, and (ii) there exists
significant empty (white) regions as a result of object-level
abstraction, i.e., locally partial. This is verifiable through a
quick pilot study on existing scene sketch dataset [24]: (i)
scene sketches include an average of 49.7% of the objects
present in photos. (ii) On average, only 13.0% of the area in
any scene sketch is occupied by its individual objects (the
other 87.0% being empty regions).
In this paper, we specifically tackle this “partial” problem in the context of scene-level fine-grained sketch-based
image retrieval (Scene-Level FG-SBIR). We first confirm
the prevalence of this problem in existing Scene-Level FGSBIR models, where we conduct an empirical study by
measuring the retrieval accuracy by progressively masking
out individual objects in a scene sketch. Fig.1(b) shows that
popular models [24, 90] collapse as scene sketches become
more partial, calling for a solution that is robust towards partial input, and in turn yields state-of-the-art performance.
Global Average Pooling used by most existing FG-SBIR
methods [4, 5] is clearly not up for the job since it is notorious for losing spatial scene configuration information.

2395

