Entropy-based Active Learning for Object Detection
with Progressive Diversity Constraint

1

Jiaxi Wu1,2 , Jiaxin Chen2 , Di Huang1,2 *
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{wujiaxi,jiaxinchen,dhuang}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Active learning is a promising alternative to alleviate the
issue of high annotation cost in the computer vision tasks
by consciously selecting more informative samples to label. Active learning for object detection is more challenging and existing efforts on it are relatively rare. In this paper, we propose a novel hybrid approach to address this
problem, where the instance-level uncertainty and diversity are jointly considered in a bottom-up manner. To balance the computational complexity, the proposed approach
is designed as a two-stage procedure. At the first stage, an
Entropy-based Non-Maximum Suppression (ENMS) is presented to estimate the uncertainty of every image, which
performs NMS according to the entropy in the feature space
to remove predictions with redundant information gains. At
the second stage, a diverse prototype (DivProto) strategy is
explored to ensure the diversity across images by progressively converting it into the intra-class and inter-class diversities of the entropy-based class-specific prototypes. Extensive experiments are conducted on MS COCO and Pascal VOC, and the proposed approach achieves state of the
art results and significantly outperforms the other counterparts, highlighting its superiority.

1. Introduction
During the past decade, visual object detection [23, 30]
has been greatly advanced by deep Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN) [12, 27] with persistently increasing performance reported. Unfortunately, strong CNNs generally
make use of huge amounts of annotated data to fit extensive
numbers of parameters, and training such detectors requires
bounding-box labels on images, which is quite expensive
and time-consuming. As one of the most promising alternatives to alleviate this dilemma, active learning [25, 38] aims
to reduce this high cost by consciously selecting more in* Corresponding author.

formative samples to label, and it is expected to deliver a
higher accuracy with much fewer annotated images compared to that conducted in the random way.
In the community of computer vision, active learning
is mainly discussed on image classification [15, 25, 28],
where current methods roughly go into two categories,
i.e. uncertainty-based [9, 36] and diversity-based [22, 25].
Uncertainty-based methods [9, 36] screen informative samples from entire databases according to their ambiguities [3,
9, 15, 36]. As the samples are separately predicted, they are
efficient but tend to incur high correlations. Diversity-based
methods [1, 22, 25] claim that informative samples are the
representatives of the whole data distribution and identify
a subset using distance metric [25] or class probability [1].
They prove effective for small models, but suffer from high
computational complexity. In addition, there exists another
trend to combine the uncertainty- and diversity-based methods as hybrid ones [2, 6, 35], and the achieved superiority
figures out a promising alternative to other tasks.
As we know, object detection is more complicated than
image classification, where object category and location are
simultaneously output. In this case, active learning is desired to deal with various numbers of objects within images
and the essential issue is to make image-level decisions according to instance-level predictions. The diversity-based
method, CDAL [1], applies spatial pooling to roughly approximate instance aggregation and formulates image selection as a reinforcement learning process. Regarding
uncertainty-based methods, Learn Loss [36] designs a taskfree loss prediction module, and computes the image uncertainty by image-level features instead of instance-level
ones, while MIAL [37] defines the image uncertainty as
that of the top-K instances and estimates it with multiple
instance learning based re-weighting. Since the diversitybased methods do not fully make use of categorical information and the uncertainty-based ones do not well measure
the discrepancy of informative samples, the two types of
methods leave room for performance improvement.
In this study, we propose a novel hybrid approach to

9397

