Modeling Image Composition for Complex Scene Generation
Zuopeng Yang1∗
Daqing Liu2∗
Chaoyue Wang3
Jie Yang1†
Dacheng Tao2,3
2
3
1
Shanghai JiaoTong University
JD Explore Academy, JD.com
The University of Sydney
{yzpeng, jieyang}@sjtu.edu.cn, chaoyue.wang@outlook.com, {liudq.ustc, dacheng.tao}@gmail.com
bus

bush

sky-

tree

tree

elephant

grass

road

sky-

sky-

skyscraper

tree
mountain
boat

tree

pavement

grass

river

cage

person

plant-

person

playingfield

bird

wall-

bird

person

branch

Layout

Context-L2I

Ours

Layout

Context-L2I

Ours

Figure 1. By specifying the layouts, we compared several results generated by recent CNN-based method [10] and our proposed TwFA.
Our approach enables transformers to synthesize high-quality images containing multiple objects with complex structures from layouts
(bounding boxes with categories).

current patch token by only focusing on its highly-related
tokens that speciﬁed by the spatial layout, thereby achieving
disambiguation during training. Furthermore, the proposed
TwFA largely increases the data efﬁciency during training,
therefore we propose the ﬁrst few-shot complex scene generation strategy based on the well-trained TwFA. Comprehensive experiments show the superiority of our method, which
signiﬁcantly increases both quantitative metrics and qualitative visual realism with respect to state-of-the-art CNNbased and transformer-based methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/JohnDreamer/TwFA.

Abstract
We present a method that achieves state-of-the-art results on challenging (few-shot) layout-to-image generation tasks by accurately modeling textures, structures
and relationships contained in a complex scene. After
compressing RGB images into patch tokens, we propose
the Transformer with Focal Attention (TwFA) for exploring dependencies of object-to-object, object-to-patch and
patch-to-patch. Compared to existing CNN-based and
Transformer-based generation models that entangled modeling on pixel-level&patch-level and object-level&patchlevel respectively, the proposed focal attention predicts the

1. Introduction
Generating photo-realistic images is the ever-lasting goal
in computer vision. Despite achieving remarkable progress
on image generation for both simple scenario, e.g., faces,

∗ Equal Contribution. † Corresponding author.

This research is partly supported by NSFC, China (No: 61876107,
U1803261), and Dr. Chaoyue Wang is supported by ARC FL-170100117.

7764

