Think Twice Before Detecting GAN-generated Fake Images
from their Spectral Domain Imprints
Chengdong Dong 1 Ajay Kumar 1 Eryun Liu 2
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
2
College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University
1

chengdong.dong@connect.polyu.hk, ajay.kumar@polyu.edu.hk, eryunliu@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Accurate detection of the fake but photorealistic images
is one of the most challenging tasks to address social, biometrics security and privacy related concerns in our community. Earlier research has underlined the existence of
spectral domain artifacts in fake images generated by powerful generative adversarial network (GAN) based methods. Therefore, a number of highly accurate frequency domain methods to detect such GAN generated images have
been proposed in the literature. Our study in this paper introduces a pipeline to mitigate the spectral artifacts. We
show from our experiments that the artifacts in frequency
spectrum of such fake images can be mitigated by proposed
methods, which leads to the sharp decrease of performance
of spectrum-based detectors. This paper also presents experimental results using a large database of images that are
synthesized using BigGAN, CRN, CycleGAN, IMLE, ProGAN, StarGAN, StyleGAN and StyleGAN2 (including synthesized high resolution fingerprint images) to illustrate effectiveness of the proposed methods. Furthermore, we select a spatial-domain based fake image detector and observe a notable decrease in the detection performance when
proposed method is incorporated. In summary, our insightful analysis and pipeline presented in this paper cautions
the forensic community on the reliability of GAN-generated
fake image detectors that are based on the analysis of frequency artifacts as these artifacts can be easily mitigated.

1. Introduction
GAN-based methods can achieve state-of-the-art performance for several computer vision related tasks. They have
shown great ability to generate images which do not exist
in the real world [8, 32, 38], transfer the style of images
[14, 25, 42] and translate text to image [16, 39]. Considering the latent risk associated with the misuse of these fake

but real-looklike images, several methods have been proposed to detect such GAN-generated images. Spatial domain methods [36, 40, 41, 44] that directly train large neural network-based detectors have shown to perform well.
More recently such fake image detectors based on the artifacts in frequency spectrum of GAN-generated images have
been proposed. These detectors require less parameters as
compared with the spatial-domain based detectors, and have
shown better performance.

Figure 1. Detectors based on the artifacts in frequency spectrum of
GAN-generated images show good performance in recent works.
However, these detectors can be compromised when the GANgenerated images are further subjected to our proposed methods.

The main reason for the success of these methods is that
the anomalies in the frequency domain representation of
GAN-generated images are more pronounced and therefore
easy to detect. These anomalies in the spectrum of GANgenerated images can be categorized into two types: abnormal spectral patterns and discrepancy in their power distribution. Some abnormal patterns such as dots and lines are
more frequent in the spectra of images generated by CycleGAN [47], StarGAN [13], and StyleGAN [27]. In frequency spectra of BigGAN [10] generated images, cloudlike blurry regions in high-frequency part of spectra are
more likely to be observed. In the spectra of synthetic images generated by CRN [12], IMLE [31], ProGAN [26] and
StyleGAN2 [28], the artifact patterns have been observed
in distinguishing latent shapes. Zhang et al. [45] use spec-

7865

