Fast Point Transformer
Chunghyun Park

Yoonwoo Jeong

Minsu Cho

Jaesik Park

POSTECH GSAI & CSE
http://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/FPT

(a) 3D object detection

(b) 3D semantic segmentation

Figure 1. Fast Point Transformer can process large-scale scenes using a local self-attention mechanism. Unlike Point Transformer [49],
our approach can infer the scene at one shot without searching for point-wise neighbors. The average inference time of our network is 0.14
seconds per scene, resulting in 129 times faster than Point Transformer in 3D semantic segmentation on S3DIS dataset [2].

Abstract
The recent success of neural networks enables a better interpretation of 3D point clouds, but processing a large-scale
3D scene remains a challenging problem. Most current
approaches divide a large-scale scene into small regions
and combine the local predictions together. However, this
scheme inevitably involves additional stages for pre- and
post-processing and may also degrade the final output due
to predictions in a local perspective. This paper introduces
Fast Point Transformer that consists of a new lightweight
self-attention layer. Our approach encodes continuous 3D
coordinates, and the voxel hashing-based architecture boosts
computational efficiency. The proposed method is demonstrated with 3D semantic segmentation and 3D detection.
The accuracy of our approach is competitive to the best
voxel-based method, and our network achieves 129 times
faster inference time than the state-of-the-art, Point Transformer, with a reasonable accuracy trade-off in 3D semantic
segmentation on S3DIS dataset.

1. Introduction
3D scene understanding is a fundamental task due to its
importance to various fields, such as robotics, intelligent

agents, and AR/VR. Recent approaches [6, 10, 22, 26, 27,
34, 37] utilize the deep learning frameworks, but processing
a large-scale 3D scene as a whole remains a challenging problem because it involves extensive computation and memory
budgets. As an alternative, some methods crop 3D scenes
and stitch predictions [18, 26, 27, 34, 35, 41], or others approximate point coordinates for efficiency [6, 10, 23, 50].
Such techniques, however, typically lead to a substantial increase of inference time and/or degrade the final output due
to the local or approximate predictions. Achieving both fast
inference time and high accuracy is thus one of the primary
challenges in the 3D scene understanding tasks.
The pioneering 3D understanding approaches, PointNet [26] and PointNet++ [27] process point clouds
with multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs), which preserve
permutation-invariance of the point clouds. Such pointbased methods introduce impressive results [22, 37] recently,
and Point Transformer [49] shows superior accuracy based
on the local self-attention mechanism. However, it involves
manual grouping of point clouds using k nearest neighbor
search. Furthermore, scene-level inference with the pointbased methods typically requires dividing a large-scale scene
into smaller regions and stitching the predictions on them.
While Voxel-based methods [1, 6, 10, 13, 19, 23, 24, 36, 50]
are alternatives for a large-scale 3D scene understanding due

16949

