Rethinking Bayesian Deep Learning Methods for
Semi-Supervised Volumetric Medical Image Segmentation
Jianfeng Wang
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford

Thomas Lukasiewicz
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford

jianfeng.wang@cs.ox.ac.uk

thomas.lukasiewicz@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract

1. Introduction

gions from medical images. Training segmentation networks
usually relies on large labeled medical image datasets, but
they are scarce and difﬁcult to obtain, since not everyone is
qualiﬁed to annotate medical data, and there is only a limited number of medical experts. Therefore, semi-supervised
segmentation has become an important research direction in
the area of medical computer vision.
Several methods [1, 2, 5, 6, 9–11, 14, 15, 17–19, 21, 22]
have been proposed in recent years.1 Among these works,
Bayesian deep-learning-based methods [14,15,17,18,21] are
closely related to this work, as they are based on Monte Carlo
(MC) dropout [4], which is an approximation of Bayesian
neural networks (BNNs). These methods are mainly built
with the teacher-student architecture, which can be regarded
as the discriminative model. Speciﬁcally, they initially build
the model P (Y |X) only from labeled data, and then apply
the model to generate pseudo labels that are reﬁned or rectiﬁed based on the epistemic uncertainty [7] provided by
MC dropout for unlabeled ones. Then, the pseudo labels are
further combined with unlabeled and labeled data to further
train the overall architecture.
The works [14, 15, 17, 18, 21] mainly have two issues.
Firstly, their models are built only with labeled data in the
early stage of training and may overﬁt to them, since the
quantity of labeled data is limited. Consequently, the new
pseudo labels generated by the models might be inaccurate,
which adversely impacts the subsequent training process.
Secondly, their models are only partially based on Bayesian
deep learning and are not designed under the Bayesian framework. Hence, they are unable to give a Bayesian formulation
with regard to their models, lacking a solid theoretical basis.
As a result, some modules in their models are empirically
designed, and the functions of those modules remain unclear.

Deep neural networks are a powerful tool for visual learning, and they have outperformed previous methods that are
based on hand-crafted features in many classical computer
vision tasks. Due to the power of deep neural networks,
researchers also try to use them to segment pathology re-

1 Note that we only consider previous methods that build their architectures with 3D CNNs, since our architecture is also based on 3D CNNs. In
most cases, using 3D CNNs to process medical volumetric data performs
better than using 2D CNNs, as the relationships among neighboring slices
are preserved in 3D CNNs. Thus, comparing our method with 2D-CNNbased methods is unfair to them.

Recently, several Bayesian deep learning methods have
been proposed for semi-supervised medical image segmentation. Although they have achieved promising results on
medical benchmarks, some problems are still existing. Firstly,
their overall architectures belong to the discriminative models, and hence, in the early stage of training, they only use labeled data for training, which might make them overﬁt to the
labeled data. Secondly, in fact, they are only partially based
on Bayesian deep learning, as their overall architectures
are not designed under the Bayesian framework. However,
unifying the overall architecture under the Bayesian perspective can make the architecture have a rigorous theoretical
basis, so that each part of the architecture can have a clear
probabilistic interpretation. Therefore, to solve the problems, we propose a new generative Bayesian deep learning
(GBDL) architecture. GBDL belongs to the generative models, whose target is to estimate the joint distribution of input
medical volumes and their corresponding labels. Estimating
the joint distribution implicitly involves the distribution of
data, so both labeled and unlabeled data can be utilized in
the early stage of training, which alleviates the potential
overﬁtting problem. Besides, GBDL is completely designed
under the Bayesian framework, and thus we give its full
Bayesian formulation, which lays a theoretical probabilistic
foundation for our architecture. Extensive experiments show
that our GBDL outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods in terms of four commonly used evaluation indicators on
three public medical datasets.

182

