Leveling Down in Computer Vision:
Pareto Inefficiencies in Fair Deep Classifiers
Dominik Zietlow1,2,†,∗ , Michael Lohaus1,3,† , Guha Balakrishnan4 , Matthäus Kleindessner1 ,
Francesco Locatello1 , Bernhard Schölkopf1,2 , Chris Russell1
1

Amazon Web Services, Tübingen, 2 MPI-IS Tübingen, Germany, 3 University of Tübingen, Germany, 4 Rice University, USA

Abstract
Algorithmic fairness is frequently motivated in terms
of a trade-off in which overall performance is decreased so
as to improve performance on disadvantaged groups where
the algorithm would otherwise be less accurate. Contrary
to this, we find that applying existing fairness approaches
to computer vision improve fairness by degrading the performance of classifiers across all groups (with increased
degradation on the best performing groups).
Extending the bias-variance decomposition for classification to fairness, we theoretically explain why the majority of fairness methods designed for low capacity models
should not be used in settings involving high-capacity models, a scenario common to computer vision. We corroborate this analysis with extensive experimental support that
shows that many of the fairness heuristics used in computer
vision also degrade performance on the most disadvantaged
groups. Building on these insights, we propose an adaptive
augmentation strategy that, uniquely, of all methods tested,
improves performance for the disadvantaged groups.

1. Introduction
High-capacity neural classifiers achieve state-of-the-art
performance on most computer vision tasks when assessed
by overall test set accuracy. However, researchers have begun examining the unfairness of these models. Here, we
use ‘unfairness’ to refer to systematic accuracy differences
across protected subgroups defined by human-sensitive attributes like gender and race [7, 8, 36].1 These differences in
accuracy can harm certain population groups, and as a result, numerous strategies for training models that match various measures of accuracy across subgroups have been developed [2, 5, 33, 85]. Typically, such methods quantify unfairness by comparing accuracy-related rates between various groups, for example the Difference of Equal Opportu† Work done during an internship at AWS
∗ Corresponding author zietld@amazon.de

nity (DEO) [36] compares groupwise true positive rates.
Many recent computer vision fairness studies are motivated by a fairness-accuracy trade-off originally targetting
low-capacity models [1, 2, 15, 22, 47, 56, 85] where high accuracy on better performing (and often larger) groups comes
at the cost of lower accuracy on the worse performing (and
often smaller) groups. In this case, it is possible to increase
fairness by reducing the accuracy on the best-performing
group and increasing the accuracy on the worst-performing
group, see models A and B in Figure 1.
We revisit this trade-off and show that it does not hold
when using high-capacity neural classifiers prevalent in
computer vision (see Figure 2). Instead, many fairness
methods degrade the accuracy of networks on all groups,
with a greater degradation occurring for the better performing groups. This increases fairness, but at the cost of producing a worse performing classifier (Figure 1 model C).
The phenomenon of balancing fairness by degrading the
performance on the better off groups is referred to as leveling down in law and philosophy, where it has received
substantial criticism [12, 19, 26, 41, 57]. The behavior we
are concerned with is even more extreme than the typical
levelling down – rather than just lower the performance on
the best performing groups, every group is worse off.
If fairness methods decrease performance for all groups,
they are Pareto Inefficient with respect to group accuracy
and should not be used in contexts where the accuracy of
any group is a primary concern.2 For example, we find that
for classifiers on CelebA [52] regularized by a DEO fairness measure, the increased fairness comes at the cost of
degraded performance for every group including the worst
performing group (see Figure 2). We attribute this problem
to two issues:
1 In this work, we focus on fairness measures that compare accuracy
across groups. These are in contrast to measures such as demographic parity [14, 28], which matches the proportion of positive decisions per group.
2 Various works in fairness have made use of Pareto Efficiency. It has
been used both to refer to trading-off global accuracy against notions of
fairness [76], and for the notion of trading-off per group accuracies against
each other [56]. We only refer to the second case.

10410

