Continual Test-Time Domain Adaptation
Qin Wang1 Olga Fink1,3* Luc Van Gool1,4 Dengxin Dai2
1
ETH Zurich, Switzerland 2 MPI for Informatics, Germany 3 EPFL, Switzerland 4 KU Lueven, Belgium
{qin.wang,vangool,dai}@vision.ee.ethz.ch olga.fink@epfl.ch

Abstract
Test-time domain adaptation aims to adapt a source pretrained model to a target domain without using any source
data. Existing works mainly consider the case where the
target domain is static. However, real-world machine perception systems are running in non-stationary and continually changing environments where the target domain distribution can change over time. Existing methods, which
are mostly based on self-training and entropy regularization, can suffer from these non-stationary environments.
Due to the distribution shift over time in the target domain, pseudo-labels become unreliable. The noisy pseudolabels can further lead to error accumulation and catastrophic forgetting. To tackle these issues, we propose a continual test-time adaptation approach (CoTTA) which comprises two parts. Firstly, we propose to reduce the error
accumulation by using weight-averaged and augmentationaveraged predictions which are often more accurate. On
the other hand, to avoid catastrophic forgetting, we propose to stochastically restore a small part of the neurons to
the source pre-trained weights during each iteration to help
preserve source knowledge in the long-term. The proposed
method enables the long-term adaptation for all parameters in the network. CoTTA is easy to implement and can be
readily incorporated in off-the-shelf pre-trained models. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on four classification tasks and a segmentation task for continual testtime adaptation, on which we outperform existing methods.
Our code is available at https://qin.ee/cotta.

1. Introduction
Test-time domain adaptation aims to adapt a source pretrained model by learning from the unlabeled test (target)
data during inference time. Due to the domain shift between source training data and target test data, an adaptation is necessary to achieve good performance. For example, a semantic segmentation model trained on data from
* The corresponding author

Figure 1. We consider the online continual test-time adaptation
scenario. The target data is provided in a sequence and from a
continually changing environment. An off-the-shelf source pretrained network is used to initialize the target network. The model
is updated online based on the current target data, and the predictions are given in an online fashion. The adaptation of the target
network does not rely on any source data. Existing methods often
suffer from error accumulation and forgetting which result in performance deterioration over time. Our method enables long-term
test-time adaptation under continually changing environments.

clear weather conditions can suffer significant performance
deterioration when tested on snowy night conditions [50].
Similarly, a pre-trained image classification model can also
suffer this phenomenon when tested on corrupted images resulting from sensor degradation. Due to privacy concerns or
legal constraints, the source data is generally considered unavailable during inference time under this setup, making it a
more challenging but more realistic problem than unsupervised domain adaptation. In many scenarios, the adaptation
also needs to be performed in an online fashion. Therefore,
test-time adaptation is critical to the success of real-world
machine perception applications under domain shift.
Existing works on test-time adaptation often tackle the
distribution shift between the source domain and a fixed
target domain by updating model parameters using pseudolabels or entropy regularization [43,61]. These self-training

7201

