Vehicle trajectory prediction works, but not everywhere
Mohammadhossein Bahari∗,1 Saeed Saadatnejad∗,1 Ahmad Rahimi2 Mohammad Shaverdikondori2
Amir Hossein Shahidzadeh2 Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli3 Alexandre Alahi1
1

EPFL Switzerland

2

Sharif university of technology

3

Imperial College London

{mohammadhossein.bahari, saeed.saadatnejad}@epfl.ch

Abstract
Vehicle trajectory prediction is nowadays a fundamental pillar of self-driving cars. Both the industry and research communities have acknowledged the need for such a
pillar by providing public benchmarks. While state-of-theart methods are impressive, i.e., they have no off-road prediction, their generalization to cities outside of the benchmark remains unexplored. In this work, we show that those
methods do not generalize to new scenes. We present a
method that automatically generates realistic scenes causing state-of-the-art models to go off-road. We frame the
problem through the lens of adversarial scene generation.
The method is a simple yet effective generative model based
on atomic scene generation functions along with physical
constraints. Our experiments show that more than 60% of
existing scenes from the current benchmarks can be modified in a way to make prediction methods fail (i.e., predicting off-road). We further show that the generated scenes (i)
are realistic since they do exist in the real world, and (ii)
can be used to make existing models more robust, yielding
30 − 40% reductions in the off-road rate. The code is available online: https://s-attack.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Vehicle trajectory prediction is one of the main building
blocks of a self-driving car, which forecasts how the future
might unfold based on the road structure (i.e., the scene)
and the traffic participants. State-of-the-art models are commonly trained and evaluated on datasets collected from a
few cities [14, 19, 23]. While their evaluation has shown
impressive performance, i.e., almost no off-road prediction,
their generalization to other types of possible scenes e.g.,
other cities, remains unknown. Figure 1 shows a real-world
example where a state-of-the-art model reaching zero offroad in the known benchmark [19] failed in South St, New
∗ Equal contribution as the first authors.

Figure 1. A real-world place (location) in New York where the
trajectory prediction model (here [32]) fails. We find this place
by retrieving real-world locations which resemble our conditional
generated scenes for the prediction model.

York, USA. Since collecting and annotating data of all realworld scenes is not a viable and affordable solution, we
present a method that automatically investigates the robustness of vehicle trajectory prediction to the scene. We tackle
the problem through the lens of realistic adversarial scene
generation.
Given an observed scene, we want to generate a realistic modification of it such that the prediction models fail in.
Having an off-road prediction is a clear indication of a failure in the the model’s scene reasoning and has been used
in some previous works [8, 16, 36, 38]. To find a realistic
example where the models go off-road, the huge space of
possible scenes should be explored. One solution is datadriven generative models that mimic the distribution of a
dataset [35]. Yet, they do not essentially produce realistic
scenes due to the possible artifacts. Moreover, they will

17123

