Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation using Out-of-Distribution Data
Jungbeom Lee1 Seong Joon Oh2,3 Sangdoo Yun2 Junsuk Choe4 Eunji Kim1 Sungroh Yoon1,5, *
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University
2
4

3

University of Tübingen

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Sogang University

Interdisciplinary Program in AI, AIIS, ASRI, INMC, and ISRC, Seoul National University

(a) Baseline

Abstract
Weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) methods are often built on pixel-level localization maps obtained
from a classifier. However, training on class labels only,
classifiers suffer from the spurious correlation between foreground and background cues (e.g. train and rail), fundamentally bounding the performance of WSSS. There have been
previous endeavors to address this issue with additional supervision. We propose a novel source of information to distinguish foreground from the background: Out-of-Distribution
(OoD) data, or images devoid of foreground object classes.
In particular, we utilize the hard OoDs that the classifier is
likely to make false-positive predictions. These samples typically carry key visual features on the background (e.g. rail)
that the classifiers often confuse as foreground (e.g. train),
so these cues let classifiers correctly suppress spurious background cues. Acquiring such hard OoDs does not require an
extensive amount of annotation efforts; it only incurs a few
additional image-level labeling costs on top of the original
efforts to collect class labels. We propose a method, W-OoD,
for utilizing the hard OoDs. W-OoD achieves state-of-the-art
performance on Pascal VOC 2012. The code is available at:
https://github.com/naver-ai/w-ood.

1. Introduction
Pixel-wise labeling is labor-intensive [8]. Lots of research have been dedicated to supervising a semantic segmentation model with weaker forms of supervision than
pixel-wise labelings, such as scribbles [52], points [3, 21],
boxes [20, 31, 49], and class labels [27, 30, 33, 56]. We tackle
the final category in this paper: weakly supervised semantic
segmentation (WSSS) with class labels.
WSSS methods utilizing class labels often follow a twostage process. First, they generate pixel-level pseudo-target
from a classifier using CAM variants [46, 63]. Then, they
train the main segmentation network using the pseudo-target
* Correspondence to: Sungroh Yoon (sryoon@snu.ac.kr).

Label: “train”

classifier

(b) Ours
Label: “train”

classifier

Label: “no train”

Additional
Supervision

5

NAVER AI Lab

Label: “no train”

Label: “no train”

OoD images

Figure 1. (a) Classifiers often confuse background cues to be a
foreground concept due to spurious correlations (e.g. “rail” for
“train”). (b) Our W-OoD employs hard OoD images as negative
samples (e.g. “rail” is not “train”) to resolve the confusion.

generated in the first stage. Built on image-level labels only,
the pseudo-target is known to suffer from the confusion
between foreground and background cues. For example,
given a database of duck images where ducks are typically
waterborne, a classifier erroneously assigns higher scores
on patches containing water than those containing ducks’
feet [7, 22, 27, 34, 36, 62]. The same goes for foregroundbackground pairs like woodpecker-tree, snowmobile-snow,
and train-rail. This is a fundamental problem that cannot be
solved solely with the class labels; additional information
is needed to learn to fully distinguish the foreground and
background cues [7, 34, 36].
Researchers have thus sought various sources of additional guidance to separate the foreground and background
cues, each with different pros and cons and different labelingcost footprints. Image saliency [38, 41] is one of the most
widely used ones [18, 28, 34, 43, 51, 60], for it naturally provides the prominent foreground object in the image in a
class-agnostic fashion. However, saliency is not very effective for non-salient foreground objects (e.g. low-contrast
objects or small objects). Low-level visual features like superpixels [25, 55], edges [19], object proposals [31, 43, 49],

16897

