IRON: Inverse Rendering by Optimizing Neural SDFs and Materials
from Photometric Images
Kai Zhang1
1

Fujun Luan2

Cornell University

2

Zhengqi Li3

Adobe Research

Noah Snavely1
3

Google Research

Abstract
We propose a neural inverse rendering pipeline called
IRON that operates on photometric images and outputs highquality 3D content in the format of triangle meshes and
material textures readily deployable in existing graphics
pipelines. Our method adopts neural representations for
geometry as signed distance fields (SDFs) and materials during optimization to enjoy their flexibility and compactness,
and features a hybrid optimization scheme for neural SDFs:
first, optimize using a volumetric radiance field approach to
recover correct topology, then optimize further using edgeaware physics-based surface rendering for geometry refinement and disentanglement of materials and lighting. In the
second stage, we also draw inspiration from mesh-based
differentiable rendering, and design a novel edge sampling
algorithm for neural SDFs to further improve performance.
We show that our IRON achieves significantly better inverse
rendering quality compared to prior works.

1. Introduction
Inverse rendering—the reconstruction of shape and appearance of real-world objects from a set of 2D input
images—can enable accessible, high-quality digitization of
our world. One way to formulate this problem is as the inversion of rendering algorithms used in computer graphics.
Recent advances in graphics have led to fully differentiable
Monte Carlo path tracing methods for jointly optimizing geometry and BRDFs represented as triangle meshes and material textures. However, meshes can be difficult to optimize,
because it is non-trivial to modify their topology or maintain
regularity during optimization. On the other hand, recently
developed neural representations for shape [22, 31] and radiance fields [23, 29] demonstrate impressive success in view
synthesis [23] and shape reconstruction [26, 30, 34, 38, 39]
tasks. But these representations entangle material and lighting, and cannot be directly used for applications like relighting or material editing. Recent methods for decoupling neural radiance fields are either limited to simple shapes [6, 41],

(a) Reconstruction of real-world objects, rendered under global illumination.

(b) Scene editing by modifying illumination and materials, and inserting objects.

Figure 1. Real-world objects reconstructed by our IRON pipeline.
We show (a) re-renderings under novel global illumination via
Mitsuba path tracing [14], and (b) scene edits that include changing
lighting, material BRDFs, and the scale/orientation of existing
objects, and inserting new virtual objects or participating media
such as the metal Van Gogh head and the heterogeneous smoke.

or have neural components [4, 43] that are incompatible with
standard 3D rendering and editing tools.
We address the inverse rendering problem with the objective of embracing both the flexibility and compactness of
neural representations, and the convenience of meshes with
material textures in downstream applications. We present
a pipeline we call IRON—Inverse Rendering by Optimizing Neural scene components, including neural signed distance fields (SDF) and neural materials. IRON performs
an inverse rendering optimization starting from multi-view
images captured by co-locating a flashlight with a moving

5565

