SkinningNet: Two-Stream Graph Convolutional Neural Network for
Skinning Prediction of Synthetic Characters
Albert Mosella-Montoro and Javier Ruiz-Hidalgo
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya
{albert.mosella, j.ruiz}@upc.edu
https://imatge-upc.github.io/skinningnet

Abstract
This work presents SkinningNet, an end-to-end TwoStream Graph Neural Network architecture that computes
skinning weights from an input mesh and its associated
skeleton, without making any assumptions on shape class
and structure of the provided mesh. Whereas previous methods pre-compute handcrafted features that relate the mesh
and the skeleton or assume a fixed topology of the skeleton,
the proposed method extracts this information in an endto-end learnable fashion by jointly learning the best relationship between mesh vertices and skeleton joints. The
proposed method exploits the benefits of the novel MultiAggregator Graph Convolution that combines the results
of different aggregators during the summarizing step of the
Message-Passing scheme, helping the operation to generalize for unseen topologies. Experimental results demonstrate
the effectiveness of the contributions of our novel architecture, with SkinningNet outperforming current state-of-theart alternatives.

1. Introduction
Animating a 3D character is a complex and timeconsuming process that animators spend years learning to
do efficiently. In a typical animation pipeline, an artist first
creates a mesh model and specifies the skeleton topology,
skinning weights are then painted manually. During this
process, the animators follow two main steps. First, they
do the skin binding, which consists of defining which parts
of the mesh will be affected by the movement of a specific
joint. Finally, they decide the skinning weights that describe
which amount of movement is transferred to the skin.
SkinningNet is a Two-Stream Graph Convolutional Network that, given an input mesh and its corresponding skeleton, performs the skin binding and then computes the skinning weights for each mesh vertex as it can be seen in Fig. 1.
Previous methods rely on pre-computed handcrafted fea-

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed pipeline. Given an input
mesh and its associated skeleton, SkinningNet predicts the skinning weights used by the Linear Blend Skinning [26] algorithm to
create a set of animations.

tures to create the mesh and skeleton relationship. The
proposed method automatically extracts the best features
to relate the mesh and the skeleton to predict the associated skinning weights. The main contributions of this paper
are: a) A Two-Stream Graph Neural architecture that learns
to extract features from meshes and skeletons with different topologies, b) A Multi-aggregator Graph Convolution
(MAGC) layer that extends the Message-Passing scheme
to use a multiple aggregation approach that better generalizes for unseen graph topologies, c) A novel skin binding method that uses a skeleton joint representation instead
of a bone representation and d) A Mesh-Skeleton Graph
Convolution Network that exploits this skeleton joint representation to find the optimal relationship between the input mesh and the skeleton. All these contributions allow the
proposed method to outperform current state-of-the-art with
over 20% improvement on mesh deformation error. Furthermore, experimental results show the ability of the proposed
method to generalize for complex mesh and skeleton structures of different domains.

2. Related Work
This section reviews techniques related to Graph Neural
Network solutions that are used for Geometric Learning and
then transitions to more specific techniques used for skin-

18593

