Industrial Style Transfer with Large-scale Geometric Warping and Content Preservation
Jinchao Yang1∗ , Fei Guo1∗ , Shuo Chen2 , Jun Li1† , Jian Yang1
1
2
PCA Lab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
RIKEN
{yangjinchao,feiguo,junli,csjyang}@njust.edu.cn
∗

Contributes equally

†

shuo.chen.ya@riken.jp

Corresponding author&project lead

Figure 1. We propose an Industrial Style Transfer method for visual product design. Our method creates new product appearances (e.g.,
logos and Day&Night bottles) by transferring both the shape of one product (target) and art style reference to another (source).

Abstract
We propose a novel style transfer method to quickly create a new visual product with a nice appearance for industrial designers reference. Given a source product, a target product, and an art style image, our method produces
a neural warping field that warps the source shape to imitate the geometric style of the target and a neural texture
transformation network that transfers the artistic style to
the warped source product. Our model, Industrial Style
Transfer (InST), consists of large-scale geometric warping
(LGW) and interest-consistency texture transfer (ICTT). LGW aims to explore an unsupervised transformation between the shape masks of the source and target products
for fitting large-scale shape warping. Furthermore, we introduce a mask smoothness regularization term to prevent the abrupt changes of the details of the source product.
ICTT introduces an interest regularization term to maintain important contents of the warped product when it is
stylized by using the art style image. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that InST achieves state-of-the-art
performance on multiple visual product design tasks, e.g.,
companies’ snail logos and classical bottles (please see
Fig. 1). To the best of our knowledge, we are the first
to extend the neural style transfer method to create industrial product appearances. Code is available at https:
//jcyang98.github.io/InST/home.html

1. Introduction
Visual Product Design (VPD) has been recognized as a
central role in the industrial product design field as consumers’ choices heavily depend on the visual appearance of
a new product in the marketplace [12]. VPD often designs a
novel product [11] by following different appearance roles
(e.g., aesthetic, functional, and symbolic). For example, designers usually produce the beautiful appearance of flying
cars by referring to airplanes and cars to fuse their flying
and driving functions and attractive aesthetic. However, it is
difficult to quickly create high-quality product appearances
due to the human intelligence in the VPD process, which
is heavily dependent on designers’ creative ability. Fortunately, neural style transfer (NST) [16, 21, 28, 38], aiming
at transferring artistic and geometric styles of one or two
reference images to a content image, has a strong opportunity to assist the designers because the art style transformation is suitable for the aesthetic value, and some geometric
shape transformations can gain the functional and symbolic
values, such as Beijing National Stadium (bird’s nest and
building). Therefore, we seek for a style transfer formulation to automatically generate many visual appearance candidates of new products for industrial designers’ reference.
However, most modern NST methods [14,25,32,59,60],
including geometric NST [28, 38], are difficultly or impossibly extended into directly design visual product appearances due to the following two challenges. One is the large-

7834

