Embracing Single Stride 3D Object Detector with Sparse Transformer
Lue Fan1,4,6,7
Ziqi Pang2
Tianyuan Zhang3
Yu-Xiong Wang2
Hang Zhao5
Feng Wang8
Naiyan Wang8
Zhaoxiang Zhang1,4,6,9,
1
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
3
Carnegie Mellon University 4 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 5 Tsinghua University
6
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA 7 School of Future Technology, UCAS
8
TuSimple 9 Center for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI CAS
{fanlue2019, zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn {ziqip2, yxw}@illinois.edu tianyuaz@andrew.cmu.edu
hangzhao@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

{feng.wff, winsty}@gmail.com

Abstract

LiDAR-based 3D object detection for autonomous driving has been benefiting from the progress of image-based
object detection. The mainstream 3D detectors quantize
the 3D space into a stack of pseudo-images from Bird
Corresponding author.

4×
2×
1×

Multi-stride 3D
object detectors

1×

1×

Detection Head

1. Introduction

Detection Head

In LiDAR-based 3D object detection for autonomous
driving, the ratio of the object size to input scene size is significantly smaller compared to 2D detection cases. Overlooking this difference, many 3D detectors directly follow
the common practice of 2D detectors, which downsample
the feature maps even after quantizing the point clouds.
In this paper, we start by rethinking how such multi-stride
stereotype affects the LiDAR-based 3D object detectors.
Our experiments point out that the downsampling operations bring few advantages, and lead to inevitable information loss. To remedy this issue, we propose Singlestride Sparse Transformer (SST) to maintain the original
resolution from the beginning to the end of the network.
Armed with transformers, our method addresses the problem of insufficient receptive field in single-stride architectures. It also cooperates well with the sparsity of point
clouds and naturally avoids expensive computation. Eventually, our SST achieves state-of-the-art results on the largescale Waymo Open Dataset. It is worth mentioning that our
method can achieve exciting performance (83.8 LEVEL 1
AP on validation split) on small object (pedestrian) detection due to the characteristic of single stride. Our codes will
be public soon.

1×

1×

Single-stride Sparse Transformer (Ours)
Voxelized feature map

Sparse voxel set

Figure 1. Compared with previous multi-stride 3D detectors, our
model is single-stride and operates sparsely on the non-empty voxels. We paint the vehicle bounding boxes on the input point cloud
to show the tiny object size compared to the input scene size.

Eye’s View (BEV), which makes it convenient to borrow advanced techniques from the 2D counterparts. Many
works [13, 19, 57, 60] are proposed under this paradigm
and achieve competitive performance. However, 3D and
2D spaces have intrinsic distinction in their relative object
scales, where the objects in 3D spaces have much smaller
relative sizes (See Fig. 2). For example, in Waymo Open
Dataset [48], the perception range is usually 150m × 150m,
while a vehicle is only about 4m long, even a pedestrian

8458

