Probabilistic Representations for Video Contrastive Learning
Jungin Park1
1
Yonsei University

Jiyoung Lee2
2
NAVER AI Lab

Ig-Jae Kim3
Kwanghoon Sohn1 *
3
Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST)

{newrun, khsohn}@yonsei.ac.kr

lee.j@navercorp.com

Video Distribution
Distribution 𝑝𝑝(𝑧𝑧|𝑉𝑉)
Video
𝑝(𝑧|𝑉)

Abstract
This paper presents Probabilistic Video Contrastive
Learning, a self-supervised representation learning method
that bridges contrastive learning with probabilistic representation. We hypothesize that the clips composing the
video have different distributions in short-term duration,
but can represent the complicated and sophisticated video
distribution through combination in a common embedding
space. Thus, the proposed method represents video clips as
normal distributions and combines them into a Mixture of
Gaussians to model the whole video distribution. By sampling embeddings from the whole video distribution, we can
circumvent the careful sampling strategy or transformations
to generate augmented views of the clips, unlike previous
deterministic methods that have mainly focused on such
sample generation strategies for contrastive learning. We
further propose a stochastic contrastive loss to learn proper
video distributions and handle the inherent uncertainty from
the nature of the raw video. Experimental results verify
that our probabilistic embedding stands as a state-of-theart video representation learning for action recognition and
video retrieval on the most popular benchmarks, including
UCF101 and HMDB51.

1. Introduction
Video is the vitality of the Internet, which means that
understanding video content is essential for the most modern artificial intelligence (AI) agents. Alongside this, learning enriched spatiotemporal representations from unlabeled
videos (i.e., self-supervised or unsupervised video representation learning) [59, 61, 62] has become a crucial research topic for the computer vision community. The interest in this topic is to learn deep features representing
general visual contents, which has proven essential to improving performance on downstream tasks such as action
* Corresponding author.

This research was supported by R&D program for Advanced
Integrated-intelligence for Identification (AIID) through the National Research Foundation of KOREA(NRF) funded by Ministry of Science and
ICT (NRF-2018M3E3A1057289) and the Yonsei University Research
Fund of 2021 (2021-22-0001).

Clip
Clip 𝑐𝑐𝑐11
Clip 𝑐𝑐𝑐2
Clip
2

Clip
Clip Embeddings
Embeddings 𝑓𝑓
𝑓𝜃𝜃𝜃 𝒯𝒯
𝒯 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑘𝑘𝑘

𝒯𝒯(⋅)
𝒯(⋅)

𝑓𝑓
𝑓𝜃𝜃𝜃

𝒯𝒯(⋅)
𝒯(⋅)

𝑓𝑓
𝑓𝜃𝜃𝜃

𝒯𝒯
Spatiotemporal transformation
transformation
𝒯 ⋅⋅ :: Spatiotemporal

(a) Deterministic embedding
2
Clip
𝒩𝒩(𝜇𝜇𝑘𝑘 ,, 𝜎𝜎
𝑘𝑘2 )
Clip Distributions
Distributions 𝒩(𝜇
𝑘 𝜎𝑘 )

Clip
Clip 𝑐𝑐𝑐11
Clip
Clip 𝑐𝑐𝑐22

𝑓𝑓
𝑓𝜃𝜃𝜃
𝑓𝑓
𝑓𝜃𝜃𝜃

2
𝜇𝜇
𝜇11 ,, 𝜎𝜎
𝜎112

2
MoG
∑𝒩𝒩(𝑧𝑧|𝜇𝜇𝑘𝑘 ,, 𝜎𝜎
𝑘𝑘2 )
MoG ∑𝒩(𝑧|𝜇
𝑘 𝜎𝑘 )

𝒮𝒮(⋅)
𝒮(⋅)
2
𝜇𝜇
𝜇22 ,, 𝜎𝜎
𝜎222

𝒮𝒮
Embedding sampling
𝒮 ⋅⋅ :: Embedding
sampling
(b) Probabilistic embedding (Ours)

Figure 1. Contrary to (a) the deterministic point embedding methods, which estimate the subset of the video distribution, (b) the
proposed method estimates the whole video distribution through
the mixture of probabilistic embeddings.

recognition [10, 28, 82], action detection [86, 88], video
retrieval [22, 80], and even multi-modal event recognition [3, 55]. However, self-supervised video representation
learning has still remained challenging due to the inherent
difficulty caused by the nature of the videos in comparison
to static images.
Recent breakthroughs in self-supervised video representation learning have been developed with two different
branches: (1) leveraging pretext tasks related to the coherence of videos and (2) using contrastive learning [26] for instance discrimination. Specifically, video coherence is empirically modeled through sub-properties of video contents
associated with temporal ordering [21, 34, 45, 54, 83], optical flow [24], spatiotemporal statistics [39,51,75], and playback rate [76, 85]. Even though they have shown that spatiotemporal representations can be learned from unlabeled

14711

𝒮𝒮(⋅)
𝒮(⋅)

