HumanNeRF:
Free-viewpoint Rendering of Moving People from Monocular Video
Chung-Yi Weng1 Brian Curless1,2 Pratul P. Srinivasan2 Jonathan T. Barron2 Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman1,2
1
University of Washington 2 Google Research

Figure 1. Our method takes as input a monocular video1 of a human performing complex movement, e.g., dancing (left), and creates a
free-viewpoint rendering for any frame in the sequence (right). We construct a canonical subject appearance volume, and a motion field
mapping from observation to canonical space, trained on the video. At test time, we take just the pose from the source frame (red square)
and synthesize all output views, including the target view. Please refer to the project page2 to see the animated results.

Abstract
We introduce a free-viewpoint rendering method – HumanNeRF – that works on a given monocular video of a human performing complex body motions, e.g. a video from
YouTube. Our method enables pausing the video at any
frame and rendering the subject from arbitrary new camera viewpoints or even a full 360-degree camera path for
that particular frame and body pose. This task is particularly challenging, as it requires synthesizing photorealistic details of the body, as seen from various camera angles
that may not exist in the input video, as well as synthesizing fine details such as cloth folds and facial appearance.
Our method optimizes for a volumetric representation of the
person in a canonical T-pose, in concert with a motion field
that maps the estimated canonical representation to every
frame of the video via backward warps. The motion field is
decomposed into skeletal rigid and non-rigid motions, produced by deep networks. We show significant performance
improvements over prior work, and compelling examples of
free-viewpoint renderings from monocular video of moving
humans in challenging uncontrolled capture scenarios.

1 e.g., https://youtu.be/0ORaAnJYROg
2 https://grail.cs.washington.edu/projects/humannerf/

1. Introduction
Given a single video of a human performing an activity, e.g., a YouTube or TikTok video of a dancer, we would
like the ability to pause at any frame and rotate 360 degrees
around the performer to view them from any angle at that
moment in time (Figure 1). This problem – free-viwepoint
rendering of a moving subject – is a longstanding research
challenge, as it involves synthesizing previously unseen
camera views while accounting for cloth folds, hair movement, and complex body poses [4, 5, 14, 17, 26, 37, 57, 63].
The problem is particularly hard for the case of “in-thewild” videos taken with a single camera (monocular video),
the case we address in this paper.
Previous neural rendering methods [2, 32, 35, 36, 48, 64,
73] typically assume multi-view input, careful lab capture,
or do not perform well on humans due to non-rigid body
motion. Human-specific methods typically assume a SMPL
template [33] as a prior, which helps constrain the motion
space but also introduces artifacts in clothing and complex
motions that are not captured by the SMPL model [47, 48].
Recently deformable NeRF methods [45,46,49,62] perform
well for small deformations, but not for large, full body motions like dancing.
We introduce a method, called HumanNeRF, that takes
as input a single video of a moving person and, after perframe, off-the-shelf segmentation (with some manual clean-

16210

