Bi-level Alignment for Cross-Domain Crowd Counting
Shenjian Gong1 , Shanshan Zhang1,* , Jian Yang1 , Dengxin Dai2 , and Bernt Schiele2
1
PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information
of Ministry of Education, and Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
MPI Informatics
{shenjiangong,shanshan.zhang,csjyang}@njust.edu.cn
{ddai,schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
Recently, crowd density estimation has received increasing
attention. The main challenge for this task is to achieve
high-quality manual annotations on a large amount of
training data. To avoid reliance on such annotations, previous works apply unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA)
techniques by transferring knowledge learned from easily
accessible synthetic data to real-world datasets. However,
current state-of-the-art methods either rely on external
data for training an auxiliary task or apply an expensive
coarse-to-fine estimation. In this work, we aim to develop
a new adversarial learning based method, which is simple
and efficient to apply. To reduce the domain gap between
the synthetic and real data, we design a bi-level alignment
framework (BLA) consisting of (1) task-driven data alignment and (2) fine-grained feature alignment. In contrast to
previous domain augmentation methods, we introduce AutoML to search for an optimal transform on source, which
well serves for the downstream task. On the other hand, we
do fine-grained alignment for foreground and background
separately to alleviate the alignment difficulty. We evaluate
our approach on five real-world crowd counting benchmarks, where we outperform existing approaches by a large
margin. Also, our approach is simple, easy to implement
and efficient to apply. The code is publicly available at
https://github.com/Yankeegsj/BLA.

1. Introduction
Crowd counting aims to estimate the number of persons
in crowded scenes. This task has gained a lot of attention
[10, 17] as it is useful for video surveillance, traffic control
and human behavior analysis. Especially under pandemics
such as COVID-19, it can be used to monitor and regulate
*Corresponding author

(a) Style Transfer
Domain Randomization

…

Task-Aware Loss:

𝐿1

𝐿2

…

𝐿𝑁

Pick the minimum:





…

✓

(b) Domain Randomization and Task-Driven Data Alignment

Figure 1. Comparison of three different ways for source domain
augmentation. (a). Style transfer translates images from source to
a target-like domain based on target style priors, but the translation
is usually limited to color changes, and blind to the task objective.
(b). Domain randomization augments the source domain randomly
in a more diverse manner (colors, scales, etc.) but without any priors from target; our proposed task-driven data alignment is more
similar to domain randomization; but instead of random selection,
we pick the most suitable augmentation based on the task objective, which enables a more dynamic and robust model to the target
domain.

the flow of people for safety reasons.
In recent years, many methods have been proposed for
crowd counting. Most state-of-the-art approaches rely on
ground truth density maps for a large number of training
images, with each human head marked. However, it is extremely expensive to annotate so many human heads and
for high-density regions such manual labels can be noisy.
To reduce annotations costs, a large-scale synthetic dataset

7542

