Data-Free Network Compression via Parametric Non-uniform Mixed Precision
Quantization
Vladimir Chikin
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Mikhail Antiukh
HSE University

vladimir.chikin@huawei.com

mikhail.antiukh@gmail.com

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) usually have a large
number of parameters and consume a huge volume of
storage space, which limits the application of DNNs on
memory-constrained devices. Network quantization is an
appealing way to compress DNNs. However, most of existing quantization methods require the training dataset and
a fine-tuning procedure to preserve the quality of a fullprecision model. These are unavailable for the confidential scenarios due to personal privacy and security problems. Focusing on this issue, we propose a novel data-free
method for network compression called PNMQ, which employs the Parametric Non-uniform Mixed precision Quantization to generate a quantized network. During the compression stage, the optimal parametric non-uniform quantization grid is calculated directly for each layer to minimize the quantization error. User can directly specify the required compression ratio of a network, which is used by the
PNMQ algorithm to select bitwidths of layers. This method
does not require any model retraining or expensive calculations, which allows efficient implementations for network compression on edge devices. Extensive experiments
have been conducted on various computer vision tasks and
the results demonstrate that PNMQ achieves better performance than other state-of-the-art methods of network compression.

1. Introduction
DNNs have achieved impressive results in a large number of problems from image classification to various generation tasks, etc. But with an increasing number of problems
to be solved the models grow in size significantly, architectures become more complex, the number of parameters is
estimated in hundreds of millions. Unfortunately, in the real
world, the use and storage of such models is difficult, especially on various peripheral and mobile devices for which
computing and memory resources are a bottleneck. Since
the demand for the use of neural networks in various mo-

bile processes and applications is growing, there is a great
need for matching neural models to the technical parameters of devices. Many researchers try to offer some approaches to solve this problem, such as making changes to
existing model structures or applying various compression
techniques to the original structure.
Popular approaches include techniques such as pruning,
quantization, encoding methods, knowledge distillation and
their various combinations. Now there are a lot of wellknown methods and ready-made frameworks that can significantly reduce the model size, but to keep a high quality
of the compressed model, many of these methods require a
lot of training data and expensive calculations such as model
retraining, which is a significant drawback. Methods that do
not use expensive calculations for compression often produce a significant quality drop of the compressed models,
since the use of uniform quantization without model training leads to a low quality of approximation from quantization for most of the weights.
In this paper, we propose a novel method of network
compression called PNMQ, which does not use expensive
calculations such as gradient descent training or clustering,
and at the same time allows us to achieve better results compared to existing data-free and training-free compression
methods, and even to some methods that use data, model
training or other additional compression techniques. First
of all, we propose a parametric family of non-uniform quantization grids that depends on a single scalar parameter and
is therefore easily optimized. The use of the proposed nonuniform quantization grids significantly improves the quality of quantization approximation relative to the uniform
quantization. We provide an optimization pipeline, which
allows to tune these non-uniform grids for each model layer,
both without using data and using a small amount of data.
In addition, we demonstrate that different layers of models
require different bitwidths for a high degree of quantization approximation, and propose a universal data-free algorithm for selecting the sufficient bitwidths of layers based
on comparison of the quantization errors of different layers
and bitwidths. This algorithm automatically selects the op-

450

