DiLiGenT102 : A Photometric Stereo Benchmark Dataset
with Controlled Shape and Material Variation
Jieji Ren1† , Feishi Wang2 , Jiahao Zhang2 , Qian Zheng3 , Mingjun Ren1* , Boxin Shi2,4,5*
1
2

School of Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3
4

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University

Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, 5 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence

{jiejiren, renmj}@sjtu.edu.cn, {wangfeishi, 1900013264, shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn, qianzheng@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Evaluating photometric stereo using real-world dataset
is important yet difficult. Existing datasets are insufficient
due to their limited scale and random distributions in shape
and material. This paper presents a new real-world photometric stereo dataset with “ground truth” normal maps,
which is 10 times larger than the widely adopted one. More
importantly, we propose to control the shape and material
variations by fabricating objects from CAD models with
carefully selected materials, covering typical aspects of reflectance properties that are distinctive for evaluating photometric stereo methods. By benchmarking recent photometric stereo methods using these 100 sets of images, with
a special focus on recent learning based solutions, a 10×10
shape-material error distribution matrix is visualized to depict a “portrait” for each evaluated method. From such
comprehensive analysis, open problems in this field are discussed. To inspire future research, this dataset is available
at https://photometricstereo.github.io.

1. Introduction
Photometric stereo recovers pixel-wise surface normals
of an object by observing it under different lighting conditions [46]. Compared with other 3D modeling approaches,
photometric stereo can produce 3D (strictly speaking 2.5D)
information with abundant details due to the per-wise recovery. Photometric stereo is an ill-posed problem because
of the unknown reflectance and lighting conditions of the
target object. There is a long research history to incorporate different assumptions on shapes (e.g., a convex shape to
avoid cast shadow) and reflectance (e.g., an isotropic BRDF
(Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Function) to apply
reflectance symmetry prior) to make the problem tractable.
* Corresponding authors.
† Part of this work was finished as a remote intern at Peking University.

To figure out the effectiveness of various assumptions for
solving real-world photometric stereo problems, the DiLiGenT [37] benchmark dataset has been built and successfully applied to conduct quantitative evaluations for photometric stereo methods published before the year 2016 1 .
The development of deep learning based photometric
stereo methods demonstrates performance boost (over those
reported in 2016) according to the constantly refreshing
benchmark records reported by papers using DiLiGenT as
a benchmark [37]. However, as a dataset originally proposed in the era that non-learning based photometric stereo
methods dominate, DiLiGenT [37] shows deficiencies in
two aspects for evaluating recent photometric stereo methods. First, as learning based methods are often trained by
large-scale data with various shapes and reflectance, the
small data scale (10 objects) of DiLiGenT [37] can be easily overfitted, which brings bottleneck for model evaluation
and improvement. Second, as learning based methods are
less interpretable, the in-depth analysis to understanding a
pre-trained neural photometric stereo model can hardly be
achieved, as DiLiGenT [37] uses randomly picked up objects (shapes and materials) from daily life.
To address these challenges, this paper builds a new photometric stereo benchmark dataset2 , named DiLiGenT102 ,
which contains 100 objects of 10 shapes multiplied by 10
materials3 , as shown in Fig. 1. These 100 objects are fabricated with the high-precise computer numerical control
1 The earlier version of [37] was published in CVPR 2016 [39]
2 “DiLiGenT”

stands for benchmarking photometric stereo under
Directional Lighting, General reflectance, with “ground Truth” shape.
Since our dataset follows the same setup assumption for evaluating photometric stereo methods, we borrow the abbreviation of DiLiGenT as prefix.
3 The abbreviations of materials and shapes are listed below: For materials, polyoxymethylene (P OM), polypropylene (P P), polyamide (N YLON ); polyvinyl chloride (P VC ), acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (A BS),
phenol formaldehyde resin (BAKELITE), aluminium alloy 6061 (A L),
brass H59 (C U), die steel P20 (S TEEL), and polymethyl methacrylate (ACRYLIC); for the polyhedron shapes, S QUARE is rhombicuboctahedron, P ENTAGON is the upper half of icosahedron, and H EXAGON is
truncated icosahedron.

12581

