Shape-invariant 3D Adversarial Point Clouds
Qidong Huang1

Xiaoyi Dong1
Dongdong Chen2
Weiming Zhang1, *
Nenghai Yu1
1
2
University of Science and Technology of China
Microsoft Cloud AI

Hang Zhou3
3

Simon Fraser University

{hqd0037@mail., dlight@mail., zhangwm@, ynh@}ustc.edu.cn
{cddlyf@, zhouhang2991@}gmail.com

Abstract
Adversary and invisibility are two fundamental but conflict characters of adversarial perturbations. Previous adversarial attacks on 3D point cloud recognition have often been criticized for their noticeable point outliers, since
they just involve an “implicit constrain” like global distance loss in the time-consuming optimization to limit the
generated noise. While point cloud is a highly structured
data format, it is hard to constrain its perturbation with
a simple loss or metric properly. In this paper, we propose a novel Point-Cloud Sensitivity Map to boost both
the efficiency and imperceptibility of point perturbations.
This map reveals the vulnerability of point cloud recognition models when encountering shape-invariant adversarial
noises. These noises are designed along the shape surface
with an “explicit constrain” instead of extra distance loss.
Specifically, we first apply a reversible coordinate transformation on each point of the point cloud input, to reduce one
degree of point freedom and limit its movement on the tangent plane. Then we calculate the best attacking direction
with the gradients of the transformed point cloud obtained
on the white-box model. Finally we assign each point with
a non-negative score to construct the sensitivity map, which
benefits both white-box adversarial invisibility and blackbox query-efficiency extended in our work. Extensive evaluations prove that our method can achieve the superior performance on various point cloud recognition models, with
its satisfying adversarial imperceptibility and strong resistance to different point cloud defense settings. Our code is
available at: https://github.com/shikiw/SI-Adv.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have contributed a lot
to various computer vision tasks with their highly praised
performances. However, recent works prove that DNNs are
* Corresponding author.

(a) Clean PC

(b) Previous Adv

(c) Our Adv

Figure 1. The point-cloud shape surface of clean (left), previous
adversarial perturbations (middle) and our perturbation (right).

vulnerable to adversarial examples [11, 25], which are generated by adding imperceptible perturbations on clean inputs to mislead the prediction of deep learning models. Numerous algorithms have been proposed to implement different kinds of adversarial attacks [4, 8, 11, 13, 25]. In addition to 2D images, the research scope of adversarial attacks
has been gradually extended to 3D point clouds. As one of
the most popular data representations captured by 3D sensors like LiDAR, point clouds are widely used in a variety
of 3D computer vision applications, such as autopilot [42]
and autonomous driving [20]. Similar with image recognition models, recent works [3, 22, 24, 28, 30, 38, 40] show
that point-cloud models are also susceptible to adversarial
perturbations. But unfortunately, existing 3D adversarial attacks either generate the noticeable point perturbation or focus on the white-box case, leading to the poor performance
on well-defended models or unseen black-box models.
The motivation for delving into black-box attacks on
point cloud recognition is quite clear. On the one hand,
both industry and academia have attached increasing importance on evaluating the robustness of point cloud models,
especially for some security-critical applications like autonomous driving. But usually, they can not release the details of the model or algorithms to robustness testers due to
the protection agreement of trade secrets. Therefore, testers
can only conduct black-box attacks to reach the demand
of robustness evaluation, which requires the more efficient

15335

