Knowledge Mining with Scene Text for Fine-Grained Recognition
Hao Wang1 ,* Junchao Liao1 ,* Tianheng Cheng1 , Zewen Gao1 , Hao Liu2 , Bo Ren2 , Xiang Bai1 , Wenyu Liu1†
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 2 Tencent YouTu Lab
{wanghao4659,liaojc,thch,gaozw,xbai,liuwy}@hust.edu.cn, {ivanhliu,timren}@tencent.com

Abstract
Recently, the semantics of scene text has been proven to
be essential in fine-grained image classification. However,
the existing methods mainly exploit the literal meaning of
scene text for fine-grained recognition, which might be irrelevant when it is not significantly related to objects/scenes.
We propose an end-to-end trainable network that mines implicit contextual knowledge behind scene text image and enhance the semantics and correlation to fine-tune the image
representation. Unlike the existing methods, our model integrates three modalities: visual feature extraction, text semantics extraction, and correlating background knowledge
to fine-grained image classification. Specifically, we employ KnowBert to retrieve relevant knowledge for semantic representation and combine it with image features for
fine-grained classification. Experiments on two benchmark
datasets, Con-Text, and Drink Bottle, show that our method
outperforms the state-of-the-art by 3.72% mAP and 5.39%
mAP, respectively. To further validate the effectiveness of
the proposed method, we create a new dataset on crowd activity recognition for the evaluation. The source code and
new dataset of this work are available at this repository1 .

1. Introduction
The text conveys the information, knowledge, and emotion of human beings as a significant carrier. Texts in natural scene images contain sophisticated semantic information
that can be used in many vision tasks such as image classification, visual search, and image-based question answering.
Several approaches [2,15,22,23,26,39] were proposed to
incorporate semantic cues of scene text for image classification or retrieval and achieved significant performance improvements. These methods follow a general pipeline that
first spots the text by a scene text reading system, then converts the spotted word into text features to combine it with
image features for the subsequent tasks.
* Authors contribute equally.
† Corresponding author.
1 https://github.com/lanfeng4659/KnowledgeMiningWithSceneText

(a)

(b)

(c)

Text

Entity

Description of entity

“party”

political party organized group of people who have the
same ideology

“party”

party

social event

“Leninade”

Leninade

Soviet-themed lemonade soda

(d): Knowledge in Wikipedia about text from (c)

Figure 1. The three images belong to the category of “Soda”. (d)
shows the knowledge behind scene text embodied in the image
(c) from knowledge base Wikipedia. Each text instance contains
one or more entities stored in the knowledge base. The associated
descriptions further explain the precise meaning of entity. Only
the entities of two text instances are listed for simplicity.

This paper explores how to dig deeper into background
knowledge and extract context information of scene text
for the fine-grained image classification task. Unlike document text, in our observation, the natural scene text is often
sparse, appearing as a few keywords rather than complete
sentences. Moreover, these few keywords may be vague
and give no clue to the classification model when their semantic cues are not directly related to the precise meaning
that the image conveys.
As shown in Fig. 1 (a) and (b), the literal meaning of the
keyword “Soda” explicitly expresses that the bottles in the
two images belong to the category Soda despite their intraclass visual variance. However, we hardly understand the
object in Fig. 1 (c) by solely fetching the semantic cues of
scene text. To understand the image certainly, getting more
relevant contextual knowledge about the image is crucial.
Therefore, we explore how to dig extra background knowledge and mine the contextual information to enhance the
correlation between scene text and a picture. For example,
the table in Fig. 1 (d) exhibits related information or knowl-

4624

