Discovering Objects that Can Move
Zhipeng Bao*,†,1
Pavel Tokmakov*,2
Allan Jabri3
Yu-Xiong Wang4
Adrien Gaidon2
Martial Hebert1
1
2
3
4
CMU
Toyota Research Institute
UC Berkeley
UIUC

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of object discovery – separating objects from the background without manual labels.
Existing approaches utilize appearance cues, such as color,
texture, and location, to group pixels into object-like regions.
However, by relying on appearance alone, these methods fail
to separate objects from the background in cluttered scenes.
This is a fundamental limitation since the definition of an
object is inherently ambiguous and context-dependent. To resolve this ambiguity, we choose to focus on dynamic objects
– entities that can move independently in the world. We then
scale the recent auto-encoder based frameworks for unsupervised object discovery from toy synthetic images to complex
real-world scenes. To this end, we simplify their architecture, and augment the resulting model with a weak learning
signal from general motion segmentation algorithms. Our
experiments demonstrate that, despite only capturing a small
subset of the objects that move, this signal is enough to generalize to segment both moving and static instances of dynamic
objects. We show that our model scales to a newly collected,
photo-realistic synthetic dataset with street driving scenarios. Additionally, we leverage ground truth segmentation
and flow annotations in this dataset for thorough ablation
and evaluation. Finally, our experiments on the real-world
KITTI benchmark demonstrate that the proposed approach
outperforms both heuristic- and learning-based methods by
capitalizing on motion cues.

1. Introduction
Objects are the key building blocks of perception [31, 50].
We understand the world not in terms of pixels, surfaces,
or entire scenes, but rather in terms of individual objects
and their combinations. Object-centric representation makes
tractable higher-level cognitive abilities such as casual reasoning, planning, etc., and is crucial for generalization and
adaptation [5, 60]. In computer vision, progress has been
achieved in object recognition recently [9, 24, 46], but these
* Equal contribution
† Work done during an internship at TRI

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. A sample from the TRI-PD dataset with: (a) motion
segmentation from [14], top-10 segments produced by (b) our approach, (c) heuristic-based MCG [3], and (d) learning-based SlotAttention [38]. Our method uses noisy, sparse motion segmentation
to learn to separate both moving and static instances of dynamic
objects from the background, whereas others cannot resolve the
object definition ambiguity based on appearance alone.

approaches rely on large amounts of expensive manual labels, and only cover a fixed vocabulary of object categories.
Discovering objects and their extent in data – in a manner
that generalizes across domains – remains an open problem.
What makes this task especially challenging is that the
notion of an object is inherently ambiguous and contextdependent. Consider a car in Figure 1: its left door and the
handle on that door can be treated as individual objects, or
parts of the whole. It is thus not surprising that existing
approaches that attempt to automatically separate objects
from the background based on appearance struggle beyond
controlled scenarios. In particular, classical methods that
use graph-based inference tend to over- or under-segment
the objects [3, 18] (Figure 1, bottom left). More recent
learning-based methods model object discovery with structured generative networks, often leveraging iterative inference in the bottleneck of an auto-encoder [8, 16, 22, 37, 38].
While promising results have been demonstrated, these approaches are typically restricted to toy images with colored
geometric shapes on a plain background, and completely fail
on realistic scenes (Figure 1, bottom right).
We posit that while the ambiguity of the object definition

11789

