Efﬁcient Classiﬁcation of Very Large Images with Tiny Objects
Fanjie Kong, Ricardo Henao
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Duke University
{fanjie.kong, ricardo.henao}@duke.edu

Abstract
An increasing number of applications in computer vision, specially, in medical imaging and remote sensing, become challenging when the goal is to classify very large images with tiny informative objects. Speciﬁcally, these classiﬁcation tasks face two key challenges: i) the size of the input
image is usually in the order of mega- or giga-pixels, however, existing deep architectures do not easily operate on
such big images due to memory constraints, consequently,
we seek a memory-efﬁcient method to process these images; and ii) only a very small fraction of the input images are informative of the label of interest, resulting in low
region of interest (ROI) to image ratio. However, most of
the current convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are designed for image classiﬁcation datasets that have relatively
large ROIs and small image sizes (sub-megapixel). Existing
approaches have addressed these two challenges in isolation. We present an end-to-end CNN model termed ZoomIn network that leverages hierarchical attention sampling
for classiﬁcation of large images with tiny objects using a
single GPU. We evaluate our method on four large-image
histopathology, road-scene and satellite imaging datasets,
and one gigapixel pathology dataset. Experimental results
show that our model achieves higher accuracy than existing
methods while requiring less memory resources.

1. Introduction
Neural networks have achieved state-of-the-art performance in many image classiﬁcation tasks [24]. However,
there are still many scenarios where neural networks can
still be improved. Using modern deep neural networks on
image inputs of very high resolution is a non-trivial problem
due to the challenges of scaling model architectures [44].
Such images are common for instance in satellite or medical imaging. Moreover, these images tend to become even
bigger due to the rapid growth in computational and memory availability, as well as the advancements in camera sensor technology. Speciﬁcally challenging are the so called

Target Tiles
(ROI)

WSI

score

Target Sub-tiles
(ROI)

score

Manually Annotated
ROI Mask

Figure 1. Illustration of processing a typical WSI using our zoomin strategy. We see that i) there are large regions with little information (mostly background), and ii) small informative regions
have high-resolution details. Leveraging the above characteristics
of WSI, we derive a method that gradually zooms-in to the ROI.
The proposed approach ﬁrst process the down-sampled WSI to
sample the target tiles, and then repeats this procedure to sample
target sub-tiles. The sampled sub-titles contain the ﬁne-grained
information for classiﬁcation. The bottom images show that the
manually annotated ROIs are captured by the proposed approach
without the need for pixel level annotations.

tiny object image classiﬁcation tasks, where the goal is to
classify images based on the information of very small objects or regions of interest (ROIs), in the presence of a much
larger and rich (non-trivial) background that is uncorrelated
or non-informative of the label. Consequently, constituting
an input image with a very low ROI-to-image ratio. Recent
work [37] showed that with a dataset of limited size, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have poor performance on
very low ROI-to-image ratio problems. In these settings, the
input resolution is increased from typical image sizes, e.g.,
224 × 224 pixels, to gigapixel images of size ranging from
45, 056 × 35, 840 to 217, 088 × 111, 104 pixels [30], which
not only require signiﬁcantly more computational processing power per image than a typical image given a ﬁxed deep
architecture, but in some cases, become prohibitive for current GPU-memory standards.

2384

