PSTR: End-to-End One-Step Person Search With Transformers
Jiale Cao1,2 , Yanwei Pang1 ,* Rao Muhammad Anwer2 , Hisham Cholakkal2 , Jin Xie3,2 ,
Mubarak Shah4 , Fahad Shahbaz Khan2,5
1
Tianjin University 2 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
3
Chongqing University 4 University of Central Florida 5 Linköping University
{connor,pyw}@tju.edu.cn, {rao.anwer,hisham.cholakkal,fahad.khan}@mbzuai.ac.ae
xiejin@cqu.edu.cn, shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract

Person search aims to detect and identify a target person
from a gallery of real-world uncropped images, which can
be seen as a joint task of person detection [1, 19, 21, 32] and
re-identification (re-id) [6, 17, 34]. Person search involves
addressing the challenges of these two diverse sub-tasks as
well as jointly optimizing them in a unified framework.
Person search approaches can be roughly divided into
* Corresponding author: Yanwei Pang

C&R

1. Introduction

detection
backbone

NMS

We propose a novel one-step transformer-based person
search framework, PSTR, that jointly performs person detection and re-identification (re-id) in a single architecture. PSTR comprises a person search-specialized (PSS)
module that contains a detection encoder-decoder for person detection along with a discriminative re-id decoder for
person re-id. The discriminative re-id decoder utilizes a
multi-level supervision scheme with a shared decoder for
discriminative re-id feature learning and also comprises
a part attention block to encode relationship between different parts of a person. We further introduce a simple multi-scale scheme to support re-id across person instances at different scales. PSTR jointly achieves the diverse objectives of object-level recognition (detection) and
instance-level matching (re-id). To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to propose an end-to-end one-step
transformer-based person search framework. Experiments
are performed on two popular benchmarks: CUHK-SYSU
and PRW. Our extensive ablations reveal the merits of the
proposed contributions. Further, the proposed PSTR sets a
new state-of-the-art on both benchmarks. On the challenging PRW benchmark, PSTR achieves a mean average precision (mAP) score of 56.5%. The source code is available at
https://github.com/JialeCao001/PSTR.

re-id
backbone
re-id features

(a) Two-step approaches
detection head

NMS

shared
backbone
re-id head
(b) One-step approaches

re-id features

query
shared
backbone

person search-specialized
encoder-decoder
(c) Our PSTR
re-id features

Figure 1. Comparison of our PSTR architecture (c) with the existing two-step (a) and one-step paradigms (b). (a) Within the twostep paradigm, person detection and re-id sub-tasks are performed
with two separate independent networks. Here, bounding-boxes
are first predicted by a detection network and then cropped and
resized (C&R) before being fed to a re-id network. (b) Within the
one-step paradigm, detection and re-id branches share the same
backbone network. (c) Distinct from these two paradigms, our
PSTR is an end-to-end one-step transformer-based architecture
with a person-search specialized module to jointly perform detection and re-id without requiring an NMS post-processing step.

two-step [4, 10, 35] and one-step methods [5, 29, 31]. Twostep approaches typically disentangle the two sub-tasks,
where person detection and re-id are performed separately
(Fig. 1(a)). First, an off-the-shelf detection network (e.g.,
Faster R-CNN [22]) is employed to detect pedestrians. Second, the detected pedestrians are cropped and resized into
a fixed resolution, followed by utilizing a re-id network to
identify cropped pedestrians. While achieving promising
performance, most two-step approaches are computationally expensive. In contrast, one-step approaches simultaneously detect and identify the persons using a single network
(Fig. 1(b)). First, the features are extracted by a shared net-

9458

