AutoMine: An Unmanned Mine Dataset
Yuchen Li1,2,3 , Zixuan Li1 , Siyu Teng2,3 , Yu Zhang4 , Yuhang Zhou4 , Yuchang Zhu4
*
Dongpu Cao1,5 , Bin Tian1,6 , Yunfeng Ai1,7 , Zhe Xuanyuan2 , Long Chen1,6
1

Waytous 2 Beijing Normal University-HongKong Baptist University United International College
3
HongKong Baptist University 4 Sun Yat-sen University 5 Tsinghua University
6
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 7 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
liyuchen2016@hotmail.com

zhexuanyuan@uic.edu.cn

long.chen@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Autonomous driving datasets have played an important
role in validating the advancement of intelligent vehicle algorithms including localization, perception and prediction
in academic areas. However, current existing datasets pay
more attention to the structured urban road, which hampers
the exploration on unstructured special scenarios. Moreover, the open-pit mine is one of the typical representatives
for them. Therefore, we introduce the Autonomous driving
dataset on the Mining scene (AutoMine) for positioning and
perception tasks in this paper. The AutoMine is collected by
multiple acquisition platforms including an SUV, a widebody mining truck and an ordinary mining truck, depending on the actual mine operation scenarios. The dataset
consists of 18+ driving hours, 18K annotated lidar and image frames for 3D perception with various mines, time-ofthe-day and weather conditions. The main contributions
of the AutoMine dataset are as follows: 1.The first autonomous driving dataset for perception and localization in
mine scenarios. 2.There are abundant dynamic obstacles of
9 degrees of freedom with large dimension difference (mining trucks and pedestrians) and extreme climatic conditions
(the dust and snow) in the mining area. 3.Multi-platform
acquisition strategies could capture mining data from multiple perspectives that fit the actual operation. More details
can be found in our website(https://automine.cc).

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving has received considerable attention
in recent years and is becoming increasingly crucial in the
field of artificial intelligence. It has been established that the
public unmanned driving datasets play a role in validating
algorithms. For example, some datasets , such as KITTI [9],
* corresponding author

Figure 1. The environmental characteristics of the strip mine include rugged unstructured roads, the strong light exposure and
dust. AutoMine annotates 3D objects with 9 degrees of freedom.

Cityscapes [5], and A2D2 [10] have been stimulating researchers’ interests. With the development of deep learning and other data-driven approaches, large volume datasets
like ApolloScape [12] and Waymo Open [8] emerge to assist scholars to examine generalization ability of high complexity models. However, the pervasive autonomous driving
datasets pursue massive redundant sensors and annotations
which ignore the applicability on special scenes, including
mines, ports, airports and so forth. Consequently, there is a
lack of representative datasets to reveal extremely complicated challenges appearing on the above-ground mines. We
publish our unmanned mine dataset (AutoMine) to fill this
gap and attract attention to autonomous driving in mining
scenarios.

1.1. Characteristics
In comparison with the application of autonomous driving in urban roads, the high casualty rate and poor working
conditions in mining environment make unmanned mines
more urgently needed. Due to the difficulty of data acquisition, researchers can not investigate mining scenarios and
assess model performances. AutoMine presents authentic
mining data that are available for researchers to observe,
measure the data, to locate and settle the problems, and to
score and compare the approaches. The aim of this study is
to facilitate the advancement and to contribute to the real-

21308

