O BJECT F OLDER 2.0: A Multisensory Object Dataset for Sim2Real Transfer
Samuel Clarke1
Yen-Yu Chang1 *
Ruohan Gao1 * Zilin Si2 *
Jeannette Bohg1
Li Fei-Fei1
Wenzhen Yuan2
Jiajun Wu1
1
2
Stanford Univeristy
Carnegie Mellon University
Object intrinsics

Abstract
Real object

Objects play a crucial role in our everyday activities.
Though multisensory object-centric learning has shown
great potential lately, the modeling of objects in prior
work is rather unrealistic. O BJECT F OLDER 1.0 is a recent
dataset that introduces 100 virtualized objects with visual,
acoustic, and tactile sensory data. However, the dataset
is small in scale and the multisensory data is of limited
quality, hampering generalization to real-world scenarios.
We present O BJECT F OLDER 2.0, a large-scale, multisensory dataset of common household objects in the form of
implicit neural representations that significantly enhances
O BJECT F OLDER 1.0 in three aspects. First, our dataset
is 10 times larger in the amount of objects and orders of
magnitude faster in rendering time. Second, we significantly improve the multisensory rendering quality for all
three modalities. Third, we show that models learned from
virtual objects in our dataset successfully transfer to their
real-world counterparts in three challenging tasks: object scale estimation, contact localization, and shape reconstruction. O BJECT F OLDER 2.0 offers a new path and
testbed for multisensory learning in computer vision and
robotics. The dataset is available at https://github.
com/rhgao/ObjectFolder.

1. Introduction
Our everyday activities involve perception and manipulation of a wide variety of objects. For example, we begin
the morning by first turning off the alarm clock on the nightstand, slowly waking up. Then we may put some bread on
a plate and enjoy our breakfast with a fork and knife to kick
off the day. Each of these objects has very different physical properties—3D shapes, appearance, and material types,
leading to their distinctive sensory modes: the alarm clock
looks round and glossy, the plate clinks when struck with
the fork, the knife feels sharp when touched on the blade.
However, prior work on modeling real-world objects is
* indicates equal contribution.

ion
Vis

Texture:
Extrinsics
Material: Ceramic
Shape:

Learning with
virtualized objects

ObjectFolder 2.0

Object File
Scale estimation

Sim2Real
…

Audio
To
uc
h

0.278m

Contact localization

Shape reconstruction

Figure 1. O BJECT F OLDER 2.0 contains 1,000 implicitly represented objects each containing the complete multisensory profile
of a real object. We virtualize each object by encoding its intrinsics
(texture, material type, and 3D shape) with an Object File implicit
neural representation. Then we can render its visual appearance,
impact sound, and tactile readings based on any extrinsic parameters. We successfully transfer the models learned from our virtualized objects to three challenging tasks on their real-world counterparts. This opens a new path for multisensory learning in computer vision and robotics, where O BJECT F OLDER 2.0 serves as a
rich and realistic object repository for training real-world models.

rather limited and unrealistic. In computer vision, objects
are often modeled in 2D with the focus of identifying and
locating them in static images [15, 24, 39]. Prior works on
shape modeling build 3D CAD models of objects [11, 72],
but they tend to focus purely on geometry, and the visual
textures of the objects are of low-quality. Moreover, most
works lack the full spectrum of physical object properties
and focus on a single modality, mostly vision.
Our goal is to build a large dataset of realistic and multisensory 3D object models such that learning with these
virtualized objects can generalize to their real-world counterparts. As shown in Fig. 1, we leverage existing highquality scans of real-world objects and extract their physical
properties including visual textures, material types, and 3D
shapes. Then we simulate the visual, acoustic, and tactile
data for each object based on their object intrinsics, and use
an implicit neural representation network—Object File—to

10598

