H4D: Human 4D Modeling by Learning Neural Compositional Representation
Boyan Jiang1∗

Yinda Zhang2∗ Xingkui Wei1 Xiangyang Xue1
1
Fudan University 2 Google

Abstract
Despite the impressive results achieved by deep learning
based 3D reconstruction, the techniques of directly learning
to model 4D human captures with detailed geometry have
been less studied. This work presents a novel framework
that can effectively learn a compact and compositional representation for dynamic human by exploiting the human
body prior from the widely used SMPL parametric model.
Particularly, our representation, named H4D, represents a
dynamic 3D human over a temporal span with the SMPL
parameters of shape and initial pose, and latent codes encoding motion and auxiliary information. A simple yet effective linear motion model is proposed to provide a rough
and regularized motion estimation, followed by per-frame
compensation for pose and geometry details with the residual encoded in the auxiliary code. Technically, we introduce novel GRU-based architectures to facilitate learning
and improve the representation capability. Extensive experiments demonstrate our method is not only efficacy in recovering dynamic human with accurate motion and detailed
geometry, but also amenable to various 4D human related
tasks, including motion retargeting, motion completion and
future prediction.

1. Introduction
The vanilla SMPL based parametric representations have
been extensively studied and widely utilized for modeling
3D human shapes, and thus shown critical impacts to many
human-centric tasks, such as pose estimation [16,24,30,32,
34, 42] and body shape fitting [9, 18, 33, 48, 58]. However,
these representations are arguably insufficient for applications involving dynamic signals, e.g. 3D moving humans
(Fig.1 top), since the temporal information is not captured.
As solutions, 4D representations are proposed and can
be in general categorized into free-form and prior-based
∗ indicates equal contributions.

Boyan Jiang, Xingkui Wei and Xiangyang Xue are with the School of
Computer Science, Fudan University.
Yanwei Fu is with the School of Data Science, Fudan University, and
Fudan ISTBI—ZJNU Algorithm Centre for Brain-inspired Intelligence,
Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua, China.

Yanwei Fu1

Time

…
Dynamic Human

Free-Form

Prior-Based

…
Initial
Shape

3D Continuous Flow

Shape

OFlow [44]

Pose1

Pose2

Posen

SMPL-Based
Motion

Shape

Pose Latent Space
4D-CR [26]

Shape

Initial Skeleton
Auxiliary
Pose Motion
Ours

Figure 1. Comparison with existing 4D human representations. Our representation supports faster inference and more complete reconstructions compared with free-form methods (Fig. 3).
And it provides long-range temporal context and additional finegrained geometry controlled by low-dimensional SMPL parameters and latent codes, which is more compact compared with previous SMPL-based methods.

methods depending on the 3D representation of the output
shape (Fig. 1). The free-form methods leveraging Neural
ODE [13] and deep implicit function [26, 44] often rely on
computational expensive architectures to learn the compact
latent spaces and reconstruct 4D sequences. Unfortunately,
since the human body prior is not explicitly modeled, the reconstruction results of these methods may contain obvious
geometry artifacts such as missing hands, and their modeling errors accumulate rapidly over time. On the other hand,
prior-based methods [30,32,66] are mostly derived from the
SMPL parametric model [37], which typically employs one
shape parameter and a series of pose parameters to model
dynamic sequences. Although they produce plausible results, their motion representations are not compact or only
support a small time span, e.g. ± 5 frames [30].

19355

