Dual-Generator Face Reenactment
Gee-Sern Hsu
Chun-Hung Tsai
Hung-Yi Wu
National Taiwan University of Science and Technology, Taipei, Taiwan
{jison, m10903418, m10703435}@mail.ntust.edu.tw

Abstract
We propose the Dual-Generator (DG) network for largepose face reenactment. Given a source face and a reference
face as inputs, the DG network can generate an output face
that has the same pose and expression as the reference face,
and has the same identity as the source face. As most approaches do not particularly consider large-pose reenactment, the proposed approach addresses this issue by incorporating a 3D landmark detector into the framework and
considering a loss function to capture visible local shape
variation across large pose. The DG network consists of
two modules, the ID-preserving Shape Generator (IDSG)
and the Reenacted Face Generator (RFG). The IDSG encodes the 3D landmarks of the reference face into a reference landmark code, and encodes the source face into
a source face code. The reference landmark code and the
source face code are concatenated and decoded to a set of
target landmarks that exhibits the pose and expression of
the reference face and preserves the identity of the source
face. The RFG is partially built on the StarGAN2 generator
with modifications on the input and layer settings, and with
a facial style encoder added in. Given the target landmarks
made by the IDSG and the source face as inputs, the RFG
generates the target face with the desired identity, pose and
expression. We evaluate our approach on the RaFD, MPIE,
VoxCeleb1, and VoxCeleb2 benchmarks and compare with
state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Given a source face and a reference face, face reenactment refers to the transformation of the action of the reference face to the source face. The action refers to the pose
and facial expression. The challenges are on the similarity between the actions of the reference face and the source
face and on the preservation of the source identity after the
transformation. It is an active research topic in the fields of
computer vision and attracts increasing attention in recent
years [23–26]. It has a wide range of applications in the
areas such as virtual reality, animation and entertainment.

Various approaches have been proposed in recent years
[4, 22–25]. A major family of the approaches is the
Landmark-Assisted Generation (LAG), which exploits the
facial landmarks to leverage the action transformation and
the reenacted face generation [4, 22, 24, 25]. The FReeNet
[25] trains a landmark converter to transfer the reference’s
landmarks to the source, and trains a generator to make the
target face show the reference’s expression, but it cannot
handle pose transformation. The FSTH [24] trains an embedder to encoder the source’s landmarks, and a generator
to transfer the reference’s action to the source face. More
approaches from the LAG family are reviewed in Sec.2.
Different from the existing LAG approaches, our approach
explores a dual-generator architecture with one generator to
make the ID-preserving 3D landmarks, and the other generator to make the target face satisfy multiple objectives. Due
to the embedding of 3D landmarks and the core losses considered in training, our approach can address the large-pose
reenactment, which is a challenging problem, but has not
received sufficient attention.
There are methods without using landmarks, for example, the MGOS [23] that uses the reconstructed 3D meshes
as guidance to learn the optical flow needed for the target
face synthesis. Although the progresses made by different approaches are substantial, many issues are yet to be
solved. The performance measured by the common metrics, for example the FID, CSIM and SSIM, is still far from
ideal. Many approaches have specific issues. For example,
the FReeNet only transfers the facial expression, but cannot handle pose transfer. Although the FSTH can transfer
both the pose and expression, the facial landmarks used to
control the conversion are often inaccurate, damaging the
identity preservation. Another important issue is that most
approaches only deal with median pose variation (yaw angle < 45o ) and ignore large/extreme poses.
To address the above issues, we propose the DualGenerator (DG) network that contains two generators, the
ID-preserving Shape Generator (IDSG) and the Reenacted
Face Generator (RFG). Given a source face Is and a reference face Ir as inputs, the IDSG transfers the pose and
expression of the reference face Ir to the source face Is and

642

