HerosNet: Hyperspectral Explicable Reconstruction and Optimal Sampling
Deep Network for Snapshot Compressive Imaging
Xuanyu Zhang1 , Yongbing Zhang2 , Ruiqin Xiong3 , Qilin Sun4 , Jian Zhang1,5
1
Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen, China
2
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China 3 Peking University, Beijing, China
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China 5 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China

Abstract
Hyperspectral imaging is an essential imaging modality for a wide range of applications, especially in remote
sensing, agriculture, and medicine. Inspired by existing
hyperspectral cameras that are either slow, expensive, or
bulky, reconstructing hyperspectral images (HSIs) from a
low-budget snapshot measurement has drawn wide attention. By mapping a truncated numerical optimization algorithm into a network with a ﬁxed number of phases, recent deep unfolding networks (DUNs) for spectral snapshot
compressive sensing (SCI) have achieved remarkable success. However, DUNs are far from reaching the scope of
industrial applications limited by the lack of cross-phase
feature interaction and adaptive parameter adjustment. In
this paper, we propose a novel Hyperspectral Explicable
Reconstruction and Optimal Sampling deep Network for
SCI, dubbed HerosNet, which includes several phases under the ISTA-unfolding framework. Each phase can ﬂexibly
simulate the sensing matrix and contextually adjust the step
size in the gradient descent step, and hierarchically fuse
and interact the hidden states of previous phases to effectively recover current HSI frames in the proximal mapping
step. Simultaneously, a hardware-friendly optimal binary
mask is learned end-to-end to further improve the reconstruction performance. Finally, our HerosNet is validated
to outperform the state-of-the-art methods on both simulation and real datasets by large margins. The source code is
available at https://github.com/jianzhangcs/HerosNet.

1. Introduction
With the development of artiﬁcial intelligence and
robotics, the demand for capturing and sensing hyperThis work was supported in part by Shenzhen Fundamental Research
Program (No.GXWD20201231165807007-20200807164903001) and National Natural Science Foundation of China (61902009). (Corresponding
author: Jian Zhang.)

Figure 1. The schematic of CASSI system and some visual results
of the proposed HerosNet and DGSM [13] on the real dataset. Our
reconstructed HSIs have clearer edges and more detailed textures,
while the results of DGSM have more noise and artifacts.

spectral images has dramatically increased in recent years
[3, 6, 12, 47]. Based on the traditional compressive sensing (CS) [51, 54], spectral snapshot compressive sensing
(SCI) system aims to record 3D scenes via a 2D detector.
It has the advantages of low bandwidth, low cost, and high
data throughput, which has played an increasingly pivotal
role in a wide range of applications, such as remote sensing, object detection, super-resolution, and medical diagnosis [2, 8, 14, 18, 25, 36, 38, 55]. In this paper, we focus on
a typical imaging system named coded aperture snapshot
spectral imager (CASSI) [11,21,30], which modulates spectral frames via a coded aperture (i.e. physical mask) and
shifts them across the spectral dimension via a disperser.
In the past few years, there have been a great amount
of reconstruction methods for HSIs compressed by CASSI,
including model-based methods and deep learning-based
methods. Traditional model-based methods [5, 15, 16, 29,
34, 40, 41, 46] often search for the optimal solution it-

17532

