SOMSI: Spherical Novel View Synthesis with
Soft Occlusion Multi-Sphere Images
Tewodros Habtegebrial *† Christiano Gava *† Marcel Rogge *† Didier Stricker *† Varun Jampani ‡
*TU Kaiserslautern

Abstract
Spherical novel view synthesis (SNVS) is the task of estimating 360◦ views at dynamic novel views given a set
of 360◦ input views. Prior arts learn multi-sphere image
(MSI) representations that enable fast rendering times but
are only limited to modelling low-dimensional color values. Modelling high-dimensional appearance features in
MSI can result in better view synthesis, but it is not feasible
to represent high-dimensional features in a large number
(> 64) of MSI spheres. We propose a novel MSI representation called Soft Occlusion MSI (SOMSI) that enables modelling high-dimensional appearance features in MSI while
retaining the fast rendering times of a standard MSI. Our
key insight is to model appearance features in a smaller set
(e.g. 3) of occlusion levels instead of larger number of MSI
levels. Experiments on both synthetic and real-world scenes
demonstrate that using SOMSI can provide a good balance
between accuracy and run-time. SOMSI can produce considerably better results compared to MSI based MODS [1],
while having similar fast rendering time. SOMSI view synthesis quality is on-par with state-of-the-art NeRF [24]
like model while being 2 orders of magnitude faster. For
code, additional results and data, please visit https:
//tedyhabtegebrial.github.io/somsi.

1. Introduction
The advent of low-cost 360◦ imaging devices makes
spherical images a standard choice of representation for 3D
scenes in comparison to more expensive 3D modelling with
artists or depth sensors. Spherical images are widely used to
capture and visualize 360◦ views of scenes with several applications in virtual tourism, navigation, advertisement, etc.
However, a spherical image alone delivers a limited viewing
experience with only rotations around the center. User navigation (translation) is usually enabled by capturing multiple
spherical images thereby allowing the user to hop from one
to another. Spherical novel view synthesis (SNVS) is the
task of estimating in-between 360◦ views making it possible for seamless continuous user navigation in a scene. See

†

DFKI

‡

Google Research

Fig. 1 (left) for a sample illustration of the problem setting.
A practical SNVS system would have the following
properties: 1. High-quality synthesis of disoccluded content and view-dependent effects in novel views, 2. Fast
synthesis time enabling realtime user navigation in a scene
and, 3. Low memory consumption to run SNVS on mobile
hardware such as VR headsets. Satisfying all these properties is quite challenging. Current SNVS techniques are
based on Multi-Sphere Image (MSI) representation [1, 4].
MSI can be seen as a spherical extension of Multi-Plane Images (MPI) [32, 37], which are widely adopted in view synthesis of common perspective images. More specifically,
MSIs represent a scene as a set of textured spheres centered
around a reference point. A key advantage of using MSIs is
that rendering spheres is extremely efficient with standard
rendering softwares. The simplicity of the rendering and
seamless integration with graphics software makes MSIs an
appealing choice for real-time rendering applications. On
the other hand, current MSI based techniques such as MatryODSHkha (MODS) [1] suffer from unsatisfactory quality in synthesized novel views.
The use of Coordinate Multi-Layer Perceptrons (CMLP)
is revolutionizing the field of novel view synthesis with very
high-quality results such as in NeRF [24]. A key drawback
of CMLP based techniques is the requirement of large number of training views as well as slow rendering. Several
very recent works try to improve NeRF-like techniques in
different aspects: improving rendering speed [13, 19, 26],
modelling reflectance properties [3], working with in-thewild images [23], re-lighting [30], generalizing across
scenes [36], etc. Even though one could adapt a NeRFlike technique for SNVS task, rendering novel 360◦ views
would be prohibitively slow. Several concurrent techniques
to improve rendering speed of NeRFs [13, 19, 26] are either
specific to perspective images or did not demonstrate their
use for spherical images in the SNVS task.
In this work, we propose a novel SNVS technique
that provides a good trade-off between different favourable
properties: high-quality view synthesis and fast runtime
with low memory requirements. Following [1], we also
make use of MSI representation for fast rendering. [1]

15725

