Sparse Non-local CRF
Olga Veksler
University of Waterloo, Canada

Yuri Boykov
University of Waterloo, Canada

oveksler@uwaterloo.ca

yboykov@uwaterloo.ca

Abstract
CRF is a classical computer vision model which is also
useful for deep learning. There are two common CRF types:
sparse and dense. Sparse CRF connects only the nearby
pixels, while dense CRF has global connectivity. Therefore
dense CRF is a more general model, but it is much harder
to optimize compared to sparse CRF. In fact, only a certain
form of dense CRF is optimized in practice, and even then
approximately. We propose a new sparse non-local CRF:
it has a sparse number of connections, but it has both local and non-local ones. Like sparse CRF, the total number
of connections is small, and our model is easy to optimize
exactly. Like dense CRF, our model is more general than
sparse CRF due to non-local connections. We show that
our sparse non-local CRF can model properties similar to
that of the popular Gaussian edge dense CRF. Besides efficiency, another advantage is that our edge weights are less
restricted compared to Gaussian edge dense CRF. We design models that take advantage of this flexibility. We also
discuss connection of our model to other CRF models. Finally, to prove the usefulness of our model, we evaluate it on
the classical application of segmentation from a bounding
box and for deep learning based salient object segmentation. We improve state of the art for both applications.

1. Introduction
Many computer vision tasks produce so called pixel labelings, where each pixel is assigned a certain label from
a pre-defined set. CRF is a classical model [4, 14, 23, 28]
that allows enforcing various desired properties on a pixel
labeling. CRFs were used for various applications in computer vision prior to deep learning [5, 8, 12, 22, 40, 48, 49]
and they are also used in conjunction with deep learning [2, 9, 10, 15, 17, 18, 20, 24, 43, 47, 61].
To model the desired properties for a pixel labeling, one
designs a set of interactions between pixels. Most often,
these interactions are between pairs of pixels, and they are
referred to as edges. These types of CRF are called pairwise. In this paper we address Potts pairwise CRF [38],

Figure 1. Top row: edge connectivity for sparse, dense and sparse
non-local CRF. For clarity, we show neighbors (in red) only for
one pixel (in yellow). Bottom row: bounding box segmentation
results. Sparse CRF cuts off the thin cat tail. Dense CRF strongly
connects the tail with the rest of the cat, and therefore preserves it.
Our sparse non-local CRF better connects the tail to the rest of the
cat using only a sparse set of connections, and also preserves it.

perhaps the most frequently used CRF model. Potts CRF
encourages pixels connected by an edge to be assigned to
the same label. We focus on binary pixel labelings, i.e. the
set of labels has size two. We call these labels the object and
the background, as binary CRFs are often used for object
segmentation. Binary pairwise Potts CRF can be optimized
exactly and efficiently with a graph cut [8].
In designing Potts CRF, we want to connect pixels that
are likely to have the same label. There are two common
connectivity types: sparse and dense. As nearby pixels are
likely to be in the same object, sparse CRF connects a pixel
to its immediate neighbors, usually on a 4 or 8 connected
grid, Fig. 1, left. The weight of the edge usually depends on
the color similarity between the pixels, since object boundaries tend to cause image edges. The properties of sparse
CRF are well understood, it encourages objects that align
with image edges and have a shorter boundary [7]. Sparse
CRF is known to have a shrinking bias [49], it tends to cut
off thin object parts and fill in narrow gaps, Fig. 1, bottom
left, preferring a shorter boundary.
To preserve thin parts, we need to connect them to the
rest of the object stronger. Dense CRF is based on ob-

4493

