High-Fidelity GAN Inversion for Image Attribute Editing
Tengfei Wang1 Yong Zhang2
Yanbo Fan2 Jue Wang2 Qifeng Chen1
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 Tencent AI Lab

Inversion
(e4e)
Inversion
(Restyle)
Inversion
(Ours)
Edit 1
(Ours)
Edit 2
(Ours)

We present a novel high-fidelity generative adversarial network (GAN) inversion framework that enables attribute editing with image-specific details well-preserved
(e.g., background, appearance, and illumination). We first
analyze the challenges of high-fidelity GAN inversion from
the perspective of lossy data compression. With a low bitrate latent code, previous works have difficulties in preserving high-fidelity details in reconstructed and edited images.
Increasing the size of a latent code can improve the accuracy of GAN inversion but at the cost of inferior editability.
To improve image fidelity without compromising editability, we propose a distortion consultation approach that employs a distortion map as a reference for high-fidelity reconstruction. In the distortion consultation inversion (DCI),
the distortion map is first projected to a high-rate latent
map, which then complements the basic low-rate latent code
with more details via consultation fusion. To achieve highfidelity editing, we propose an adaptive distortion alignment (ADA) module with a self-supervised training scheme,
which bridges the gap between the edited and inversion
images. Extensive experiments in the face and car domains show a clear improvement in both inversion and editing quality. The project page is https://tengfeiwang.github.io/HFGI/.

Input

Abstract

1. Introduction

Figure 1. High-fidelity image inversion and editing (age, smile,
eyes, color, grass). Our method performs well on details preservation in both inverted and edited results such as background,
makeup, beard/hair style, reflection and shadow.

Image attribute editing is the task of modifying desired attributes of a given image while preserving other details. With the rapid advancement of generative adversarial networks (GANs) [9], a promising direction is to manipulate images with the strong control capacity of StyleGAN [19,20]. To enable real-world image editing, GAN inversion techniques [40] have been recently explored, which
aim at projecting images to the latent space of a pre-trained
GAN generator.
Existing GAN inversion approaches either perform perimage optimization [1, 17, 45] or learn a data-driven encoder [26, 34]. Optimization approaches achieve higher

reconstruction accuracy by over-fitting on a single image,
but the latent code may get out of GAN manifold, leading to inferior editing quality. In contrast, encoder-based
GAN inversion methods are faster and show better editing performance due to knowledge learned from numerous
training images. Nevertheless, their reconstruction results
are usually inaccurate and of low fidelity: these methods
can reconstruct a coarse layout (low-frequency patterns),
but the image-specific details (high-frequency patterns) are
often ignored. For example, the reconstructed face images typically possess averaged patterns that agree with the
majority of training images (e.g., normal pose/expression,

11379

