Layered Depth Reﬁnement with Mask Guidance
Soo Ye Kim1

Jianming Zhang2
Simon Niklaus2
Yifei Fan2
2
2
1
Simon Chen
Zhe Lin
Munchurl Kim
1
2
KAIST, Republic of Korea
Adobe Inc., USA

Abstract
Depth maps are used in a wide range of applications from
3D rendering to 2D image effects such as Bokeh. However,
those predicted by single image depth estimation (SIDE)
models often fail to capture isolated holes in objects and/or
have inaccurate boundary regions. Meanwhile, high-quality
masks are much easier to obtain, using commercial automasking tools or off-the-shelf methods of segmentation and
matting or even by manual editing. Hence, in this paper, we
formulate a novel problem of mask-guided depth reﬁnement
that utilizes a generic mask to reﬁne the depth prediction of
SIDE models. Our framework performs layered reﬁnement
and inpainting/outpainting, decomposing the depth map into
two separate layers signiﬁed by the mask and the inverse
mask. As datasets with both depth and mask annotations are
scarce, we propose a self-supervised learning scheme that
uses arbitrary masks and RGB-D datasets. We empirically
show that our method is robust to different types of masks and
initial depth predictions, accurately reﬁning depth values in
inner and outer mask boundary regions. We further analyze
our model with an ablation study and demonstrate results
on real applications. More information can be found on our
project page.1

RGB / Mask

Initial Depth

with ‫ܯ‬

with ͳ െ ‫ܯ‬

Layered Outputs

Our Refined Depth

Figure 1. Our layered depth reﬁnement result on an initial prediction by DPT [31]. Aided by a high-quality mask M generated with
an auto-masking tool [33], our method is able to accurately reﬁne
mask boundaries and correct depth values in isolated hole regions
between body parts. Regions in M and 1 − M are reﬁned and
inpainted/outpainted separately with our layered approach.

1. Introduction
very challenging due to limited model capacity and the lack
of high-quality RGB-D datasets.
Therefore, we take a novel approach of utilizing an additional cue of a high-quality mask to reﬁne depth maps
predicted by SIDE methods. The provided mask can be
hard (binary) or soft (e.g., from matting) and can be of
objects or other parts of the image such as the sky. As highquality auto-masking tools are very accessible nowadays,
such masks can be easily obtained with commercial tools
(e.g., removebg [33] or Photoshop) or off-the-shelf segmentation models [14, 30, 52, 57]. Segmentation masks can
also be annotated by humans [7,41,49], and accurate datasets
are easier to obtain than RGB-D data, which facilitates the
training of auto-masking models.

Recent progress in deep learning has enabled the prediction of fairly reliable depth maps from single RGB images [20, 31, 32, 47]. However, despite the specialized network architectures [11,29,31] and training strategies [32,46]
in single image depth estimation (SIDE) models, the estimated depth maps are still inadequate in the following aspects: (i) depth boundaries tend to be blurry and inaccurate;
(ii) thin structures such as poles and wires are often missing; and (iii) depth values in narrow or isolated background
regions (e.g., between body parts in humans) are often imprecise, as shown in the initial depth estimation in Figure 1.
Addressing these issues within a single SIDE model can be
1 https://sooyekim.github.io/MaskDepth/

3855

