Classification-Then-Grounding:
Reformulating Video Scene Graphs as Temporal Bipartite Graphs
Kaifeng Gao† , Long Chen‡∗, Yulei Niu‡ , Jian Shao† , Jun Xiao†
†
Zhejiang University, ‡ Columbia University
{kite phone,jshao,junx}@zju.edu.cn

{zjuchenlong,yn.yuleiniu}@gmail.com

Abstract
Today’s VidSGG models are all proposal-based methods,
i.e., they first generate numerous paired subject-object snippets as proposals, and then conduct predicate classification
for each proposal. In this paper, we argue that this prevalent
proposal-based framework has three inherent drawbacks:
1) The ground-truth predicate labels for proposals are partially correct. 2) They break the high-order relations among
different predicate instances of a same subject-object pair.
3) VidSGG performance is upper-bounded by the quality of
the proposals. To this end, we propose a new classificationthen-grounding framework for VidSGG, which can avoid
all the three overlooked drawbacks. Meanwhile, under this
framework, we reformulate the video scene graphs as temporal bipartite graphs, where the entities and predicates are
two types of nodes with time slots, and the edges denote different semantic roles between these nodes. This formulation
takes full advantage of our new framework. Accordingly, we
further propose a novel BIpartite Graph based SGG model:
BIG. It consists of a classification stage and a grounding
stage, where the former aims to classify the categories of
all the nodes and the edges, and the latter tries to localize
the temporal location of each relation instance. Extensive
ablations on two VidSGG datasets have attested to the effectiveness of our framework and BIG. Code is available at
https://github.com/Dawn-LX/VidSGG-BIG.

1. Introduction
To bridge the gap between vision and other modalities
(e.g., language), a surge of interests in our community start
to convert the vision data into graph-structured representations, called scene graphs [20]. Scene graphs are visuallygrounded graphs, where the nodes and edges represent object instances (or entities) and their pairwise visual relations
(predicates), respectively. Due to the inherent interpretabil-

…

…
9.21

10.21

12.01

16.62

17.22

(9.21, 11.21)
behind
(9.71, 16.62)
towards

Proposal
Generation

18.82

22.42

(9.90, 11.80)

a
b

behind

Classification

(10.10, 13.10)

time /s
ground-truth
dog (subject)
child (object)

in front of
away

towards

(17.50, 22.50)

(a)

in front of, away
with respect to video range
(9.21, 11.21)

behind
Classification

towards
in front of
away

Grounding

(9.71, 16.62)
(17.22, 22.42)

(b)

(18.82, 22.42)
with respect to video range

Figure 1. (a): The pipeline of proposal-based framework. Given
a video, it first generates numerous proposals (with different time
slots), and then conducts predicate classification for each proposal.
(b): The pipeline of classification-then-grounding framework. It
first conducts predicate classification based on the whole tracklet
pair, and then grounds all the predicted relation instances.

ity, scene graphs have been widely used in numerous downstream tasks to help boost model performance, e.g., captioning [6, 10, 47], grounding [8, 23], and QA [9, 11, 19, 26].
Video Scene Graph Generation (VidSGG) has achieved
significant progress over the recent years. Currently, almost
all existing VidSGG models are proposal-based1 . Specifically, they can be categorized into two groups: 1) Segmentproposal based: They first cut the video into short segments
and detect object tracklets in each segment to compose segment proposals, then classify predicates in each proposal
and merge all predicted relation triplets (i.e., hsubject,
predicate, objecti) among adjacent segments [28,32,
33]. However, they fail to exploit the long-term context in
the video (or tracklets) due to the limits of short segments.
2) Tracklet-proposal based: They directly detect tracklets in

∗ Long Chen is the corresponding author. This work started when LC at
Zhejiang University, and YN at Nanyang Technological University.

1 We use proposals to represent paired subject-object tracklet segments.

19497

