Projective Manifold Gradient Layer for Deep Rotation Regression
Jiayi Chen1,2

Yingda Yin1 Tolga Birdal3,4
1
CFCS, Peking University
3
Stanford University

Abstract
Regressing rotations on SO(3) manifold using deep neural networks is an important yet unsolved problem. The
gap between the Euclidean network output space and the
non-Euclidean SO(3) manifold imposes a severe challenge
for neural network learning in both forward and backward passes. While several works have proposed different regression-friendly rotation representations, very few
works have been devoted to improving the gradient backpropagating in the backward pass. In this paper, we propose a manifold-aware gradient that directly backpropagates into deep network weights. Leveraging Riemannian
optimization to construct a novel projective gradient, our
proposed regularized projective manifold gradient (RPMG)
method helps networks achieve new state-of-the-art performance in a variety of rotation estimation tasks. Our proposed gradient layer can also be applied to other smooth
manifolds such as the unit sphere. Our project page is at
https://jychen18.github.io/RPMG.

1. Introduction
Estimating rotations is a crucial problem in visual perception that has broad applications, e.g., in object pose estimation, robot control, camera relocalization, 3D reconstruction and visual odometry [8, 12, 15, 21, 34]. Recently, with
the proliferation of deep neural networks, learning to accurately regress rotations is attracting more and more attention. However, the non-Euclidean characteristics of rotation
space make accurately regressing rotation very challenging.
As we know, rotations reside in a non-Euclidean manifold, SO(3) group, whereas the unconstrained outputs of
neural networks usually live in Euclidean spaces. This gap
between the neural network output space and SO(3) manifold becomes a major challenge for deep rotation regression, thus tackling this gap becomes an important research
topic. One popular research direction is to design learningfriendly rotation representations, e.g., 6D continuous rep† : He Wang is the corresponding author (hewang@pku.edu.cn).

Baoquan Chen1 Leonidas J. Guibas3
2
Beijing Institute for General AI
4
Imperial College London

†

He Wang1

resentation from [42] and 10D symmetric matrix representation from [26]. Recently, Levinson et al. [24] adopted
the vanilla 9D matrix representation discovering that simply
replacing the Gram-Schmidt process in the 6D representation [42] with symmetric SVD-based orthogonalization can
make this representation superior to the others.
Despite the progress on discovering better rotation representations, the gap between a Euclidean network output
space and the non-Euclidean SO(3) manifold hasn’t been
completely filled. One important yet long-neglected problem lies in optimization on non-Euclidean manifolds [1]: to
optimize on SO(3) manifold, the optimization variable is
a rotation matrix, which contains nine matrix elements; if
we naively use Euclidean gradient, which simply computes
the partial derivatives with respect to each of the nine matrix elements, to update the variable, this optimization step
will usually lead to a new matrix off SO(3) manifold. Unfortunately, we observe that all the existing works on rotation regression simply rely upon vanilla auto-differentiation
for backpropagation, exactly computing Euclidean gradient
and performing such off-manifold updates to predicted rotations. We argue that, for training deep rotation regression
networks, the off-manifold components will lead to noise in
the gradient of neural network weights, hindering network
training and convergence.
To tackle this issue, we draw inspiration from differential geometry, where people leverage Riemannian optimization to optimize on the non-Euclidean manifold, which finds
the direction of the steepest geodesic path on the manifold
and take an on-manifold step. We thus propose to leverage Riemannian optimization and delve deep into the study
of the backward pass. Note that this is a fundamental yet
currently under-explored avenue, given that most of the existing works focus on a holistic design of rotation regression that is agnostic to forward/backward pass. However,
incorporating Riemannian optimization into network training is highly non-trivial and challenging. Although methods of Riemannian optimization allow for optimization on
SO(3) [5, 29], matrix manifolds [1] or general Riemannian
manifolds [32,40], they are not directly applicable to update
the weights of the neural networks that are Euclidean. Also,

6646

