IDR: Self-Supervised Image Denoising via Iterative Data Refinement
Yi Zhang1

Dasong Li1
Ka Lung Law2
Xiaogang Wang1
2
Hongwei Qin
Hongsheng Li1
1
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
SenseTime Research
zhangyi@link.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
The lack of large-scale noisy-clean image pairs restricts
supervised denoising methods’ deployment in actual applications. While existing unsupervised methods are able
to learn image denoising without ground-truth clean images, they either show poor performance or work under
impractical settings (e.g., paired noisy images). In this paper, we present a practical unsupervised image denoising
method to achieve state-of-the-art denoising performance.
Our method only requires single noisy images and a noise
model, which is easily accessible in practical raw image denoising. It performs two steps iteratively: (1) Constructing
a noisier-noisy dataset with random noise from the noise
model; (2) training a model on the noisier-noisy dataset
and using the trained model to refine noisy images to obtain the targets used in the next round. We further approximate our full iterative method with a fast algorithm for
more efficient training while keeping its original high performance. Experiments on real-world, synthetic, and correlated noise show that our proposed unsupervised denoising approach has superior performances over existing unsupervised methods and competitive performance with supervised methods. In addition, we argue that existing denoising datasets are of low quality and contain only a small
number of scenes. To evaluate raw image denoising performance in real-world applications, we build a high-quality
raw image dataset SenseNoise-500 that contains 500 reallife scenes. The dataset can serve as a strong benchmark for
better evaluating raw image denoising. Code and dataset
will be released1

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep neural networks have made great
progress in image denoising. The mainstream of the advances is powered by supervised learning-based approaches
[6, 11, 13, 22, 29]. However, large-scale datasets with highquality ground-truth are still unavailable due to high human
1 https://github.com/zhangyi-3/IDR

epoch 0

epoch 2

epoch 3

epoch 5

Noisier2noise

DBSN

Ours

GT

Figure 1. Top row: The training targets created at different
epochs. They have been refined progressively in our approach.
Bottom row: Comparison with previous works: DBSN [31]
(ECCV 2020), Noisier2Noise [23] (CVPR 2020).

and time costs, which limit the learning-based approaches’
applications in real-world scenarios.
A few unsupervised learning-based approaches have
been proposed to learn image denoising without ground
truth. However, existing unsupervised denoising methods either show poor performance or work under impractical settings. One research direction focuses on unsupervised learning of denoising from single noisy images
[5, 14, 16, 28, 31]. Although such training data are convenient to collect, learning from single noisy images shows
relatively poor performance since the task is highly illposed. Another research direction focuses on learning from
paired noisy images [18]. It utilizes two perfectly aligned
images of the same scene as the training pairs. Such a
method significantly improves the denoising performance
and can sometimes even outperform supervised learningbased methods. However, multiple perfectly aligned noisy
images of the same scene are sometimes challenging to capture in practice, especially for moving scenes. One recent
approach applies noise models to add synthetic noise on the
already noisy images to create noisier-noisy image pairs for
training a denoising network to partially capture the noise
prior [23]. However, such synthetic noisier-noisy training
pairs’ distributions cannot well fit that of the actual noisy-

2098

