A Unified Framework for Implicit Sinkhorn Differentiation
Marvin Eisenberger∗ , Aysim Toker∗ , Laura Leal-Taixé∗ , Florian Bernard† , Daniel Cremers∗
Technical University of Munich∗ , University of Bonn†

(a) Registration of two pointclouds

(b) Barycentric interpolation of distributions on a torus (c) MNIST clustering

Figure 1. The Sinkhorn operator is becoming a fundamental building block for various computer vision algorithms. Relevant applications
include (a) point cloud registration, (b) interpolation on manifolds, (c) image clustering, and many more [13, 25, 39, 46, 47]. A recent trend
to training respective neural networks efficiently is implicit differentiation [7, 11, 17, 22, 26]. In this work, we provide a framework of
implicit Sinkhorn differentiation that generalizes existing methods. It is the first to derive analytical gradients for the Sinkhorn operator in
its most general form, covering all the applications (a)-(c) shown above.

Abstract
The Sinkhorn operator has recently experienced a surge
of popularity in computer vision and related fields. One
major reason is its ease of integration into deep learning
frameworks. To allow for an efficient training of respective neural networks, we propose an algorithm that obtains
analytical gradients of a Sinkhorn layer via implicit differentiation. In comparison to prior work, our framework is
based on the most general formulation of the Sinkhorn operator. It allows for any type of loss function, while both the
target capacities and cost matrices are differentiated jointly.
We further construct error bounds of the resulting algorithm
for approximate inputs. Finally, we demonstrate that for a
number of applications, simply replacing automatic differentiation with our algorithm directly improves the stability
and accuracy of the obtained gradients. Moreover, we show
that it is computationally more efficient, particularly when
resources like GPU memory are scarce.1

1. Introduction
Computing matchings and permutations is a fundamental problem at the heart of many computer vision and machine learning algorithms. Common applications include
pose estimation, 3D reconstruction, localization, information transfer, ranking, and sorting, with data domains ranging from images, voxel grids, point clouds, 3D surface
meshes to generic Euclidean features. A popular tool to
address this is the Sinkhorn operator, which has its roots in
the theory of entropy regularized optimal transport [9]. The
1 Our implementation is available under the following link: https:
//github.com/marvin-eisenberger/implicit-sinkhorn

Sinkhorn operator can be computed efficiently via a simple
iterative matrix scaling approach. Furthermore, the resulting operator is differentiable, and can therefore be readily
integrated into deep learning frameworks.
A key question is how to compute the first-order derivative of a respective Sinkhorn layer in practice. The standard approach is automatic differentiation of Sinkhorn’s algorithm. Yet, this comes with a considerable computational
burden because the runtime of the resulting backward pass
scales linearly with the number of forward iterations. More
importantly, since the computation graph needs to be maintained for all unrolled matrix-scaling steps, the memory demand is often prohibitively high for GPU processing.
A number of recent works leverage implicit gradients as
an alternative to automatic differentiation [7, 11, 17, 22, 26]
to backpropagate through a Sinkhorn layer. Although such
approaches prove to be computationally inexpensive, a
downside is that corresponding algorithms are less straightforward to derive and implement. Hence, many application
works still rely on automatic differentiation [13, 25, 39, 46,
47]. Yet, the computational burden of automatic differentiation might drive practitioners to opt for an insufficiently
small number of Sinkhorn iterations which in turn impairs
the performance as we experimentally verify in Sec. 5.
To date, existing work on implicit differentiation of
Sinkhorn layers suffers from two major limitations: (i) Most
approaches derive gradients only for very specific settings,
i.e. specific loss functions, structured inputs, or only a subset of all inputs. Algorithms are therefore often not transferable to similar but distinct settings. (ii) Secondly, beyond
their empirical success, there is a lack of an in-depth theoretical analysis that supports the use of implicit gradients.
Our work provides a unified framework of implicit dif-

509

