A Keypoint-based Global Association Network for Lane Detection
Jinsheng Wang1,3 * Yinchao Ma2,3 * Shaofei Huang3 * Tianrui Hui4,5
Fei Wang2 Chen Qian3 Tianzhu Zhang2†
1
2
Peking University
University of Science and Technology of China 3 SenseTime Research
4
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
Lane detection is a challenging task that requires predicting complex topology shapes of lane lines and distinguishing different types of lanes simultaneously. Earlier
works follow a top-down roadmap to regress predefined anchors into various shapes of lane lines, which lacks enough
flexibility to fit complex shapes of lanes due to the fixed anchor shapes. Lately, some works propose to formulate lane
detection as a keypoint estimation problem to describe the
shapes of lane lines more flexibly and gradually group adjacent keypoints belonging to the same lane line in a pointby-point manner, which is inefficient and time-consuming
during postprocessing. In this paper, we propose a Global
Association Network (GANet) to formulate the lane detection problem from a new perspective, where each keypoint
is directly regressed to the starting point of the lane line instead of point-by-point extension. Concretely, the association of keypoints to their belonged lane line is conducted by
predicting their offsets to the corresponding starting points
of lanes globally without dependence on each other, which
could be done in parallel to greatly improve efficiency. In
addition, we further propose a Lane-aware Feature Aggregator (LFA), which adaptively captures the local correlations between adjacent keypoints to supplement local
information to the global association. Extensive experiments on two popular lane detection benchmarks show that
our method outperforms previous methods with F1 score of
79.63% on CULane and 97.71% on Tusimple dataset with
high FPS.

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving [10] has drawn remarkable attention of researchers from both academia and industry. In
order to ensure the safety of the car during driving, the au* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author (tzzhang@ustc.edu.cn)

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. (a) Anchor-based methods, which regress the predefined anchors into the shape of lanes. (b) Keypoint-based methods, which predict offsets between keypoint to its neighbourhood
to group them one-by-one. (c) Illustration of our GANet, which
directly regresses each keypoint to its belonged lane by predicting
offset between each keypoint and the starting point of its corresponding lane line. (d) Illustration of our LFA module, which correlates each keypoint with its adjacent points for local information
supplement.

tonomous system needs to keep the car moving along the
lane lines on the road, requiring accurate perception of the
lane lines. Thus, lane detection plays an important role
in the autonomous driving system, especially in Advanced
Driver Assistance System (ADAS).
Given a front-viewed image taken by a camera mounted
on the vehicle, lane detection aims to produce the accurate shape of each lane line on the road. Due to the slender shapes of lane lines and the need for instance-level discrimination, it is crucial to formulate lane detection task appropriately. Inspired by the anchor-based object detection
methods [22], some works [10, 25] follow a top-down design as illustrated in Figure 1a. Similar to object detection, a
group of straight lines with various orientations are defined
as anchors. Points on anchors are regressed to lane lines
by predicting the offsets between anchor points and lane

1392

