Deep Visual Geo-localization Benchmark
Gabriele Berton
Politecnico di Torino

Riccardo Mereu
Politecnico di Torino

Gabriela Csurka
NAVER LABS Europe

Gabriele Trivigno
Politecnico di Torino

Torsten Sattler
CIIRC, Czech Technical
University in Prague

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new open-source benchmarking framework for Visual Geo-localization (VG) that allows
to build, train, and test a wide range of commonly used architectures, with the flexibility to change individual components of a geo-localization pipeline. The purpose of this
framework is twofold: i) gaining insights into how different components and design choices in a VG pipeline impact the final results, both in terms of performance (recall@N metric) and system requirements (such as execution time and memory consumption); ii) establish a systematic evaluation protocol for comparing different methods.
Using the proposed framework, we perform a large suite
of experiments which provide criteria for choosing backbone, aggregation and negative mining depending on the
use-case and requirements. We also assess the impact of
engineering techniques like pre/post-processing, data augmentation and image resizing, showing that better performance can be obtained through somewhat simple procedures: for example, downscaling the images’ resolution to
80% can lead to similar results with a 36% savings in extraction time and dataset storage requirement. Code and
trained models are available at dataset storage requirement. https://deep-vg-bench.herokuapp.com/.

1. Introduction
The task of coarsely estimating the place where a photo
was taken based on a set of previously visited locations is
called Visual (Image) Geo-localization (VG) [35, 40, 81] or
Visual Place Recognition (VPR) [20, 42] and it is addressed
using image matching and retrieval methods on a database
of images of known locations. We are witnessing a rapid
growth of this field of research, as demonstrated by the increasing number of publications [2,10, 14,21–23,27,29, 34,
35,40,42,44,55,58,69,70,73–76,78,82], but this expansion

R@1

Carlo Masone
CINI

Barbara Caputo
Politecnico di Torino

Vanilla

Resize
(80%)

Data augm.
(brightness = 2)

Pred. refinement
(nearest crop)

PCA
(2048)

CRN [35]

63.4

64.3

68.6

67.0

56.6

68.8

Table 1. Example of how results can be influenced by little train
or test time changes to the VG pipeline. Recall@1 for a ResNet18 with NetVLAD trained on Pitts30k and tested on Tokyo24/7.
Results are thoroughly discussed in later sections.

is accompanied by two major limitations:
i) A focus on single metric optimization, as it is common
practice to compare results solely based on the recall on
chosen datasets and ignoring other factors such as execution
time, hardware requirements, and scalability. All these aspects are important constraints in the design of a real-world
VG system. For instance, one might gladly accept a 5%
drop in accuracy if this leads to a 90% decrease of descriptors size as the resulting reduction in memory requirements
enables a better scalability. Similarly, computational time
and descriptor dimensionality are crucial constraints in realtime applications, given a target hardware platform.
ii) A lack of a standardized framework to train and test
VG models. It is common practice to perform direct comparisons among off-the-shelf methods that use different setups (e.g., data augmentation, initialization, training dataset,
etc.) [35, 64, 80], which can hide the improvement (or lack
thereof) obtained by algorithmic changes and it does not allow to pinpoint the impact of each individual component.
Table 1 shows how some simple engineering choices can
have big effects on the recall metric.
Although previous benchmarks for VPR [80] and the related task of Visual Localization [56, 62] offer interesting
insights, they do not address the aforementioned issues. For
these reasons, we propose a new open-source benchmark
that provides researchers with an all-inclusive tool to build,
train, and test a wide range of commonly used VG architectures, offering the flexibility to change each component
of a geo-localization pipeline. This allows to rigorously examine how each element of the system influences the final

5396

