Parameter-free Online Test-time Adaptation
Malik Boudiaf
ÉTS Montreal *

Romain Mueller
FiveAI

Abstract
Training state-of-the-art vision models has become prohibitively expensive for researchers and practitioners. For
the sake of accessibility and resource reuse, it is important
to focus on adapting these models to a variety of downstream scenarios. An interesting and practical paradigm
is online test-time adaptation, according to which training
data is inaccessible, no labelled data from the test distribution is available, and adaptation can only happen at test
time and on a handful of samples. In this paper, we investigate how test-time adaptation methods fare for a number
of pre-trained models on a variety of real-world scenarios,
significantly extending the way they have been originally
evaluated. We show that they perform well only in narrowlydefined experimental setups and sometimes fail catastrophically when their hyperparameters are not selected for the
same scenario in which they are being tested. Motivated
by the inherent uncertainty around the conditions that will
ultimately be encountered at test time, we propose a particularly “conservative” approach, which addresses the problem with a Laplacian Adjusted Maximum-likelihood Estimation (LAME) objective. By adapting the model’s output (not its parameters), and solving our objective with
an efficient concave-convex procedure, our approach exhibits a much higher average accuracy across scenarios
than existing methods, while being notably faster and have
a much lower memory footprint. The code is available at
https://github.com/fiveai/LAME.

1. Introduction
In recent years, training state-of-the-art models has become a massive computational endeavor for many machine
learning problems (e.g. [5, 13, 38]). For instance, it has
been estimated that each training of GPT-3 [5] produces an
equivalent of 552 tons of CO2, which is approximately the
amount emitted in six flights from New York to San Francisco [35]. As implied in the whitepaper on “foundation
* Work done as part of a research internship at FiveAI. Corresponding
author: malik.boudiaf.1@etsmtl.net

Ismail Ben Ayed
ÉTS Montreal

Luca Bertinetto
FiveAI

models” [4], we should expect that more and more efforts
will be dedicated to the design of procedures that allow for
the efficient adaptation of pre-trained large models under
a variety of circumstances. In other words, these models
will be “trained once” on a vast dataset and then adapted
at test time to newly-encountered scenarios. Besides being important for resource reuse, being able to abstract the
pre-training stage away from the adaptation is paramount
in privacy-focused applications, and in any other situation in
which preventing access to the training data is desirable. Towards this goal, it is important that, from the point of view
of the adaptation system, there is neither access to the training data nor the training procedure of the model to adapt.
With this context in mind, we are particularly interested in
designing adaptation methods ready to be used in realistic
scenarios, and that are suitable for a variety of models.
One aspect that many real-world applications have in
common is the need to perform adaptation online, and with
a limited amount of data. That is, we should be able to perform adaptation while the data is being received. Take for
instance the vision model with which an autonomous vehicle or a drone may be equipped. At test-time, it will ingest
a video stream of highly-correlated data (non-i.i.d.), which
could be used for adaptation. We would like to be confident that leveraging this information will be useful, and
not destructive, no matter the type of domain shift that may
exist between training and test data. Such shifts could be,
for instance, “low-level” (e.g. the data stream is affected by
snowy weather which has never been encountered during
the California-sunlit training stage), or “high-level” (e.g. the
data include the particular Art Deco architecture of Miami
Beach’s Historic District), or even a combination of both.
To summarize, we are interested in the design of test-time
adaptation systems that 1) are unsupervised; 2) can operate online and on potentially non-i.i.d. data; 3) assume no
knowledge of training data or training procedure; and 4) are
not tailored to a certain model, so that the progress made by
the community can be directly harnessed.
This problem specification falls under the fully testtime adaptation paradigm studied in a handful of recent
works [1, 27, 29, 56], where simple techniques like test-time

8344

