Transformer Based Line Segment Classifier with Image Context for Real-Time
Vanishing Point Detection in Manhattan World
Xin Tong, Xianghua Ying* , Yongjie Shi, Ruibin Wang and Jinfa Yang
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MoE)
School of Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
{xin tong, xhying, shiyongjie, robin wang, jinfayang}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Previous works on vanishing point detection usually use
geometric prior for line segment clustering. We find that image context can also contribute to accurate line classification. Based on this observation, we propose to classify line
segments into three groups according to three unknown-butsought vanishing points with Manhattan world assumption,
using both geometric information and image context in this
work. To achieve this goal, we propose a novel Transformer
based Line segment Classifier (TLC) that can group line
segments in images and estimate the corresponding vanishing points. In TLC, we design a line segment descriptor to represent line segments using their positions, directions and local image contexts. Transformer based feature
fusion module is used to capture global features from all
line segments, which is proved to improve the classification
performance significantly in our experiments. By using a
network to score line segments for outlier rejection, vanishing points can be got by Singular Value Decomposition
(SVD) from the classified lines. The proposed method runs
at 25 fps on one NVIDIA 2080Ti card for vanishing point
detection. Experimental results on synthetic and real-world
datasets demonstrate that our method is superior to other
state-of-the-art methods on the balance between accuracy
and efficiency, while keeping stronger generalization capability when trained and evaluated on different datasets.

1. Introduction
Under the pinhole camera model, parallel world lines
in 3D are projected into 2D image lines that converge on
an image point, which is called the vanishing point (VP).
Vanishing point detection is one of the most fundamental
problems in computer vision. A fast and accurate vanishing
point detection algorithm enables and enhances applications
* Corresponding Author

?

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Classical vanishing point detection methods usually
depend on geometric prior for line segment clustering. However,
it is not easy to determine which group the line segment (colored
purple) should belong to only based on the geometric prior, since
the line segment is close to both candidate horizontal vanishing
points. (b) On the contrary, one can easily categorize the line segment when the image context is given. The example is from [12].
Combining image context, it may become easier and faster to cluster a line segment to a certain group. Motivated by this observation, we use both image context and geometric information in
learning based line segment clustering for vanishing point detection in this work.

such as camera calibration, 3D reconstruction, object detection, wireframe parsing, and autonomous driving.
Classical vanishing point detection methods usually follow three steps including line detection, line clustering and
vanishing point regression. With Manhattan world assumption, line segments are supposed to be clustered into three
groups according to the three orthogonal vanishing points.
Previous methods often consider the geometric prior that
line segments in the same group should intersect at the same
point (the vanishing point). Therefore, the image is often
no longer used after the lines are extracted. However, as
shown in Fig. 1, it is not easy to determine which group the
line segment should belong to only based on the geometric
prior, since the line segment is close to both candidate horizontal vanishing points. This ambiguity is eliminated when
the image contexts are given, which shows the potential of
the image contexts in improving the line clustering performance. Motivated by this observation, we employ image

6093

