FENeRF: Face Editing in Neural Radiance Fields
Xuan Wang2†
Yong Zhang2
Xiaoyu Li2
Jingxiang Sun1 *
Qi Zhang2
Yebin Liu3
Jue Wang2
1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

2

Tencent AI Lab

3

Tsinghua University

Abstract
Previous portrait image generation methods roughly fall
into two categories: 2D GANs and 3D-aware GANs. 2D
GANs can generate high fidelity portraits but with low view
consistency. 3D-aware GAN methods can maintain view
consistency but their generated images are not locally editable. To overcome these limitations, we propose FENeRF,
a 3D-aware generator that can produce view-consistent
and locally-editable portrait images. Our method uses
two decoupled latent codes to generate corresponding facial semantics and texture in a spatial-aligned 3D volume with shared geometry. Benefiting from such underlying 3D representation, FENeRF can jointly render the
boundary-aligned image and semantic mask and use the
semantic mask to edit the 3D volume via GAN inversion.
We further show such 3D representation can be learned
from widely available monocular image and semantic mask
pairs. Moreover, we reveal that joint learning semantics
and texture helps to generate finer geometry. Our experiments demonstrate that FENeRF outperforms state-of-theart methods in various face editing tasks. Code is available
at https://github.com/MrTornado24/FENeRF.

1. Introduction
Photo-realistic image synthesis via Generative Adversarial Networks is an important problem in computer vision
and graphics. Specifically, synthesizing high-fidelity and
editable portrait images has gained considerable attention
in recent years. Two main classes of methods have been
proposed: 2D GAN image generation and 3D-aware image
synthesis techniques.
Despite their great success of synthesizing highlyrealistic and even locally-editable images, 2D GAN methods all ignore the projection or rendering process of the
underlying 3D scene, which is essential for view consistency. Consequently, they produce inevitable artifacts
* Work done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab.
† Corresponding Author.

Figure 1. View-consistent portrait editing. Given the proposed
FENeRF generator, we invert a given reference (top left) into
shape and texture latent spaces to get the free-view portrait (first
row). We can modify the rendered semantic masks and then leverage GAN inversion again to edit the free-view portraits (second
row). As of last, we can replace the optimized texture code with
the one from another image (bottom left) to perform the style
transfer (bottom row) as well.

when changing the viewpoint of generated portraits. In
order to overcome this issue, the Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) [35] have been explored to develop 3D-aware image synthesis techniques. Some of these methods [3, 44]
adopt vanilla NeRF generator to synthesize free-view portraits that are not editable, and the results could be blurry.
Niemeyer et al. [37] employ volumetric rendering techniques to first produce view-consistency 2D feature maps,
and then use an additional 2D decoder to obtain the final
highly-realistic images. Nevertheless, such method suffers
from additional view-dependent artifacts introduced by 2D
convolutions and the mirror symmetry problem. To this end,
CIPS-3D [53] replaces the 2D convolutions with implicit
neural representation (INR) network. Unfortunately, all existing 3D-aware GANs do not support the interactive local
editing on the generated free-view portraits.
In this paper, we propose a generator that can produce
strictly view-consistent portraits, while supports interactive
local editing. We adopt the noise-to-volume scheme. The
generator takes as input the decoupled shape and texture
17672

