Equivariant Point Cloud Analysis via Learning Orientations for Message Passing
Shitong Luo*1 , Jiahan Li*1,2 , Jiaqi Guan*3
Yufeng Su3 , Chaoran Cheng3 , Jian Peng3 , Jianzhu Ma2
1
HeliXon Research
2
Peking University
3
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
luost26@gmail.com,majianzhu@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Equivariance has been a long-standing concern in various fields ranging from computer vision to physical modeling. Most previous methods struggle with generality, simplicity, and expressiveness — some are designed ad hoc for
specific data types, some are too complex to be accessible,
and some sacrifice flexible transformations. In this work,
we propose a novel and simple framework to achieve equivariance for point cloud analysis based on the message passing (graph neural network) scheme. We find the equivariant
property could be obtained by introducing an orientation
for each point to decouple the relative position for each
point from the global pose of the entire point cloud. Therefore, we extend current message passing networks with a
module that learns orientations for each point. Before aggregating information from the neighbors of a point, the networks transforms the neighbors’ coordinates based on the
point’s learned orientations. We provide formal proofs to
show the equivariance of the proposed framework. Empirically, we demonstrate that our proposed method is competitive on both point cloud analysis and physical modeling tasks. Code is available at https://github.com/
luost26/Equivariant-OrientedMP.

1. Introduction
3D point cloud has become a prevalent data structure for
representing a wide range of 3D objects such as 3D scenes
[1, 4, 8, 36], molecules [12, 15, 28], and physical particles
[7,31]. To capture the geometric relationship among points,
message passing networks (graph neural networks) [9] and
their variants such as DGCNN [33] and PointNet++ [24]
have become standard tools to model 3D point cloud data.
A characteristic of 3D point cloud is that most of the scalar

Figure 1. An illustration of the proposed method. It first learns orientations for each point in the point cloud. By projecting the relative coordinate of neighbor points before information aggregation,
the model successfully decouples global rotation and achieves
equivariance.

features of the point cloud are invariant1 to global rotation
and translation, and the vector features of point clouds are
equivariant to global rotation and translation. For instance,
the category of a shape and its part semantics are not affected by their poses in the 3D space, and the normal vector
of each point rotates together with the shape. Therefore,
designing a new type of message passing network that preserves invariance and equivariance for point clouds is a critical challenge with broad impacts on both computer vision
and other science domains.
The key module of conventional message passing networks for modeling point clouds is to construct the message from point j to i using the difference between 3D
coordinates xj − xi which is usually transformed by nonequivariant layers such as regular MLPs. Hence, it is clear
that the outputs of these models are not equivariant to the
rotation of point clouds.
Recently, two notable lines of methods have been proposed to address the equivariance problem: tensor fieldbased neural networks [7, 31] and vector-based neural net1 Note that invariance is a special case of equivariance.

* equal contribution.

18932

