Conditional Prompt Learning for Vision-Language Models
Kaiyang Zhou
Jingkang Yang
Chen Change Loy
Ziwei Liu
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{kaiyang.zhou, jingkang001, ccloy, ziwei.liu}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
With the rise of powerful pre-trained vision-language
models like CLIP, it becomes essential to investigate ways
to adapt these models to downstream datasets. A recently
proposed method named Context Optimization (CoOp) introduces the concept of prompt learning—a recent trend in
NLP—to the vision domain for adapting pre-trained visionlanguage models. Specifically, CoOp turns context words
in a prompt into a set of learnable vectors and, with only a
few labeled images for learning, can achieve huge improvements over intensively-tuned manual prompts. In our study
we identify a critical problem of CoOp: the learned context is not generalizable to wider unseen classes within the
same dataset, suggesting that CoOp overfits base classes
observed during training. To address the problem, we propose Conditional Context Optimization (CoCoOp), which
extends CoOp by further learning a lightweight neural network to generate for each image an input-conditional token
(vector). Compared to CoOp’s static prompts, our dynamic
prompts adapt to each instance and are thus less sensitive
to class shift. Extensive experiments show that CoCoOp
generalizes much better than CoOp to unseen classes, even
showing promising transferability beyond a single dataset;
and yields stronger domain generalization performance as
well. Code is available at https://github.com/
KaiyangZhou/CoOp.

1. Introduction
Recent research in large-scale vision-language pretraining has achieved striking performance in zero-shot image recognition [13,24,33,40], demonstrating a potential in
learning open-world visual concepts for such a paradigm.
The key design lies in how visual concepts are modeled.
In traditional supervised learning where labels are discretized, each category is associated with a randomly initialized weight vector that is learned to minimize the distance
with images containing the same category. Such a learning
Corresponding author

method focuses on closed-set visual concepts, limiting the
model to a pre-defined list of categories, and is unscalable
when it comes to new categories unseen during training.
In contrast, for vision-language models1 like CLIP [40]
and ALIGN [24], the classification weights are diametrically generated by a parameterized text encoder (e.g., a
Transformer [48]) through prompting [34]. For instance, to
differentiate pet images containing different breeds of dogs
and cats, one can adopt a prompt template like “a photo of
a {class}, a type of pet” as input to the text encoder, and
as a result, class-specific weights for classification can be
synthesized by filling in the “{class}” token with real class
names. Compared to discrete labels, vision-language models’ source of supervision comes from natural language,
which allows open-set visual concepts to be broadly explored and has been proven effective in learning transferable
representations [24, 40].
With the rise of such powerful vision-language models,
the community has recently started to investigate potential
solutions to efficiently adapt these models to downstream
datasets [14, 53, 56, 62]. To fit web-scale data, such as the
400 million pairs of images and texts used by CLIP, visionlanguage models are purposefully designed to have high capacity, entailing that the model size would be enormous,
typically with hundreds of millions of parameters or even
billions. Therefore, fine-tuning the entire model, as often
adopted in deep learning research [18], is impractical and
might even damage the well-learned representation space.
A safer approach is to tune a prompt by adding some
context that is meaningful to a task, like “a type of pet” for
the pet dataset mentioned above, which has been found effective in improving performance [40]. However, prompt
engineering is extremely time-consuming and inefficient as
it has to be based on trial and error, and does not guarantee an optimal prompt either. To automate prompt engineering, Zhou et al. [62] have recently explored the concept
of prompt learning—a recent trend in NLP [15, 25, 30, 32,
44, 60]—for adapting pre-trained vision-language models.
Their approach, Context Optimization (CoOp), turns con1 We follow existing studies [13,24,33,40] to refer to CLIP-like models
as vision-language models.

16816

