Better Trigger Inversion Optimization in Backdoor Scanning
Guanhong Tao, Guangyu Shen, Yingqi Liu, Shengwei An, Qiuling Xu
Shiqing Ma† , Pan Li, Xiangyu Zhang
Purdue University, † Rutgers University
{taog, shen447, liu1751, an93, xu1230, panli, xyzhang}@cs.purdue.edu
†

sm2283@cs.rutgers.edu

Abstract
Backdoor attacks aim to cause misclassification of a subject model by stamping a trigger to inputs. Backdoors could
be injected through malicious training and naturally exist.
Deriving backdoor trigger for a subject model is critical to
both attack and defense. A popular trigger inversion method
is by optimization. Existing methods are based on finding a
smallest trigger that can uniformly flip a set of input samples by minimizing a mask. The mask defines the set of
pixels that ought to be perturbed. We develop a new optimization method that directly minimizes individual pixel
changes, without using a mask. Our experiments show that
compared to existing methods, the new one can generate
triggers that require a smaller number of input pixels to be
perturbed, have a higher attack success rate, and are more
robust. They are hence more desirable when used in realworld attacks and more effective when used in defense. Our
method is also more cost-effective.

1. Introduction
Backdoor attacks aim to induce model misclassification
of arbitrary input samples to a target label by stamping a
special input pattern called trigger. Backdoors could be
injected by various methods, such as data poisoning [17,
35, 40] and neuron hijacking [39], and also naturally exist
in normally trained models, called natural backdoors [41].
The latter is caused by distribution bias of low level features
and can be exploited just like injected backdoors. For example, if a person always wears a unique pair of glasses in
a clean face recognition dataset, the glasses may become a
trigger to induce misclassification to the person.
Due to the prominent threat of backdoors, researchers
have proposed a large body of defense solutions (see Section 2). Among them, backdoor scanning [21, 22, 68, 76] is
an important type of defense. Many scanners [38,41,59,65,
75] rely on trigger inversion, which leverages optimization

(a) NC

(b) Ours

Figure 1. Loss landscapes of NC and our method. The x-axis and
y-axis show the coefficients on two random directions. The z-axis
denotes the loss value.

to derive a small input pattern that can flip clean samples
(of a victim class) to the target label. A model is considered having backdoor if an exceptionally small trigger can
be found.
Most existing trigger inversion methods (e.g., ABS [38],
K-arm [59], and Tabor [19]) are built on Neural Cleanse
(NC) [65], which decouples a trigger into a perturbation
vector and a mask. The perturbation vector denotes the
perturbations applied to an input and the mask determines
which part of the perturbation vector should be applied. NC
minimizes the mask and the perturbation vector together to
produce a small trigger (details in Section 3.1). Due to the
multiplication correlation between the mask and the perturbation vector during optimization, NC can fall into local
optima and fail to reach the optimal trigger, i.e., the smallest trigger with a high attack success rate. Figure 1a shows
the loss landscape of NC using the contour plot with two
random directions [16, 24, 31] with (x = 0, y = 0) the optimum. Observe that there are multiple dips (local optima) on
the loss surface, which prevent NC from reaching the optimum. In addition, triggers by NC are often not robust and
may become ineffective when undertaking transformations
(see Section 5.3).
Figure 2 shows the results of various techniques for generating a natural backdoor pattern for a normally trained

13368

