Understanding 3D Object Articulation in Internet Videos
Shengyi Qian

Linyi Jin

Chris Rockwell Siyi Chen
University of Michigan

David F. Fouhey

{syqian,jinlinyi,cnris,siyich,fouhey}@umich.edu
https://jasonqsy.github.io/Articulation3D

Figure 1. Given an ordinary video, our system produces a 3D planar representation of the observed articulation. The 3D renderings
illustrate how the microwave (in Pink) can be articulated in 3D space. We also show the predicted rotation axis using a Blue arrow.

Abstract
We propose to investigate detecting and characterizing
the 3D planar articulation of objects from ordinary RGB
videos. While seemingly easy for humans, this problem
poses many challenges for computers. Our approach is
based on a top-down detection system that finds planes that
can be articulated. This approach is followed by optimizing
for a 3D plane that explains a sequence of detected articulations. We show that this system can be trained on a combination of videos and 3D scan datasets. When tested on
a dataset of challenging Internet videos and the Charades
dataset, our approach obtains strong performance.

1. Introduction
How would you make sense of Figure 1? Behind the set
of RGB pixels that make up the video is a real 3D transformation consisting of a 3D planar door rotating about an
axis. The goal of this paper is to give the same ability to
computers. We focus on planar articulation taking the form
of a rotation or translation along an axis. This special case
of articulation is ubiquitous in human scenes and understanding it lets a system understand objects ranging from
refrigerators and drawers to closets and cabinets. While we
often learn about these shapes and articulations with physical embodiment [50], we have no difficulty understanding
them from video cues alone, for instance while watching a

movie or seeing another person perform an action. We formalize this ability for computers as recognizing and characterizing a class-agnostic planar articulation via a 3D planar
segment, articulation type (rotation or translation), 3D articulation axis, and articulation angle.
This problem is beyond the current state of the art in
scene understanding since it requires reconciling single
image 3D understanding with dynamic 3D understanding.
While there has been substantial work on 3D reconstruction
from a single image [4, 9, 12, 61], including work dedicated
to planes [33], these works focus on reconstructing static
scenes. On the other hand, while there has been work understanding articulation, these works often require the placement of tags for tracking [36, 41], a complete 3D model or
depth sensor [20, 30, 39], or successful 3D human reconstruction [65]. Moreover, making progress is challenging
because of data. Unsupervised approaches based on motion
analysis [42, 51] require something to track, which breaks
in realistic data since many human-made articulated objects are untextured (e.g., refrigerators) or transparent (e.g.,
ovens). While supervised approaches [30, 38, 39] can perhaps bypass tracking features, they seemingly require access to large amounts of RGBD data of interactions. For
now, this data does not exist, and training on synthetic data
can fall short when tested on real data (as our experiments
empirically demonstrate).
We overcome these challenges with a learning-based approach that combines both detection and 3D optimization

1599

