Point2Seq: Detecting 3D Objects as Sequences
Yujing Xue1,2 * Jiageng Mao3 * Minzhe Niu2 Hang Xu2 Michael Bi Mi4
Wei Zhang2 Xiaogang Wang3 Xinchao Wang1†
1
National University of Singapore 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 Huawei International Pte Ltd

Abstract
We present a simple and effective framework, named
Point2Seq, for 3D object detection from point clouds. In
contrast to previous methods that normally predict attributes of 3D objects all at once, we expressively model the
interdependencies between attributes of 3D objects, which
in turn enables a better detection accuracy. Specifically,
we view each 3D object as a sequence of words and reformulate the 3D object detection task as decoding words
from 3D scenes in an auto-regressive manner. We further
propose a lightweight scene-to-sequence decoder that can
auto-regressively generate words conditioned on features
from a 3D scene as well as cues from the preceding words.
The predicted words eventually constitute a set of sequences
that completely describe the 3D objects in the scene, and
all the predicted sequences are then automatically assigned
to the respective ground truths through similarity-based sequence matching. Our approach is conceptually intuitive
and can be readily plugged upon most existing 3D-detection
backbones without adding too much computational overhead; the sequential decoding paradigm we proposed, on
the other hand, can better exploit information from complex 3D scenes with the aid of preceding predicted words.
Without bells and whistles, our method significantly outperforms previous anchor- and center-based 3D object detection frameworks, yielding the new state of the art on
the challenging ONCE dataset as well as the Waymo Open
Dataset. Code is available at https://github.com/
ocNflag/point2seq.

1. Introduction
3D object detection is a critical component of intelligent
perception systems for self-driving, aiming to localize and
recognize cars, pedestrians, and other key objects around
an autonomous vehicle. With the increasing popularity of
LiDAR sensors, 3D object detection from point clouds has
* Joint first authors with equal contribution.
† Corresponding author. Email: xinchao@nus.edu.sg

3D Object as a Sequence

Point Cloud

Backbone

BEV Feature
Map

Region
𝑊𝑅

Location
𝑊𝐿

Orientation
𝑊𝑂

Size
𝑊𝑆

Category
𝑊𝐶

Figure 1. Point2Seq reformulates the 3D object detection problem
as auto-regressively generating sequences of words that can represent the 3D objects. The sequential decoding paradigm attains better detection performance compared to previous works that predict
all attributes of the 3D objects in parallel, thanks to its competence
in exploring intrinsic dependencies among object attributes.

been receiving much attention owing to the advanced detection accuracy compared to other input modalities.
In driving scenes, most 3D objects are extremely small
relative to the detection range, and numerous approaches
have been employed to detect those small objects from point
clouds accurately. Anchor-based methods [13, 38] place
predefined anchors on each pixel center of a Bird-Eye-View
(BEV) feature map, while center-based approaches [9, 42]
treat the pixels near object centers as positives and predict
boxes using those pixel features. These methods rely on
complex hand-crafted procedures of label assignments and
post-processing, and quantization errors introduced by the
BEV representations lead to severe misalignment between
the object locations and the pixel features used to predict
those objects. Approaches like [16, 25, 27] rely on a second refinement stage to mitigate the misalignment issue,
yet at the cost of adding too much computational overhead.
Therefore, learning more spatially-aligned features to detect the 3D objects accurately while maintaining a high efficiency poses an open challenge to the research community.
To address the challenge, in this paper, we introduce
Point2Seq, a flexible and streamlined framework for 3D object detection from point clouds. Unlike prior methods that
typically predict all attributes of a 3D object (e.g., location,
class, size) simultaneously, we represent each object as a
sequence, in which each word corresponds to an object attribute, and we explicitly explore the inherent dependencies
among words alongside their relations with the input 3D
scene to progressively predict each attribute of 3D objects.
Our motivation is quite intuitive: given the fact that each ob-

8521

