PUMP: Pyramidal and Uniqueness Matching Priors
for Unsupervised Learning of Local Descriptors
Jérome Revaud

Vincent Leroy
Philippe Weinzaepfel
NAVER LABS Europe

Boris Chidlovskii

firstname.lastname@naverlabs.com

Abstract
Existing approaches for learning local image descriptors have shown remarkable achievements in a wide range
of geometric tasks. However, most of them require per-pixel
correspondence-level supervision, which is difficult to acquire at scale and in high quality. In this paper, we propose
to explicitly integrate two matching priors in a single loss in
order to learn local descriptors without supervision. Given
two images depicting the same scene, we extract pixel descriptors and build a correlation volume. The first prior
enforces the local consistency of matches in this volume via
a pyramidal structure iteratively constructed using a nonparametric module. The second prior exploits the fact that
each descriptor should match with at most one descriptor from the other image. We combine our unsupervised
loss with a standard self-supervised loss trained from synthetic image augmentations. Feature descriptors learned
by the proposed approach outperform their fully- and selfsupervised counterparts on various geometric benchmarks
such as visual localization and image matching, achieving state-of-the-art performance. Project webpage: https:
//europe.naverlabs.com/research/3d-vision/pump.

1. Introduction
Local image descriptors, usually extracted sparsely as
keypoints, are at the core of numerous computer vision
tasks such as large-scale visual localization [60], pose
estimation [25], Structure-from-Motion (SfM) [56, 70],
dense 3D reconstruction [63] and SLAM [6]. Nowadays,
learning-based approaches [1, 18, 26, 43, 48, 62, 68, 69, 76]
significantly outperform the standard handcrafted keypoints
such as SIFT [34] or ORB [53]. They are often trained assuming that numerous ground-truth pixel correspondences
between pairs of images are available. These correspondences are most of the time obtained by considering a large
collection of images for a given landmark and building a
Structure-from-Motion (SfM) reconstruction, as done for
instance for the MegaDepth dataset [31]. This SfM pipeline

Without unsupervised loss:
(16 true matches / 7 false matches)

With our unsupervised loss:
(38 true matches / 2 false matches)

Figure 1. Qualitative impact of PUMP, our novel unsupervised
loss, on a challenging image pair with illumination changes. We
match keypoints extracted with models trained without (top) and
with it (bottom), showing only matches that pass the geometric
verification. Our unsupervised model finds more than twice as
many true matches compared to a model trained without PUMP.

nevertheless fails in many cases, yielding an unfathomable
bottleneck to the kind of ground-truth data that can be generated. The question we try to answer in this work is the
following: is it possible to exploit the sleeping potential
of unsupervised image pairs, i.e. image pairs without any
ground-truth pixel correspondences?
In the remainder of the paper, we follow Truong et
al. [67] and adopt a practical definition of unsupervised
learning w.r.t. the feature learning task. We denote a learning formulation ‘unsupervised’ if it does not require any
supervision other than pairs of images depicting the same
visual content. Inspired by the success of self-supervised
learning for representation learning [8, 17, 24, 72], depth regression [15] and point cloud registration [2, 3], pure selfsupervised learning approaches for local descriptors have
provided partial answers to this question. They are trained
on synthetically generated image pairs, where the second
image is obtained by applying known transformations to

3926

