Uni6D: A Unified CNN Framework without Projection Breakdown for 6D Pose
Estimation
Xiaoke Jiang1
Donghai Li1
Hao Chen1
Ye Zheng2,3
Rui Zhao1,4
Liwei Wu1
1
SenseTime Research Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences3
Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China4
{jiangxiaoke,lidonghai,chenhao2,zhaorui,wuliwei}@sensetime.com
zhengye@ict.ac.cn

3D Camera Field of View

Abstract

1. Introduction
6D pose estimation plays a fundamental role in emerging applications, e.g., autonomous driving [1–3], intelligent

2D Image Plane
(0,0) u
v

Camera
intrinsic K

O
y

c

Aligned
ROI

DEF
V

ify U

Mod

GXY

Z
x

Optical Center

a

b

ROI

depth image

3D Object

(a) Projection breakdown caused by the RoI transformation, including
crop, resize and RoI-Align [8]: The red dotted line connects a 3D object
and its projected RoI in the depth image. Any pixel (d, u, v) in the RoI
and its corresponding point (a, b, c) on the 3D object follow the projection
equation. The equation no longer holds if the built-in coordinate (UV) is
modified by RoI-Align, as though the RoI was moved to the top left corner
of the image.

AUC-ADDS-0.1

As RGB-D sensors become more affordable, using RGBD images to obtain high-accuracy 6D pose estimation results becomes a better option. State-of-the-art approaches
typically use different backbones to extract features for RGB
and depth images. They use a 2D CNN for RGB images and
a per-pixel point cloud network for depth data, as well as a
fusion network for feature fusion. We find that the essential
reason for using two independent backbones is the “projection breakdown” problem. In the depth image plane, the
projected 3D structure of the physical world is preserved
by the 1D depth value and its built-in 2D pixel coordinate
(UV). Any spatial transformation that modifies UV, such as
resize, flip, crop, or pooling operations in the CNN pipeline,
breaks the binding between the pixel value and UV coordinate. As a consequence, the 3D structure is no longer preserved by a modified depth image or feature. To address
this issue, we propose a simple yet effective method denoted
as Uni6D that explicitly takes the extra UV data along with
RGB-D images as input. Our method has a Unified CNN
framework for 6D pose estimation with a single CNN backbone. In particular, the architecture of our method is based
on Mask R-CNN with two extra heads, one named RT head
for directly predicting 6D pose and the other named abc
head for guiding the network to map the visible points to
their coordinates in the 3D model as an auxiliary module.
This end-to-end approach balances simplicity and accuracy, achieving comparable accuracy with state of the arts
and 7.2× faster inference speed on the YCB-Video dataset.

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30

without UV
with UV
0

5

10

15

20
epoch

25

30

35

40

(b) Introducing UV data fixes the problem of projection breakdown and
improve the 6D pose estimation performance with various spatial transformations. x axis is the training epoch, and y axis is the testing accuracy.

Figure 1. Visualization and experiment results of projection breakdown problem.

robotic grasping [4–6] and augmented reality [7]. RGB-D
sensors provide a direct signal of the surface texture and geometry of the physical 3D world, and as their prices fall,

11174

