Optimizing Video Prediction via Video Frame Interpolation

𝑡+3

𝑡+1

Input

Yue Wu
Qiang Wen
Qifeng Chen
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

(a) Driving scene

(b) Human motion

(c) Animation

(d) Natural scene

Figure 1. Our method can produce plausible video prediction results in diverse scenarios without external training, such as driving scenes,
human motion, animation, and natural scenes. We use red arrows to indicate the motions from input frames. Video results are presented in
the supplementary material.

Abstract
Video prediction is an extrapolation task that predicts
future frames given past frames, and video frame interpolation is an interpolation task that estimates intermediate
frames between two frames. We have witnessed the tremendous advancement of video frame interpolation, but the general video prediction in the wild is still an open question.
Inspired by the photo-realistic results of video frame interpolation, we present a new optimization framework for
video prediction via video frame interpolation, in which we
solve an extrapolation problem based on an interpolation
model. Our video prediction framework is based on optimization with a pretrained differentiable video frame interpolation module without the need for a training dataset, and
thus there is no domain gap issue between training and test
data. Also, our approach does not need any additional information such as semantic or instance maps, which makes
our framework applicable to any video. Extensive exper-

iments on the Cityscapes, KITTI, DAVIS, Middlebury, and
Vimeo90K datasets show that our video prediction results
are robust in general scenarios, and our approach outperforms other video prediction methods that require a large
amount of training data or extra semantic information.

1. Introduction
Video prediction is an extrapolation task to predict future
video frames given some past frames. Video prediction has
broad applications including robotics planning, autonomous
driving and video manipulations [6,23,39,41]. For instance,
predicted videos can help autonomous robots to better plan
future actions with future visual information. Video prediction is also a fundamental task for unconditional video
synthesis that can be decomposed into image synthesis and
future video prediction.
Video prediction is a challenging extrapolation problem.

17814

