Deep Anomaly Discovery from Unlabeled Videos via
Normality Advantage and Self-Paced Refinement
Guang Yu*, Siqi Wang*†, Zhiping Cai†, Xinwang Liu, Chuanfu Xu,
National University of Defense Technology, China

Chengkun Wu

{guangyu, wangsiqi10c, zpcai, xinwangliu, xuchuanfu, chengkun wu}@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
Train

While classic video anomaly detection (VAD) requires
labeled normal videos for training, emerging unsupervised
VAD (UVAD) aims to discover anomalies directly from fully
unlabeled videos. However, existing UVAD methods still
rely on shallow models to perform detection or initialization, and they are evidently inferior to classic VAD methods. This paper proposes a full deep neural network (DNN)
based solution that can realize highly effective UVAD. First,
we, for the first time, point out that deep reconstruction
can be surprisingly effective for UVAD, which inspires us
to unveil a property named “normality advantage”, i.e.,
normal events will enjoy lower reconstruction loss when
DNN learns to reconstruct unlabeled videos. With this property, we propose Localization based Reconstruction (LBR)
as a strong UVAD baseline and a solid foundation of our
solution. Second, we propose a novel self-paced refinement (SPR) scheme, which is synthesized into LBR to conduct UVAD. Unlike ordinary self-paced learning that injects
more samples in an easy-to-hard manner, the proposed SPR
scheme gradually drops samples so that suspicious anomalies can be removed from the learning process. In this way,
SPR consolidates normality advantage and enables better
UVAD in a more proactive way. Finally, we further design
a variant solution that explicitly takes the motion cues into
account. The solution evidently enhances the UVAD performance, and it sometimes even surpasses the best classic VAD methods. Experiments show that our solution not
only significantly outperforms existing UVAD methods by a
wide margin (5% to 9% AUROC), but also enables UVAD to
catch up with the mainstream performance of classic VAD.

1. Introduction
Video anomaly detection (VAD) [29, 58] has constantly
been a valuable topic in computer vision, as it aims to au* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Training videos (normal)
Model

Infer

Normality

Anomaly

Testing videos

(a) Classic video anomaly detection.

Model

Infer

Normality

Testing videos

Anomaly

(b) Unsupervised video anomaly detection (UVAD).

Figure 1. Comparison of classic VAD and UVAD.

tomatically discover abnormal events (i.e., anomalies) that
deviate from frequently-seen normal routine in surveillance
videos. With a great potential to be applied to realms like
public security and city management [53,90], VAD enjoys a
continuous interest from both academia and industry. However, VAD remains open and unsolved. The underlying reason is that anomalies are typically rare and novel, and such
characteristics make anomalies hard to be foreseen or enumerated in practice. As a result, a sufficient and comprehensive collection of anomaly data can be particularly difficult
or even impossible, which makes the fully supervised classification paradigm not directly applicable to VAD.
Thus, classic VAD follows a semi-supervised setup,
which labels a training set that contains only normal videos
to train a normality model (see Fig. 1a). During inference,
video events that do not fit this normality model are viewed
as anomalies. Although such a classic semi-supervised

13987

