Audio-visual Generalised Zero-shot Learning
with Cross-modal Attention and Language
Otniel-Bogdan Mercea1 , Lukas Riesch1,2 , A. Sophia Koepke1 , Zeynep Akata1,3,4
1

University of Tübingen 2 Robert Bosch GmbH 3 MPI for Informatics
4
MPI for Intelligent Systems

{otniel-bogdan.mercea, a-sophia.koepke, zeynep.akata}@uni-tuebingen.de
lukas.riesch@de.bosch.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Most zero-shot learning (ZSL) methods developed for
image classification [5, 6, 60, 61, 72, 82] and action recognition [12, 13, 31, 84] only use unimodal input, e.g. images.
However, humans leverage multi-modal sensory inputs in
their everyday activities. Imagine the situation in which the
sound of a dog barking is audible but the dog is visually oc-

playing
squash

striking
bowling
...

striking bowling
playing squash
…

elephant
trumpeting

...

Learning to classify video data from classes not included in the training data, i.e. video-based zero-shot
learning, is challenging. We conjecture that the natural
alignment between the audio and visual modalities in video
data provides a rich training signal for learning discriminative multi-modal representations. Focusing on the relatively underexplored task of audio-visual zero-shot learning, we propose to learn multi-modal representations from
audio-visual data using cross-modal attention and exploit
textual label embeddings for transferring knowledge from
seen classes to unseen classes. Taking this one step further, in our generalised audio-visual zero-shot learning setting, we include all the training classes in the test-time
search space which act as distractors and increase the difficulty while making the setting more realistic. Due to the
lack of a unified benchmark in this domain, we introduce a
(generalised) zero-shot learning benchmark on three audiovisual datasets of varying sizes and difficulty, VGGSound,
UCF, and ActivityNet, ensuring that the unseen test classes
do not appear in the dataset used for supervised training
of the backbone deep models. Comparing multiple relevant and recent methods, we demonstrate that our proposed
AVCA model achieves state-of-the-art performance on all
three datasets. Code and data are available at https:
//github.com/ExplainableML/AVCA-GZSL.

wood thrush
calling

elephant trumpeting
wood thrush calling
…

Figure 1. Our audio-visual (generalised) ZSL framework aligns
an audio-visual embedding with the corresponding textual label
embedding via cross-modal attention. It can classify videos from
previously unseen classes (e.g. elephant trumpeting) by predicting the class (red) whose textual label embedding (purple cross) is
closest to the audio-visual embedding (blue star).

cluded. In this case, we cannot understand the scene when
relying on visual information alone. Using multiple modalities, such as vision and sound, allows to gather context
and capture complementary information. Similarly, using
both visual and audio information allows for a richer training signal for learning frameworks. This paper investigates
the challenging task of (generalised) ZSL with multi-modal
audio-visual data by leveraging the natural alignment of audio and visual information in videos.
Recently, [42, 54] have explored the task of zero-shot
video recognition using multi-modal visual and audio information as inputs. However, the AudioSetZSL dataset [54]
used for this, contains an overlap between the classes used
for validation and testing. This results in learning stronger
representations for classes overlapping with the training and
validation sets (which covers all the classes in this dataset)
and hinders the model’s capability to learn sufficiently gen-

10553

