Depth-Guided Sparse Structure-from-Motion for Movies and TV Shows
Sheng Liu*
University at Buffalo

Xiaohan Nie, Raffay Hamid
Amazon Prime Video

sliu66@buffalo.edu

{nxiaohan, raffay}@amazon.com

Abstract
Existing approaches for Structure from Motion (SfM) produce impressive 3-D reconstruction results especially when
using imagery captured with large parallax. However, to
create engaging video-content in movies and TV shows, the
amount by which a camera can be moved while filming a
particular shot is often limited. The resulting small-motion
parallax between video frames makes standard geometrybased SfM approaches not as effective for movies and TV
shows. To address this challenge, we propose a simple yet
effective approach that uses single-frame depth-prior obtained from a pretrained network to significantly improve
geometry-based SfM for our small-parallax setting. To this
end, we first use the depth-estimates of the detected keypoints to reconstruct the point cloud and camera-pose for
initial two-view reconstruction. We then perform depthregularized optimization to register new images and triangulate the new points during incremental reconstruction.
To comprehensively evaluate our approach, we introduce
a new dataset (StudioSfM) consisting of 130 shots with
21K frames from 15 studio-produced videos that are manually annotated by a professional CG studio. We demonstrate that our approach: (a) significantly improves the
quality of 3-D reconstruction for our small-parallax setting, (b) does not cause any degradation for data with
large-parallax, and (c) maintains the generalizability and
scalability of geometry-based sparse SfM. Our dataset can
be obtained at https://github.com/amazon-research/smallbaseline-camera-tracking.

1. Introduction
Estimating camera motion and 3-D scene geometry in
movies and TV shows is a standard task in video production. Existing Structure from Motion (SfM) approaches for
3-D scene reconstruction produce high-quality results especially for images with large parallax [16, 6, 36, 34]. However, creating engaging viewing experience in movies and
TV shows often constrains the amount of camera movement
while filming a shot. This often leads to insufficient paral* This work was done when the author was an intern at Amazon.

Figure 1: Comparison of Parallax-Distribution: Parallaxdistribution of ETH3D [34] is plotted with StudioSfM – a new
dataset with 21K frames in 130 manually annotated shots from 15
TV episodes (see § 4.1 for details of data and computation of parallax). The long-tail distribution of StudioSfM shows that smallmotion parallax is significantly more common in studio-produced
content than in standard SfM datasets.

lax compared to standard SfM datasets captured specifically
for 3-D reconstruction (see Figure 1 for more details).
This insufficient parallax is one of the key challenges [9]
that limits the effectiveness of well-developed geometrybased SfM approaches [10, 2, 33, 1, 43, 28] that recover
camera motion and geometry based on the principle of
motion-parallax. Shots with small motion-parallax are illconditioned for 3-D reconstruction as algebraic methods
for two-view reconstruction are numerically unstable in
such situations [26]. Conventional SfM pipelines (e.g.,
COLMAP [33]) use various heuristics to handle smallparallax data, e.g., by using inlier ratio to decide the twoview motion type to prevent two-view reconstruction from
using panoramic image pairs, and filtering out points with
small triangulation angles. These heuristics however require careful tuning and can fail completely when using data
which has no image pairs with sufficient parallax.
In contrast, learning-based approaches [17, 47, 40, 42]
are able to handle data with small parallax more effectively
as they can learn to predict depth and pose from large-scale
labelled datasets. However, as these methods do not incorporate geometric-consistency constraints between images,

15980

