Cross-view Transformers for real-time Map-view Semantic Segmentation
Brady Zhou
UT Austin

Philipp Krähenbühl
UT Austin

brady.zhou@utexas.edu

philkr@cs.utexas.edu

Camera-aware
embedding

Abstract
We present cross-view transformers, an efficient
attention-based model for map-view semantic segmentation
from multiple cameras. Our architecture implicitly learns
a mapping from individual camera views into a canonical
map-view representation using a camera-aware cross-view
attention mechanism. Each camera uses positional embeddings that depend on its intrinsic and extrinsic calibration.
These embeddings allow a transformer to learn the mapping across different views without ever explicitly modeling it geometrically. The architecture consists of a convolutional image encoder for each view and cross-view transformer layers to infer a map-view semantic segmentation.
Our model is simple, easily parallelizable, and runs in realtime. The presented architecture performs at state-of-theart on the nuScenes dataset, with 4x faster inference speeds.
Code is available at https://github.com/bradyz/
cross_view_transformers.

1. Introduction
Autonomous vehicles depend on robust scene understanding and online mapping to navigate the world. To
drive safely, these systems not only reason about the semantics of their surroundings, but also a spatial understanding due to the geometric nature of navigation. Many
prior approaches directly model geometry and relationships
between different view and a canonical map representation [2, 14, 15, 16, 20, 29, 35]. They require an explicit [2, 15, 16, 20, 35] or probabilistic [14, 29] estimate of
depth in either image or map-view. However, this explicit
modeling can be hard. First, image-based depth estimates
are error-prone, as monocular depth estimates scale poorly
with the distance to the observer. Second, depth-based projections are a fairly inflexible and rigid bottleneck to map
between views. In this work, we take a different approach.
We learn to map from camera-view to a canonical mapview representation using a cross-view transformer architecture. The transformer does not perform any explicit geometric reasoning but instead learns to map between views

Map-view
embedding

Cross-View
Transformer

…

Figure 1. We introduce an architecture for perception in a mapview frame from multiple views. Our model builds a map-view
representation by cross-attending to image features. A cameraaware positional embedding can geometrically link up the camera
and map-views.

through a geometry-aware positional embedding. Multihead attention then learns to map features from cameraview into a canonical map-view representation using a
learned map-view positional embedding. We learn a single
map-view positional embedding for all cameras and perform attention across all views. The model thus learns to
link up different map locations to both cameras and locations within each camera. Our cross-view transformer refines the map-view embedding through multiple attention
and MLP blocks. The cross-view transformer allows the
network to learn any geometric transformation implicitly
and directly from data. It learns an implicit estimate of
depth through the camera-dependent map-view positional
embedding by performing the downstream task as accurately as possible.
The simplicity of our model is a key strength. The model
performs at state-of-the-art on the nuScenes [3] dataset for
vehicle and road segmentation in the map-view and comfortably runs in real-time (35 FPS) on a single RTX 2080
Ti GPU. The model is easy to implement and trains within

13760

