Learning with Neighbor Consistency for Noisy Labels
Ahmet Iscen1

Jack Valmadre* 2

1 Google Research

Anurag Arnab1

Cordelia Schmid1

2 AIML, University of Adelaide

Abstract
Recent advances in deep learning have relied on large,
labelled datasets to train high-capacity models. However,
collecting large datasets in a time- and cost-efficient manner often results in label noise. We present a method for
learning from noisy labels that leverages similarities between training examples in feature space, encouraging the
prediction of each example to be similar to its nearest neighbours. Compared to training algorithms that use multiple
models or distinct stages, our approach takes the form of
a simple, additional regularization term. It can be interpreted as an inductive version of the classical, transductive label propagation algorithm. We thoroughly evaluate
our method on datasets evaluating both synthetic (CIFAR10, CIFAR-100) and realistic (mini-WebVision, WebVision,
Clothing1M, mini-ImageNet-Red) noise, and achieve competitive or state-of-the-art accuracies across all of them.

1. Introduction
While deep learning can achieve unprecedented accuracy in image classification tasks, it requires a large, supervised dataset that is often expensive to obtain. Unsupervised and semi-supervised learning seek to alleviate this
requirement by incorporating unlabelled examples. However, these approaches cannot take advantage of the various
sources of noisy labels in the modern world, such as images
with hashtags in social media or images contained in webpages retrieved by a textual query. Training algorithms that
are robust to label noise are therefore highly attractive for
deep learning.
The dominant approach to learning with noisy labels in
recent work is to use the predictions of the model itself to
reject or modify training examples (e.g. [1, 13, 22, 26, 29,
33, 37, 46]). This is inherently risky due to the ability of
deep networks to fit arbitrary labels [47] and it is important to take significant measures against overfitting. Moreover, this paradigm often leads to complicated training procedures, such as maintaining multiple models or alternating
between updating the model and updating the training set.

This paper proposes Neighbor Consistency Regularization (NCR) for the specific problem of learning with noisy
labels, illustrated in Figure 1. Rather than adopting model
predictions as pseudo-labels, NCR introduces an additional
consistency loss that encourages each example to have similar predictions to its neighbors. Concretely, the neighbor
consistency loss penalizes the divergence of each example’s
prediction from a weighted combination of its neighbors’
predictions, with the weights determined by their similarity
in feature space. The motivation of NCR is to enable incorrect labels to be improved or at least attenuated by the labels
of their neighbors, relying on the assumption that the noise
is sufficiently weak or unstructured so as not to overwhelm
the correct labels. Compared to the popular approach of
bootstrapping the model predictions [33], NCR can be seen
as instead bootstrapping the learned feature representation,
which may reduce its susceptibility to overfitting and improve its stability at random initialization.
NCR is inspired by label propagation algorithms for
semi-supervised learning [15, 19, 49], which seek to transfer labels from supervised examples to neighboring unsupervised examples according to their similarity in feature
space. However, whereas label propagation is typically performed in a batch setting over the entire dataset, our method
effectively performs label propagation online within minibatches during stochastic gradient descent. This results in a
simple, single-stage training procedure. Moreover, whereas
existing methods for label propagation represent transductive learning in that they only produce labels for the specific
examples which are provided during training, NCR can be
understood as an inductive form of label propagation in that
it produces a model which can later be applied to classify
unseen examples.
The key contributions of the paper are as follows.
• We propose Neighbor Consistency Regularization, a
novel loss term for deep learning with noisy labels that
encourages examples with similar feature representations to have similar predictions.
• We verify empirically that NCR achieves better accuracy than several important baselines at a wide range
of noise levels from both synthetic and real distribu-

* Work done at Google.

4672

