FedCor: Correlation-Based Active Client Selection Strategy for Heterogeneous
Federated Learning
Minxue Tang1 , Xuefei Ning2 , Yitu Wang1 , Jingwei Sun1 , Yu Wang2 , Hai Li1 , Yiran Chen1 *
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University
2
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
1

{minxue.tang,yitu.wang,jingwei.sun,hai.li,yiran.chen}@duke.edu
2

foxdoraame@gmail.com

Abstract
Client-wise data heterogeneity is one of the major issues that hinder effective training in federated learning (FL).
Since the data distribution on each client may vary dramatically, the client selection strategy can significantly influence the convergence rate of the FL process. Active client
selection strategies are popularly proposed in recent studies. However, they neglect the loss correlations between
the clients and achieve only marginal improvement compared to the uniform selection strategy. In this work, we
propose FedCor—an FL framework built on a correlationbased client selection strategy, to boost the convergence rate
of FL. Specifically, we first model the loss correlations between the clients with a Gaussian Process (GP). Based on
the GP model, we derive a client selection strategy with a
significant reduction of expected global loss in each round.
Besides, we develop an efficient GP training method with
a low communication overhead in the FL scenario by utilizing the covariance stationarity. Our experimental results
show that compared to the state-of-the-art method, FedCorr
can improve the convergence rates by 34% ∼ 99% and
26% ∼ 51% on FMNIST and CIFAR-10, respectively.

1. Introduction
As a newly emerging distributed learning paradigm, federated learning (FL) [9, 12, 13, 17, 23] has recently attracted
attention because of the offered data privacy. FL aims at dealing with scenarios where training data is distributed across a
number of clients. Considering limited communication bandwidth and the privacy requirement, in each communication
round, FL usually selects only a fraction of clients, and the
selected clients will perform multiple iterations of local updating without exposing their own datasets [23]. This special
* Corresponding Author

2

yu-wang@tsinghua.edu.cn

scenario also introduces other challenges that distinguish FL
from the conventional distributed learning [2, 35].
One major challenge in FL is the high degree of clientwise data heterogeneity [17], which is the inherent characteristic of a large number of clients. There have been many
studies [10, 15, 16, 18, 20, 25, 27, 32] trying to tackle non-IID
(independent and identically distributed) and unbalanced
data of the clients in FL. Most of these studies [10,18,20,32]
focus on amending the local model updates or the central
aggregation based on FedAvg [23].
Recently, active client selection arises as a complement
of the aforementioned studies, aiming at accelerating the
convergence of FL with non-IID data. Some recent studies
propose to assign higher probability of being selected to the
clients with larger training loss value [4, 6]. However, they
neglect the correlations between the clients and consider
their losses independently, which leads to only marginal
performance improvement. In this paper, we propose a
correlation-based active client selection strategy that can
effectively alleviate the accuracy degradation caused by data
heterogeneity and significantly boost the convergence of FL.
Our key idea is mainly based on the following intuitions:
1. Clients do not contribute equivalently. For example,
training with a large and balanced dataset on a “good”
client can reduce the losses of most clients, while training with a small and extremely biased dataset on a “bad”
client may increase the losses of other clients.
2. Clients do not contribute independently. The influence
of selecting one client depends on the other selected
clients because their local updates will be aggregated.
A toy experiment shown in Fig. 1 also illustrates the necessity of considering the correlations for client selection. In
this experiment, each client has only one data sample, and
thus each data point in the figure represents a client. The
task is to select two clients (different markers represent the
client selections of different strategies) for training a binary

10102

