Retrieval Augmented Classification for Long-Tail Visual Recognition*
Alexander Long1,3 , Wei Yin2 , Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan1 , Vu Nguyen1 , Pulak Purkait1 ,
Ravi Garg1 , Alan Blair3 , Chunhua Shen4 , Anton van den Hengel1,2
1

Amazon

2

The University of Adelaide, Australia

3

University of New South Wales

Abstract
We introduce Retrieval Augmented Classification (RAC),
a generic approach to augmenting standard image classification pipelines with an explicit retrieval module. RAC
consists of a standard base image encoder fused with a
parallel retrieval branch that queries a non-parametric external memory of pre-encoded images and associated text
snippets. We apply RAC to the problem of long-tail classification and demonstrate a significant improvement over
previous state-of-the-art on Places365-LT and iNaturalist2018 (14.5% and 6.7% respectively), despite using only
the training datasets themselves as the external information source. We demonstrate that RAC’s retrieval module, without prompting, learns a high level of accuracy on
tail classes.This, in turn, frees the base encoder to focus
on common classes, and improve its performance thereon.
RAC represents an alternative approach to utilizing large,
pretrained models without requiring fine-tuning, as well as
a first step towards more effectively making use of external
memory within common computer vision architectures.

1. Introduction
Large Transformer [48] models have arrived in Computer Vision, with parameter counts and pretraining dataset
size increasing rapidly [11,26,34,42,44,53]. The distributed
representations learned by such models result in significant
performance gains on a range of tasks, however come with
the drawback of storing world knowledge implicitly within
their parameters, making post-hoc modification [8] and interpretability [4] challenging. In addition, real-world data
is long-tailed by nature, and implicitly storing every visual
cue present in the world appears futile with current hardware constraints. As an alternative to this fully parametric
approach, we propose augmenting standard classification
pipelines with an explicit external memory, thus separating
model performance from parameter count, and facilitating
* Part of this work was done when WY was with Amazon and CS was
with The University of Adelaide.

4

Zhejiang University, China

the dynamic addition and removal of information explicitly
with no changes to model weights.
To evaluate our approach, we focus on the problem of
Long-Tail visual recognition, as it shares many of the properties likely to be encountered by a general agent. Specifically, the data distributions are highly skewed on a per-class
basis, with a majority of classes containing a small number
of samples. The number of samples in these small classes,
commonly referred to as the “tail”, can far outweigh those
in the relative minority of high sample classes (referred to
as the “head”). In this situation, learning is challenging due
to both the lack of information provided for tail classes,
and the tendency for head classes to dominate the learning
process. Long-tail learning is a well-studied [2, 20, 39] instance of the more general label shift problem [41], where
the shift is static and known during both training and testing. Despite being well-studied, commonly occurring, and
of great practical importance, classification performance on
long-tail distributions lags significantly behind the state-ofthe-art for better balanced classes [24].
Base approaches are largely variants of the same core
idea—that of “adjustment”, where the learner is encouraged
to focus on the tail of the distribution. This can be achieved
implicitly, via over/under-weighting samples during training [3, 12, 19, 22] or cluster-based sampling [6], or explicitly via logit [10, 36, 57] or loss [21, 36] modification. Such
approaches largely focus on consistency, ensuring minimizing the training loss corresponds to a minimal error on the
known, balanced, test distribution.
An alternative approach focuses on ensembling models.
Instead of disregarding knowledge of the test distribution,
recent work [17, 52, 59] use ensembling models to induce
invariance to the test distribution. This is typically done
by training separate models under different losses or resampling techniques, and combining them at test time.
We introduce a third approach, Retrieval Augmented
Classification (RAC), motivated by the desire to explicitly
store tail knowledge, as a retrieval-based augmentation to
standard classification pipelines.
RAC’s retrieval module is multi-modal, making use of
image representations as retrieval keys, and returning en-

6959

