Part-based Pseudo Label Refinement for Unsupervised Person Re-identification
Yoonki Cho

Woo Jae Kim

Seunghoon Hong

Sung-Eui Yoon

KAIST
{yoonki, wkim97, seunghoon.hong, sungeui}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Unsupervised person re-identification (re-ID) aims at
learning discriminative representations for person retrieval
from unlabeled data. Recent techniques accomplish this
task by using pseudo-labels, but these labels are inherently
noisy and deteriorate the accuracy. To overcome this problem, several pseudo-label refinement methods have been
proposed, but they neglect the fine-grained local context essential for person re-ID. In this paper, we propose a novel
Part-based Pseudo Label Refinement (PPLR) framework
that reduces the label noise by employing the complementary relationship between global and part features. Specifically, we design a cross agreement score as the similarity of
k-nearest neighbors between feature spaces to exploit the
reliable complementary relationship. Based on the cross
agreement, we refine pseudo-labels of global features by
ensembling the predictions of part features, which collectively alleviate the noise in global feature clustering. We
further refine pseudo-labels of part features by applying label smoothing according to the suitability of given labels
for each part. Thanks to the reliable complementary information provided by the cross agreement score, our PPLR
effectively reduces the influence of noisy labels and learns
discriminative representations with rich local contexts. Extensive experimental results on Market-1501 and MSMT17
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method over
the state-of-the-art performance. The code is available at
https:// github.com/ yoonkicho/ PPLR.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-ID) aims to retrieve a person corresponding to a given query across disjoint camera
views or different time stamps [59, 69]. Thanks to the discriminative power of deep neural networks, supervised approaches [20–22,53] have achieved impressive performance
in this task. Unfortunately, they require a large amount of
labeled data that demands costly annotations, limiting their
practicality in large-scale real-world re-ID problems. Due

to this issue, unsupervised methods that learn the discriminative features for person retrieval from unlabeled data have
recently received much attention.
Prior works on unsupervised person re-ID have utilized
pseudo-labels obtained by k-nearest neighbor search [25,
47,60] or unsupervised clustering [7,24] for training. These
approaches alternate a two-stage training scheme: the label
generation phase that assigns pseudo-labels and the training phase that trains a model with generated labels. Among
these approaches, the clustering-based methods [2, 9] have
especially demonstrated their effectiveness with state-ofthe-art performance. However, inherent noises in pseudolabels significantly hinder the performance of these unsupervised methods.
To tackle this problem, many efforts have been made to
improve the accuracy of pseudo-labels by performing robust
clustering [9, 62] or pseudo-label refinement [25, 64]. Recent techniques [8, 63] significantly reduce the label noise
through the model ensemble in a peer-teaching manner by
using predictions from an auxiliary network as refined labels for the target network. Nevertheless, training multiple backbones as teacher networks (e.g., dual ResNet in
MMT [8], and single DenseNet, ResNet, and Inception-v3
in MEB-Net [63]) requires high computational costs. Furthermore, labels refined by these methods consider only
global features and neglect the fine-grained clues essential
to person re-ID, leading to insufficient performance.
To address the aforementioned problems, we propose
Part-based Pseudo Label Refinement (PPLR), a novel unsupervised re-ID framework that effectively handles the label
noise using part features in a self-teaching manner. Several studies [42, 67] demonstrate that the fine-grained information from part features improves the re-ID performance.
Our key idea is that this fine-grained information can provide not only useful cues for better representation learning
but also robustness against label noises. In contrast to the
global-shape information that has large variations due to
significant changes in poses and viewpoints, part features
can capture the local-texture information that provides a
more crucial clue to re-identifying a person [70].
We argue that the complementary relationship between

7308

