Multi-level Feature Learning for Contrastive Multi-view Clustering
Jie Xu1† , Huayi Tang1† , Yazhou Ren1∗ , Liang Peng1 , Xiaofeng Zhu1,2 , Lifang He3
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China
2

Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Shenzhen 518000, China
3

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Lehigh University, PA 18015, USA

jiexuwork@outlook.com,tangh4681@gmail.com,yazhou.ren@uestc.edu.cn
larrypengliang@gmail.com,seanzhuxf@gmail.com,lih319@lehigh.edu

Abstract
Multi-view clustering can explore common semantics
from multiple views and has attracted increasing attention.
However, existing works punish multiple objectives in the
same feature space, where they ignore the conflict between
learning consistent common semantics and reconstructing
inconsistent view-private information. In this paper, we propose a new framework of multi-level feature learning for
contrastive multi-view clustering to address the aforementioned issue. Our method learns different levels of features
from the raw features, including low-level features, highlevel features, and semantic labels/features in a fusion-free
manner, so that it can effectively achieve the reconstruction
objective and the consistency objectives in different feature
spaces. Specifically, the reconstruction objective is conducted on the low-level features. Two consistency objectives
based on contrastive learning are conducted on the highlevel features and the semantic labels, respectively. They
make the high-level features effectively explore the common
semantics and the semantic labels achieve the multi-view
clustering. As a result, the proposed framework can reduce
the adverse influence of view-private information. Extensive
experiments on public datasets demonstrate that our method
achieves state-of-the-art clustering effectiveness.

1. Introduction
Multi-view clustering (MVC) is attracting more and more
attention in recent years [22, 50, 52, 57] as multi-view data or
multi-modal data can provide common semantics to improve
the learning effectiveness [3, 14, 27, 33, 36, 43]. In the literature, existing MVC methods can be roughly divided into
two categories, i.e., traditional methods and deep methods.
The traditional MVC methods conduct the clustering task
based on traditional machine learning methods and can be
† Equal contribution. ∗ Corresponding author.

subdivided into three subgroups, including subspace methods [6, 18, 24], matrix factorization methods [45, 53, 56], and
graph methods [28, 55, 60]. Many traditional MVC methods
have the drawbacks such as poor representation ability and
high computation complexity, resulting in limited performance in the complex scenarios with real-world data [10].
Recently, deep MVC methods have gradually become
a popular trend in the community due to the outstanding
representation ability [1, 2, 20, 44, 49, 50, 54]. Previous deep
MVC methods can be subdivided into two subgroups, i.e.,
two-stage methods and one-stage methods. Two-stage deep
MVC methods (e.g., [21, 50]) focus on separately learning
the salient features from multiple views and performing the
clustering task. However, Xie et al. [48] present that the
clustering results can be leveraged to improve the quality of
feature learning. Therefore, one-stage deep MVC methods
(e.g., [39, 59]) embed the feature learning with the clustering
task in a unified framework to achieve end-to-end clustering.
Multi-view data contains two kinds of information, i.e.,
the common semantics across all views and the view-private
information for individual view. For example, a text and
an image can be combined to describe common semantics,
while the unrelated context in the text and the background
pixels in the image are meaningless view-private information
for learning common semantics. In multi-view learning, it
is an always-on topic to learn common semantics and avoid
the misleading of meaningless view-private information. Although important progress has been achieved by existing
MVC methods, they have the following drawbacks to be
addressed: (1) Many MVC methods (e.g., [39, 59]) try to discover the latent cluster patterns by fusing the features of all
views. However, the meaningless view-private information
might be dominant in the feature fusion process, compared
to the common semantics, and thus interferes with the quality of clustering. (2) Some MVC methods (e.g., [18, 21])
leverage the consistency objective on the latent features to
explore the common semantics across all views. However,
they usually need the reconstruction objective on the same

16051

