CAD: Co-Adapting Discriminative Features for Improved Few-Shot
Classification
Philip Chikontwe, Soopil Kim, Sang Hyun Park
Department of Robotics and Mechatronics, DGIST, South Korea
{philipchicco,soopilkim,shpark13135}@dgist.ac.kr

Abstract
Few-shot classification is a challenging problem that
aims to learn a model that can adapt to unseen classes
given a few labeled samples. Recent approaches pre-train
a feature extractor, and then fine-tune for episodic metalearning. Other methods leverage spatial features to learn
pixel-level correspondence while jointly training a classifier. However, results using such approaches show marginal
improvements. In this paper, inspired by the transformer
style self-attention mechanism, we propose a strategy to
cross-attend and re-weight discriminative features for fewshot classification. Given a base representation of support
and query images after global pooling, we introduce a single shared module that projects features and cross-attends
in two aspects: (i) query to support, and (ii) support to
query. The module computes attention scores between features to produce an attention pooled representation of features in the same class that is later added to the original
representation followed by a projection head. This effectively re-weights features in both aspects (i & ii) to produce
features that better facilitate improved metric-based metalearning. Extensive experiments on public benchmarks
show our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods by
3%∼5%.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved remarkable success in numerous computer vision tasks, reaching human-level performance in domains with sufficiently large-scale labeled
training data. However, large-scale data is not always readily available due to costly curation and labeling. Hence,
there is a ongoing research effort to design models that
can learn to solve tasks using a limited number of labeled
examples to alleviate this requirement. While several approaches such as transfer-, semi- and unsupervised learning
have shown reasonable performance, learning to generalize
with an extremely limited number of labeled samples is still

NN
pooling

NN
pooling

FC

pre-training

NN
pooling

Figure 1. Visual intuition of the proposed framework compared
to other approaches using attention. (a) Standard ProtoNet [43]
architecture with nearest neighbour classifier (NN). (b) Adaptation
of support embeddings only without using relations in the query
sets, with backbone pre-training [54]. (c) Our method leverages
attention from each set in a cross-relational perspective to improve
classification performance by re-weighting features.

a challenge. Motivated by the ability of humans to rapidly
adapt to new tasks using prior knowledge, the field of fewshot learning shows promise in achieving this goal.
Few-shot learning [22, 36, 43] aims to classify unlabeled
query samples from unseen classes using only limited labeled support examples. Recent approaches have leveraged
the meta-learning paradigm where transferable knowledge
across a collection of tasks is learned and propagated to improve generalization. In particular, one of the promising
approaches have used the meta-learning framework to optimize model parameters [11, 33, 36] with a few gradient
steps, thus enabling neural network classifiers to quickly
adapt to unseen classes. Other works employ similarity
information between images (Fig. 1(a)), augmentation of

14554

