Calibrating Deep Neural Networks by Pairwise Constraints
Jiacheng Cheng
Nuno Vasconcelos
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, San Diego
{jicheng,nvasconcelos}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
It is well known that deep neural networks (DNNs) produce poorly calibrated estimates of class-posterior probabilities. We hypothesize that this is due to the limited
calibration supervision provided by the cross-entropy loss,
which places all emphasis on the probability of the true
class and mostly ignores the remaining. We consider how
each example can supervise all classes and show that the
calibration of a C-way classification problem is equivalent
to the calibration of C(C − 1)/2 pairwise binary classification problems that can be derived from it. This suggests
the hypothesis that DNN calibration can be improved by
providing calibration supervision to all such binary problems. An implementation of this calibration by pairwise
constraints (CPC) is then proposed, based on two types of
binary calibration constraints. This is finally shown to be
implementable with a very minimal increase in the complexity of cross-entropy training. Empirical evaluations of the
proposed CPC method across multiple datasets and DNN
architectures demonstrate state-of-the-art calibration performance.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs), especially deep convolutional neural networks, have enabled significant advances
in computer vision [17,23]. While achieving state-of-the-art
accuracy in various tasks such as image recognition [8, 43]
and segmentation [25, 41], DNNs do not excel at estimating the confidence of their predictions. Although they output class-posterior probabilities via softmax regression, it
is well known that these predictive probabilities are usually
poorly calibrated. Frequently, DNNs tend be overconfident,
assigning high confidence to incorrect predictions [5, 6, 34].
For many real-world applications (e.g. weather forecasting [3, 29, 30], medical diagnosis [13]), it is important that
a classifier output not only accurate predictions but also
sound estimates of confidence in these predictions. This
is known as calibration. For a calibrated classifier, a poste-

Softmax
Regression

Softmax
Regression

Feature
Extractor

Feature
Extractor

Figure 1. Efficiency of CPC supervision for calibration. Left: Under classic cross-entropy training, each training example only provides significant supervision to the posterior probability of its class
label. Right: Under CPC, each training example provides significant supervision to the probabilities of all classes.

rior probability of p for a given class, implies that selecting
the class will result in the correct classification p × 100%
of the time. Consider, for example, a medical diagnosis
setting where a diagnostic accuracy above 95% is required
for any system to be considered “human equivalent”. A diagnostic classifier with accuracy of 80% fails to meet this
criterion. However, if the classifier can accurately predict
the posterior probabilities associated with its predictions,
it can still be useful: Predictions with posterior probabilities above 95% can be accepted automatically, and only the
examples of predictions with lower confidence need to be
routed to human doctors. Since all the “easy” cases tend
to be in the first class, this can reduce the need for human
inspection to a relatively small batch of “hard” examples,
saving significant time and expense. For these reasons, the
probability calibration of DNNs is attracting increasing attention in the computer vision and machine learning communities [18, 19, 21, 27, 35, 48, 52, 56].
Various methods have been proposed to calibrate DNN

13709

