V IS CUIT: Visual Auditor for Bias in CNN Image Classifier
Seongmin Lee
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, Georgia

Zijie J. Wang
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, Georgia

seongmin@gatech.edu

jayw@gatech.edu

Judy Hoffman
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, Georgia

Duen Horng (Polo) Chau
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, Georgia

judy@gatech.edu

polo@gatech.edu

Abstract
CNN image classifiers are widely used, thanks to their
efficiency and accuracy. However, they can suffer from biases that impede their practical applications. Most existing
bias investigation techniques are either inapplicable to general image classification tasks or require significant user
efforts in perusing all data subgroups to manually specify
which data attributes to inspect. We present V IS CUIT, an
interactive visualization system that reveals how and why
a CNN classifier is biased. V IS CUIT visually summarizes the subgroups on which the classifier underperforms
and helps users discover and characterize the cause of the
underperformances by revealing image concepts responsible for activating neurons that contribute to misclassifications. V IS CUIT runs in modern browsers and is opensource, allowing people to easily access and extend the
tool to other model architectures and datasets. V IS CUIT
is available at the following public demo link: https:
//poloclub.github.io/VisCUIT. A video demo is
available at https://youtu.be/eNDbSyM4R_4.

1. Introduction
Recently, data classification algorithms are widely used
for practical applications, such as face recognition [39, 50,
53], autonomous driving [19, 41], and clinical trials [44, 51,
59]. Despite the fact that visual models outperform humans
in some circumstances [7], several works have found that
these classifiers are often biased with disparate performance
across data subgroups [4, 8, 29, 35]. Exploiting the biased
classifiers for critical purposes can cause unintentional fairness violation and huge societal problems [20, 37, 55, 61].
Likewise, image classifiers based on deep convolutional
neural networks (CNN), which have achieved state-of-the-

art performance in various areas [22, 30, 45, 48, 49], often
suffer from biases [29]. To facilitate real-world applications
of the state-of-the-art techniques, there have been attempts
to understand [3, 11, 15] and mitigate [14, 21, 52, 54] the
biases in CNN classifiers. However, most existing methods require humans to specify the attributes on which to
audit the classifiers. As people tend to focus more on sensitive attributes (e.g., race, gender), less sensitive attributes
(e.g., wearing glasses, hair color) that can correlate with biases and degrade the overall performance are easily missed.
Existing approaches assume availability of additional attributes other than the class label for each image; thus,
datasets without any additional attributes cannot be analyzed using these methods.
Krishnakumar et al. [28] proposed UDIS, which automatically detects the data subgroups, on which a CNN classifier underperforms. While UDIS does not require additional attribute labels, the approach produces a large number of potentially biased subgroups which may or may not
align with semantic concepts. This leads to ambiguous findings even after substantial manual inspection. Moreover,
most aforementioned bias investigation approaches detect
the source of biases in classifiers, primarily focusing on
their training datasets, not how the neurons in the classifier
are activated and generate biased outputs [3, 8, 13].
In this paper, we present V IS CUIT, an interactive visualization system that reveals how and why a CNN image
classifier is biased, without requiring users to pre-determine
which attributes to inspect. V IS CUIT’s major contributions
include:
• Visual summarization of the undeperforming subgroups. V IS CUIT highlights the data subgroups generated by UDIS [28] on which a CNN classifier underperforms. This allows users to understand how the
classifier is biased, not limiting the bias factors to the

