Less is More: Generating Grounded Navigation Instructions from Landmarks
Su Wang Ceslee Montgomery Jordi Orbay Vighnesh Birodkar
Izzeddin Gur Natasha Jaques Austin Waters Jason Baldridge

Aleksandra Faust
Peter Anderson

Google Research

Abstract
We study the automatic generation of navigation instructions from 360◦ images captured on indoor routes. Existing
generators suffer from poor visual grounding, causing them
to rely on language priors and hallucinate objects. Our
M ARKY- M T5 system addresses this by focusing on visual
landmarks; it comprises a first stage landmark detector and
a second stage generator–a multimodal, multilingual, multitask encoder-decoder. To train it, we bootstrap grounded
landmark annotations on top of the Room-across-Room
(RxR) dataset. Using text parsers, weak supervision from
RxR’s pose traces, and a multilingual image-text encoder
trained on 1.8b images, we identify 971k English, Hindi and
Telugu landmark descriptions and ground them to specific
regions in panoramas. On Room-to-Room, human wayfinders obtain success rates (SR) of 71% following M ARKYM T5’s instructions, just shy of their 75% SR following human instructions—and well above SRs with other generators. Evaluations on RxR’s longer, diverse paths obtain 6164% SRs on three languages. Generating such high-quality
navigation instructions in novel environments is a step towards conversational navigation tools and could facilitate
larger-scale training of instruction-following agents.

1. Introduction
Wayfinding–navigating to a destination–is an everyday
task. We study the automatic generation of navigation instructions that effectively guide people. Template-based
language generators that use cardinal directions and street
names are commonly used in outdoor mapping applications, and some more flexible generation approaches rely
on databases containing information about maps, roads and
landmarks [17, 50, 51]. In contrast, instructions for indoor
wayfinding require egocentric movement guidance and reference to the visual environment (e.g. notable objects).
Systems for generating indoor wayfinding instructions
assume access to pre-existing floorplans and landmark
databases [42], but recent work attempts to generate novel

Figure 1. We generate grounded navigation instructions from a
sequence of 360◦ images captured along a route in a previously
unseen building. Our two-stage approach first detects landmarks
and then generates instructions conditioned on these landmarks.

instructions directly from visual inputs [22,39,58]. Progress
toward this goal will enable navigation aids that are conversational rather than map-based—and it could provide a virtually unlimited supply of high-quality synthetic navigation
instructions for training instruction-following robots. Describing navigation paths is also a key capability for humanrobot communication, equipping robots to answer questions
such as where did you go? or where should I meet you?.
We seek to generate accurate and fluent navigation
instructions–in multiple languages–directly from visual
representations and actions taken to traverse a path. Previous work assumed that the input to the instruction generator
is a sequence of 360◦ panoramic (henceforth, pano) images
captured at intervals on a path, typically training on instructions from Room-to-Room (R2R) [5] using Matterport3D
environments [9]. These models’ instructions have proven

15428

