Open-Set Text Recognition via Character-Context Decoupling
Chang Liu1
1

Chun Yang1,∗

Xu-Cheng Yin1,2,∗

School of Computer and Communication Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing
2

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, University of Science and Technology Beijing, China
lasercat@gmx.us, {chunyang, xuchengyin}@ustb.edu.cn

Abstract
The open-set text recognition task is an emerging challenge that requires an extra capability to cognize novel
characters during evaluation. We argue that a major cause
of the limited performance for current methods is the confounding effect of contextual information over the visual
information of individual characters. Under open-set scenarios, the intractable bias in contextual information can
be passed down to visual information, consequently impairing the classification performance. In this paper, a
Character-Context Decoupling framework is proposed to
alleviate this problem by separating contextual information and character-visual information. Contextual information can be decomposed into temporal information and linguistic information. Here, temporal information that models character order and word length is isolated with a detached temporal attention module. Linguistic information
that models n-gram and other linguistic statistics is separated with a decoupled context anchor mechanism. A variety of quantitative and qualitative experiments show that
our method achieves promising performance on open-set,
zero-shot, and close-set text recognition datasets.

1. Introduction
Text recognition is a well-studied task and has been
widely applied in various applications [7]. Most existing
text recognition methods assume characters in the testing
set are covered by the training set. Moreover, consistency
of contextual information between the training set and the
testing set is also assumed. These methods are not adaptable to recognize unseen characters without retraining the
model. However, as the language evolves, novel ligatures
(e.g., rare characters, emoticons, and foreign characters)
can be frequently used in a region during a certain period.
For example, foreign characters can be seen frequently in
scene text images as a result of globalization. Hence, it is

Figure 1. Illustration of the “salience region” [37] of each timestamp, showing where the models look at. Base model (top) tends
to seek the help from the context, while our framework (bottom)
focuses more on local character features.

unfeasible if the model needs to be retrained whenever a
“new character” emerges. This task is defined as the openset text recognition task [23], as a specific field of open-set
recognition [33] and a typical case of robust pattern recognition [54]. Currently, a few visual-matching-based text
recognition methods are capable to recognize novel characters in text lines [16, 23, 52].
However, these open-set text recognition methods tend
to be affected by contextual information captured from the
training set. This phenomenon can be seen in the salience
map (Fig. 1) 1 , and is also observed in [41]. In such cases,
feature representation for each character is always mixed
with linguistic information. This could benefit close-set
scenarios where the contextual information bias between
training and evaluation is negligible, as some characters
(e.g. ‘0’ and ‘O’) are hard to separate only by character visual information (glyph shapes). However, under open-set
scenarios, contextual information could be severely biased
from the training set. Consequentially, existing models may
mistakenly “correct” a character into a wrong one that fits
“better” in the context according to the training set [41].
To alleviate the impact of contextual information over
open-set text recognition, we propose a character-context
decoupling framework allowing explicit separation of character visual information and contextual information. Con-

∗ Corresponding authors.

1 https://github.com/MisaOgura/flashtorch

4523

