FLOAT: Factorized Learning of Object Attributes for Improved Multi-object
Multi-part Scene Parsing
Rishubh Singh1

Pranav Gupta2
Pradeep Shenoy1
Ravikiran Sarvadevabhatla2
1
2
Google Research
IIIT Hyderabad

{rishubh,shenoypradeep}@google.com, {ravi.kiran@,pranav.gu@research.}iiit.ac.in

Image

FLOAT (ours)

Ground-truth

BSANet

Figure 1. Multi-object multi-part semantic segmentation results for sample images from our expanded label space dataset, Pascal-Part201. Compared to state of the art BSANet [58], FLOAT accurately segments tiny parts (e.g. left eyebrow, right eyebrow on faces
in upper image) and handles scale variations better – note the size variations of person instances. Also, observe that FLOAT predicts
directional attributes of parts (e.g. ‘left’/‘right’) accurately – [‘left’/‘right’]: see eyebrow, eye, arm in upper image and leg in lower
image ; [‘front’/‘back’]: see wheel parts of the bicycle (lower image).

Abstract
Multi-object multi-part scene parsing is a challenging
task which requires detecting multiple object classes in a
scene and segmenting the semantic parts within each object. In this paper, we propose FLOAT, a factorized label
space framework for scalable multi-object multi-part parsing. Our framework involves independent dense prediction of object category and part attributes which increases
scalability and reduces task complexity compared to the
monolithic label space counterpart. In addition, we propose an inference-time ‘zoom’ refinement technique which
significantly improves segmentation quality, especially for
smaller objects/parts. Compared to state of the art, FLOAT
obtains an absolute improvement of 2.0% for mean IOU
(mIOU) and 4.8% for segmentation quality IOU (sqIOU) on
the Pascal-Part-58 dataset. For the larger Pascal-Part-108
dataset, the improvements are 2.1% for mIOU and 3.9% for
sqIOU. We incorporate previously excluded part attributes

and other minor parts of the Pascal-Part dataset to create the most comprehensive and challenging version which
we dub Pascal-Part-201. FLOAT obtains improvements of
8.6% for mIOU and 7.5% for sqIOU on the new dataset,
demonstrating its parsing effectiveness across a challenging diversity of objects and parts. The code and datasets
are available at floatseg.github.io.

1. Introduction
Semantic scene parsing is a foundational image understanding problem in the vision community [23,49,50,52,54,
55, 60]. Typically, the goal is to segment objects and “stuff”
regions (e.g. road, background) in the scene. Multi-object
multi-part parsing is a significantly more challenging variant which requires part-level segmentation of each scene
object [32, 40, 58]. Compared to traditional object-level
segmentation, semantic representations infused with finegrained part-level knowledge can provide richer informa-

1445

