Not All Tokens Are Equal: Human-centric Visual Analysis via
Token Clustering Transformer
Wang Zeng1 , Sheng Jin2,3 , Wentao Liu3 , Chen Qian3 , Ping Luo2 , Wanli Ouyang4 , and Xiaogang Wang1
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 The University of Hong Kong 3 SenseTime Research and Tetras.AI 4 The University of Sydney
{zengwang@link, xgwang@ee}.cuhk.edu.hk, {js20@connect, pluo@cs}.hku.hk,
{liuwentao, qianchen}@sensetime.com, wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Vision transformers have achieved great successes in
many computer vision tasks. Most methods generate vision tokens by splitting an image into a regular and fixed
grid and treating each cell as a token. However, not all regions are equally important in human-centric vision tasks,
e.g., the human body needs a fine representation with many
tokens, while the image background can be modeled by a
few tokens. To address this problem, we propose a novel
Vision Transformer, called Token Clustering Transformer
(TCFormer), which merges tokens by progressive clustering, where the tokens can be merged from different locations
with flexible shapes and sizes. The tokens in TCFormer
can not only focus on important areas but also adjust the
token shapes to fit the semantic concept and adopt a fine
resolution for regions containing critical details, which is
beneficial to capturing detailed information. Extensive experiments show that TCFormer consistently outperforms its
counterparts on different challenging human-centric tasks
and datasets, including whole-body pose estimation on
COCO-WholeBody and 3D human mesh reconstruction on
3DPW. Code is available at https://github.com/
zengwang430521/TCFormer.git.

1. Introduction
Human-centric tasks [12, 18, 21, 60, 69] of computer vision such as face alignment [2, 61, 76], human pose estimation [8, 22, 31, 37, 44, 45, 50, 54, 65, 67], and 3D human
mesh reconstruction [27, 29, 52, 74] have drawn increasing
research attention owing to their broad applications such as
action recognition, virtual reality, and augmented reality.
Inspired by the success of transformers in natural language processing, vision transformers are recently developed to solve human-centric computer vision tasks and
achieve state-of-the-art performance [33,35,40,66,71]. The

(a) Grid-based tokens in different stages

(b) Clustering-based tokens in different stages

Figure 1. Comparisons between vision tokens generated by (a)
standard grids and (b) TCFormer. The token regions of different
tokens, or the image regions represented by vision tokens, are visualized by different colors. From left to right, different images represent different stages. Grid-based tokens treat all regions equally
as shown in (a). While the tokens in (b) treat image regions dynamically. Tokens distribute more densely on the human body. For
background regions, a large area is represented by a single token
(in blue), while for the regions containing important details, such
as the face area, tokens with fine spatial sizes are used (in red).

properties of transformers such as the long-range attention
between image patches are beneficial to model the relationship between different body parts and thus are critical in
human-centric visual analysis.
Since the traditional transformers employed a sequence
of tokens as input, most existing vision transformers follow this paradigm by dividing an input image into a regular
and fixed grid, where each cell (image patch) is treated as a
token as shown in Figure 1 (a). The grid-based token generation is simple and achieves great successes in many computer vision tasks [10, 38, 57] such as image recognition,
object detection, and segmentation.

11101

