BARC: Learning to Regress 3D Dog Shape from Images
by Exploiting Breed Information
Nadine Rüegg1,2 , Silvia Zuffi3 , Konrad Schindler1 and Michael J. Black2
1

2

ETH Zürich, Switzerland
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
3
IMATI-CNR, Milan, Italy

Figure 1. Monocular 3D shape and pose regression of 3D dogs from 2D images. Since 3D training data is limited, BARC uses breed
information at training time via triplet and classification losses to learn how to regress realistic 3D shapes at test time.

Abstract
Our goal is to recover the 3D shape and pose of dogs
from a single image. This is a challenging task because
dogs exhibit a wide range of shapes and appearances, and
are highly articulated. Recent work has proposed to directly regress the SMAL animal model, with additional limb
scale parameters, from images. Our method, called BARC
(Breed-Augmented Regression using Classification), goes
beyond prior work in several important ways. First, we
modify the SMAL shape space to be more appropriate for
representing dog shape. But, even with a better shape
model, the problem of regressing dog shape from an image
is still challenging because we lack paired images with 3D
ground truth. To compensate for the lack of paired data,
we formulate novel losses that exploit information about
dog breeds. In particular, we exploit the fact that dogs of
the same breed have similar body shapes. We formulate
a novel breed similarity loss consisting of two parts: One
term encourages the shape of dogs from the same breed
to be more similar than dogs of different breeds. The sec-

ond one, a breed classification loss, helps to produce recognizable breed-specific shapes. Through ablation studies,
we find that our breed losses significantly improve shape
accuracy over a baseline without them. We also compare BARC qualitatively to WLDO with a perceptual study
and find that our approach produces dogs that are significantly more realistic. This work shows that a-priori information about genetic similarity can help to compensate
for the lack of 3D training data. This concept may be
applicable to other animal species or groups of species.
Our code is publicly available for research purposes at
https://barc.is.tue.mpg.de/.

1. Introduction
Learning to infer 3D models of articulated and non-rigid
objects from 2D images is challenging. For the case of humans, recent methods leverage detailed parametric models
of human body shape and pose, like SMPL [10]. Such models have been learned from thousands of high-resolution 3D
scans of people in varied poses. This approach cannot be

3876

