Multi-label Classification with Partial Annotations using Class-aware Selective Loss
Emanuel Ben-Baruch Tal Ridnik
Itamar Friedman Avi Ben-Cohen Nadav Zamir Asaf Noy Lihi Zelnik-Manor1
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
{emanuel.benbaruch, tal.ridnik, itamar.friedman, avi.bencohen, nadav.zamir, asaf.noy}
@alibaba-inc.com

1

lihi@ee.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Large-scale multi-label classification datasets are commonly, and perhaps inevitably, partially annotated. That
is, only a small subset of labels are annotated per sample. Different methods for handling the missing labels induce different properties on the model and impact its accuracy. In this work, we analyze the partial labeling problem, then propose a solution based on two key ideas. First,
un-annotated labels should be treated selectively according to two probability quantities: the class distribution in
the overall dataset and the specific label likelihood for a
given data sample. We propose to estimate the class distribution using a dedicated temporary model, and we show its
improved efficiency over a naı̈ve estimation computed using the dataset’s partial annotations. Second, during the
training of the target model, we emphasize the contribution of annotated labels over originally un-annotated labels
by using a dedicated asymmetric loss. With our novel approach, we achieve state-of-the-art results on OpenImages
dataset (e.g. reaching 87.3 mAP on V6). In addition, experiments conducted on LVIS and simulated-COCO demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach. Code is available
at https://github.com/Alibaba-MIIL/PartialLabelingCSL.

1. Introduction
Recently, a remarkable progress has been made in multilabel classification [4, 8, 17, 32]. Dedicated loss functions
were proposed in [2, 6, 30], as well as transformers based
approaches [5, 17, 21, 26]. In many common cases, such
as [7, 9, 12, 15, 16, 18], as the amounts of samples and labels
in the data increase, it becomes impractical to fully annotate
each image. For example, OpenImages dataset [16] consists of 9 million training images and having 9,600 classes.
An exhaustive annotation process would require annotating
more than 86 billion labels. As a result, partially labeled
data is inevitable in realistic large-scale multi-label classification tasks. A partially labeled image is annotated with

Figure 1. Challenges in partial annotation. (1) “Lip” and “Yellow” are clearly present in the left image but were not annotated
as positive labels. The middle and right images are annotated with
“Yellow” and “Lip” respectively, while not being dominant labels
in those images. (2) The deficiency of positive annotations is a key
challenge: classes that frequently appear in images (e.g. “Black”,
“Lip”) may be annotated much less compared to infrequent classes
(“Flower”, “Guitar”) (3) Most labels are un-annotated. How to exploit a temporary model’s predictions for the un-annotated labels
when training a target model?

a subset of positive labels and a subset of negative labels,
where the rest un-annotated labels are considered as unknown (Figure 1). Typically, the majority of the labels are
un-annotated. For example, on average, a picture in OpenImages is annotated with only 7 labels. Thus, the question
of how to treat the numerous un-annotated labels may have
a considerable impact on the learning process.
The basic training mode for handling the un-annotated
labels is simply to ignore their contribution in the loss
function, as proposed in [7]. We denote this mode as Ignore. While ignoring the un-annotated labels is a reasonable choice, it may lead to a poor decision boundary as it
exploits only a fraction of the data, see Figure 2(b). Moreover, in a typical multi-label dataset, the probability of a
label being negative is very high. Consequently, treating
the un-annotated labels as negative may improve the discriminative power as it enables the exploitation of the entire
data [15]. However, this training mode, denoted as Neg-

4764

