GAN-Supervised Dense Visual Alignment
William Peebles1
1

Jun-Yan Zhu2

UC Berkeley

2

Richard Zhang3

Antonio Torralba4

Carnegie Mellon University

3

Alexei A. Efros1

Adobe Research

Facebook AI Research (FAIR)

4

Eli Shechtman3

MIT CSAIL
Average Image

Input
Images

Congealed
Images

Correspondence
Visualization

Edit
Propagation

Figure 1. Given an input dataset of unaligned images, our GANgealing algorithm discovers dense correspondences between all images. Top
row: Images from LSUN Cats and the dataset’s average image. Second row: Our learned transformations of the input images. Third row:
Dense correspondences learned by GANgealing. Bottom row: By annotating the average transformed image, we can propagate user edits to
images and videos. Please see our project page for detailed video results: www.wpeebles.com/gangealing.

Abstract
We propose GAN-Supervised Learning, a framework for
learning discriminative models and their GAN-generated
training data jointly end-to-end. We apply our framework
to the dense visual alignment problem. Inspired by the classic Congealing method, our GANgealing algorithm trains
a Spatial Transformer to map random samples from a GAN
trained on unaligned data to a common, jointly-learned target mode. We show results on eight datasets, all of which
demonstrate our method successfully aligns complex data
and discovers dense correspondences. GANgealing significantly outperforms past self-supervised correspondence algorithms and performs on-par with (and sometimes exceeds)
state-of-the-art supervised correspondence algorithms on
several datasets—without making use of any correspondence
supervision or data augmentation and despite being trained
exclusively on GAN-generated data. For precise correspondence, we improve upon state-of-the-art supervised methods
by as much as 3⇥. We show applications of our method
for augmented reality, image editing and automated preprocessing of image datasets for downstream GAN training.
Code and models: www.github.com/wpeebles/gangealing

1. Introduction
Visual alignment, also known as the correspondence or
registration problem, is a critical element in much of computer vision, including optical flow, 3D matching, medical
imaging, tracking and augmented reality. While much recent
progress has been made on pairwise alignment (aligning image A to image B) [2, 14, 22, 34, 51, 57, 58, 60, 68–71, 75], the
problem of global joint alignment (aligning all images across
a dataset) has not received as much attention. Yet, joint alignment is crucial for tasks requiring a common reference frame,
such as automatic keypoint annotation, augmented reality
or edit propagation (see Figure 1 bottom row). There is
also evidence that training on jointly aligned datasets (such
as FFHQ [42], AFHQ [15], CelebA-HQ [40]) can produce
higher quality generative models than training on unaligned
data.
In this paper, we take inspiration from a series of classic
works on automatic joint image set alignment. In particular,
we are motivated by the seminal unsupervised Congealing
method of Learned-Miller [48] which showed that a set of images could be brought into alignment by continually warping
them toward a common, updating mode. While Congeal-

13470

