Semi-Supervised Wide-Angle Portraits Correction by Multi-Scale Transformer
Fushun Zhu 1 * Shan Zhao 2∗ Peng Wang 2∗ Hao Wang 2 Hua Yan 1† Shuaicheng Liu 3,2†
1
Sichuan University 2 Megvii Technology
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China

research/Portraits_Correction

1. Introduction
In recent years, a growing number of smartphones have
been equipped with wide-angle cameras, which take wideangle images with rich contents. However, a wider FOV
camera often causes severe perspective distortions, which
bends straight edges on buildings, and distorts faces, as
shown in Fig. 1(a). Therefore, an ideal intelligent algorithm
is required to correct the distortion image. After correction,
the faces will look more natural while the curved lines in
the background are also corrected, as shown in Fig. 1(b).
The traditional undistortion methods apply perspective
projection using calibrated camera parameters, which cor* Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors.

(a) Input Image

We propose a semi-supervised network for wide-angle
portraits correction. Wide-angle images often suffer from
skew and distortion affected by perspective distortion, especially noticeable at the face regions. Previous deep learning based approaches need the ground-truth correction flow
maps for training guidance. However, such labels are expensive, which can only be obtained manually. In this
work, we design a semi-supervised scheme and build a
high-quality unlabeled dataset with rich scenarios, allowing us to simultaneously use labeled and unlabeled data
to improve performance. Specifically, our semi-supervised
scheme takes advantage of the consistency mechanism, with
several novel components such as direction and range consistency (DRC) and regression consistency (RC). Furthermore, different from the existing methods, we propose the
Multi-Scale Swin-Unet (MS-Unet) based on the multi-scale
swin transformer block (MSTB), which can simultaneously
learn short-distance and long-distance information to avoid
artifacts. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed method is superior to the state-of-the-art methods
and other representative baselines. The source code and
dataset are available at https://github.com/megvii-

1

(b) Our Result

Abstract

1

1

2

1

2

2

2

Figure 1. An example of our method. (a) the original wide-angle
image with curved lines and distorted faces. (b) result by the proposed semi-supervised method, both lines and faces are corrected.

rectly warp the lines at the background to straight [3,8,24].
Nevertheless, faces on the image are stretched unnaturally
due to incorrect projection as a plane. Compared to perspective projection, the mercator and stereographic projections [28] can preserve the shape of faces locally, but they
also bend linear structures in the background [4].
It is obvious that facial regions and background need two
different types of projections for the wide-angle image correction. Carroll et al. [4] presented a content-preserving
approach that finds an optimal mapping solution according to the user-specified lines. Recently, Shih et al. [26]
designed an optimization problem to create a mesh that
adapts stereographic projection on facial regions regionally
and applies perspective projection on background, enabling
a smooth transition between portraits and background by
solving the optimization problem automatically. However,
the method [26] sometimes causes distorted architectures
nearby corrected faces. In addition, it requires portraits segmentation mask and camera parameters as additional inputs.
Tan et al. [29] proposed the first fully-supervised CNNbased method for wide-angle image correction, which consists of a line correction network and a portraits correction
network. Tan’s method obtained satisfactory results with
the distorted image as input. However, there still exists disadvantages in their work. First, it needs many training pho-

19689

