Lite-MDETR: A Lightweight Multi-Modal Detector
Qian Lou, Yen-Chang Hsu, Burak Uzkent, Ting Hua, Yilin Shen, Hongxia Jin
Samsung Research America
{qian.lou, yenchang.hsu, b.uzkent, ting.hua, yilin.shen, hongxia.jin}@samsung.com

Abstract
Recent multi-modal detectors based on transformers and
modality encoders have successfully achieved impressive
results on end-to-end visual object detection conditioned
on a raw text query. However, they require a large model
size and an enormous amount of computations to achieve
high performance, which makes it difficult to deploy mobile
applications that are limited by tight hardware resources.
In this paper, we present a Lightweight modulated detector,
Lite-MDETR, to facilitate efficient end-to-end multi-modal
understanding on mobile devices. The key primitive is that
Dictionary-Lookup-Transformormations (DLT) is proposed
to replace Linear Transformation (LT) in multi-modal detectors where each weight in Linear Transformation (LT)
is approximately factorized into a smaller dictionary, index, and coefficient. This way, the enormous linear projection with weights is converted into efficient linear projection with dictionaries, a few lookups and scalings with
indices and coefficients. DLT can be applied to any pretrained multi-modal detectors, removing the need to perform expensive training from scratch. To tackle the challenging training of DLT due to non-differentiable index, we
convert the index and coefficient into a sparse matrix, train
this sparse matrix during the fine-tuning phase, and recover
it back to index and coefficient during the inference phase.
Our experiments on phrase grounding, referring expression
comprehension and segmentation, and VQA show that our
Lite-MDETR achieves similar accuracy as the prior multimodal detectors with up to ∼ 4.1× model size reduction.

1. Introduction
Recently, multi-modal models on vision and language
data have shown increased performance on vision and language tasks thanks to the adoption of transformers and
large-scale pre-training [3, 7, 12, 21, 32]. These multi-modal
transformers substantially benefit from large model complexity and computationally costly pre-training on largescale datasets. Unfortunately, their large model complex-

Tiny Vision
Encoder

“the man in the
red shirt carrying
baseball bats”

the man: 1.00

DLT-based Multi-Modal Transformer

DLT-based Text Transformer

Figure 1. Our lightweight multi-modal Lite-MDETR using proposed DLT layers. We replace the linear transformation layers in
text encoder and multi-modal transformer with more efficient DLT
layers to reduce the model size.

ity prohibits us from deploying them on resource-limited
platforms, i.e., mobile devices [19, 31]. For this reason, improving the efficiency of recent multi-modal models is critical for real-world applications. However, there exists no
method that can leverage already pre-trained multi-modal
transformers while reducing their size as the existing methods [25, 26, 29] require pre-training the compressed model
on large-scale datasets.
Diving deeper into multi-modal models, we observe that
linear transformer layer (LT) in individual transformers
dominate large share of the overall model size. For example, a recently published state-of-the-art vision and languge
model, called MDETR [12], uses a vision and language
transformer based detector together with a language transformer and a CNN as backbones to process text and image
inputs. We find out that the LT layers in the text encoder, a
RoBERTa transformer [20], and vision and language transformer in MDETR occupy ∼ 90% of the model size. As
a result, it is reasonable to replace the traditional LT layers with more efficient layers to reduce the model size of
MDETR to achieve high accuracy while being able to deploy it on resource-limited real-world platforms.
Inspired by this finding, we propose Lightweight Dictionary Lookup Transform (DLT) layer that can replace the
costly LT layers in transformers in MDETR model. We
show integration of our DLT layers in MDETR in Figure 1.
As shown in the figure, we use the DLT layers in the text

12206

