Aladdin: Joint Atlas Building and Diffeomorphic Registration Learning
with Pairwise Alignment
Zhipeng Ding Marc Niethammer
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, USA
{zp-ding, mn}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
Atlas building and image registration are important tasks
for medical image analysis. Once one or multiple atlases
from an image population have been constructed, commonly (1) images are warped into an atlas space to study
intra-subject or inter-subject variations or (2) a possibly
probabilistic atlas is warped into image space to assign
anatomical labels. Atlas estimation and nonparametric
transformations are computationally expensive as they usually require numerical optimization. Additionally, previous approaches for atlas building often define similarity
measures between a fuzzy atlas and each individual image,
which may cause alignment difficulties because a fuzzy atlas does not exhibit clear anatomical structures in contrast
to the individual images. This work explores using a convolutional neural network (CNN) to jointly predict the atlas
and a stationary velocity field (SVF) parameterization for
diffeomorphic image registration with respect to the atlas.
Our approach does not require affine pre-registrations and
utilizes pairwise image alignment losses to increase registration accuracy. We evaluate our model on 3D knee magnetic resonance images (MRI) from the OAI-ZIB dataset.
Our results show that the proposed framework achieves better performance than other state-of-the-art image registration algorithms, allows for end-to-end training, and for fast
inference at test time.1

1. Introduction
Medical images can vary significantly across individuals
due to different organ shapes and sizes. Therefore, representing medical images to account for such variability is
crucial [27, 18]. A popular approach to represent and analyze medical images is through the use of one or more atlases [21, 9]. An atlas refers to a specific representation
for a population of images; typically a form of generalized
mean. An atlas can be used as a common coordinate system
1 Source code: https://github.com/uncbiag/Aladdin.

Figure 1: Different atlas evaluation approaches with 2 images. (a)
The labels of I1 and I2 are warped into atlas I’s space, where
their alignment is compared; (b) The probabilistic labels of atlas
I are warped into image I1 ’s (or I2 ’s) space, where alignment is
compared; (c) Using the atlas-as-a-bridge, each image’s labels are
warped to the other image’s space, where alignment is compared.

for the analysis of image segmentations or deformations or
to track changes in longitudinal data, e.g., for the purpose of
dose accumulation calculations in radiation treatment planning [54, 39]. One simple way to obtain an atlas is by
choosing one image from the image population [21, 33].
However, this approach may introduce bias due to the particular selected image and in consequence may lead to inaccurate analysis results [27]. To obtain an unbiased atlas, many groupwise registration methods [27, 29, 49] have
been proposed. These approaches achieve more accurate
overall alignments and more consistent registrations among
the images by simultaneously estimating a population atlas.
The quality of an atlas is usually evaluated in combination with the quality of the image registration algorithm.
For example, an atlas framework is often evaluated based
on the sharpness or entropy of the atlas [49, 29], the alignment of test images in the atlas space [23] (Fig. 1(a)), or
the alignment of the warped atlas in test image space [12]
(Fig. 1(b)). These evaluation measures all have shortcomings. For sharpness, it is unclear if a sharper atlas is indeed better, as the atlas is usually used as a common coordinate space to which images are registered. Thus the ability of a registration algorithm to align corresponding points
between images in atlas space may matter more than the
sharpness of the atlas itself. When measuring atlas quality
via the alignment of test images in atlas space, the performance between different atlases is not directly comparable,
because atlas quality is then measured in an atlas-specific

20784

