A sampling-based approach for efficient clustering in large datasets
Georgios Exarchakis∗
IHU Strasbourg, France
ICube, University of Strasbourg, CNRS, France
Sorbonne Université, INSERM, CNRS, France
Institut de la Vision, 17 rue Moreau, F-75012 Paris, France
georgios.exarchakis@ihu-strasbourg.eu
Omar Oubari
Sorbonne Université, INSERM, CNRS,
Institut de la Vision, 17 rue Moreau, F-75012 Paris, France
Gregor Lenz
Sorbonne Université, INSERM, CNRS,
Institut de la Vision, 17 rue Moreau, F-75012 Paris, France

Abstract
We propose a simple and efficient clustering method
for high-dimensional data with a large number of clusters.
Our algorithm achieves high-performance by evaluating distances of datapoints with a subset of the cluster centres. Our
contribution is substantially more efficient than k-means as
it does not require an all to all comparison of data points
and clusters. We show that the optimal solutions of our approximation are the same as in the exact solution. However,
our approach is considerably more efficient at extracting
these clusters compared to the state-of-the-art. We compare
our approximation with the exact k-means and alternative
approximation approaches on a series of standardised clustering tasks. For the evaluation, we consider the algorithmic
complexity, including number of operations to convergence,
and the stability of the results. An efficient implementation
of the algorithm is available online.

1. Introduction
Data clustering is an ubiquitous problem in Machine
Learning literature. One of the most popular approaches for
clustering is the k-means algorithm. Due to the simplicity of
the algorithm and relative efficiency of identifying clusters
the algorithm has found use in a wide range of fields, e.g.
medicine, physics and computer vision among many others.
With the increasingly large supply of data, computational
∗ Corresponding Author.

efficiency improvements become all the more significant.
Recent advances in approximate inference methods have
allowed for training algorithms with convergence performance that is sub-linear to the number of clusters [16]. This
is typically achieved by avoiding the comparison between
datapoints and clusters that lie far away in feature space.
Probabilistic data models that relate to the k-means algorithm can be found in Gaussian Mixture Models (GMM).
In particular, Lücke and Forster [31] detail the relationship between k-means and a variational approximation of
the Expectation Maximisation (EM) algorithm for isotropic
GMMs. In most cases, the GMM-based formulation of the
clustering problem provides higher likelihoods without introducing impractical constraints [31]. Theoretical developments in convergence analysis of Gaussian Mixture Models
(GMM) [9, 32, 35] concerning global and optimal convergence have sparked renewed interest in the field. Novel training algorithms that aim for stability [22,24] and increased efficiency [16,21] are actively being developed. Markov Chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods have also been employed
for fitting GMMs to account for input variation [13, 27, 36].
Tree-based methods have also been proposed for efficient
inference in k-means [19, 34]. However, tree-based methods
are known to exhibit instabilities when faced with small perturbations in the data, due to their recurrent structure, and
therefore are likely to produce substantially different clusters
for small changes in the input.
In this work, we propose a method for efficient EM-based
learning that uses a truncated approximation [29, 30] of the
posterior in the E-step. To identify the truncated space, we

12403

