Semi-Supervised Object Detection via Multi-instance Alignment with
Global Class Prototypes
Aoxue Li Peng Yuan Zhenguo Li
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, China
lax@pku.edu.cn, yuanpeng126@huawei.com, Li.Zhenguo@huawei.com

Abstract
Semi-Supervised object detection (SSOD) aims to improve the generalization ability of object detectors with
large-scale unlabeled images. Current pseudo-labelingbased SSOD methods individually learn from labeled data
and unlabeled data, without considering the relation between them. To make full use of labeled data, we propose a Multi-instance Alignment model which enhances
the prediction consistency based on Global Class Prototypes (MA-GCP). Specifically, we impose the consistency
between pseudo ground-truths and their high-IoU candidates by minimizing the cross-entropy loss of their class
distributions computed based on global class prototypes.
These global class prototypes are estimated with the whole
labeled dataset via the exponential moving average algorithm. To evaluate the proposed MA-GCP model, we integrate it into the state-of-the-art SSOD framework and experiments on two benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our MA-GCP approach.

1. Introduction
With a large amount of labeled data available, deep
learning has shown superior performance when solving object detection task. However, it is very costly to collect sufficient labeled data for each object category. Fortunately,
there are large amount of unlabeled data available which
can be collected from social media and websites. Semisupervised object detection (SSOD) is proposed to improve
the generalization ability of object detectors with largescale unlabeled images [8, 18, 23, 28, 31]. In SSOD, we are
given a labeled dataset and an unlabeled dataset. SSOD
aims to learn a object detector with good generalization
ability by using these labeled and unlabeled images.
To achieve this goal, existing SSOD approaches usually adopt two strategies: consistency-based SSOD [12,
13, 30] and pseudo-labeling-based SSOD [18, 22, 26–29,
31]. Consistency-based approaches train the target detec-

tor by minimizing inconsistency between prediction results
of unlabeled data with different perturbations. Their performance highly depends on the design of perturbations
and the measurement of consistency. Recently, pseudolabeling-based approaches become popular. As shown in
the yellow box of Figure 1, they adopt a teacher-student
learning framework. Specifically, the pseudo labels of unlabeled images are first estimated by using a teacher detector followed by a label refinement module. Then, they
jointly train a student detector with both labeled and unlabeled images. The detection losses of labeled and unlabeled
images are used to optimize the parameters of student detector. Teacher detector’s parameters are updated with the
parameters of student detector via Exponential Moving Average (EMA) algorithm or pretrained with all labeled images. However, these models individually train the student
detector with labeled data and unlabeled data. That is, their
detection losses of labeled and unlabeled data update the
student detector individually, without considering the relation between them.
This work fully leverages the labeled images to improve
SSOD by developing a Multi-instance Alignment model
with Global Class Prototypes (MA-GCP). Our key insight
is to better estimate prediction consistency of unlabeled images by using the reliable information learned from all labeled images. By enforcing the consistency regularization
in the pseudo-labeling-based framework, our approach can
improve its detection performance.
Specifically, we assume each class is represented by a
prototype in the feature space. As shown in the green box
of Figure 1, each prototype is progressed with region features of the corresponding category via EMA algorithm.
Since each prototype is updated with all labeled instances
during the whole training process, we call it global class
prototype. Then, we compute the class distributions of unlabeled images’ proposals based on its visual similarity with
each global class prototype. After that, we impose consistency between each pseudo ground-truth proposal and its
candidate proposals with high Intersection-of-Union (IoU)
scores by minimizing the cross-entropy loss of their class

9809

