Patch-level Representation Learning for Self-supervised Vision Transformers
Sukmin Yun
Hankook Lee
Jaehyung Kim
Jinwoo Shin
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{sukmin.yun, hankook.lee, jaehyungkim, jinwoos}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Recent self-supervised learning (SSL) methods have
shown impressive results in learning visual representations
from unlabeled images. This paper aims to improve their
performance further by utilizing the architectural advantages of the underlying neural network, as the current stateof-the-art visual pretext tasks for SSL do not enjoy the benefit, i.e., they are architecture-agnostic. In particular, we focus on Vision Transformers (ViTs), which have gained much
attention recently as a better architectural choice, often outperforming convolutional networks for various visual tasks.
The unique characteristic of ViT is that it takes a sequence
of disjoint patches from an image and processes patch-level
representations internally. Inspired by this, we design a
simple yet effective visual pretext task, coined SelfPatch, for
learning better patch-level representations. To be specific,
we enforce invariance against each patch and its neighbors, i.e., each patch treats similar neighboring patches
as positive samples. Consequently, training ViTs with SelfPatch learns more semantically meaningful relations among
patches (without using human-annotated labels), which can
be beneficial, in particular, to downstream tasks of a dense
prediction type. Despite its simplicity, we demonstrate that
it can significantly improve the performance of existing SSL
methods for various visual tasks, including object detection
and semantic segmentation. Specifically, SelfPatch significantly improves the recent self-supervised ViT, DINO, by
achieving +1.3 AP on COCO object detection, +1.2 AP on
COCO instance segmentation, and +2.9 mIoU on ADE20K
semantic segmentation.

1. Introduction
Recently, self-supervised learning (SSL) has achieved
successful results in learning visual representations from
unlabeled images with a variety of elaborate pretext tasks,
including contrastive learning [5, 6, 14], clustering [3], and
pseudo-labeling [4, 7, 13]. The common nature of their designs is on utilizing different augmentations from the same
image as the positive pairs, i.e., they learn representations

to be invariant to the augmentations. The SSL approaches
without utilizing human-annotated labels have been competitive with or even outperformed the standard supervised
learning [16] in various downstream tasks, including image
classification [6], object detection [3], and segmentation [3].
Meanwhile, motivated by the success of Transformers
[29] in natural language processing [1, 10], Vision Transformers (ViTs) [11, 27, 28] have gained much attention
as an alternative to convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
with superior performance over CNNs in various visual
tasks [25,27]. For example, ViT-S/16 [27] has a 1.8× faster
throughput than ResNet-152 [16] with higher accuracy in
the ImageNet [9] benchmark.
There have been several recent attempts to apply existing
self-supervision techniques to ViTs [4, 8, 36]. Although the
techniques have shown to be also effective with ViTs, they
do not fully utilize the architectural advantages of ViTs,
i.e., their pretext tasks are architecture-agnostic. For example, ViTs are able to process patch-level representations,
but pretext tasks used in the existing SSL schemes only use
the whole image-level self-supervision without considering
learning patch-level representations. As a result, existing
self-supervised ViTs [4, 8] may fail to capture semantically
meaningful relations among patches; e.g., collapsed selfattention maps of among patches as shown in the second
row of Fig. 1. This limitation inspires us to investigate the
following question: how to utilize architectural characteristics of ViTs for improving the quality of learned patch-level
representations without human-annotated supervision?
Contribution. In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective SSL scheme for learning patch-level representations,
coined SelfPatch, which can be beneficial to various visual
downstream tasks. Our patch-level SSL scheme, SelfPatch,
can be incorporated into any image-level self-supervised
ViT, e.g., DINO [4], MoCo-v3 [8] and MoBY [36], for
learning both global (i.e., image-level) and local (i.e., patchlevel) information simultaneously. Fig. 1 shows that SelfPatch enhances the quality of self-attention maps of DINO,
which is evidence that SelfPatch encourages to learn better
patch-level representations.
Our key idea is to treat semantically similar neighboring

8354

