Boosting 3D Object Detection by Simulating Multimodality on Point Clouds
Wu Zheng1 Mingxuan Hong1,2 Li Jiang3 Chi-Wing Fu1,2
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, CUHK
2
3
Shun Hing Institute of Advanced Engineering, CUHK
Max Planck Institute
{wuzheng, cwfu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

lijiang@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
This paper presents a new approach to boost a singlemodality (LiDAR) 3D object detector by teaching it to simulate features and responses that follow a multi-modality
(LiDAR-image) detector. The approach needs LiDAR-image
data only when training the single-modality detector, and
once well-trained, it only needs LiDAR data at inference.
We design a novel framework to realize the approach: response distillation to focus on the crucial response samples
and avoid most background samples; sparse-voxel distillation to learn voxel semantics and relations from the estimated crucial voxels; a fine-grained voxel-to-point distillation to better attend to features of small and distant objects;
and instance distillation to further enhance the deep-feature
consistency. Experimental results on the nuScenes dataset
show that our approach outperforms all SOTA LiDAR-only
3D detectors and even surpasses the baseline LiDAR-image
detector on the key NDS metric, filling ∼72% mAP gap between the single- and multi-modality detectors.

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art 3D object detectors, e.g., [11, 33, 48, 51,
54], widely adopt LiDAR-produced point clouds as the major input modality, since point clouds offer precise depth information and are robust to varying weather condition and
illumination. Yet, due to the laser-ray divergence, the sparsity of point clouds increases with distance. So, there are
only few points in small and distant objects, making it very
hard to predict their object boundaries and semantic classes.
On the other hand, camera-produced images are a popular modality for monocular and stereo 3D object detection [7,16,21,22,31]. As images offer clear appearance and
texture with dense pixels, image-based detectors can easily
recognize the object boundaries and classify even small and
distant objects. Yet, images have no depth information and
the visibility of objects depends on the environment conditions, e.g., lighting, so image-based detectors usually cannot
be as accurate and robust as the LiDAR-based ones.

Four levels of Distillation
1 Sparse-Voxel Feature
Single-Modality
SSD

2 Voxel-to-Point Feature
3

Instance Feature

Multi-Modality
SSD

4 Detection Response

Close
Precisions

Figure 1. Overview of our Simulated Single-to-Multi-Modality
Single-Stage 3D object Detector (S2M2-SSD) framework, by
which we can train a single-modality SSD to learn from a multimodality SSD and to achieve a high precision close to the multimodality SSD but with only single-modality input at inference.

Some recent works [17, 27, 41, 44, 52] started to explore
the fusion of 3D point clouds and 2D RGB images for improving the feature quality. While higher precisions can often be attained, multi-modality detectors unavoidably sacrifice the inference efficiency for processing the extra modality. Also, it is tedious to calibrate and synchronize different
sensors, spatially and temporally, for high-quality data fusion. Last, a breakdown of any modality sensor will cause a
detector failure, thus reducing the system’s fault tolerance.
In this work, we propose to teach a single-modality network to produce simulated multi-modality features and responses from only LiDAR input by training the network to
learn from a multi-modality LiDAR-image detector. Our
approach needs multi-modality data only when training the
single-modality network, and once it is well-trained, it can
detect 3D objects without image inputs. This approach perfectly meets the sheer practical need of autonomous driving and boosts single-modality 3D object detection for (i)
high efficiency, since our approach needs to process only
LiDAR data at inference; (ii) high precision, since our network outperforms the SOTA LiDAR-only detectors; and

13638

