RIDDLE: Lidar Data Compression with Range Image Deep Delta Encoding
Xuanyu Zhou∗ Charles R. Qi∗

Yin Zhou

Dragomir Anguelov

Waymo LLC

Abstract
Lidars are depth measuring sensors widely used in autonomous driving and augmented reality. However, the
large volume of data produced by lidars can lead to high
costs in data storage and transmission. While lidar data can
be represented as two interchangeable representations: 3D
point clouds and range images, most previous work focus on
compressing the generic 3D point clouds. In this work, we
show that directly compressing the range images can leverage the lidar scanning pattern, compared to compressing
the unprojected point clouds. We propose a novel datadriven range image compression algorithm, named RIDDLE (Range Image Deep DeLta Encoding). At its core is
a deep model that predicts the next pixel value in a raster
scanning order, based on contextual laser shots from both
the current and past scans (represented as a 4D point cloud
of spherical coordinates and time). The deltas between predictions and original values can then be compressed by entropy encoding. Evaluated on the Waymo Open Dataset and
KITTI, our method demonstrates significant improvement in
the compression rate (under the same distortion) compared
to widely used point cloud and range image compression
algorithms as well as recent deep methods.

1. Introduction
Lidar (or LiDAR, short for light detection and ranging)
sensors are commonly used in applications that require 3D
scene understanding such as autonomous driving and augmented reality. However, with the growing resolution of
lidars, storing and transmitting large volumes of sequential
lidar data become a challenge. There is a strong need to
develop effective algorithms for lidar data compression.
While the measurements of a lidar scan are often used as
a 3D point cloud, the raw lidar data can be represented as
a more structured format: a range image, where each pixel
corresponds to a laser shot, each row represents shots from
the same laser, each column represents shots at a specific azimuth rotation angle. Given the lidar scanning mechanism
∗ equal contribution

(directions of the lasers) and sensor poses (6D poses in the
global coordinate at the timestamp of every shot), a range
image and its corresponding point cloud can be converted
interchangeably and losslessly. By organizing the points in
a range image, instead of storing the three-dimensional coordinates of the points, we can just store one-dimensional
ranges (around 3x saving in storage). Given this observation, in contrast to previous works that focus on compressing 3D point clouds [9, 16, 23], we propose to directly compress range images to leverage the lidar scanning patterns.
As range images are in the image format, naturally we
can apply existing compression methods for optical images
(RGB or grayscale); however, those methods have their limitations. For example, the PNG format is often used to compress depth images in indoor datasets [4, 11, 25], where the
depth value are normalized and quantized to 16-bit integers
and compressed losslessly. While PNG also applies to compress lidar range images, it is not data-driven and does not
use temporal information. There are also attempts to use
auto-encoder networks [31] to lossily compress range images by storing the bottleneck layer output. However, as
range values often have a much wider distribution than RGB
colors, it is challenging to learn an accurate reconstruction,
especially at the object boundaries.
In this work, we propose RIDDLE (Range Image Deep
DeLta Encoding), a data-driven algorithm to compress
range images with predictive neural networks (Fig. 2). Our
method is inspired by the use of delta encoding in PNG image compression. However, instead of simply computing a
difference between close-by pixels, we adopt a deep model
to predict the pixel value from context pixels. The deep
model takes a local patch of the decoded range image and
predicts the attributes of the next pixel in a raster-scanning
order (a similar process to the sequential image decoder
PixelCNN [33]). We can then entropy encode the residuals between the predicted values and the original values to
achieve lossless compression under a chosen quantization
rate. In this scheme, the more accurate the prediction is,
the smaller the entropy of the residuals are – improving the
compression rate is equivalent to developing a more accurate predictive model.
What is unique in our model design is that we represent

17212

