Practical Learned Lossless JPEG Recompression with Multi-Level
Cross-Channel Entropy Model in the DCT Domain
Lina Guo12 *, Xinjie Shi1 *, Dailan He1 *, Yuanyuan Wang1 , Rui Ma1 , Hongwei Qin1 , Yan Wang13†
SenseTime Research1 , National University of Defense Technology2 , Tsinghua University3
{guolina1, shixinjie, hedailan, wangyuanyuan, marui, qinhongwei, wangyan1}@sensetime.com
guolina19@nudt.edu.cn, wangyan@air.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
JPEG is a popular image compression method widely
used by individuals, data center, cloud storage and network
filesystems. However, most recent progress on image compression mainly focuses on uncompressed images while ignoring trillions of already-existing JPEG images. To compress these JPEG images adequately and restore them back
to JPEG format losslessly when needed, we propose a deep
learning based JPEG recompression method that operates
on DCT domain and propose a Multi-Level Cross-Channel
Entropy Model to compress the most informative Y component. Experiments show that our method achieves stateof-the-art performance compared with traditional JPEG
recompression methods including Lepton, JPEG XL and
CMIX. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first learned
compression method that losslessly transcodes JPEG images to more storage-saving bitstreams.

1. Introduction
JPEG [44], a popular image compression algorithm, is
used by billions of people daily and JPEG images spread
widely in data center, cloud storage and network filesystems. According to a survey, in operating network filesystems like Dropbox, JPEG images make up roughly 35% of
bytes stored [21]. However, most of these images are not
sufficiently compressed due to the limitation of JPEG algorithm: relying on hand-crafted module design and hard to
eliminate data redundancy adequately. Actually, JPEG algorithm has been developed for many years so that it has already been outperformed by other more recent image compression methods, such as JPEG2000 [34], BPG [10], intra
coding of VVC/H.266 [31] and deep-learning based methods [8, 9, 29]. However, these subsequent image compres-

sion methods devote to process original images in lossless
format like PNG while ignoring the need of further compressing trillions of existing JPEG images losslessly.
Considering the recompression needs of storage service,
there exist several methods on further compression of JPEG
images, e.g. Lepton [21], JPEG XL [6, 7], and CMIX [1].
However, they rely on hand-crafted features and independently optimized modules, limiting compression efficiency.
Along with the quick proliferation of mobile devices saving and uploading JPEG images, these storage systems have
become gargantuan and existing JPEG recompression algorithms are not expected to be optimal and general solutions
to storage challenges faced by service providers.
We propose an efficient JPEG image lossless recompression neural network using quantized DCT [5] coefficients
as input, which is stored in the JPEG file. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first work proposing a deep learning based model dedicated for lossless recompression of
JPEG images and outperforms existing traditional methods
including Lepton, JPEG XL, and CMIX by a large margin.
In our method, JPEG in YCbCr 4:2:0 format is considered because of its popularity. As shown in Fig. 1, we first
construct a color-space entropy model for YCbCr 4:2:0 format which extracts side information z as prior to build conditional distribution of the three components. Then we further exploit the correlation of Y, Cb, and Cr components sequentially (i.e. Cb component conditioned on Cr, Y component conditioned on both Cb and Cr). Additionally, since Y
component is much more informative than Cb and Cr components, we propose a Multi-Level Cross-Channel (MLCC)
entropy enhancement model for Y component to reduce the
mismatch between estimated and true data distribution.
In conclusion, our main contributions include:
• We propose an end-to-end lossless compression model
for images already encoded with JPEG format. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first approach investigating learning-based JPEG recompression, which further benefits the widely adopted JPEG format based on

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author. This work is done when Lina Guo, Xinjie Shi,

and Rui Ma are interns at SenseTime Research.

5862

