FvOR: Robust Joint Shape and Pose Optimization for Few-view Object Reconstruction
Zhenpei Yang1 Zhile Ren2 Miguel Angel Bautista2
Zaiwei Zhang1 Qi Shan2 Qixing Huang1
1
The University of Texas at Austin 2 Apple

Abstract
Reconstructing an accurate 3D object model from a few
image observations remains a challenging problem in computer vision. State-of-the-art approaches typically assume
accurate camera poses as input, which could be difficult to
obtain in realistic settings. In this paper, we present FvOR,
a learning-based object reconstruction method that predicts
accurate 3D models given a few images with noisy input
poses. The core of our approach is a fast and robust multiview reconstruction algorithm to jointly refine 3D geometry and camera pose estimation using learnable neural network modules. We provide a thorough benchmark of stateof-the-art approaches for this problem on ShapeNet. Our
approach achieves best-in-class results. It is also two orders of magnitude faster than the recent optimization-based
approach IDR [67].

1. Introduction
Reconstructing the 3D shape of objects solely from unregistered RGB inputs is a long-standing problem in computer vision. One popular pipeline is to integrate Structurefrom-Motion (SfM) and Multi-view Stereo (MVS) [24, 35].
A common principle of this popular pipeline is to recover
relative camera poses, establish pixel correspondences (either explicitly or implicitly), and solve triangulation to obtain a dense reconstruction. The success of this paradigm
relies on dense image coverage to obtain accurate camera
poses and correspondences [1, 18, 19, 49]. Enabled by the
emergence of large scale 3D datasets that provide shape priors about 3D objects, a recent line of works focus on learning monocular 3D reconstruction [9, 13, 14, 21, 59, 60]. The
general idea is to learn multi-scale correlation priors among
different regions of geometric shapes, which are used to infer complete geometry from partial observations.
Acquiring dense input views is crucial for achieving
good 3D reconstruction quality on current pipelines, but it
is also a very tedious and not user-friendly process. For in∗ Experiments are conducted by Z. Yang at The University of Texas
at Austin. Email: yzp@utexas.edu

OccNet† [2, 37]

IDR [67]

FvOR (Ours)

Figure 1. Our approach FvOR outperforms state-of-the-art approaches of few-view 3D reconstruction.

stance, a casual non-expert user that just began using 3D
reconstruction applications (such as creating 3D models of
their house), may overlook the strict requirements of capturing high-quality dense views.
In this paper, we study the setting of few-view reconstruction [9], which sits between dense-view reconstruction
and single-view reconstruction. The promise of this setting
is that the input views cover the most of underlying object,
and one only needs to fill in a small portion of missing regions, a task that is easier to achieve than single-view reconstruction. The ultimate goal is to match the quality of dense
reconstruction while significantly reducing the number of
inputs. While both few-view reconstruction and single-view
reconstruction fall into the category of learning-based approaches, the performance of few-view reconstruction relies on accurate image poses, which could be challenging
to estimate from the input images themselves in realistic
scenarios. In dense-view reconstruction, the SfM pipeline
estimates image poses by first predicting relative camera
poses using feature correspondences and then performing
synchronization [6, 11] to extract absolute camera poses.
However, this pipeline does not apply to few-view reconstruction as there are only a few images, which makes the

2497

