It’s Time for Artistic Correspondence in Music and Video
“

Dı́dac Surı́sˇ (
Columbia University

Carl Vondrick
Columbia University

Bryan Russell
Adobe Research

Justin Salamon
Adobe Research

didacsuris@cs.columbia.edu

musicvideo.cs.columbia.edu
This is a description of the music track
provided by the authors (and not used by
the model), just to help visualize the figure

This is the spectrogram of
the retrieved music track

Query Video

Retrieved Music

Query Music

Spanish-speaking male singing to a
reggaeton beat, that matches the
dancing beat of the person in the video

Heavy metal music with drums
and electric guitars, and a male
singer screaming

Funk-rock music playing, with
vocals and guitars

Pop sang by a teenager female
voice, Disney Channel-style

Bubble pop music, rhythmic

Rap English music on top of
a simple base, male voice

Female vocalist playing singing pop
music on top of a guitar and drums

Electronic house music, no
vocals, fast tempo

Retrieved Video

Figure 1. We present an approach for recommending a music track for a given video, and vice versa. We model the long-term temporal
context of both signals, allowing our model to capture the high-level artistic correspondences between them. Our model learns a strong
audiovisual representation that allows us to retrieve videos and music that look and sound natural to humans. On the left we show query
video segments with the corresponding retrieved music segments, and on the right we show the opposite retrieval direction. Our model’s
audiovisual correspondence exploits artistic attributes such as music genre or rhythm.

Abstract
We present an approach for recommending a music track
for a given video, and vice versa, based on both their temporal alignment and their correspondence at an artistic level.
We propose a self-supervised approach that learns this correspondence directly from data, without any need of human
annotations. In order to capture the high-level concepts
that are required to solve the task, we propose modeling
the long-term temporal context of both the video and the
music signals, using Transformer networks for each modality. Experiments show that this approach strongly outperforms alternatives that do not exploit the temporal context.
The combination of our contributions improve retrieval accuracy up to 10× over prior state of the art. This strong
improvement allows us to introduce a wide range of analyses and applications. For instance, we can condition music
retrieval based on visually defined attributes.

ˇ “( Work partly done during an internship at Adobe Research.

1. Introduction
Music is a crucial component of video creation, for
example soundtracks in feature film, music for advertisements, background music in video blogs, or creative uses
of music in social media. However, choosing the right music for a video is difficult—the video creator needs to determine what kind of music to use for different moments
in the video and then search for this music. Each of these
tasks presents difficulties: choosing the right music to set
the mood of a video can be hard for non-professionals and,
even when you know what type of music you want, it can be
hard to search for it using conventional text-based methods.
It is very hard to describe the “feel” of a song in words and
metadata-based search engines are not well suited for this
task. An automated tool to suggest relevant music given
video footage as input could be of great value to a range
of creators, from beginners and amateurs in need of a simple solution, through to communicators and professionals
in search of inspiration. The inverse problem, matching

10564

