Integrating Language Guidance into Vision-based Deep Metric Learning
Karsten Roth1 , Oriol Vinyals2 , Zeynep Akata1,3
1
University of Tübingen, 2 DeepMind, 3 MPI for Intelligent Systems

Abstract
Deep Metric Learning (DML) proposes to learn metric spaces which encode semantic similarities as embedding space distances. These spaces should be transferable to classes beyond those seen during training. Commonly, DML methods task networks to solve contrastive
ranking tasks defined over binary class assignments. However, such approaches ignore higher-level semantic relations between the actual classes. This causes learned embedding spaces to encode incomplete semantic context and
misrepresent the semantic relation between classes, impacting the generalizability of the learned metric space. To
tackle this issue, we propose a language guidance objective for visual similarity learning. Leveraging language embeddings of expert- and pseudo-classnames, we contextualize and realign visual representation spaces corresponding to meaningful language semantics for better semantic
consistency. Extensive experiments and ablations provide
a strong motivation for our proposed approach and show
language guidance offering significant, model-agnostic improvements for DML, achieving competitive and state-ofthe-art results on all benchmarks. Code available at
github.com/ExplainableML/LanguageGuidance for DML.

1. Introduction
Visual similarity learning with deep networks drives important applications such as image retrieval [94, 115], face
verification [19, 63], clustering [6] or contrastive supervised [49] and unsupervised representation learning [13,
39]. Deep Metric Learning (DML) has proven a useful
and widely adopted framework to contextualize visual similarities by learning (deep) metric representation/embedding
spaces in which a predefined distance metric, such as the euclidean or cosine distance, has a strong connection to the actual underlying semantic similarity of two samples [72, 91].
In most visual similarity tasks, transfer beyond just the
training distribution and classes is crucial, which requires
learned representation spaces to encode meaningful semantic context that generalizes beyond relations seen during
training. However, the majority of DML methods introduce

Figure 1. Language-guidance for better semantic visual alignment. We leverage language context to better align learned metric
spaces with higher-level semantic relations and significantly improve generalization performance.

training paradigms based only around class labels provided
in given datasets to define ranking tasks for networks to
solve. This treats every class the same, with the arrangement of classes in embedding space solely derived from
the class-label generated ranking tasks. In doing so, highlevel semantic connections between different classes (e.g.
sports cars vs. pickup trucks) can’t be accounted for, even
though semantic context beyond what can be derived from
purely discriminative class labels facilitates stronger generalization especially to novel classes [60, 66, 88, 123]. And
while contextualization via e.g. the definition of hierarchies
[4, 10, 17, 22] can help refine classlabels, such approaches
commonly rely on predefined rules or expert knowledge.
To address this problem, we propose to leverage the large
corpora of readily available, large-scale pretrained natural
language models 1 to provide task-independent contextualization for class labels and encourage DML models to learn
semantically more consistent visual representation spaces.
Using language-based pretraining for contextualization of
visual similarities is long overdue - for vision-based DML,
pretraining (on ImageNet) has already become standard
1 S.a. transformer language models [107] with strong zero-/fewshot
generalization [8, 23, 64, 83, 84] across a large variety of applications. Provided e.g. through public libraries such as huggingface [113].

16177

