Generating Representative Samples for Few-Shot Classification
Jingyi Xu
Stony Brook University

Hieu Le*
Amazon Robotics

jingyixu@cs.stonybrook.edu

ahieu@amazon.com

Abstract
Few-shot learning (FSL) aims to learn new categories
with a few visual samples per class. Few-shot class representations are often biased due to data scarcity. To mitigate this issue, we propose to generate visual samples
based on semantic embeddings using a conditional variational autoencoder (CVAE) model. We train this CVAE
model on base classes and use it to generate features for
novel classes. More importantly, we guide this VAE to
strictly generate representative samples by removing nonrepresentative samples from the base training set when
training the CVAE model. We show that this training
scheme enhances the representativeness of the generated
samples and therefore, improves the few-shot classification results. Experimental results show that our method
improves three FSL baseline methods by substantial margins, achieving state-of-the-art few-shot classification performance on miniImageNet and tieredImageNet datasets
for both 1-shot and 5-shot settings. Code is available
at: https://github.com/cvlab-stonybrook/
fsl-rsvae.

1. Introduction
Few-shot learning (FSL) methods aim to learn useful
representations with limited training data. They are extremely useful for situations where machine learning solutions are required but large labelled datasets are not trivial to obtain (e.g. rare medical conditions [49, 71], rare
animal species [75], failure cases in autonomous systems
[42,43,58]). Generally, FSL methods learn knowledge from
a fixed set of base classes with a surplus of labelled data and
then adapt the learned model to a set of novel classes for
which only a few training examples are available [73].
Many FSL methods [10, 23, 39, 65, 65, 77, 82] employ a
prototype-based classifier for its simplicity and good performance. They aim to find a prototype for each novel class
such that it is close to the testing samples of the same class
and far away from testing samples for other classes. How* Work done outside of Amazon

Representative
samples

Non-representative
samples

Gaussian
distribution

Figure 1. Representative Samples. We refer representative samples to the “easy-to-recognize” samples that faithfully reflect the
key characteristics of the category. We identify those samples and
then use them to train a VAE model for feature generation, conditioned on class-representative semantic embeddings. We show
that the generated data significantly improves few-shot classification performance.

ever, it is challenging to estimate a representative prototype
just from a few available support samples [37,79]. An effective strategy to enhance the representativeness of the prototype is to employ textual semantic embeddings learned via
NLP models [13, 46, 52, 53] using large unsupervised text
corpora [77, 82]. These semantic embeddings implicitly
associate a class name, such as “Yorkshire Terriers”, with
the class representative semantic attributes such as “smallest dog” or “long coat” [1] ( Fig. 1), providing strong and
unbiased priors for category recognition.
For the most part, current FSL methods focus on learning to adaptively leverage the semantic information to complete the original biased prototype estimated from the few
available samples. For example, the recent FSL method of
Zhang et al. [82] learns to fuse the primitive knowledge and
attribute features into a representative prototype, depending
on the set of given few-shot samples. Similarly, Xing et
al. [77] propose a method that computes an adaptive mixture coefficient to combine features from the visual and tex-

9003

