Bring Evanescent Representations to Life in Lifelong Class Incremental
Learning

1

Marco Toldo 1,2 *
Samsung Research UK

2

Mete Ozay1
University of Padova

marco.toldo@dei.unipd.it

m.ozay@samsung.com

Evanescent
Representations

Abstract
In Class Incremental Learning (CIL), a classification
model is progressively trained at each incremental step on
an evolving dataset of new classes, while at the same time,
it is required to preserve knowledge of all the classes observed so far. Prototypical representations can be leveraged to model feature distribution for the past data and inject information of former classes in later incremental steps
without resorting to stored exemplars. However, if not updated, those representations become increasingly outdated
as the incremental learning progresses with new classes. To
address the aforementioned problems, we propose a framework which aims to (i) model the semantic drift by learning the relationship between representations of past and
novel classes among incremental steps, and (ii) estimate
the feature drift, defined as the evolution of the representations learned by models at each incremental step. Semantic and feature drifts are then jointly exploited to infer
up-to-date representations of past classes (evanescent representations), and thereby infuse past knowledge into incremental training. We experimentally evaluate our framework
achieving exemplar-free SotA results on multiple benchmarks. In the ablation study, we investigate nontrivial relationships between evanescent representations and models.

1. Introduction
Continual learning (also called lifelong learning) refers
to the ability to continuously learn and adapt to new environments, exploiting knowledge gained from the past for
solving novel tasks. Though being a common human trait,
lifelong learning methods are hardly deployed in practical
systems. As a matter of fact, learning models are usually
constrained to well-defined and narrow tasks, where they
can achieve remarkable performance. Nonetheless, when
training a model on a continuous stream of tasks, the catastrophic forgetting arises; new information acquired by the
* Researched during internship at Samsung Research UK

Decision
boundaries

New class
representations
Evanescent
representations
of old classes

Learning new
classes causes
representations
of past data
to change

Catastrophic
Forgetting by
Representation
Evanescence

Modeling Semantic Drift

Old class
prototype

Revived
Evanescent
Representations

Semantic
drift (learned)
Semantic
drift (inferred)
Feature drift
(learned)
Feature drift
(inferred)

Modeling Feature Drift
Revived
Evanescent
Representations

Figure 1. In CIL, training models on new classes causes representations of past categories to constantly change. Yet, unavailability
of data of former classes prevents from tracking their evolution in
feature spaces, leading to evanescence of their representations and,
in turn, to catastrophic forgetting. We propose to model representation drift on a semantic level (i.e., relationship among novel and
past classes) and on a feature level (i.e., the combined evolution of
features learned by a classification model), and exploit it to infer
up-to-date representations of past classes. By injecting old-class
knowledge into the learning process, we counteract forgetting.

model tends to erase what has been experienced so far.
Continual learning has been extensively studied in a
class incremental fashion [6, 22, 23]. In class incremental
learning (CIL), a model is employed with sequential tasks,
where classes to be learned progressively change (Fig. 1).
For each incremental training task and step t, the training
set is composed of images belonging to the current class set
Ct , whereas past semantic categories Cold , {Ct0 }tt−1
0 =1 lack
any training sample. The goal of the model is to maximise
the generalisation (classification) accuracy on all the classes
observed up to the current step. Yet, the change of distribution of training data Dt in the form of semantic drift (i.e.,
due to change of experienced class set Ct ) leads to forgetting, where bias towards new data causes past information
to be gradually erased and learned representations to be constantly updated (i.e., feature drift) focusing on new tasks.
Contributions of this work to overcome the aforementioned limitations can be summarised as follows:

16732

