Arch-Graph: Acyclic Architecture Relation Predictor for Task-Transferable
Neural Architecture Search
Minbin Huang1
1

Zhijian Huang1 Changlin Li3 Xin Chen4
Zhenguo Li2 Xiaodan Liang1 *

Hang Xu2

Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
ReLER, AAII, UTS 4 The University of Hong Kong

{huangmb5,huangzhj56}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, changlinli.ai@gmail.com, cyn0531@connect.hku.hk,
chromexbjxh@gmail.com, li.zhenguo@huawei.com, xdliang328@gmail.com

Abstract
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) aims to find efficient
models for multiple tasks. Beyond seeking solutions for a
single task, there are surging interests in transferring network design knowledge across multiple tasks. In this line
of research, effectively modeling task correlations is vital
yet highly neglected. Therefore, we propose Arch-Graph,
a transferable NAS method that predicts task-specific optimal architectures with respect to given task embeddings. It
leverages correlations across multiple tasks by using their
embeddings as a part of the predictor’s input for fast adaptation. We also formulate NAS as an architecture relation
graph prediction problem, with the relational graph constructed by treating candidate architectures as nodes and
their pairwise relations as edges. To enforce some basic
properties such as acyclicity in the relational graph, we add
additional constraints to the optimization process, converting NAS into the problem of finding a Maximal Weighted
Acyclic Subgraph (MWAS). Our algorithm then strives to
eliminate cycles and only establish edges in the graph if the
rank results can be trusted. Through MWAS, Arch-Graph
can effectively rank candidate models for each task with
only a small budget to finetune the predictor. With extensive experiments on TransNAS-Bench-101, we show ArchGraph’s transferability and high sample efficiency across
numerous tasks, beating many NAS methods designed for
both single-task and multi-task search. It is able to find top
0.16% and 0.29% architectures on average on two search
spaces under the budget of only 50 models.1

1. Introduction
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) methods [2, 40] have
the potential to democratize deep learning and reduce costly
* Corresponding author.
1 Code: https://github.com/Centaurus982034/Arch-Graph

Finetune
Architecures
...
...

Pairwise
Relation
Predictor

Source task

...

...
Architecture
Relation
Graph
Target task

Maximal Weighted
Acyclic Subgraph

...

Output
ranking

Figure 1. Overview of our Arch-Graph that trains a pairwise relation predictor on a source task and transfers to target task by
finetuning. It constructs an architecture relation graph based on
the pairwise relation predictor. After selecting the MWAS of the
architecture relation graph, Arch-Graph can give a proper ranking
of different candidate architectures.

human labor in designing neural networks. By automatically searching for optimal architectures, many NAS methods have discovered models exceeding human-designed
ones on various tasks. However, many NAS solutions are
computationally expensive as they require training over numerous candidate architectures. Under cases where networks for multiple tasks are needed, searching for an architecture for each task requires repeatedly running NAS methods from scratch to find the top performing network, throwing away potentially valuable knowledge accumulated over
the course of searching. There are many recent attempts
[15, 34] investigating transferable NAS problems over different tasks by mining task correlations. For instance, [15]
proposes to use meta-learning to generate architectures for
a given new task. However, it makes a strong assumption
that information on top-performing architectures for each
pretrain task is always available, which can limit its use
case. [34] proposed to use task embeddings to inform an
RNN controller of the task information and framed NAS
as a reinforcement learning (RL) problem, which inherits
the sample inefficiency problem from RL. Weight-sharing

11881

