UTC: A Unified Transformer with Inter-Task Contrastive Learning
for Visual Dialog
Cheng Chen1 , Zhenshan Tan1 , Qingrong Cheng1 , Xin Jiang2 , Qun Liu2 , Yudong Zhu2 , Xiaodong Gu1 *
1
Department of Electronic Engineering, Fudan University
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{chengchen19, zstan19, qrcheng17, xdgu}@fudan.edu.cn

{ {Jiang.Xin, qun.liu, zhuyudong3}@huawei.com

Abstract
Visual Dialog aims to answer multi-round, interactive
questions based on the dialog history and image content.
Existing methods either consider answer ranking and generating individually or only weakly capture the relation
across the two tasks implicitly by two separate models. The
research on a universal framework that jointly learns to
rank and generate answers in a single model is seldom explored. In this paper, we propose a contrastive learningbased framework UTC to unify and facilitate both discriminative and generative tasks in visual dialog with a single
model. Specifically, considering the inherent limitation of
the previous learning paradigm, we devise two inter-task
contrastive losses i.e., context contrastive loss and answer
contrastive loss to make the discriminative and generative tasks mutually reinforce each other. These two complementary contrastive losses exploit dialog context and
target answer as anchor points to provide representation
learning signals from different perspectives. We evaluate
our proposed UTC on the VisDial v1.0 dataset, where our
method outperforms the state-of-the-art on both discriminative and generative tasks and surpasses previous state-ofthe-art generative methods by more than 2 absolute points
on Recall@1.

1. Introduction
Recently, an increasing amount of attention has been
paid to vision and language understanding. Many related
tasks in this intersecting field have been designed and introduced for different scenarios, such as Moment Localization
with Natural Language [21, 25], Image Captioning [6], Visual Question Answering [4], and Visual Dialog [14, 17].
Among them, Visual Dialog is designed to interact with
* This work was done under the guidance of Yudong Zhu, and the corresponding author is Xiaodong Gu (xdgu@fudan.edu.cn)

humans about an unseen image through continuous communication. In general, there are two types of settings in
visual dialog: a discriminative decoder that ranks the predefined answer candidates in the discriminative setting, and
a generative decoder that synthesizes the target answer in
the generative setting.
Compared with visual question answering, visual dialog
not only demands that the agent is able to engage in a question about an image but also requires the agent to fully exploit the clues in previous questions and answers. Thus, the
interactions among an answer candidate, a question, a dialog history and an image are the key to produce a correct
answer.
As shown in Figure 1(a), most of the current visual dialog models [19, 22] focus on designing various attention
mechanisms to capture such interaction in the discriminative setting while training answer ranking and generating
tasks individually. Recently, several related works [8, 16]
weakly capture the relation across the generative and discriminative tasks by training the entire network using the
two decoders simultaneously. Though these models have
impressive results, the designing of a unified model to facilitate the training of both answer ranking and generating
tasks remains two challenges.
On the one hand, the limitation originates from the inherently different peculiarities of the two tasks. As shown
in Figure 1(a and b), the discriminative setting can capitalize on the unrestricted message passing across answer candidates and multi-modal context. While in the generation
task, the models need to autoregressively decode the answer
word by word, which makes the message passing from answers to multi-modal context restricted. This raises the first
challenge for our unified model: how to fully transfer the
rich semantic clues of answer candidates in the discriminative task to answer generation.
On the other hand, the discriminative setting focuses on
the alignment of dialog context and answer, and most of

18103

