Unknown-Aware Object Detection:
Learning What You Don’t Know from Videos in the Wild
Xuefeng Du1 , Xin Wang2 , Gabriel Gozum1 , and Yixuan Li1
1
University of Wisconsin-Madison, 2 Microsoft Research
{xfdu,sharonli}@cs.wisc.edu, wanxin@microsoft.com, ggozum@wisc.edu

Abstract

car 100%car 100%
pedestrian 85%
pedestrian 98%

Building reliable object detectors that can detect outof-distribution (OOD) objects is critical yet underexplored. One of the key challenges is that models lack
supervision signals from unknown data, producing overconﬁdent predictions on OOD objects. We propose a
new unknown-aware object detection framework through
Spatial-Temporal Unknown Distillation (STUD), which distills unknown objects from videos in the wild and meaningfully regularizes the model’s decision boundary. STUD
ﬁrst identiﬁes the unknown candidate object proposals in
the spatial dimension, and then aggregates the candidates across multiple video frames to form a diverse set
of unknown objects near the decision boundary. Alongside, we employ an energy-based uncertainty regularization loss, which contrastively shapes the uncertainty
space between the in-distribution and distilled unknown objects. STUD establishes the state-of-the-art performance
on OOD detection tasks for object detection, reducing the
FPR95 score by over 10% compared to the previous best
method. Code is available at https://github.com/
deeplearning-wisc/stud.

(a) Overconfident Predictions (b) Unknown objects in videos

Figure 1. (a) Vanilla object detectors can predict OOD objects
(e.g., deer) as an ID class (e.g., pedestrian) with high conﬁdence.
(b) Unknown objects (in bounding boxes) naturally exist in the
video datasets, such as billboards, trafﬁc cones, overbridges, street
lights, etc. Image is taken from the BDD100K dataset [67].

knowns for object detection requires a ﬁner-grained understanding of the complex scenes. In practice, an image can
be OOD in speciﬁc regions while being in-distribution (ID)
elsewhere. Taking autonomous driving as an example, we
observe that an object detection model trained to recognize ID objects (e.g., cars, pedestrians) can produce a highconﬁdence prediction for an unseen object such as a deer;
see Figure 1(a). This happens when our object detector minimizes its training error without explicitly accounting for
the uncertainty that could appear outside the training categories. Unfortunately, the plethora of ways that unknown
objects can emerge are innumerable in an open world. It is
arguably expensive to annotate a large number of OOD objects in complex scenes—in addition to the already costly
process of ID data collection.

1. Introduction
Object detection models have achieved remarkable success in known contexts for which they are trained. Yet,
they often struggle with out-of-distribution (OOD) data—
samples from unknown classes that the network has not
been exposed to during training, and therefore should not be
predicted by the model in testing. Teaching the object detectors to be aware of unknown objects is critical for building a
reliable vision system, especially in safety-critical applications like autonomous driving [8] and medical analysis [2].
While much research progress is made in OOD detection for classiﬁcation models [17, 20, 29, 31, 33, 36, 59], the
problem remains underexplored in the context of object detection. Unlike image-level OOD detection, detecting un-

In this paper, we propose a new unknown-aware object
detection framework through Spatial-Temporal Unknown
Distillation (STUD), which distills unknown objects from
videos in the wild and meaningfully regularizes the model’s
decision boundary. Video data naturally captures the openworld environment that the model operates in, and encapsulates a mixture of both known and unknown objects; see
Figure 1(b). For example, buildings and trees (OOD) may
appear in the driving video, though they are not labeled explicitly for training an object detector for cars and pedestrians (ID). Our approach draws an analogy to the concept
of distillation in chemistry, which refers to the “process of
13678

