ZebraPose: Coarse to Fine Surface Encoding for 6DoF Object Pose Estimation
Yongzhi Su1,2*
Nassir Navab3
1

Mahdi Saleh3*
Benjamin Busam3

Torben Fetzer2
Didier Stricker1,2

German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI)
3
Technische Universität München

Jason Rambach1
Federico Tombari3,4
2
4

TU Kaiserslautern

Google

{yongzhi.su; jason.rambach; torben.fetzer; didier.stricker}@dfki.de
{m.saleh; b.busam; nassir.navab}@tum.de, tombari@in.tum.de

Abstract
Establishing correspondences from image to 3D has
been a key task of 6DoF object pose estimation for a long
time. To predict pose more accurately, deeply learned dense
maps replaced sparse templates. Dense methods also improved pose estimation in the presence of occlusion. More
recently researchers have shown improvements by learning
object fragments as segmentation. In this work, we present
a discrete descriptor, which can represent the object surface
densely. By incorporating a hierarchical binary grouping,
we can encode the object surface very efficiently. Moreover,
we propose a coarse to fine training strategy, which enables
fine-grained correspondence prediction. Finally, by matching predicted codes with object surface and using a PnP
solver, we estimate the 6DoF pose. Results on the public
LM-O and YCB-V datasets show major improvement over
the state of the art w.r.t. ADD(-S) metric, even surpassing
RGB-D based methods in some cases.

1. Introduction
Augmented reality and robotics are two of the main application fields of 3D computer vision. In many augmented
reality applications, the location and pose of an object of interest has to be determined at a high precision [45,54]. Similarly, object grasping and manipulation is needed for many
robotic applications (e.g. automatic manufacturing [50], cooperative assistance [9, 21]), and also demands accurate 6
Degree-of-Freedom (6DoF) object pose information. As the
crucial element in both application domains, estimating the
6DoF object pose has received increasing attention from the
computer vision research community.
The correspondence problem is a classical problem in
* The authors contributed equally to this paper

Code: https://github.com/suyz526/ZebraPose

…
3D Hierarchical groupings

0110

Object CAD model

Binary Coding

Figure 1. ZebraPose assigns a discrete code to each surface vertex hierarchically. We project the code as binary black and white
values (top) and learn them using deep neural networks. Our binary descriptor allows one-to-one correspondence for the problem
of 6DoF object pose efficiently.

computer vision. While finding correspondences across the
same domain is more straightforward, estimating the 6DoF
object pose requires 2D-3D correspondences. In earlier object pose estimation research, depth maps came to help to
match image pixels to 3D surface points [28, 64]. Due to
cost and setup complications, the detection of 6DoF pose
without depth information can be advantageous. However,
RGB approaches typically achieve a lower accuracy with
respect to their depth-based counterparts [16, 26].
Driven by the recent developments in deep learning and
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), various methods
were proposed, which make 6DoF pose estimation from
a single RGB image feasible [10, 34, 53, 61, 69]. In a
correspondence-based setting, to estimate the object pose,
Perspective-n-Points (PnP) algorithms require at least 4 2D3D point matches [38]. Therefore, sparse methods are ap-

6738

