InfoNeRF: Ray Entropy Minimization for Few-Shot Neural Volume Rendering
Mijeong Kim1
Seonguk Seo1
Bohyung Han1,2
1
ECE & 1 ASRI & 1,2 IPAI, Seoul National University
{mijeong.kim, seonguk, bhhan}@snu.ac.kr

Figure 1. Qualitative comparison of InfoNeRF (ours) with other NeRF-based models [11, 20, 37] on the Lego, Materials, and Ficus scenes
of Realistic Synthetic 360◦ dataset in 4-view settings. Existing works often suffer from noise (b), color distortion (c), or blur effect (d),
while InfoNeRF (ours) achieves outstanding quality of rendered images with only a few input views. The last column (f) visualizes depth
maps estimated by InfoNeRF (ours), which provide clear boundaries and fine details of the objects.

Abstract
We present an information-theoretic regularization technique for few-shot novel view synthesis based on neural implicit representation. The proposed approach minimizes potential reconstruction inconsistency that happens due to insufficient viewpoints by imposing the entropy constraint of
the density in each ray. In addition, to alleviate the potential degenerate issue when all training images are acquired
from almost redundant viewpoints, we further incorporate
the spatial smoothness constraint into the estimated images
by restricting information gains from additional rays with
slightly different viewpoints. The main idea of our algorithm is to make reconstructed scenes compact along individual rays and consistent across rays in the neighborhood.

The proposed regularizers can be plugged into most of existing neural volume rendering techniques based on NeRF in a
straightforward way. Despite its simplicity, we achieve consistently improved performance compared to existing neural
view synthesis methods by large margins on multiple standard benchmarks. Our codes and models are available in
the project website1 .

1. Introduction
Understanding 3D structure of a natural scene is a critical step for various high-level computer vision applications
including object recognition, photorealistic rendering, au1 http://cvlab.snu.ac.kr/research/InfoNeRF

12912

