ATPFL: Automatic Trajectory Prediction Model Design under Federated
Learning Framework
Chunnan Wang1 , Xiang Chen1 , Junzhe Wang1 , Hongzhi Wang1,2 *
1
Harbin Institute of Technology
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
WangChunnan@hit.edu.cn, {20s003052,1190201815}@stu.hit.edu.cn, wangzh@hit.edu.cn

Abstract

observed trajectory
prediction trajectory

p1

Although the Trajectory Prediction (TP) model has
achieved great success in computer vision and robotics
fields, its architecture and training scheme design rely on
heavy manual work and domain knowledge, which is not
friendly to common users. Besides, the existing works ignore Federated Learning (FL) scenarios, failing to make
full use of distributed multi-source datasets with rich actual scenes to learn more a powerful TP model. In this paper, we make up for the above defects and propose ATPFL
to help users federate multi-source trajectory datasets to
automatically design and train a powerful TP model. In
ATPFL, we build an effective TP search space by analyzing and summarizing the existing works. Then, based on
the characters of this search space, we design a relationsequence-aware search strategy, realizing the automatic design of the TP model. Finally, we find appropriate federated training methods to respectively support the TP model
search and final model training under the FL framework,
ensuring both the search efficiency and the final model performance. Extensive experimental results show that ATPFL
can help users gain well-performed TP models, achieving
better results than the existing TP models trained on the
single-source dataset.

1. Introduction
Human Trajectory Prediction (TP) models aim to predict
the movement of pedestrians [13, 20]. Their high performance greatly depends on abundant trajectory data. However, in real applications, the TP data sources are generally
monitor devices scattered across different regions. They
contain trajectory data in a variety of scenarios but can not
be shared due to privacy protection, which brings limitations to the existing TP works. In order to break the TP data
island problem, Federated Learning (FL) framework needs
* Corresponding author.

pi
pN

t0

tpred

tobs+1

tobs
Agent1

Agent1

p1
x

pj

AutoML
pM

tobs

t0
Agent2

tpred

tobs+1
Agent2

Figure 1. ATPFL combines AutoML with FL techniques on TP
area, aiming to utilize multi-source TP datasets to jointly design
and train the powerful TP model.

to be introduced to unite these multiple data sources jointly
obtain a more robust and general TP model in a distributed
and privacy-preserving manner. While this idea brings two
major challenges.
On one hand, the design of TP models under the FL
framework is difficult. Specifically, the TP model design process requires both heavy manual work and domain
knowledge. However, FL users are generally non-experts.
They fail to realize the independent development without
the domain knowledge, which brings great obstacles to the
general application of TP models under the FL framework.
On the other hand, the FL method suitable for TP models has not been studied or discussed yet. The existing FL
works are mainly built around CNN [6,8,19] without paying
attention to TP models. How to train TP models effectively
under the FL framework remains to be further studied.
In this paper, we aim to tackle the above two challenges
and propose ATPFL algorithm, which combines Automated
Machine Learning (AutoML) with FL (as is shown in Figure 1), to federate multi-source trajectory datasets to automatically design and train powerful TP models.

6563

