Stereoscopic Universal Perturbations across Different Architectures and Datasets
Zachary Berger†
UCLA Vision Lab

Parth Agrawal†
UCLA Vision Lab

Tian Yu Liu
UCLA Vision Lab

zackeberger@g.ucla.edu

parthagrawal24@g.ucla.edu

tianyu139@g.ucla.edu

Stefano Soatto
UCLA Vision Lab

Alex Wong
UCLA Vision Lab

soatto@cs.ucla.edu

alexw@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We study the effect of adversarial perturbations of images on deep stereo matching networks for the disparity estimation task. We present a method to craft a single set of
perturbations that, when added to any stereo image pair
in a dataset, can fool a stereo network to significantly alter the perceived scene geometry. Our perturbation images are “universal” in that they not only corrupt estimates
of the network on the dataset they are optimized for, but
also generalize to different architectures trained on different datasets. We evaluate our approach on multiple benchmark datasets where our perturbations can increase the D1error (akin to fooling rate) of state-of-the-art stereo networks from 1% to as much as 87%. We investigate the effect
of perturbations on the estimated scene geometry and identify object classes that are most vulnerable. Our analysis
on the activations of registered points between left and right
images led us to find architectural components that can increase robustness against adversaries. By simply designing
networks with such components, one can reduce the effect
of adversaries by up to 60.5%, which rivals the robustness
of networks fine-tuned with costly adversarial data augmentation. Our design principle also improves their robustness
against common image corruptions by an average of 70%.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial perturbations, where small changes in the input image(s) can
cause large inference errors, for instance in the label of objects portrayed within. Even when the images contain sufficient information for inference, for instance in stereo where
the disparity between two calibrated images is used to infer
† denotes authors with equal contributions.

Code: github.com/alexklwong/stereoscopic-universal-perturbations

the depth of the scene, adversarial perturbations have been
shown to alter the depth map [44]. Such perturbations are
ordinarily specific to each individual input, and depend on
the particular deep network architecture and the particular
dataset on which it is trained.
For classification, [22] showed that a single perturbation
can be crafted to disrupt the inference for all images in a
dataset with high probability. These are called “universal”
adversarial perturbations, even though they are universal to
each image in a particular dataset, and usually do not extend to different datasets. In this paper, we show the existence of stereoscopic universal perturbations (SUPs). SUPs
are perturbations that can disrupt the depth or disparity estimate of different stereo networks, with different architectures, trained on different datasets, and operating on different images and domains.
Adversarial perturbations arose mainly as a means to
study the topology and geometry of the decision boundary
of deep networks. Since individual perturbations had to be
crafted for each image, security concerns were far fetched.
Universal adversarial perturbations, however, revealed vulnerabilities that could be shared among different images.
Still, crafting them required knowledge of the architecture
and availability of the training set. In contrast, the existence
of universal adversarial perturbations for stereo and other
spatial inference tasks, common in robotics and autonomy,
suggests that such perturbations could present a concern, especially if they can be applied to different images, processed
by different neural network models that are trained on different datasets. To the best of our knowledge, we are the
first to show, for stereo, that universal perturbations can be
applied effectively even without knowledge of the trained
model, and generalize across domains and datasets. Such
perturbations can be optimized on an off-the-shelf model
and realized as a filter to be placed on top of a camera lens.
Our main methodological innovation is to design SUPs
so that they are approximately space equivariant. We build

15180

