Partial Class Activation Attention for Semantic Segmentation
Sun-Ao Liu1 Hongtao Xie1 * Hai Xu1 Yongdong Zhang1 Qi Tian2
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Huawei Cloud & AI
{lsa1997, keda2010}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {htxie, zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn, tian.qi1@huawei.com

Abstract
…

Current attention-based methods for semantic segmentation mainly model pixel relation through pairwise affinity and coarse segmentation. For the first time, this paper
explores modeling pixel relation via Class Activation Map
(CAM). Beyond the previous CAM generated from imagelevel classification, we present Partial CAM, which subdivides the task into region-level prediction and achieves
better localization performance. In order to eliminate the
intra-class inconsistency caused by the variances of local
context, we further propose Partial Class Activation Attention (PCAA) that simultaneously utilizes local and global
class-level representations for attention calculation. Once
obtained the partial CAM, PCAA collects local class centers and computes pixel-to-class relation locally. Applying local-specific representations ensures reliable results
under different local contexts. To guarantee global consistency, we gather global representations from all local
class centers and conduct feature aggregation. Experimental results confirm that Partial CAM outperforms the previous two strategies as pixel relation. Notably, our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance on several challenging benchmarks including Cityscapes, Pascal Context, and
ADE20K. Code is available at https://github.com/
lsa1997/PCAA.

1. Introduction
Scene parsing is a pixel-wise prediction task which aims
to assign a class label to each pixel in a given image. The
difficulty of this task is that the features of pixels belonging to the same category may vary dramatically due to the
differences in texture, lighting, and position. Hence, in order to achieve precise segmentation, we need to eliminate
this local specificity and generate features with global consistency. In recent years, models based on Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) have adopted various strategies
to handle this problem like pyramid pooling [40], dilated
* Corresponding author.

(a) Image

(b) Ground Truth

(c) Coarse Segmentation

…

×

(d) Pairwise Affinity

…

…

(e) CAM

(f) Partial CAM

Figure 1. Different methods to model pixel relation. Here, H × W
denotes the spatial size of inputs and K is the number of classes.
Non-local uses dot product to calculate pairwise affinity, while
OCRNet adopts coarse prediction to obtain class-level relation.
This paper first introduces CAM to model pixel-to-class relation
and proposes Partial CAM to subdivide the prediction task for better localization performance. Best viewed in color.

convolution [2], and self-attention [9, 14, 34, 44].
Among these methods, attention-based models often
show considerable performance. They generally include
two steps: first calculate pixel relation, and then augment
features via a weighted aggregation based on the relation
maps. Current works mainly follow two strategies for pixel
relation calculation: pairwise affinity and coarse segmentation. The non-local models [26] use dot product as pairwise
affinity to construct pixel-to-pixel relation. These methods
are computationally intensive, and pixel-level aggregation
can not guarantee the global consistency of the same category. In the first two attention maps of Fig. 1(d), the two
pixels marked by red dots both belong to building but focus

16836

