Image

GCoNet

Democracy Does Matter: Comprehensive Feature
Ours Mining for Co-Salient Object
Detection
Siyue Yu1,2 ,

Jimin Xiao1 *,
XJTLU,

1

2

Bingfeng Zhang1,2 ,
University of Liverpool

Eng Gee Lim1

{siyue.yu,jimin.xiao,bingfeng.zhang,enggee.lim}@xjtlu.edu.cn

‘Butterfly’

Abstract
Co-salient object detection, with the target of detecting
co-existed salient objects among a group of images, is gaining popularity. Recent works use the attention mechanism
or extra information to aggregate common co-salient features, leading to incomplete even incorrect responses for
target objects. In this paper, we aim to mine comprehensive co-salient features with democracy and reduce background interference without introducing any extra information. To achieve this, we design a democratic prototype
generation module to generate democratic response maps,
covering sufficient co-salient regions and thereby involving more shared attributes of co-salient objects. Then a
comprehensive prototype based on the response maps can
be generated as a guide for final prediction. To suppress
the noisy background information in the prototype, we propose a self-contrastive learning module, where both positive and negative pairs are formed without relying on additional classification information. Besides, we also design a democratic feature enhancement module to further
strengthen the co-salient features by readjusting attention
values. Extensive experiments show that our model obtains
better performance than previous state-of-the-art methods,
especially on challenging real-world cases (e.g., for CoCA,
we obtain a gain of 2.0% for MAE, 5.4% for maximum Fmeasure, 2.3% for maximum E-measure, and 3.7% for Smeasure) under the same settings. Source code is available
at https://github.com/siyueyu/DCFM .

1. Introduction
Co-salient object detection (CoSOD) aims to detect the
common salient objects among a group of input images.
Unlike salient object detection (SOD), which is to detect
the most attractive objects by mimicking human eyes [3,21,
* corresponding author
1 The work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of

China under 61972323.

(a)

(a

(b)

(b

(c)

(c

Figure 1. Visualization of response maps. (a) Inputs; (b) Response
maps generated by the previous approach [11]; (c) Ours. It can be
seen that ours can cover more co-salient objects.

24, 27, 30, 31, 36, 45], CoSOD focuses on detecting salient
yet co-existed objects among all the input images. In this
case, CoSOD faces two main challenges: 1) reduce the
interference of noisy background in complex scenes; 2)
mine integral co-salient objects with large appearance variations. Some works introduce extra SOD dataset to provide
saliency guidance [52, 53] or predict saliency maps [19] in
order to mask out the co-salient objects. However, these
approaches highly depend on the extra dataset, leading to
supererogatory human effort to provide annotations.
Recent approaches [11, 19, 49, 52] try to use attention
mechanism [39] to strengthen co-salient features or build
feature consistency to formulate the shared attributes of
co-salient objects for integral predictions. However, there
are two main drawbacks when directly applying attention
mechanism for this task. On the one hand, the response
maps reflecting the shared attributes, obtained in the attention mechanism, can only cover limited pixels belonging
to co-salient objects, as shown in Fig. 1.(b). In this case,
it is difficult for the model to learn comprehensive shared
attributes of co-salient objects. On the other hand, for complex scenes, the attention mechanism tends to focus on the

979

