Aug-NeRF: Training Stronger Neural Radiance Fields with Triple-Level
Physically-Grounded Augmentations
Tianlong Chen1* , Peihao Wang1* , Zhiwen Fan1 , Zhangyang Wang1
1
The University of Texas at Austin
{tianlong.chen,peihaowang,zhiwenfan,atlaswang}@utexas.edu

1. Introduction
Neural radiance fields (NeRF) [29] and its variants have
demonstrated impressive progresses in learning to represent
3D objects and scenes from images towards photo-realistic
novel view synthesis. NeRF leverages a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) to implicitly modeling the mapping from an input
5D coordinates (i.e., 3D coordinates (x, y, z) and 2D viewing
* Equal Contribution.

Aug-NeRF

Rendering

NeRF

Geometry

Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) regresses a neural parameterized scene by differentially rendering multi-view images
with ground-truth supervision. However, when interpolating novel views, NeRF often yields inconsistent and visually
non-smooth geometric results, which we consider as a generalization gap between seen and unseen views. Recent advances in convolutional neural networks have demonstrated
the promise of advanced robust data augmentations, either
random or learned, in enhancing both in-distribution and
out-of-distribution generalization. Inspired by that, we propose Augmented NeRF (Aug-NeRF), which for the first time
brings the power of robust data augmentations into regularizing the NeRF training. Particularly, our proposal learns to
seamlessly blend worst-case perturbations into three distinct levels of the NeRF pipeline with physical grounds,
including (1) the input coordinates, to simulate imprecise
camera parameters at image capture; (2) intermediate features, to smoothen the intrinsic feature manifold; and (3)
pre-rendering output, to account for the potential degradation factors in the multi-view image supervision. Extensive results demonstrate that Aug-NeRF effectively boosts
NeRF performance in both novel view synthesis (up to 1.5dB
PSNR gain) and underlying geometry reconstruction. Furthermore, thanks to the implicit smooth prior injected by
the triple-level augmentations, Aug-NeRF can even recover
scenes from heavily corrupted images, a highly challenging setting untackled before. Our codes are available in
https://github.com/VITA-Group/Aug-NeRF.

Ground Truth

Zoom In

Abstract

Figure 1. Comparisons between Aug-NeRF (ours) and NeRF [29].
From upper to bottom, we present the test-set synthesized views,
3D geometry, and their zoom-in RGBσ distributions, respectively.

directions (θ, ϕ)) to volume density σ and view-dependent
emitted radiance color (r, g, b) at the corresponding position
in the scene. Then, the obtained continuous 5D function (i.e.,
MLP) can be utilized to generate novel views with traditional
volume rendering mechanisms.
Although NeRF is capable of producing novel views, it
unfortunately suffers from inconsistent and non-smooth geometries since the vanilla MLP lacks geometry-awareness.
For example, as shown in Fig. 1, the depth maps and 3D
geometries of the scene generated by NeRF show obvious
discontinuity and outliers, especially around the edge of objects. Considering that the quality of reconstructed geometry
plays a central role in view rendering, that might account for
NeRF’s limited generalization to unseen views.
To fill in this research gap, a straightforward solution
is introducing explicit geometric regularizers like Laplacian [17, 45] or total variation (TV) [84] to enhance the
continuity. However, these explicit regularizers are often

15191

