H2 FA R-CNN: Holistic and Hierarchical Feature Alignment for
Cross-domain Weakly Supervised Object Detection

1

Yunqiu Xu1,2 * Yifan Sun1 Zongxin Yang3 Jiaxu Miao3 Yi Yang3
Baidu Research 2 ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney 3 CCAI, Zhejiang University

imyunqiuxu@gmail.com

sunyf15@tsinghua.org.cn

{yangzongxin,jiaxumiao,yangyics}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Cross-domain weakly supervised object detection (CDWSOD) aims to adapt the detection model to a novel target domain with easily acquired image-level annotations.
How to align the source and target domains is critical to
the CDWSOD accuracy. Existing methods usually focus
on partial detection components for domain alignment. In
contrast, this paper considers that all the detection components are important and proposes a Holistic and Hierarchical Feature Alignment (H2 FA) R-CNN. H2 FA R-CNN
enforces two image-level alignments for the backbone features, as well as two instance-level alignments for the RPN
and detection head. This coarse-to-fine aligning hierarchy is in pace with the detection pipeline, i.e., processing the image-level feature and the instance-level features
from bottom to top. Importantly, we devise a novel hybrid
supervision method for learning two instance-level alignments. It enables the RPN and detection head to simultaneously receive weak/full supervision from the target/source
domains. Combining all these feature alignments, H2 FA
R-CNN effectively mitigates the gap between the source
and target domains. Experimental results show that H2 FA
R-CNN significantly improves cross-domain object detection accuracy and sets new state of the art on popular
benchmarks. Code and pre-trained models are available at
https://github.com/XuYunqiu/H2FA_R-CNN .

1. Introduction
Cross-domain weakly supervised object detection (CDWSOD) is of significant value in realistic detection applications. Specifically, the training data and the testing data are
sometimes under different domains (i.e., the source domain
and target domain, respectively), yielding a cross-domain
detection scenario. To mitigate the domain shift, there are
three potential solutions, i.e., the supervised, unsupervised
* Work done during an internship at Baidu Research.

top

IIR unit
RoI feature

instance-level
class-wise

RPN

instance-level
foreground

proposal

image-level
feature

Image-level
class-agnostic

target

cat, person

source
cat

semantic

supervision

fine

class-wise
instance

hybrid
foreground

Image-level
class-wise

backbone
bottom

spatial

detection
head

class-wise

image

image
class-agnostic domain
coarse

holistic and hierarchical feature align

Figure 1. Our H2 FA R-CNN employs four feature alignments,
i.e., image-level (class-agnostic and class-wise) alignments and
instance-level (foreground and class-wise) alignments for CDWSOD. From the viewpoints of spatial granularity, semantic granularity and the supervision signals, there is a clear hierarchy from
coarse to fine, which is paced with the detection pipeline from bottom to top. The novel Instance- and Image-level Recognition (IIR)
unit is based on the RPN and detection head and is compatible to
both full and weak supervision signals.

and weakly supervised approaches. The supervised approach requires additional densely annotated samples (i.e.,
instance-level bounding boxes) on the target domain, which
can be very burdensome. In contrast, the unsupervised approach [10,15,50] relieves the annotation cost, but generally
achieves inferior detection accuracy. Therefore, many literature [27, 30, 43] explore the weakly supervised approach
(i.e., CDWSOD), which provides good trade-off between
accuracy and annotation efficiency. Generally, CDWSOD
improves cross-domain detection accuracy by adapting the
deep model to the target domain with additional weak supervision signals (i.e., the image-level annotations).
We argue it is important to exploit the characteristics
of the detection pipeline during the domain adaptation for
CDWSOD. Specifically, a popular cross-domain detection
baseline adopts the two-stage pipeline [45] and is consisted
of a backbone, a region proposal network (RPN) and a detection head. While the common sense is that all these
three components are critical to the detection accuracy, existing methods usually focus on partial components for do-

14329

