Style-ERD: Responsive and Coherent Online Motion Style Transfer
Tianxin Tao1 Xiaohang Zhan Zhongquan Chen2 Michiel van de Panne1
1
University of British Columbia 2 University of California, Davis
{taotianx,van}@cs.ubc.ca

xiaohangzhan@outlook.com

czqchen@ucdavis.edu

Abstract
Motion style transfer is a common method for enriching
character animation. Motion style transfer algorithms are
often designed for offline settings where motions are processed in segments. However, for online animation applications, such as real-time avatar animation from motion capture, motions need to be processed as a stream with minimal latency. In this work, we realize a flexible, high-quality
motion style transfer method for this setting. We propose
a novel style transfer model, Style-ERD, to stylize motions
in an online manner with an Encoder-Recurrent-Decoder
structure, along with a novel discriminator that combines
feature attention and temporal attention. Our method stylizes motions into multiple target styles with a unified model.
Although our method targets online settings, it outperforms
previous offline methods in motion realism and style expressiveness and provides significant gains in runtime efficiency.

1. Introduction
Animators commonly seek to create stylized motions to
express the characters’ personalities or emotions, thus making characters more lifelike. Since many computer animation techniques are based on motion capture data, the variety and diversity of the motion data play an essential role in
the quality of the resulting animation. However, a captureeverything approach scales poorly if there is a need to capture every style, e.g., childlike or depressed, for every motion type. Hence, animators usually capture motion in a
neutral style and then stylize them by hand, which is again
laborious. This motivates automated methods for stylizing
existing motions according to desired target-style labels.
In this work, we develop a novel motion style transfer
framework capable of stylizing streaming input motion data
for online applications, which we define as Online Motion
Style Transfer. As shown in Fig. 1, current motion style
transfer methods [1, 5, 17, 19, 38, 54] with deep learning
models require a motion segment as input, and produce a
transferred motion segment as output, and where the input

(a) Offline motion style transfer.

(b) Online motion style transfer.

Figure 1. a) Offline motion style transfer processes motion segments, while b) online motion style transfer processes motions in
a stream.

segment has a minimum duration of 1 s. While these methods make significant progress on a difficult problem, with
a subset being described as being real-time [47, 57], they
still suffer from startup latency caused by waiting for the
multiple frames required as input. For online motion style
transfer, only the current frame is processed by the model,
which enables the direct processing of the stream of motion
data. We believe such transfer methods are more suitable for
many novel applications requiring streaming motion data.
For example, in animating a human avatar, motion is captured online to animate the virtual avatar in real-time, and
the streaming motion data needs to be processed with minimal latency. Online motion style transfer can also be easily incorporated into the workflows of real-time motion systems, such as games, interactive exhibitions, and augmented
reality with minimal additional latency.
Motion style transfer exists as a long-standing research
problem due to several difficulties, among many: (1) lack
of a standardized qualitative style representation for motions, (2) difficulty in handling and generating temporally
correlated data, (3) a lack of temporally registered motion
data in different styles. Several approaches [20, 46, 57, 60]
aim to solve this problem with manually designed models. However, they often fail to generalize well to large
motion datasets with various styles. Researchers have developed more scalable methods with the rapid progress of
deep learning machinery [1, 6, 17, 36]. However, only a few
of them can transfer the motion to multiple target styles with

6593

