Hyperbolic Vision Transformers: Combining Improvements in Metric Learning
Aleksandr Ermolov
University of Trento, Italy

Leyla Mirvakhabova
Skoltech*, Russia

Valentin Khrulkov
Yandex & Skoltech*, Russia

aleksandr.ermolov@unitn.it

leyla.mirvakhabova@skoltech.ru

khrulkov.v@gmail.com

Nicu Sebe
University of Trento, Italy

Ivan Oseledets
Skoltech*& AIRI, Russia

niculae.sebe@unitn.it

I.Oseledets@skoltech.ru

Abstract
Metric learning aims to learn a highly discriminative
model encouraging the embeddings of similar classes to
be close in the chosen metrics and pushed apart for dissimilar ones. The common recipe is to use an encoder
to extract embeddings and a distance-based loss function
to match the representations – usually, the Euclidean distance is utilized. An emerging interest in learning hyperbolic data embeddings suggests that hyperbolic geometry
can be beneficial for natural data. Following this line of
work, we propose a new hyperbolic-based model for metric
learning. At the core of our method is a vision transformer
with output embeddings mapped to hyperbolic space. These
embeddings are directly optimized using modified pairwise
cross-entropy loss. We evaluate the proposed model with six
different formulations on four datasets achieving the new
state-of-the-art performance. The source code is available
at https://github.com/htdt/hyp_metric.

1. Introduction
Metric learning task formulation is general and intuitive: the obtained distances between data embeddings
must represent semantic similarity. It is a typical cognitive task to generalize similarity for new objects given some
examples of similar and dissimilar pairs. Metric learning algorithms are widely applied in various computer vision tasks: content-based image retrieval [32, 46, 47], nearduplicate detection [65], face recognition [27, 44], person
re-identification [5, 63], as a part of zero-shot [47] or fewshot learning [38, 45, 50].
Modern image retrieval methods can be decomposed into
roughly two components: the encoder mapping the image
to its compact representation and the loss function govern* Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology

ing the training process. Encoders with backbones based
on transformer architecture have been recently proposed
as a competitive alternative to previously used convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Transformers lack some of
CNN’s inductive biases, e.g., translation equivariance, requiring more training data to achieve a fair generalization.
On the other hand, it allows transformers to produce more
general features, which presumably can be more beneficial
for image retrieval [3,8], as this task requires generalization
to unseen classes of images. To alleviate the issue above,
several training schemes have been proposed: using a large
dataset [7], heavily augmenting training dataset and using
distillation [53], using self-supervised learning scenario [3].
The choice of the embedding space directly influences
the metrics used for comparing representations. Typically,
embeddings are arranged on a hypersphere, i.e. the output
of the encoder is L2 normalized, resulting in using cosine
similarity as a distance. In this work, we propose to consider the hyperbolic spaces. Their distinctive property is the
exponential volume growth with respect to the radius, unlike Euclidean spaces with polynomial growth. This feature
makes hyperbolic space especially suitable for embedding
tree-like data due to increased representation power. The
paper [42] shows that a tree can be embedded to Poincaré
disk with an arbitrarily low distortion. Most of the natural data is intrinsically hierarchical, and hyperbolic spaces
suit well for its representation. Another desirable property
of hyperbolic spaces is the ability to use low-dimensional
manifolds for embeddings without sacrificing the model accuracy and its representation power [34].
The goal of the loss function is straightforward: we want
to group the representations of similar objects in the embedding space while pulling away representations of dissimilar
objects. Most loss functions can be divided into two categories: proxy-based and pair-based [23]. Additionally to
the network parameters, the first type of losses trains proxies, which represent subsets of the dataset [32]. This proce-

7409

