Proto2Proto: Can you recognize the car, the way I do?
Monish Keswani

Sriranjani Ramakrishnan Nishant Reddy Vineeth N Balasubramanian
Indian Institute of Technology, Hyderabad

{monish.keswani01, sriranjani.ramakrish, s.nishantreddy024}@gmail.com, vineethnb@iith.ac.in

Abstract
Prototypical methods have recently gained a lot of attention due to their intrinsic interpretable nature, which is
obtained through the prototypes. With growing use cases
of model reuse and distillation, there is a need to also
study transfer of interpretability from one model to another. We present Proto2Proto, a novel method to transfer interpretability of one prototypical part network to another via knowledge distillation. Our approach aims to add
interpretability to the “dark” knowledge transferred from
the teacher to the shallower student model. We propose
two novel losses: “Global Explanation” loss and “PatchPrototype Correspondence” loss to facilitate such a transfer. Global Explanation loss forces the student prototypes
to be close to teacher prototypes, and Patch-Prototype Correspondence loss enforces the local representations of the
student to be similar to that of the teacher. Further, we propose three novel metrics to evaluate the student’s proximity to the teacher as measures of interpretability transfer
in our settings. We qualitatively and quantitatively demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on CUB-200-2011
and Stanford Cars datasets. Our experiments show that
the proposed method indeed achieves interpretability transfer from teacher to student while simultaneously exhibiting
competitive performance. The code is available at https:
//github.com/archmaester/proto2proto

1. Introduction
Interpretability in machine learning helps humans understand the reasoning behind a model in arriving at a particular
decision. From an end-user’s perspective, interpretability
increases the trust in the models, eventually leading to better machine learning systems, especially the ones involved
in making high-stake decisions. Lipton [28] points out various desiderata for interpretability like trust, causality, transferability, etc. In the past decade, the primary focus of
the vision community was on designing models to improve
performance on tasks like classification, object detection,
segmentation, etc. Deep learning models such as CNNs

[12, 40, 44] have played a considerable role in this success.
However, they are often criticized as non-interpretable due
to their black-box nature.
To add interpretations to the CNN models [?], numerous efforts falling into categories of model approximation,
exemplar-based, gradient-based and concept-based interpretations have been studied in recent years. In this work,
we specifically focus on methods that perform model approximation using prototypes, which allow both post hoc interpretability (explaining in terms of concepts after a model
is trained) and ante hoc interpretability (learning to predict and explain through prototypes jointly during training
itself). ProtoPNet [6] and ProtoTree [33] are two recent
methods that add interpretability to prototypical models.
ProtoPNet learns class-specific prototypes, while ProtoTree
learns class-agnostic prototypes to provide global and local interpretability. However, the efforts in this space are
nascent, with no effort yet to translate to shallower networks
or transfer interpretability through the learned prototypes to
other models, which could have many applications in model
compression, few-shot learning, continual learning, etc.
Knowledge Distillation (KD) is a well-known technique
to transfer the “dark” knowledge from the Teacher model
to a Student network. Many works [1, 7, 9, 13–16, 23, 34,
35, 37, 46, 47, 51, 53] have focused on improving the performance and faithfulness of the student model to the teacher
model in terms of accuracy, without much focus on the interpretability aspect. Liu et al. [29] distilled a black-box
deep learning model to a decision tree to make it more interpretable. Song et al. [41] constructed an intermediate
decision tree to capture the intrinsic problem-solving process of the teacher and transfer it to a student. The goal
of these few works was to add interpretability to a blackbox teacher model through knowledge distillation. We, on
the other hand, consider an already implcitly interpretable
teacher model and show how our distillation method can
retain faithfulness of interpretability while transferring to a
student model.
To this end, we present Proto2Proto, a novel method to
transfer the interpretability of one prototypical part network
to another. We consider a Teacher network, whose inter-

10233

