Towards Unsupervised Domain Generalization
Xingxuan Zhang† , Linjun Zhou† , Renzhe Xu, Peng Cui*, Zheyan Shen, Haoxin Liu
Department of Computer Science, Tsinghua University
xingxuanzhang@hotmail.com, zhoulj16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xrz199721@gmail.com
cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn, shenzy17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, 1132462715@qq.com

Abstract
Domain generalization (DG) aims to help models trained
on a set of source domains generalize better on unseen target domains. The performances of current DG methods
largely rely on sufficient labeled data, which are usually
costly or unavailable, however. Since unlabeled data are
far more accessible, we seek to explore how unsupervised
learning can help deep models generalize across domains.
Specifically, we study a novel generalization problem called
unsupervised domain generalization (UDG), which aims to
learn generalizable models with unlabeled data and analyze
the effects of pre-training on DG. In UDG, models are pretrained with unlabeled data from various source domains
before being trained on labeled source data and eventually tested on unseen target domains. Then we propose
a method named Domain-Aware Representation LearnING
(DARLING) to cope with the significant and misleading
heterogeneity within unlabeled pretraining data and severe
distribution shifts between source and target data. Surprisingly we observe that DARLING can not only counterbalance the scarcity of labeled data but also further strengthen
the generalization ability of models when the labeled data
are insufficient. As a pretraining approach, DARLING
shows superior or comparable performance compared with
ImageNet pretraining protocol even when the available data
are unlabeled and of a vastly smaller amount compared to
ImageNet, which may shed light on improving generalization with large-scale unlabeled data.

1. Introduction
Deep neural network based approaches have achieved
striking performance in tasks where training and test data
share similar distribution [23, 24]. However, under considerable distribution shifts, they can significantly fail [4,
15, 27, 49, 56]. To address this problem, the literature in
†Equal contribution, *Corresponding author

domain generalization (DG) proposes algorithms that have
access to labeled data from multiple domains or environments during training and generalize well to unseen test domains [18, 32, 36, 37, 43, 63].
Sufficient labeled data are crucial for current DG methods to learn domain invariant features, which are proved to
be generalizable to unseen domains [1, 43, 54, 64]. A common and effective approach to learning discriminative features in DG is to enlarge the available data space with augmentations of source domains [5, 69, 70]. With sufficient
source data and strong augmentations, even empirical risk
minimization (ERM) can outperform previous state-of-theart methods [21]. Nevertheless, both augmentation-based
methods and carefully hyperparameter tuned ERM assume
adequate labeled data from multiple domains available for
representation learning.
As manually labeled data can be costly or unavailable
while unlabeled data are far more accessible, we study a
novel generalization problem called unsupervised domain
generalization (UDG). UDG aims to unsupervised learn discriminative representations that generalize well across domains and thus reduce the dependence of DG methods on
labeled data. Specifically, models are trained with unlabeled heterogeneous data before finetuned and evaluated on
labeled data, so that methods for UDG can be easily assembled with current DG methods as pretraining and study how
pre-training affects models’ generalization ability.
In the field of unsupervised learning [22, 50, 65], contrastive learning (CL) advances in discriminative representation learning for downstream tasks compared to its counterparts [6, 23, 57]. Actually, the objective of CL, which
is to maximize the similarity between a given image and
its variant under disturbance while contrasting with negatives [16, 34, 66], agrees with the target of DG. However,
current CL only learns robust representations against predefined perturbation under independent and identically distributed (I.I.D) hypothesis [3, 26, 28] and fails to consider
severe distribution shifts across domains beyond predefined
perturbation types [45, 67]. With samples from various domains as negative pairs, current CL methods leverage both

4910

