ScanQA: 3D Question Answering for Spatial Scene Understanding
Daichi Azuma⇤
Kyoto University

Taiki Miyanishi⇤
ATR, RIKEN AIP

Shuhei Kurita⇤
RIKEN AIP, JST PRESTO

Motoaki Kawanabe
ATR, RIKEN AIP

Question + 3D-Scan

Answer + 3D-Bounding Box

Abstract
We propose a new 3D spatial understanding task for 3D
question answering (3D-QA). In the 3D-QA task, models
receive visual information from the entire 3D scene of a
rich RGB-D indoor scan and answer given textual questions about the 3D scene. Unlike the 2D-question answering of visual question answering, the conventional 2D-QA
models suffer from problems with spatial understanding of
object alignment and directions and fail in object localization from the textual questions in 3D-QA. We propose
a baseline model for 3D-QA, called the ScanQA1 , which
learns a fused descriptor from 3D object proposals and encoded sentence embeddings. This learned descriptor correlates language expressions with the underlying geometric features of the 3D scan and facilitates the regression
of 3D bounding boxes to determine the described objects
in textual questions. We collected human-edited question–
answer pairs with free-form answers grounded in 3D objects in each 3D scene. Our new ScanQA dataset contains
over 41k question–answer pairs from 800 indoor scenes
obtained from the ScanNet dataset. To the best of our
knowledge, ScanQA is the first large-scale effort to perform
object-grounded question answering in 3D environments.

1. Introduction
In recent years, significant advances have been achieved
in vision-and-language tasks and datasets, and several new
datasets have been created to develop models that understand textual expressions, such as captions or questions,
which are grounded in two-dimensional (2D) images, such
as image captioning [12, 42], understanding referring expressions [25, 50], image region and phrase correspondence [37], and visual question answering (VQA) [6, 20,
23]. VQA is successful in grasping object features visualized in 2D frames. However, when we develop models that
understand the spatial information of 3D scenes, such as
“What is between the table and TV set?” or “Where is the
⇤ denotes equally contributed.

1 https://github.com/ATR-DBI/ScanQA

3D Scan

Q. Where is the medium sized
blue suitcase laid?

A. in front of right bed

3D Scan

Q. What is sitting on the floor between
the tv and the wooden chair?

A. 2 black backpacks

Figure 1. We introduce the new task of question answering for 3D
modeling. Given inputs of an entire 3D modeling and a linguistic
question, models predict an answer phrase and the corresponding
3D-bounding boxes.

suitcase located?”, the existing models based on 2D images
have several challenges in accurately understanding the 3D
world. For example, 2D images lack an accurate sense of
the relative directions and distances in the 3D scenes, i.e.,
the stereoscopic attribute-perception problem. Some objects are hidden by other objects when they overlap, i.e., the
occlusion problem. When multiple images are used in 2Dimage-based question answering models, such models often
encounter difficulties in tracking and recognizing whether
some objects are the same object between images, i.e., the
object localization and identification problem.
Currently, 3D spatial-understanding models can be developed for the 3D object localization task of ScanRefer [10], the dialog-based localization of ReferIt3D [1], and
the 3D object captioning task of Scan2Cap [13]. Embodied question answering [17, 46, 49] is an important task
for navigating agents in a 3D scene. We consider that
3D spatial understanding datasets contribute to developing
models that comprehend the embodied 3D scene and ask
and answer questions about the 3D environment as humans
do. However, unlike their 2D image counterparts, question answering datasets on 3D environmental annotations

19129

