Exploiting Temporal Relations on Radar Perception for Autonomous Driving
Peizhao Li1 *, Pu Wang2 , Karl Berntorp2 , Hongfu Liu1
1
Brandeis University, 2 Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories
{peizhaoli,hongfuliu}@brandeis.edu, {pwang,berntorp}@merl.com

Abstract
We consider the object recognition problem in autonomous driving using automotive radar sensors. Comparing to Lidar sensors, radar is cost-effective and robust in
all-weather conditions for perception in autonomous driving.
However, radar signals suffer from low angular resolution
and precision in recognizing surrounding objects. To enhance the capacity of automotive radar, in this work, we
exploit the temporal information from successive ego-centric
bird-eye-view radar image frames for radar object recognition. We leverage the consistency of an object’s existence
and attributes (size, orientation, etc.), and propose a temporal relational layer to explicitly model the relations between
objects within successive radar images. In both object detection and multiple object tracking, we show the superiority of
our method compared to several baseline approaches.

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving utilizes sensing technology for robust dynamic object perception, and sequentially uses the
perception for reliable and safe vehicle decision-making [34].
Among various perception sensors, camera and Lidar are the
two dominant ones exploited for surrounding object recognition. The camera provides semantically rich visual features
of traffic scenarios, while Lidar provides high-resolution
point clouds that can capture the reflection from objects.
Compared with camera and Lidar, radar enjoys the following
unique advantages when applied in automotive applications.
Primarily operating at 77 GHz, radar transmits electromagnetic waves at a millimeter wavelength to estimate the range,
velocity, and angle of objects. At such a wavelength, it can
penetrate or diffract around tiny particles in conditions such
as rain, fog, snow, and dust, and offer long-range perception
in these adverse weather conditions [35]. In contrast, laser
sent by Lidar at a much shorter wavelength may bounce off
these tiny particles, which leads to a significantly reduced
operating range. Compared with the camera, radar is also
resilient to light conditions, e.g., night and sun glare. Furthermore, radar offers a cost-effective and reliable option
* Work done during the internship at MERL

Figure 1. Showcasing of two successive radar images and the
corresponding camera recording from Radiate dataset [20]. From
top to bottom, we display examples in the normal, foggy, and snowy
weather. The bounding boxes are the ground-truth annotations of
objects where its color implies the object ID. The plotted arrows
show the consistency of the object’s appearance and attributes
within a short time period, e.g., length, width, and orientation.

to complement other sensors. For the cost of Lidar, according to an aggressive estimate by Luminar, is expected to
be the range of $500 - $1000 [1]. In contrast, automotive
radar is expected to be less than $100 in 2022 [8]. However,
as a disadvantage of radar-assisted automotive perception,
a high angular resolution in the azimuth and elevation domains are indispensable. In recent open-access automotive
radar datasets, an azimuth resolution of 1◦ becomes available, while the elevation resolution is still lagging behind.
With 1◦ azimuth resolution, semantic features for objects
in a short range, e.g., corners and shapes, can be observed,
while an object at far distances can still be blurred due to
the cross-range resolution. In summary, the capability of
localizing and identifying objects for radar is still falling
behind from full-level autonomous driving.
Some recent efforts have been taken to leverage and enhance automotive radar for object recognition from an algorithmic perspective. [14] proposes a deep-learning approach
using range-azimuth-doppler measurement. [16] detects ob-

17071

