Pastiche Master: Exemplar-Based High-Resolution Portrait Style Transfer
Shuai Yang

Liming Jiang Ziwei Liu Chen Change Loy
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

{shuai.yang, liming002, ziwei.liu, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg

(a) input

(b) cartoon style transfer

(e) randomly generated cartoon

(c) caricature style transfer

(f) varying extrinsic styles

(g) varying intrinsic styles

(d) anime style transfer

(h) varying both styles

Figure 1. We propose a novel DualStyleGAN for exemplar-based high-resolution (1024×1024) portrait style transfer. The artistic portraits
of (b)-(d) generated from a real face (a) successfully imitate the color and structural styles of the examples seen in their respective lower-left
corners. DualStyleGAN features dual style paths: an intrinsic style path and an extrinsic style path for flexible control over the content
and style, respectively. (e) A cartoon face generated from arbitrary intrinsic and extrinsic style codes. Samples generated by (f) varying
extrinsic styles with fixed intrinsic styles, (g) varying intrinsic styles with fixed extrinsic styles, and (h) varying both styles.

Abstract
Recent studies on StyleGAN show high performance on
artistic portrait generation by transfer learning with limited
data. In this paper, we explore more challenging exemplarbased high-resolution portrait style transfer by introducing a novel DualStyleGAN with flexible control of dual
styles of the original face domain and the extended artistic
portrait domain. Different from StyleGAN, DualStyleGAN
provides a natural way of style transfer by characterizing
the content and style of a portrait with an intrinsic style
path and a new extrinsic style path, respectively. The delicately designed extrinsic style path enables our model to
modulate both the color and complex structural styles hierarchically to precisely pastiche the style example. Furthermore, a novel progressive fine-tuning scheme is introduced to smoothly transform the generative space of the
model to the target domain, even with the above modifications on the network architecture. Experiments demonstrate
the superiority of DualStyleGAN over state-of-the-art methods in high-quality portrait style transfer and flexible style

control. Code is available at https://github.com/
williamyang1991/DualStyleGAN .

1. Introduction
Artistic portraits are popular in our daily lives and especially in industries related to comics, animations, posters,
and advertising. In this paper, we focus on exemplar-based
portrait style transfer, a core problem that aims to transfer the style of an exemplar artistic portrait onto a target
face. Its potential application is appealing in that it allows
any novice to easily transform their photograph into a stunning pastiche based on the style of their favourite artworks,
which otherwise would have required highly professional
skills for manual creation.
Automatic portrait style transfer based on image style
transfer [23, 24, 31] and image-to-image translation [6,
19, 22] has been extensively studied. Recently, StyleGAN [17, 18], the state-of-the-art face generator, has been
very promising for high-resolution artistic portrait generation via transfer learning [29]. Specifically, StyleGAN can

7693

