Enhancing Face Recognition with Self-Supervised 3D Reconstruction
Mingjie He1,2 , Jie Zhang1,2 , Shiguang Shan1,2,3 , Xilin Chen1,2
1
Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, 518055, China
{hemingjie, zhangjie, sgshan, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

3D reconstruction
auxiliary bypass

Face recognition loss

Face attributes
recognition loss

FC

Attributed to both the development of deep networks and
abundant data, automatic face recognition (FR) has quickly
reached human-level capacity in the past few years. However, the FR problem is not perfectly solved in case of uncontrolled illumination and pose. In this paper, we propose to
enhance face recognition with a bypass of self-supervised
3D reconstruction, which enforces the neural backbone to
focus on the identity-related depth and albedo information
while neglects the identity-irrelevant pose and illumination
information. Specifically, inspired by the physical model of
image formation, we improve the backbone FR network by
introducing a 3D face reconstruction loss with two auxiliary
networks. The first one estimates the pose and illumination
from the input face image while the second one decodes the
canonical depth and albedo from the intermediate feature
of the FR backbone network. The whole network is trained
in end-to-end manner with both classic face identification
loss and the loss of 3D face reconstruction with the physical parameters. In this way, the self-supervised reconstruction acts as a regularization that enables the recognition
network to understand faces in 3D view, and the learnt features are forced to encode more information of canonical
facial depth and albedo, which is more intrinsic and beneficial to face recognition. Extensive experimental results
on various face recognition benchmarks show that, without
any cost of extra annotations and computations, our method
outperforms state-of-the-art ones. Moreover, the learnt representations can also well generalize to other face-related
downstream tasks such as the facial attribute recognition
with limited labeled data.

1. Introduction
With abundant data [2,8] and the development of marginbased loss functions [5, 17, 30, 31], great progresses have

FC

FC
FC

Reconstruction
loss

Self-supervised bypass

Supervised pathway

Attributes
big nose 
attractive 
…

Down-stream task

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed 3D bypass enhanced representation learning (3D-BERL). Inspired by the physical model of
image formation, 3D-BERL incorporates a self-supervised 3D reconstruction bypass to improve the face recognition. Besides, the
shallow stages of the backbone can also serve as a good foundation
model for downstream tasks such as facial attribute recognition
with only limited labeled data.

been achieved on face recognition. The accuracy on the famous LFW benchmark [10] is almost perfect, e.g., 99.83%
by ArcFace [5]. Even though, existing methods degenerate
severely under large poses, various illuminations and partial
occlusions. Face recognition under unconstrained scenarios
still remains a challenging task. Unfortunately, conventional methods with fixed-margins do not fit well with these factors as they do not consider the difficultness of each sample,
and may result in convergence issue. To alleviate this problem, AdaptiveFace [16], AdaCos [39], MagFace [20] and
CurricularFace [12] propose to dynamically tune the margin during the training process. MagFace [20] proposes a
quality assessment method to evaluate the face quality and
then adaptively adjust its margins. To some extent, these
adaptive margin methods have alleviated the convergence
issue. However, the performance still degenerates when
testing under large poses, various illuminations and occlu-

4062

