PLAD: Learning to Infer Shape Programs with
Pseudo-Labels and Approximate Distributions
R. Kenny Jones
Brown University

Homer Walke
UC Berkeley

Abstract
Inferring programs which generate 2D and 3D shapes is
important for reverse engineering, editing, and more. Training models to perform this task is complicated because
paired (shape, program) data is not readily available for
many domains, making exact supervised learning infeasible.
However, it is possible to get paired data by compromising
the accuracy of either the assigned program labels or the
shape distribution. Wake-sleep methods use samples from a
generative model of shape programs to approximate the distribution of real shapes. In self-training, shapes are passed
through a recognition model, which predicts programs that
are treated as ‘pseudo-labels’ for those shapes. Related to
these approaches, we introduce a novel self-training variant
unique to program inference, where program pseudo-labels
are paired with their executed output shapes, avoiding label
mismatch at the cost of an approximate shape distribution.
We propose to group these regimes under a single conceptual framework, where training is performed with maximum
likelihood updates sourced from either Pseudo-Labels or
an Approximate Distribution (PLAD). We evaluate these
techniques on multiple 2D and 3D shape program inference domains. Compared with policy gradient reinforcement
learning, we show that PLAD techniques infer more accurate
shape programs and converge significantly faster. Finally,
we propose to combine updates from different PLAD methods within the training of a single model, and find that this
approach outperforms any individual technique.

1. Introduction
Having access to a procedure which generates a visual
datum reveals its underlying structure, facilitating high-level
manipulation and editing by a person or autonomous agent.
Thus, inferring such programs from visual data is an important problem. In R2 , inferring shape programs has applications in the design of diagrams, icons, and other 2D
graphics. In R3 , it has applications in reverse engineering of

Daniel Ritchie
Brown University

CAD models, procedural modeling for 3D games, and 3D
structure understanding for autonomous agents.
We formally define shape program inference as obtaining
a latent program z which generates a given observed shape
x. We model p(z|x) with deep neural networks that train
over a distribution of real shapes in order to amortize the
cost of shape program inference on unseen shapes (e.g. a
test set). This is a challenging problem: it is a structured
prediction problem whose output is high-dimensional and
can feature both discrete and continuous components (i.e.
program control flow vs. program parameters). Nevertheless,
learning p(z|x) becomes tractable provided that one has
access to paired (X, Z) data (i.e. a dataset of shapes and the
programs which generate them) [31]. Unfortunately, while
shape data is increasingly available in large quantities [2],
these shapes do not typically come with their generating
program.
To circumvent this data problem, researchers have typically synthesized paired data by generating synthetic programs and pairing them with the shapes they output [24, 28].
However, as there is typically significant distributional mismatch between these synthetic shapes and “real” shapes from
the distribution of interest, S ∗ , various techniques must be
employed to fine-tune p(z|x) models towards S ∗ .
A number of these fine-tuning strategies attempt to directly propagate gradients from geometric similarity measures back to p(z|x). When the program executor is not a
black-box, it may be possible to do this by implementing
a differentiable relaxation of its behavior [16], but this requires knowledge of its functional form. One can also try
learning a differentiable proxy of the executor’s behavior
[28], but this approximation introduces errors. Moreover,
as shape programs typically involve many discrete structural decisions, training such a model end-to-end is usually
infeasible in many domains. Thus, many prior works often resort to general-purpose policy gradient reinforcement
learning [8, 24], which treats the program executor as a (nondifferentiable) black-box. The downside of this strategy is
that RL is notoriously unstable and slow to converge.
In this paper, we study a collection of methods that create

9871

