COAP: Compositional Articulated Occupancy of People
Marko Mihajlovic1 , Shunsuke Saito2 , Aayush Bansal2 , Michael Zollhoefer2 , Siyu Tang1
1
ETH Zürich 2 Reality Labs Research
neuralbodies.github.io/COAP

Figure 1. We present COAP, a COmpositional Articulated occupancy representation of People that is robust to highly articulated outof-distribution pose sequences and that generalizes well to novel identities. The key idea is to decompose a human body into articulated
body parts and employ a part-aware encoder-decoder architecture to learn neural articulated occupancy that models complex deformations
locally. The displayed example visualizes unseen subjects performing challenging poses from the PosePrior dataset [1]. The color scheme
indicates labels of the activated articulated local implicit representations.

Abstract

We present a novel neural implicit representation for
articulated human bodies. Compared to explicit template
meshes, neural implicit body representations provide an efficient mechanism for modeling interactions with the environment, which is essential for human motion reconstruction and synthesis in 3D scenes. However, existing neural implicit bodies suffer from either poor generalization
on highly articulated poses or slow inference time. In this
work, we observe that prior knowledge about the human
body’s shape and kinematic structure can be leveraged to
improve generalization and efficiency. We decompose the
full-body geometry into local body parts and employ a partaware encoder-decoder architecture to learn neural articulated occupancy that models complex deformations locally.
Our local shape encoder represents the body deformation
of not only the corresponding body part but also the neighboring body parts. The decoder incorporates the geometric
constraints of local body shape which significantly improves
pose generalization. We demonstrate that our model is
suitable for resolving self-intersections and collisions with
3D environments. Quantitative and qualitative experiments
show that our method largely outperforms existing solutions
in terms of both efficiency and accuracy.

1. Introduction
Computers can perceive rich representations of 3D human pose, shape, and motion by regressing the latent parameters of parametric human body models [25, 35, 54].
Conventionally, such generative human body models are
represented as polygonal meshes and are easy to deform
and animate by leveraging skinning algorithms such as linear blend skinning (LBS) [14]. However, they are not well
suited for efficient interactions with 3D graphics environment and resolving self-intersections.
Unlike meshes, neural implicit representations [6,28,48]
are flexible, continuous, and support efficient intersection
tests with the environment. The state-of-the-art neural implicit body models [28, 42, 52] learn an inverse LBS network to convert an arbitrary point in 3D space to the canonical space where identity- and pose-dependent surface deformations are modeled. While being effective in capturing surface deformations in the canonical space, the learned
inverse LBS networks often suffer from poor generalization capability to highly articulated unseen poses (Fig. 1).
SNARF [6] circumvents the need of learning the inverse
LBS network by formulating the inverse mapping as a rootfinding problem. However, the model is learned per subject, and the computationally expensive root-finding prevents the practical application of their method for human
body reconstruction in 3D scenes. In this work, we present
a novel part-aware encoder-decoder architecture that mod-

13201

