Point-NeRF: Point-based Neural Radiance Fields
Qiangeng Xu1 †

Zexiang Xu2
Julien Philip 2
Sai Bi2
Zhixin Shu2
Kalyan Sunkavalli2
Ulrich Neumann1
1
2
University of Southern California
Adobe Research

{qiangenx,uneumann}@usc.edu

{zexu,juphilip,sbi,zshu,sunkaval}@adobe.com

Figure 1. Point-NeRF uses neural 3D points to efficiently represent and render a continuous radiance volume. The point-based radiance
field can be predicted via network forward inference from multi-view images. It can then be optimized per scene to achieve reconstruction
quality that surpasses NeRF [34] in tens of minutes. Point-NeRF can also leverage off-the-shelf reconstruction methods like COLMAP [42]
and is able to perform point pruning and growing that automatically fix the holes and outliers in these approaches.

Abstract
Volumetric neural rendering methods like NeRF [34]
generate high-quality view synthesis results but are optimized per-scene leading to prohibitive reconstruction time.
On the other hand, deep multi-view stereo methods can
quickly reconstruct scene geometry via direct network inference. Point-NeRF combines the advantages of these two
approaches by using neural 3D point clouds, with associated neural features, to model a radiance field. Point-NeRF
can be rendered efficiently by aggregating neural point features near scene surfaces, in a ray marching-based rendering pipeline. Moreover, Point-NeRF can be initialized via
direct inference of a pre-trained deep network to produce
a neural point cloud; this point cloud can be finetuned to
surpass the visual quality of NeRF with 30× faster training time. Point-NeRF can be combined with other 3D reconstruction methods and handles the errors and outliers in
such methods via a novel pruning and growing mechanism.

1. Introduction
Modeling real scenes from image data and rendering
photo-realistic novel views is a central problem in computer vision and graphics. NeRF [34] and its extensions
† This work is partially done during the internship at Adobe Research.
Code and results: xharlie.github.io/projects/project sites/pointnerf.

[28, 31, 58] have shown great success on this by modeling
neural radiance fields. These methods [34, 37, 58] often reconstruct radiance fields using global MLPs for the entire
space through ray marching. This leads to long reconstruction times due to the slow per-scene network fitting and the
unnecessary sampling of vast empty space.
We address this issue using Point-NeRF, a novel pointbased radiance field representation that uses 3D neural
points to model a continuous volumetric radiance field. Unlike NeRF that purely depends on per-scene fitting, PointNeRF can be effectively initialized via a feed-forward deep
neural network, pre-trained across scenes. Moreover, PointNeRF avoids ray sampling in the empty scene space by
leveraging classical point clouds that approximate the actual scene geometry. This advantage of Point-NeRF leads
to more efficient reconstruction and more accurate rendering than other neural radiance field models [8, 34, 50, 57].
Our Point-NeRF representation consists of a point cloud
with per-point neural features: each neural point encodes
the local 3D scene geometry and appearance around it.
Prior point-based rendering techniques [2] use similar neural point clouds but perform rendering with rasterization
and 2D CNNs operating in image space. We instead treat
these neural points as local neural basis functions in 3D to
model a continuous volumetric radiance field which enables
high-quality rendering using differentiable ray marching. In

5438

