Efficient Deep Embedded Subspace Clustering
Jinyu Cai1,3 , Jicong Fan2,3∗, Wenzhong Guo1 , Shiping Wang1 , Yunhe Zhang1 , Zhao Zhang4
1
College of Computer and Data Science, Fuzhou University, China
2
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen), China
3
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, China 4 Hefei University of Technology, China
{jinyucai1995,cszzhang}@gmail.com, fanjicong@cuhk.edu.cn
guowenzhong@fzu.edu.cn,{shipingwangphd,zhangyhannie}@163.com

Abstract

ta. Indeed, some previous works [14, 37, 38, 47] utilized
the feature learning techniques such as non-negative matrix factorization [2], auto-encoder (AE) [1] and its variants [24, 31, 36] to learn low-dimensional embeddings for
clustering, which increased the clustering accuracy. Nevertheless, since these methods are two-stage clustering and
the feature learning is not specific to clustering, it is not
guaranteed that the learned representations are appropriate
for clustering.
Recently, a few researchers [3, 9, 26, 43, 46] have proposed end-to-end clustering methods, such as deep embedded clustering (DEC) [40], joint unsupervised learning
(JULE) [41], deep adaptive clustering (DAC) [6], and deep
comprehensive correlation mining (DCCM) [39]. In these
methods, the clustering objectives are integrated with the
network optimization process, which provides an approach
to learning clustering-oriented embedded representations.
However, most deep clustering methods use the Euclidean
distance-based measure in identifying clusters, whereas Euclidean distance is not always valid or reasonable for different types of data structures.
Subspace clustering assumes that data lie in different
subspaces [11]. A category of classical subspace clustering methods such as sparse subspace clustering (SSC) [11]
and low-rank representation (LRR) [27] are mainly based
on spectral clustering [30] and outperformed k-means and
classical spectral clustering in many tasks such as face image clustering. Recently, a few researchers [8, 21, 25, 44]
showed that joint subspace clustering and deep learning
have promising performance on benchmark datasets. However, these approaches can hardly be extended to large-scale
datasets because they need to learn a self-expressive matrix
leading to quadratic time and space complexities. Consequently, some latest works [12, 48, 49] dedicate to improving the efficiency of subspace clustering.
In this paper, we aim to provide an approach to efficient
and accurate deep subspace clustering. We propose to learn
a set of subspace bases from the latent features extracted

Recently deep learning methods have shown significant
progress in data clustering tasks. Deep clustering methods (including distance-based methods and subspace-based
methods) integrate clustering and feature learning into a
unified framework, where there is a mutual promotion between clustering and representation. However, deep subspace clustering methods are usually in the framework of
self-expressive model and hence have quadratic time and
space complexities, which prevents their applications in
large-scale clustering and real-time clustering. In this paper, we propose a new mechanism for deep clustering. We
aim to learn the subspace bases from deep representation
in an iterative refining manner while the refined subspace
bases help learning the representation of the deep neural
networks in return. The proposed method is out of the selfexpressive framework, scales to the sample size linearly,
and is applicable to arbitrarily large datasets and online
clustering scenarios. More importantly, the clustering accuracy of the proposed method is much higher than its competitors. Extensive comparison studies with state-of-the-art
clustering approaches on benchmark datasets demonstrate
the superiority of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Clustering is a fundamental issue in machine learning,
which aims to separate samples into classes in the absence
of label information, under the requirement of high intraclass similarity and low inter-class similarity. Many classical clustering algorithms such as k-means [29] and spectral
clustering (SC) [30] have showed great success in real applications. However, they are not effective in handling data with complicated structures or/and high-dimensionality,
which can be improved by using refined features of the da∗ Jicong Fan is the corresponding author.

1

