LAKe-Net: Topology-Aware Point Cloud Completion
by Localizing Aligned Keypoints
Junshu Tang1 , Zhijun Gong1 , Ran Yi1 *, Yuan Xie2 , Lizhuang Ma1,2 *
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 East China Normal University
{tangjs, gongzhijun, ranyi}@sjtu.edu.cn, yxie@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, ma-lz@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Point cloud completion aims at completing geometric
and topological shapes from a partial observation. However, some topology of the original shape is missing, existing methods directly predict the location of complete points,
without predicting structured and topological information
of the complete shape, which leads to inferior performance.
To better tackle the missing topology part, we propose
LAKe-Net, a novel topology-aware point cloud completion model by localizing aligned keypoints, with a novel
Keypoints-Skeleton-Shape prediction manner. Specifically,
our method completes missing topology using three steps:
1) Aligned Keypoint Localization. An asymmetric keypoint
locator, including an unsupervised multi-scale keypoint detector and a complete keypoint generator, is proposed for localizing aligned keypoints from complete and partial point
clouds. We theoretically prove that the detector can capture aligned keypoints for objects within a sub-category.
2) Surface-skeleton Generation. A new type of skeleton,
named Surface-skeleton, is generated from keypoints based
on geometric priors to fully represent the topological information captured from keypoints and better recover the local
details. 3) Shape Refinement. We design a refinement subnet where multi-scale surface-skeletons are fed into each
recursive skeleton-assisted refinement module to assist the
completion process. Experimental results show that our
method achieves the state-of-the-art performance on point
cloud completion.

1. Introduction
The geometry and vision community has put huge effort into point cloud processing, which is challenging due to
the unordered, unstructured characteristics, and complex semantics of the point clouds. However, in real applications,
occlusions and insufficient lighting lead to partial scans of
real shapes and degrade the performance of subsequent processing. Point cloud completion focuses on predicting miss* Corresponding authors.

(a)

GRNet

PMP-Net

(b)

PoinTr

Ground Truth

Snowflake

Topology

Partial localize
Input

Keypoints

generate

Surfaceskeleton

assist

Fine
Output

(c)

Figure 1. Illustration of (a) visual comparison results of current
completion methods, (b) completion process of our LAKe-Net,
and (c) aligned keypoints. Compared with GRNet [34], PMPNet [29], PoinTr [40] and Snowflake [32], LAKe-Net can effectively recover missing topology part (see Red ellipses).

ing regions from partial observations, and shows its unique
significance in many fundamental applications.
Recent works [7, 18, 26, 29, 32, 34, 35, 40, 41] for point
cloud completion successfully utilized deep-learning methods and achieved more plausible and flexible results compared with traditional geometric-based methods [8, 19, 23]
and alignment-based methods [11, 12, 16]. However, most
existing methods directly predict the location of complete
points, without predicting structured and topological information of the complete shape, which leads to coarse results
in missing regions (see Figure 1(a)).
Inspired by typical geometric modeling theory that a
complete 3D object includes geometry and topology, e.g.,
coordinates and connectivity, we tend to predict both geometric and structured topological information for point
cloud completion, including keypoints and generated skeleton. To this end, we propose a novel Keypoints-SkeletonShape prediction manner, including three steps: keypoint

1726

