Implicit Feature Decoupling with Depthwise Quantization
Iordanis Fostiropoulos
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA

Barry Boehm
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA

fostirop@usc.edu

boehm@usc.edu

Abstract
Quantization has been applied to multiple domains in
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). We propose Depthwise
Quantization (DQ) where quantization is applied to a decomposed sub-tensor along the feature axis of weak statistical dependence. The feature decomposition leads to an
exponential increase in representation capacity with a linear
increase in memory and parameter cost. In addition, DQ
can be directly applied to existing encoder-decoder frameworks without modification of the DNN architecture. We
use DQ in the context of Hierarchical Auto-Encoders and
train end-to-end on an image feature representation. We
provide an analysis of the cross-correlation between spatial
and channel features and propose a decomposition of the
image feature representation along the channel axis. The
improved performance of the depthwise operator is due to
the increased representation capacity from implicit feature
decoupling. We evaluate DQ on the likelihood estimation
task, where it outperforms the previous state-of-the-art on
CIFAR-10, ImageNet-32 and ImageNet-64. We progressively
train with increasing image size a single hierarchical model
that uses 69% fewer parameters and has faster convergence
than the previous work.

1. Introduction
Quantization is an effective lossy compression process
that maps a continuous signal to a set of discrete values,
also called codes. Quantization is extended to vector feature
spaces with learning paradigms such as Vector Quantization
(VQ) and with a training objective identical to k-means.
Product Quantization (PQ) decomposes the feature vector
and assumes a weak statistical dependence between feature
sub-vectors. Additive Quantization (AQ) decomposes the
feature vector into a sum of quantized vectors as opposed to
the concatenated output in PQ.
Quantization is used in conjunction with Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) for tasks such as classification [46], incremental learning [46], zero-shot learning [28], generation [33],

Figure 1. The original images (left) are reconstructed by DQ (middle) and VQ (right) with identical models and training setup. The
perceptual quality of DQ outperform VQ.

compression [29] and data retrieval [4]. The discrete quantized feature representations can be used post-hoc [11,33,38]
or as a learning objective (i.e. classification) [28, 46]. Our
work is motivated by the increasing number of quantization
applications to high dimensional feature tensors. We view
the quantizer as a density estimator and evaluate it on the
task of likelihood estimation for the visual domain.
Likelihood estimation models seek to minimize the divergence between the data distribution and the model prior. Explicit likelihood estimation models, including Vector Quanti-

396

