Virtual Correspondence: Humans as a Cue for Extreme-View Geometry
Wei-Chiu Ma1,4

Anqi Joyce Yang2,4,5 Shenlong Wang3 Raquel Urtasun2,4,5 Antonio Torralba1
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 University of Toronto
3
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 4 Waabi 5 Vector Institute

Figure 1. Can you tell the relationships between these matched pixels? The head pixel and the face pixel in the leftmost images have
completely different semantics and appearances, yet we can still associate them for 3D reasoning. Why, and how? In this paper, we present a
novel concept to establish geometric relationships between pixels even if they are not semantically or visually similar. See Fig. 11 for cars.

Abstract
Recovering the spatial layout of the cameras and the
geometry of the scene from extreme-view images is a longstanding challenge in computer vision. Prevailing 3D reconstruction algorithms often adopt the image matching
paradigm and presume that a portion of the scene is covisible across images, yielding poor performance when there
is little overlap among inputs. In contrast, humans can
associate visible parts in one image to the corresponding
invisible components in another image via prior knowledge
of the shapes. Inspired by this fact, we present a novel concept called virtual correspondences (VCs). VCs are a pair
of pixels from two images whose camera rays intersect in
3D. Similar to classic correspondences, VCs conform with
epipolar geometry; unlike classic correspondences, VCs do
not need to be co-visible across views. Therefore VCs can be
established and exploited even if images do not overlap. We
introduce a method to find virtual correspondences based
on humans in the scene. We showcase how VCs can be
seamlessly integrated with classic bundle adjustment to recover camera poses across extreme views. Experiments show
that our method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art
camera pose estimation methods in challenging scenarios
and is comparable in the traditional densely captured setup.
Our approach also unleashes the potential of multiple downstream tasks such as scene reconstruction from multi-view
stereo and novel view synthesis in extreme-view scenarios1 .

1 Project page:
https : / / people . csail . mit . edu /
weichium/virtual-correspondence/

1. Introduction
Epipolar geometry and correspondence estimation are
two keystones of mainstream 3D reconstruction systems.
When given a set of RGB images as input, a classic 3D
pipeline [34, 53] first identifies co-visible 3D points across
images via pixel-wise visual features, and then recovers the
spatial relationships among cameras. Such a “golden standard” framework has experienced huge success in practice
and has given birth to numerous applications in robotics,
AR, VR, etc. The reliance on correspondences, however,
makes one ponder: what if the input images have little or
no overlap? Does this still work when there are barely any
co-visible 3D points in the scene (see Fig. 1)?
At first thought the answer is no. Predominant correspondence estimators focus on finding pixel pairs that describe
the same, co-visible 3D points in the scene by matching
their visual features. If the viewpoint differences across
images are extreme, the pixels will be inherently different
and cannot be matched, rendering current 3D systems to fail
catastrophically. In contrast, humans can identify where the
two photographs were taken with respect to the scene despite
the large viewpoint variations. Such a remarkable capability
comes from our prior knowledge of the underlying geometry,
which helps us match pixels between images even if their
exact correspondences are occluded or invisible in the other
image. For instance, we know how the front and back of a
human body should look like. Therefore, if we see a human
face in one image and the back of a head in the other, we
can easily associate them and infer that the two cameras are
roughly 180 degrees apart. The aim of this paper is to equip
3D systems with similar abilities.
Towards this goal, we first ask the following question:

15924

