Personalized Image Aesthetics Assessment with Rich Attributes
Yuzhe Yang1† , Liwu Xu1† , Leida Li2 , Nan Qie1 , Yaqian Li1 , Peng Zhang1 , Yandong Guo1 *
1
OPPO Research Institute 2 Xidian University
ippllewis@gmail.com, {xuliwu, qienan, liyaqian, zhangpeng6}@oppo.com,
ldli@xidian.edu.cn, yandong.guo@live.com

Abstract
Personalized image aesthetics assessment (PIAA) is
challenging due to its highly subjective nature. People’s
aesthetic tastes depend on diversiﬁed factors, including image characteristics and subject characters. The existing
PIAA databases are limited in terms of annotation diversity, especially the subject aspect, which can no longer meet
the increasing demands of PIAA research. To solve the
dilemma, we conduct so far, the most comprehensive subjective study of personalized image aesthetics and introduce
a new Personalized image Aesthetics database with Rich Attributes (PARA), which consists of 31,220 images with annotations by 438 subjects. PARA features wealthy annotations, including 9 image-oriented objective attributes and 4
human-oriented subjective attributes. In addition, desensitized subject information, such as personality traits, is also
provided to support study of PIAA and user portraits. A
comprehensive analysis of the annotation data is provided
and statistic study indicates that the aesthetic preferences
can be mirrored by proposed subjective attributes. We also
propose a conditional PIAA model by utilizing subject information as conditional prior. Experimental results indicate that the conditional PIAA model can outperform the
control group, which is also the ﬁrst attempt to demonstrate
how image aesthetics and subject characters interact to produce the intricate personalized tastes on image aesthetics.
We believe the database and the associated analysis would
be useful for conducting next-generation PIAA study. The
project page of PARA can be found at: https://cvdatasets.institutecv.com/#/data-sets .

1. Introduction
Image aesthetics assessment (IAA) aims at evaluating
photo aesthetics computationally. Due to the highly differentiated aesthetic preference, image aesthetics assessment
* Corresponding author
† Equal contribution

19861

(a) Animal

(b) Building

(c) Food

(d) Indoor

(e) Night scene

(f) Plant

(g) Portrait

(h) Scene

(i) Still life

(j) Others

Figure 1. Sample images in PARA.

can be divided into two categories: generic and personalized image aesthetics assessment (a.k.a GIAA and PIAA)
[13]. For GIAA, an image is annotated by different voters and mean opinion score (MOS) is used as the aesthetics
“ground truth”. However, GIAA merely reﬂects an “average opinion”, which neglects the highly subjective nature of aesthetic tastes. To mitigate this issue, PIAA was
proposed to capture unique aesthetic preferences [13]. In
the past decade, PIAA has achieved encouraging advances.
Initially, Ren et al. [13] proposed the ﬁrst PIAA database
named FLICKR-AES and they addressed this problem by

