Real-time Object Detection for Streaming Perception
Jinrong Yang1 , Songtao Liu2 ,* Zeming Li2 , Xiaoping Li1 , Jian Sun2
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 2 Megvii Technology
yangjinrong@hust.edu.cn;liusongtao@megvii.com;lizeming@megvii.com;
lixiaoping@hust.edu.cn;sunjian@megvii.com

Abstract
Autonomous driving requires the model to perceive the
environment and (re)act within a low latency for safety.
While past works ignore the inevitable changes in the environment after processing, streaming perception is proposed
to jointly evaluate the latency and accuracy into a single
metric for video online perception. In this paper, instead of
searching trade-offs between accuracy and speed like previous works, we point out that endowing real-time models
with the ability to predict the future is the key to dealing
with this problem. We build a simple and effective framework for streaming perception. It equips a novel DualFlow Perception module (DFP), which includes dynamic
and static flows to capture the moving trend and basic detection feature for streaming prediction. Further, we introduce
a Trend-Aware Loss (TAL) combined with a trend factor to
generate adaptive weights for objects with different moving speeds. Our simple method achieves competitive performance on Argoverse-HD dataset and improves the AP
by 4.9% compared to the strong baseline, validating its effectiveness. Our code will be made available at https:
//github.com/yancie-yjr/StreamYOLO.

1. Introduction
One critical factor for autonomous safe driving is to perceive its environment and (re)act within a low latency. Recently, several real-time detectors [3, 13, 18, 31, 33, 41–43]
achieve competitive performance under the low latency restriction. But they are still explored in an offline setting [26].
In a real-world vision-for-online scenario, no matter how
fast the model becomes, the surrounding environment has
changed once the model finishes processing the latest frame.
As shown in Fig. 1(a), the inconsistency between perceptive
results and the changed state may trigger unsafe decisions
for autonomous driving. Thus for online perception, detectors are imposed to have the ability of future forecasting.
* Corresponding author

(a) baseline

(b) ours

Figure 1. Illustration of visualization results of base detector and
our method. The green boxes are ground truth, while the red ones
are predictions. The red arrows mark the shifts of the prediction
boxes caused by the processing time delay while our approach alleviates this issue.

To tackle this issue, [26] firstly proposes a new metric
named streaming accuracy, which integrates latency and accuracy into a single metric for real-time online perception.
It jointly evaluates the output of the entire perception stack
at every time instant, forcing the perception to forecast the
state where the model finishes processing. With this metric, [26] shows a significant performance drop of several
strong detectors [6, 21, 28] from offline setting to streaming
perception. Further, [26] proposes a meta-detector named
Streamer that can incorporate any detector with decisiontheoretic scheduling, asynchronous tracking, and future
forecasting to recover much of the performance drop. Following this work, Adaptive streamer [16] adopts numerous
approximate executions based on deep reinforcement learning to learn a better trade-off online. These works focus on
searching for a better trade-off policy between speed and accuracy for some existing detectors, while a novel streaming
perception model design is not well studied.
One more thing ignored by the above works is the existing real-time object detectors [13, 18]. By strong data
augmentation and delicate architecture design, they achieve
competitive performance and can run faster than 30 FPS.
With these ”fast enough” detectors, there is no space for ac-

5385

