3DJCG: A Unified Framework for Joint Dense Captioning and Visual
Grounding on 3D Point Clouds

1

Daigang Cai1 , Lichen Zhao1 , Jing Zhang†1 , Lu Sheng1 , Dong Xu2
College of Software, Beihang University, China, 2 The University of Sydney, Australia
{caidaigang, zlc1114, zhang jing, lsheng}@buaa.edu.cn, dong.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Observing that the 3D captioning task and the 3D
grounding task contain both shared and complementary information in nature, in this work, we propose a unified
framework to jointly solve these two distinct but closely related tasks in a synergistic fashion, which consists of both
shared task-agnostic modules and lightweight task-specific
modules. On one hand, the shared task-agnostic modules
aim to learn precise locations of objects, fine-grained attribute features to characterize different objects, and complex relations between objects, which benefit both captioning and visual grounding. On the other hand, by casting
each of the two tasks as the proxy task of another one,
the lightweight task-specific modules solve the captioning
task and the grounding task respectively. Extensive experiments and ablation study on three 3D vision and language datasets demonstrate that our joint training framework achieves significant performance gains for each individual task and finally improves the state-of-the-art performance for both captioning and grounding tasks.

1. Introduction
There is increasing research interest in the intersection
field between 3D visual understanding and natural language
processing, such as 3D dense captioning [9] and 3D visual
grounding [1, 7, 21, 50]. These two tasks push the advance
of the intersection field along different directions (i.e., from
vision to language versus from language to vision), and encouraging progress has been achieved by separately solving
each task. It still remains an open issue on whether it is possible to develop a unified framework to jointly solve the two
closely related tasks in a synergistic fashion.
We observe that the two 3D vision-language tasks contain both shared and complementary information in nature,
and it is possible to enhance the performance of both tasks
if we treat one task as a proxy task of the other. On one
† Corresponding author: Jing Zhang.

hand, each of the two tasks can be decomposed into several
sub-tasks, and some of these sub-tasks share the common
objectives and network structures. For example, as shown
in the previous vision-language works [1,7,9,21,44,47,50]
on RGB-D scans, both 3D dense captioning and 3D visual grounding require: 1) a 3D object detector to detect
the salient object proposals in a 3D scene, 2) a relation
modeling module to model complex 3D relations among
these detected objects, and 3) a multi-modal learning module to learn fused information from both visual features and
textual features to generate sentences or produce bounding
boxes based on each input sentence. On the other hand,
the opposite procedures are also used to separately solve
the two problems, namely, the captioning task is to generate a meaningful textual description from the detected boxes
(i.e., from vision to language), while the grounding task is
to locate the desired box by understanding a given textual
description (i.e., from language to vision).
Moreover, the 3D point clouds generated from RGB-D
scans often contain rich and complex relations among different objects, while the corresponding RGB data provides
more fine-grained attribute information, such as color, texture, and materials. Thus, the RGB-D scans intrinsically
contain rich and abundant attribute and relation information
for enhancing both 3D captioning and 3D grounding tasks.
However, we empirically observe that the 3D dense captioning task is more object-oriented, which tends to learn more
attribute information of the target objects (i.e., the objects
of interest) in a scene and only the primary relationship between the target object and its surrounding objects. In contrast, the 3D visual grounding task is more relation-oriented,
which focuses more on the relations between objects and
distinguishes different objects (especially the objects from
the same class) based on their relations. Thus, it is desirable to develop a joint framework to unify both 3D dense
captioning and 3D visual grounding tasks and take advantage of each other for improving the performance of both
tasks.
To this end, in this work, we propose a joint framework by unifying the distinct but closely related 3D vision-

16464

