PILC: Practical Image Lossless Compression with
an End-to-end GPU Oriented Neural Framework
Ning Kang 1 * Shanzhao Qiu 2 * Shifeng Zhang 1 Zhenguo Li 1† Shutao Xia 2†
1
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 2 Tsinghua University

Abstract
Generative model based image lossless compression algorithms have seen a great success in improving compression ratio. However, the throughput for most of them is less
than 1 MB/s even with the most advanced AI accelerated
chips, preventing them from most real-world applications,
which often require 100 MB/s. In this paper, we propose
PILC, an end-to-end image lossless compression framework
that achieves 200 MB/s for both compression and decompression with a single NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU, 10× faster
than the most efficient one before. To obtain this result,
we first develop an AI codec that combines auto-regressive
model and VQ-VAE which performs well in lightweight setting, then we design a low complexity entropy coder that
works well with our codec. Experiments show that our
framework compresses better than PNG by a margin of 30%
in multiple datasets. We believe this is an important step to
bring AI compression forward to commercial use.

1. Introduction
Lossy compression have shown great success in recent
research [3, 6, 22, 25–28, 30]. In this paper, we focus on
lossless compression. The basic idea of a lossless compression algorithm is to represent more likely appeared data
with shorter codewords, while less frequent data with longer
ones, such that the codeword is shorter than the original data
in expectation. For example, an image with each pixel randomly generated is rarely seen in the real world, while a real
picture taken by a camera occurs much more often, so the
latter compresses better for almost all image compression
algorithms.
According to Shannon’s source coding theorem [34], no
algorithm can compress data shorter than its entropy. On
the other hand, if the distribution of data is known in ad* Equal contribution.
† Correspondence to:

Zhenguo Li (li.zhenguo@huawei.com) and
Shutao Xia (xiast@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn).

Compression Throughput (MB/s)

kang.ning2@huawei.com, qiusz20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

103
PILC

102
PNG
101
100
10 1
10 2

WebP
L3C
FLIF

Traditional
Auto-regressive
AE/VAE
Flow
PILC

Bit-Swap IDF
IDF++
PixelCNN++

DistAug

LBB
1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00 2.25 2.50 2.75 3.00 3.25

Compression ratio

Figure 1. Comparison of compression throughput and ratio on
CIFAR10. Our framework achieves high compression throughput
with a competitive compression ratio.

vance, an entropy coder can be applied so that the code
length would be very close to its entropy, thus obtaining
the optimal compression ratio.
Unfortunately, in most cases, the data distribution is unknown. Traditional algorithms make use of some prior information to infer this distribution. For example, LZ77 [47]
and LZ78 [48] used by most archive formats assume that
data with lots of repeated segments occur more often than
those without. For image compression algorithms, PNG [4]
assumes most adjacent pixels are similar to each other,
and JPEG-like algorithms apply the fact that lower frequency components are more significant than higher frequency ones.
Recently, deep generative models have shown great success in probabilistic modelling and lossless compression.
However, the low throughput makes them difficult to be
used in real scenarios. An end user does not want to wait
for too long to compress/decompress a file, and a file server
needs to manipulate tons of files every day. In many cases,
a 100+ MB/s throughput is needed. For example, streaming
a 1080p video with 30 fps requires 187 MB/s for decom-

3739

