Align and Prompt: Video-and-Language Pre-training with Entity Prompts
Dongxu Li1,2 , Junnan Li1 , Hongdong Li2 , Juan Carlos Niebles1 , Steven C.H. Hoi1
1
Salesforce Research, 2 The Australian National University
dongxuli1005@gmail.com, {junnan.li,jniebles,shoi}@salesforce.com, hongdong.li@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Video-and-language pre-training has shown promising
improvements on various downstream tasks. Most previous
methods capture cross-modal interactions with a standard
transformer-based multimodal encoder, not fully addressing the misalignment between unimodal video and text features. Besides, learning fine-grained visual-language alignment usually requires off-the-shelf object detectors to provide object information, which is bottlenecked by the detector’s limited vocabulary and expensive computation cost.
In this paper, we propose Align and Prompt: a
new video-and-language pre-training framework (A L P RO),
which operates on sparsely-sampled video frames and
achieves more effective cross-modal alignment without explicit object detectors. First, we introduce a video-text contrastive (VTC) loss to align unimodal video-text features at
the instance level, which eases the modeling of cross-modal
interactions. Then, we propose a novel visually-grounded
pre-training task, prompting entity modeling (PEM), which
learns fine-grained alignment between visual region and
text entity via an entity prompter module in a self-supervised
way. Finally, we pretrain the video-and-language transformer models on large webly-source video-text pairs using
the proposed VTC and PEM losses as well as two standard
losses of masked language modeling (MLM) and video-text
matching (VTM). The resulting pre-trained model achieves
state-of-the-art performance on both text-video retrieval
and videoQA, outperforming prior work by a substantial
margin. Implementation and pre-trained models are available at https://github.com/salesforce/ALPRO.

1. Introduction
Video-and-language pre-training aims to jointly learn
multimodal representations that transfer effectively to
downstream tasks, such as text-video retrieval and videoQAvideo question answering. Compared with images, videos
usually contain more redundancy in consecutive frames.
This challenges models on both capacity and computation
efficiency. Most prior approaches [29, 34, 36, 38, 47, 56]
circumvent the expensive computation overhead by using
offline-extracted video features. Since the video feature ex-

person
dog

object
detector

e.g. ActBERT
random video crops
prompter

girl

0.96

sport 0.02

video
encoder
similarity

dog

0.47

pup

0.44

grass 0.61

“A video of a {ENTITY}.”

text
encoder

bush 0.32

soft entity labels

video
encoder
multimodal
encoder

“A cute girl walks a
dog in the park.”

text
encoder

ALPRO

Figure 1. Generating supervision for region-entity alignment.
Above: previous methods (e.g. ActBERT [56]) rely on object detectors with expensive computation cost and limited object categories, leaving text data unexploited. Below: A L P RO generates
soft entity labels with a prompter module, which computes similarities between video crops and textual entity prompts. A L P RO requires no detector while taking advantage of video-text alignment
to generate entity labels with a large vocabulary, thus strengthening the cross-modal learning.

tractors are fixed without finetuning, these approaches are
suboptimal when transferring to distinct target domains. In
contrast, recent emerging approaches [3, 25] sample frames
sparsely from videos, which enable end-to-end pre-training
and finetuning of video backbones. In this work, we
adopt the sparse video-text pre-training paradigm considering their effectiveness on downstream tasks.
Despite their promising performance, current video-text
pre-training models have several limitations. (1) The interaction between video and text features is commonly mod-

4953

