C2 AM: Contrastive learning of Class-agnostic Activation Map for Weakly
Supervised Object Localization and Semantic Segmentation
Jinheng Xie, Jianfeng Xiang, Junliang Chen, Xianxu Hou, Xiaodong Zhao, Linlin Shen∗
School of Computer Science & Software Engineering, Shenzhen University, China
Dept. of Computer Science, Wenzhou-Kean University, Wenzhou, China
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence of Robotics of Society, Shenzhen, China
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Shenzhen University, China
xiejinheng2020@email.szu.edu.cn, hxianxu@gmail.com, llshen@szu.edu.cn

Abstract
While class activation map (CAM) generated by image
classification network has been widely used for weakly supervised object localization (WSOL) and semantic segmentation (WSSS), such classifiers usually focus on discriminative object regions. In this paper, we propose Contrastive
learning for Class-agnostic Activation Map (C2 AM) generation only using unlabeled image data, without the involvement of image-level supervision. The core idea comes
from the observation that i) semantic information of foreground objects usually differs from their backgrounds; ii)
foreground objects with similar appearance or background
with similar color/texture have similar representations in
the feature space. We form the positive and negative pairs
based on the above relations and force the network to disentangle foreground and background with a class-agnostic
activation map using a novel contrastive loss. As the network is guided to discriminate cross-image foregroundbackground, the class-agnostic activation maps learned
by our approach generate more complete object regions.
We successfully extracted from C2 AM class-agnostic object
bounding boxes for object localization and background cues
to refine CAM generated by classification network for semantic segmentation. Extensive experiments on CUB-2002011, ImageNet-1K, and PASCAL VOC2012 datasets show
that both WSOL and WSSS can benefit from the proposed
C2 AM. Code will be available at https://github.com/CVISZU/CCAM.

1. Introduction
Massive image data and manual annotations are usually required to train deep neural networks for many vi∗ Corresponding Author

Figure 1. Feature manifold of foreground objects (blue) and backgrounds (green). As semantic information of foreground objects
differs from that of backgrounds, the distribution of the representation of foreground objects (blue) is far away from backgrounds
(green). Foreground objects with similar appearance or backgrounds with similar color/texture also have similar representations in the feature space. Based on these observations, positive and negative pairs can be formed for contrastive learning. tSNE [34] is used to reduce the dimensionality of features.

sion tasks, e.g., object detection and semantic segmentation.
However, it is time-consuming and labor-intensive to obtain
bounding box or pixel-level annotations. In recent years,
weaker supervision, e.g., image-level label, has been introduced in weakly supervised object localization (WSOL)
and semantic segmentation (WSSS), which aims to achieve
localization or segmentation with only image-level supervision, i.e., without bounding box or pixel-level annotations.
Most previous WSOL and WSSS methods rely on class activation map (CAM) to estimate location of the target object. With image-level supervision, the classifier tries to
find discriminative regions of target objects. Thus, though
image-level labels enable CAM to indicate the correct location of target objects, they also limit the focus of CAM

989

