Programmatic Concept Learning for Human Motion Description and Synthesis
Sumith Kulal*
Stanford University

Jiayuan Mao*
MIT

Abstract
We introduce Programmatic Motion Concepts, a hierarchical motion representation for human actions that captures both low-level motion and high-level description as
motion concepts. This representation enables human motion
description, interactive editing, and controlled synthesis of
novel video sequences within a single framework. We present
an architecture that learns this concept representation from
paired video and action sequences in a semi-supervised manner. The compactness of our representation also allows us
to present a low-resource training recipe for data-efficient
learning. By outperforming established baselines, especially
in the small data regime, we demonstrate the efficiency and
effectiveness of our framework for multiple applications.

1. Introduction
The advent of new datasets and progress in machine learning has pushed the boundaries of several video analysis tasks.
In particular, there has been tremendous progress on description tasks such as action recognition [20, 22, 36, 46, 47] and
localization [4,11,12,44,53,57], and on synthesis tasks such
as human motion synthesis [1, 14–16, 27, 37, 43] and video
synthesis [5, 40, 45, 50]. However, most of these models
focus solely on their respective tasks of video description or
synthesis. We posit that these tasks are better learned jointly.
We present a single framework for human motion description
(recognizing and temporally localizing individual actions in
the video), synthesis (generating videos from abstract descriptions) and editing (adding or removing actions and other
fine-grained manipulations).
Our key insight is a hierarchical motion representation,
Programmatic Motion Concepts (PMC). Beginning with
standard low-level input (sequences of keypoints), we learn
a representation of the distribution of high-level motion concepts (such as jumping jacks) first from a few examples and
then from longer sequences of repetitions of the concept that
* and † indicate equal contribution.
Project page: https : / /
sumith1896.github.io/motion-concepts

Alex Aiken†
Stanford University

Jiajun Wu†
Stanford University

we automatically segment. More specifically, for each motion concept and each body keypoint, we learn a distribution
of time-space trajectories expressed as cubic splines. The
fact that we explicitly learn a distribution of motions at the
level of the entire motion concept is what makes it possible to perform recognition and localization well, since our
methods leverage information about the motion of individual
keypoints over the entire span of the motion concept. Similarly, sampling from these distributions allows us to directly
synthesize natural-looking instances of the motion concept.
PMC is based on prior work on hierarchical motion understanding with programmatic primitive-based representations [23]. Illustrated in Figure 1(I), a human motion
sequence is represented as a sequence of motion primitives,
which are compact, and human-interpretable, parametric
curves. We further represent motion concepts as groupings of consecutive motion primitives that are named by humans, such as jumping jack and squat in workout videos, as
shown in Figure 1(I). This representation choice has access
to both low-level pose sequences and high-level description
sequences as motion concepts.
We want to enable easy and efficient learning of our representation to quickly adapt this framework to different domains. Hence, we propose to learn this representation from
weakly-annotated data. Our input data contains each concept
annotated with only a few mouse clicks by the human annotator. For example, the annotation of each concept in our
dataset consists of weak labels from < 15 workout videos.
Illustrated in Figure 1(II), in each video, the human annotator provides a start and end point for a video segment that
contains repetitions of jumping jacks as well as the start
and end points of three individual jumping jack instances.
Our method learns two models from this data, a recognition
model that can be applied on any human motion sequences to
detect occurrences of jumping jacks and a generative model
that can synthesize jumping jack motions.
The key ideas behind our data efficient learning algorithm
are three-fold. First, instead of using human skeleton sequences as input, our model operates on a representation of
motion as time-space curves, which is a strong but generically applicable inductive bias for videos of human motion.

13843

