Contextualized Spatio-Temporal Contrastive Learning with Self-Supervision
Liangzhe Yuan1
Rui Qian1,2∗
Yin Cui1
Boqing Gong1
Florian Schroff1
Ming-Hsuan Yang1
Hartwig Adam1
Ting Liu1
1

Google Research

2

Cornell University

Abstract
Modern self-supervised learning algorithms typically
enforce persistency of instance representations across
views. While being very effective on learning holistic image
and video representations, such an objective becomes suboptimal for learning spatio-temporally fine-grained features in videos, where scenes and instances evolve through
space and time. In this paper, we present Contextualized
Spatio-Temporal Contrastive Learning (ConST-CL) to effectively learn spatio-temporally fine-grained video representations via self-supervision. We first design a regionbased pretext task which requires the model to transform instance representations from one view to another, guided by
context features. Further, we introduce a simple network design that successfully reconciles the simultaneous learning
process of both holistic and local representations. We evaluate our learned representations on a variety of downstream
tasks and show that ConST-CL achieves competitive results on 6 datasets, including Kinetics, UCF, HMDB, AVAKinetics, AVA and OTB. Our code and models will be available at https://github.com/tensorflow/models/
tree/master/official/projects/const_cl.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has revolutionized natural language processing [12, 32] and computer vision [3,
4, 9, 23] due to strong representations learned from a vast
amount of unlabeled data. The key breakthroughs that
paved the way for SSL’s success in computer vision come
from the instance discrimination pretext task [16] and the
contrastive objective [39], with which for the first time the
self-supervised pretraining surpasses the supervised pretraining on downstream visual tasks [26]. For videos, many
self-supervised contrastive learning approaches [3,4,18,43]
directly extend established image-based methods [9, 26] to
the spatio-temporal domain. Most of them, however, do
not explicitly exploit the temporal evolutions of multiple instances and scene context in videos.
∗ Work done as a student researcher at Google.

Maximize Agreement

Predict

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) A typical contrastive learning algorithm draws two
augmented views {x, x0 } from one source s and trains an encoder network f (·) to construct representations h and h0 . A projection function g(·) is trained to project representations into a
shared space and to maximize the agreement between two views.
(b) Contextualized Spatio-Temporal Contrastive Learning uses a
binary projection function g(·, ·) to transform a representation h
from one view to the other, guided by context features Fc0 from the
other view. The contrastive objective encourages the transformed
representation z to agree with its correspondence h0 .

Self-supervised learning methods typically enforce semantic consistency across views to construct instance representations [9, 26]. This assumption is particularly true
in the image domain because two views are typically generated from the same image. As shown in Fig. 1a, the
goal is to enforce the representations of these two views
to be as close as possible in the feature space. In the video
domain, these view-based contrastive approaches [18, 43]
may be less effective as the visual appearance of an instance frequently and drastically changes across frames.
For example, one person in a video can have different poses
and perform different activities over time, indicating the
states and semantics of an instance are likely to change
across space and time. Enforcing spatio-temporal persistency throughout the video [18] would lead to representations only encoding minimally shared information across
frames, which may negatively impact spatio-temporally
fine-grained downstream tasks.
Furthermore, existing self-supervised methods typically

13977

