MuKEA: Multimodal Knowledge Extraction and Accumulation for Knowledge-based Visual
Question Answering
Yang Ding1,2 , Jing Yu1,2∗ , Bang Liu3,4† , Yue Hu1,2 , Mingxin Cui1,2 , Qi Wu5
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
4
Université de Montréal, Canada
Mila - Quebec AI Institute, Canada
5
University of Adelaide, Australia
1

{dingyang, yujing02, huyue, cuimingxin}@iie.ac.cn, bang.liu@umontreal.ca
qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract

Knowledge Graph

on road

light

Knowledge-based visual question answering requires
the ability of associating external knowledge for openended cross-modal scene understanding. One limitation of
existing solutions is that they capture relevant knowledge
from text-only knowledge bases, which merely contain facts
expressed by first-order predicates or language descriptions while lacking complex but indispensable multimodal
knowledge for visual understanding. How to construct
vision-relevant and explainable multimodal knowledge for
the VQA scenario has been less studied. In this paper, we
propose MuKEA to represent multimodal knowledge by an
explicit triplet to correlate visual objects and fact answers
with implicit relations. To bridge the heterogeneous gap,
we propose three objective losses to learn the triplet representations from complementary views: embedding structure, topological relation and semantic space. By adopting
a pre-training and fine-tuning learning strategy, both basic and domain-specific multimodal knowledge are progressively accumulated for answer prediction. We outperform
the state-of-the-art by 3.35% and 6.08% respectively on two
challenging knowledge-required datasets: OK-VQA and
KRVQA. Experimental results prove the complementary
benefits of the multimodal knowledge with existing knowledge bases and the advantages of our end-to-end framework
over the existing pipeline methods. The code is available at
https://github.com/AndersonStra/MuKEA.

1. Introduction
Visual Question Answering based on external Knowledge Bases (KB-VQA) [37] requires an AI agent to answer
* Corresponding author.
† Canada CIFAR AI Chair.

Multimodal Knowledge
motorcycle

Kawasaki

motorcycle
Q: What is the name of this
type of motorcycle?
A: Kawasaki

drive

wheel

(a)
Knowledge Graph

drive
on tower

tell time

Multimodal Knowledge
clock

London

clock
Q: Can you guess the place
shown in this picture?
A: London

roman numeral on table

(b)

Figure 1. An illustration of our motivation. Compared with rigid
facts in the knowledge graph, multimodal knowledge for depicting complex and inexpressible facts is indispensable in both openended object understanding (a) and scene understanding (b).

a question by incorporating knowledge about the world beyond what the question and the image contains. Despite the
great success in VQA tasks [11,40], KB-VQA is more challenging for models to achieve human-like ability of openended cross-modal scene understanding associating with
external knowledge. Therefore, how to appropriately represent and leverage knowledge in such cross-modal scenario
becomes a core problem of KB-VQA.
Most of recent works [9, 23, 46] focus on capturing relevant knowledge from structured knowledge graphs, such
as ConceptNet [18] and DBpedia [4], or unstructured/semistructured knowledge, like Wikipedia [1] and Visual
Genome [15]. Though these knowledge bases provide highquality knowledge by large-scale human annotations, the
information is generally limited to the definite facts that
can be explicitly expressed by natural language or simple
triplets with first-order predicate. Therefore, such knowledge bases are quite difficult to represent high-order predi-

5089

