Towards Weakly-Supervised Text Spotting using a Multi-Task Transformer
Yair Kittenplon Inbal Lavi Sharon Fogel
R. Manmatha Pietro Perona

Yarin Bar

AWS AI Labs
{yairk, ilavi, shafog, yarinbar, manmatha, peronapp}@amazon.com

Abstract
Text spotting end-to-end methods have recently gained
attention in the literature due to the benefits of jointly optimizing the text detection and recognition components. Existing methods usually have a distinct separation between
the detection and recognition branches, requiring exact annotations for the two tasks. We introduce TextTranSpotter
(TTS), a transformer-based approach for text spotting and
the first text spotting framework which may be trained with
both fully- and weakly-supervised settings. By learning a
single latent representation per word detection, and using
a novel loss function based on the Hungarian loss, our
method alleviates the need for expensive localization annotations. Trained with only text transcription annotations
on real data, our weakly-supervised method achieves competitive performance with previous state-of-the-art fullysupervised methods. When trained in a fully-supervised
manner, TextTranSpotter shows state-of-the-art results on
multiple benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Text spotting, i.e., detecting and reading text in images,
is a key capability for machines to operate in the real world.
Applications include vehicle navigation in buildings and
cities, indexing of image collections and video, automated
handling of packages, and prosthetics for blind and visually
impaired people. This challenge was recognized early in the
computer vision literature [6, 19, 40] and is currently undergoing a deep learning revival [14,20], with most researchers
focusing on two issues: architectures and data.
Early systems [3, 13] use separate architectures for text
detection and recognition, without sharing any component.
More recent approaches take a leap forward towards a unified end-to-end architecture by sharing a convolutional feature backbone [5, 20] and employing a feature cropping
mechanism to extract the relevant area of interest for the
recognition head. Such architectures are still not ideal, since

Figure 1. Weakly-supervised text spotting. Top: Visualization
of ’fully’ (left) and ’weakly’ (right) supervised ground-truth (GT)
annotations. Bottom: Text spotting methods results on the TotalText dataset (higher is better) vs. the time cost per word to annotate
the datasets used for training (Sec. 4.5, lower is better). Even when
using weaker annotations only, our method surpasses state-of-theart fully-supervised methods.

the recognition head is usually trained using the detection
ground-truth and thus it is not optimized for the predictions
of the detection head. Furthermore, the detection head is
trained as a standard object detection model, without regard to the additional supervision given by the text transcription or to the downstream recognition task. Other than

4604

