Towards Multimodal Depth Estimation from Light Fields
Titus Leistner, Radek Mackowiak, Lynton Ardizzone, Ullrich Köthe, Carsten Rother
Visual Learning Lab, Heidelberg University
first.last@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract
Light field applications, especially light field rendering
and depth estimation, developed rapidly in recent years.
While state-of-the-art light field rendering methods handle
semi-transparent and reflective objects well, depth estimation methods either ignore these cases altogether or only
deliver a weak performance. We argue that this is due current methods only considering a single “true” depth, even
when multiple objects at different depths contributed to the
color of a single pixel. Based on the simple idea of outputting a posterior depth distribution instead of only a single estimate, we develop and explore several different deeplearning-based approaches to the problem. Additionally, we
contribute the first “multimodal light field depth dataset”
that contains the depths of all objects which contribute to
the color of a pixel. This allows us to supervise the multimodal depth prediction and also validate all methods by
measuring the KL divergence of the predicted posteriors.
With our thorough analysis and novel dataset, we aim to
start a new line of depth estimation research that overcomes
some of the long-standing limitations of this field.

1. Introduction
Light field recordings and their applications, like real
time rendering for virtual reality or highly accurate depth
estimation, have improved vastly in recent years. However, while light field rendering methods handle transparent
and reflective objects well, current depth estimation methods still perform poorly in those areas. State-of-the-art
depth estimation methods mainly fail in three corner cases:
at objects edges, semi-transparent and reflective surfaces.
All three are caused by multiple objects at different depths
contributing to the projected color of a single pixel on the
camera sensor. Most existing models fundamentally ignore
these cases and assume only one “true” depth for each pixel.
Instead, we propose a series of deep-learning based
methods to perform multimodal depth estimation, and
depth estimation with uncertainty estimates. For this, we
start with the basic idea of outputting Bayesian posteriors,

(a) Rendered scene (left) containing multiple disparity layers (right)

p(y|x)

UPR
ESE
GT

disparity y
(b) Disparity posterior distributions, predicted by different methods

Figure 1. Comparison of disparity posterior distributions. Synthetic scene (a) containing overlapping objects at different depths.
(b) shows disparity posterior distributions, estimated by different
methods, for a single pixel (red crosses in (a)). This pixel captured two disparity modes (mesh material of chair (foreground)
and wooden wall (background)). Note, that the Unimodal Posterior Regression (UPR) network, which outputs the mean and width
of a Laplacian distribution, makes a wrong and uncertain prediction. The EPI-Shift Ensamble (ESE) detects both valid modes near
the ground truth (GT).

whereas standard regression models just produce a single
estimate. From this idea, and by using a simple and wellfounded maximum likelihood training framework, we develop three different light field depth estimation methods,
all three of which are able to infer uncertainty estimates,
and use multiple ground truth values during training. Two
of the proposed methods are also able to predict multiple
distinct depth values per pixel at test time.
12953

