Revisiting Random Channel Pruning for Neural Network Compression
Yawei Li1 Kamil Adamczewski2 Wen Li3 Shuhang Gu4 Radu Timofte1 Luc Van Gool1,5
1
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zürich 2 MPI-IS 3 UESTC 4 USYD 5 KU Leuven
{yawei.li, radu.timofte, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
Channel (or 3D filter) pruning serves as an effective way
to accelerate the inference of neural networks. There has
been a flurry of algorithms that try to solve this practical
problem, each being claimed effective in some ways. Yet, a
benchmark to compare those algorithms directly is lacking,
mainly due to the complexity of the algorithms and some
custom settings such as the particular network configuration or training procedure. A fair benchmark is important
for the further development of channel pruning.
Meanwhile, recent investigations reveal that the channel configurations discovered by pruning algorithms are at
least as important as the pre-trained weights. This gives
channel pruning a new role, namely searching the optimal
channel configuration. In this paper, we try to determine
the channel configuration of the pruned models by random search. The proposed approach provides a new way
to compare different methods, namely how well they behave compared with random pruning. We show that this
simple strategy works quite well compared with other channel pruning methods. We also show that under this setting,
there are surprisingly no clear winners among different
channel importance evaluation methods, which then may
tilt the research efforts into advanced channel configuration searching methods. Code will be released at https:
//github.com/ofsoundof/random_channel_
pruning.

tention to, i.e. random channel pruning. By random pruning, we mean that the pruning ratio of each layer is randomly selected and the channels to be pruned within the
layer are determined by some criterion. Random pruning is frequently referred as a baseline to show the improvements of the state-of-the-art channel pruning methods [11, 12, 35, 39, 42, 47, 49, 61, 64]. Yet, the power of random pruning is not fully released. By the rigorous study in
this paper, we have several striking findings as follows.
F1 When brought to the same setting under random pruning, the recent proposed channel pruning criteria [19,
36, 44, 49] performs just comparable with the simple
L1 and L2 norm based pruning criteria.
F2 Compared with channel pruning algorithms that start
with a pre-trained model [9, 17–19, 23, 37–39, 45, 60,
66] (See results in Table 3), random pruning can find
a pruned model with comparable or even superior performances.
F3 Even compared with advanced pruning methods that
optimize the overall network architecture such placement of pooling layers [40] and expansion of available
network width [57], random pruning still narrows the
performance gap (less than 0.5% on ImageNet classification).

1. Introduction

F4 Fine-tuning epochs has a strong influence on the performance of the pruned network. High-performing
pruned networks usually comes with prolonged finetuning epochs.

Since the advent of deep learning based computer vision
solutions, network compression has been at the core of reducing the computational complexity of neural networks,
accelerating their inference, and enabling their deployment
on resource constrained devices [20,21,31,41,55,56,63,65].
Channel pruning (or structured pruning, filter pruning) is
one of the approaches that can achieve the acceleration of
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [10, 18, 30, 32, 40].
The goal of this paper is to conduct an empirical study
on channel pruning procedure that is not paid enough at-

Those findings lead to several implications. First of all,
considering F1, since L1/L2 based channel pruning could
perform as well as the other pruning criteria, by the law
of Occam’s razor, most of the cases, the simple L1 and
L2 based pruning criteria can just serve the purpose of
channel pruning. Secondly, combining F2 and F3, random pruning as a neutral baseline, reveals the fundamental development in the field of network pruning. For
algorithms that rely on the predefined network architecture and pre-trained network weight, we haven’t gone far

191

