ChiTransformer: Towards Reliable Stereo from Cues
Qing Su
Georgia State University

Shihao Ji
Georgia State University

qsu3@gsu.edu

sji@gsu.edu

1

1. Introduction
In the context of computer vision, nowadays almost
all mainstream depth estimation methods are deep learning based and can be roughly categorized into two prevalent methodologies, namely, stereo matching and monocular depth estimation. Stereo matching has traditionally been
the most investigated area due to its strong connection to
the human visual system. The task is to find or estimate
the correspondences of all the pixels in two rectified images [3, 5, 54]. Virtually, all the current works resort to
convolutional neural network (CNN) based methods to calculate the matching cost since it was first introduced to the
task by [16, 71] in 2015. Following the seminal work of
FlowNet [16], more than 150 papers have been published
1 https://github.com/ISL-CV/ChiTransformer.git

ChiTransformer
DPT [51]
Monodepth2 [25]

Current stereo matching techniques are challenged by
restricted searching space, occluded regions and sheer size.
While single image depth estimation is spared from these
challenges and can achieve satisfactory results with the extracted monocular cues, the lack of stereoscopic relationship renders the monocular prediction less reliable on its
own especially in highly dynamic or cluttered environments.
To address these issues in both scenarios, we present an
optic-chiasm-inspired self-supervised binocular depth estimation method, wherein vision transformer (ViT) with a
gated positional cross-attention (GPCA) layer is designed
to enable feature-sensitive pattern retrieval between views,
while retaining the extensive context information aggregated through self-attentions. Monocular cues from a single view are thereafter conditionally rectified by a blending
layer with the retrieved pattern pairs. This crossover design is biologically analogous to the optic-chasma structure in human visual system and hence the name, ChiTransformer. Our experiments show that this architecture
yields substantial improvements over state-of-the-art selfsupervised stereo approaches by 11%, and can be used on
both rectilinear and non-rectilinear (e.g., fisheye) images.

(Left) input

Abstract

Figure 1. Depth estimation from cues. Monocular depth estimation relies on depth cues to make prediction. While our selfsupervised stereo method, ChiTransformer, leverages retrieved
and rectified depth cues from a stereo to make superior predictions
with context consistency.

using CNN-related methods [39], pushing the performance
forward by more than 50%. Some deep-seated issues such
as thin structures, large texture-less areas, and occlusions
have been mitigated or addressed over time [32, 73]. So far,
stereo matching is the most adopted technique in majority
of passive stereo applications.
However, the applications that entail depth estimation
grow increasingly demanding as visual systems are greatly
downsized and installed on platforms with higher mobility
(e.g., UAV, commercial robots). This indicates a more congested, cluttered and dynamic operating environment where
the once side issues become major ones, i.e., large disparity,

1939

