ScaleNet: A Shallow Architecture for Scale Estimation
Axel Barroso-Laguna

Yurun Tian
Imperial College London

Krystian Mikolajczyk

{axel.barroso17, yurun.tian, k.mikolajczyk}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problem of estimating
scale factors between images. We formulate the scale estimation problem as a prediction of a probability distribution over scale factors. We design a new architecture,
ScaleNet, that exploits dilated convolutions as well as selfand cross-correlation layers to predict the scale between
images. We demonstrate that rectifying images with estimated scales leads to significant performance improvements for various tasks and methods. Specifically, we
show how ScaleNet can be combined with sparse local features and dense correspondence networks to improve camera pose estimation, 3D reconstruction, or dense geometric matching in different benchmarks and datasets. We provide an extensive evaluation on several tasks, and analyze
the computational overhead of ScaleNet. The code, evaluation protocols, and trained models are publicly available at
https://github.com/axelBarroso/ScaleNet.

1. Introduction
Establishing correspondences is the very first step in
many different 3D pipelines. Advancing on this task will
have a direct impact on the performance of downstream applications such as camera pose estimation [39], autonomous
driving [6], or 3D reconstructions [41]. However, methods
that search for correspondences between images face significant challenges, and although some solutions are more
mature than others, the task still is far from being solved.
As the field advances, even though the intermediate
tasks in the correspondence search remain the same, their
methods are being revisited and redesigned, e.g., keypoint
detectors/descriptors [10, 11, 37], dense geometric matchers [25,53], or geometric verification techniques [31,40,46].
These new approaches have shown that the downstream
tasks can be pushed to new performance levels through robust correspondences. The key objective of these new methods is to handle more and more extreme cases where previous pipelines failed, and although some methods are arguably application-specific [60], their robustness to extreme

Scale
Distribution

Matching
Pipeline

ScaleNet

Upsample

Figure 1. We propose a scale-aware system that helps establish
correspondences under strong scale changes, allowing to correctly
match pairs where previous pipelines were not successful. We introduce ScaleNet, a network that estimates the scale distribution
between two images so that regions of interest can be corrected
and exhibit the same scale factor (top). We display (bottom) an indoor and outdoor example where matches from R2D2 with multiscale pyramid (left) increase if using ScaleNet rectification (right).

conditions is the main reason for success.
Inspired by the previous methods targeting visual robustness [29, 30, 58], we address the problem of handling
the scale change between images, which is a long-standing
challenge in computer vision [23, 26]. Scale robustness and
estimation have been the focus of much research in the area
of handcrafted feature extraction [23, 54, 60] as a reliable
solution that can significantly boost the performance of existing methods. Moreover, the scale change is arguably the
most challenging, and the most important parameter to estimate compared to rotation, translation, or even local affine
deformations [54]. There are several strategies to deal with
scale changes, with the multi-scale pyramid being one of
the most popular solutions [3,4,11,23,37,52,54]. Although
the multi-scale pyramid mitigates the problem of different

12808

