IDEA-Net: Dynamic 3D Point Cloud Interpolation
via Deep Embedding Alignment
Yiming Zeng1 Yue Qian1 Qijian Zhang1 Junhui Hou1 Yixuan YUAN1 Ying He2
1
City University of Hong Kong 2 Nanyang Technological University
ym.zeng@my.cityu.edu.hk, jh.hou@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
This paper investigates the problem of temporally interpolating dynamic 3D point clouds with large non-rigid deformation. We formulate the problem as estimation of pointwise trajectories (i.e., smooth curves) and further reason
that temporal irregularity and under-sampling are two major challenges. To tackle the challenges, we propose IDEANet, an end-to-end deep learning framework, which disentangles the problem under the assistance of the explicitly
learned temporal consistency. Specifically, we propose a
temporal consistency learning module to align two consecutive point cloud frames point-wisely, based on which we can
employ linear interpolation to obtain coarse trajectories/inbetween frames. To compensate the high-order nonlinear components of trajectories, we apply aligned feature embeddings that encode local geometry properties to
regress point-wise increments, which are combined with the
coarse estimations. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method on various point cloud sequences and observe large
improvement over state-of-the-art methods both quantitatively and visually. Our framework can bring benefits to 3D
motion data acquisition. The source code is publicly available at https://github.com/ZENGYIMING-EAMON/IDEANet.git.

1. Introduction
Dynamic 3D point clouds, which are sequences of 3D
point cloud frames sampled in the temporal domain for
capturing the changes in geometric details or motion of
scenes/objects, have been widely used in many application
scenarios, such as autopilot [22], immersive communication [6], computer animation [27], and virtual/augmented
reality [40]. Despite of rapid development in 3D sensing
technology [41], it is still difficult and costly to acquire
3D point cloud sequences with high temporal resolution
(HTR), which hinders to finely represent deformable 3D
1 This work was supported by the HK RGC Grant CityU 11202320 and
11218121. Corresponding author: J. Hou.

...

...

...

...

Computational
Methods

Figure 1. Illustration of the problem considered in this paper. One
can adopt a low-cost 3D sensing device to sample the motion at a
low frequency, leading to an LTR point cloud sequence, then apply the computational method to interpolate/estimate in-between
point cloud frames to obtain an HTR one for finely representing
the 3D motion of objects (or 3D shapes/objects deforming over
time). We are interested in point cloud sequences with massive
non-rigid deformation. Moreover, in real application scenario, the
point cloud frames of a sequence are independently captured in the
sensor space, thus lacking point-wise temporal consistency.

objects [36]. Instead of relying on hardware development,
we consider computational methods to construct an HTR
point cloud sequence from one with low temporal resolution (LTR), as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Although the considered problem shares similar properties with 2D video frame interpolation, both of which aim
to interpolate/predict the in-between frames of any two consecutive frames of an LTR sequence, the essentially different data modality (i.e., illumination vs. geometry information) makes it non-trivial to extend existing 2D video frame
interpolation methods [13,14,21] to 3D point clouds. Moreover, the unordered and irregular nature of 3D point cloud
data in spatial and temporal domains poses great challenges.
Recently, several deep learning-based interpolation
methods for 3D point cloud sequences have been proposed [12,19,29,31]. Nevertheless, for the flow-based PointINet [19], it is mainly applicable to shapes with nearly rigid
transformation and cannot well generalize to those with
large non-rigid deformation. For the auto-encoder-based
methods like [29, 31], which directly interpolate global features, since the global features are abstract and insufficient

6338

