Interact before Align:
Leveraging Cross-Modal Knowledge for Domain Adaptive Action Recognition
Lijin Yang, Yifei Huang*, Yusuke Sugano, Yoichi Sato
Institute of Industrial Science, The University of Tokyo
{yang-lj,hyf,sugano,ysato}@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptive video action recognition
aims to recognize actions of a target domain using a model
trained with only out-of-domain (source) annotations. The
inherent complexity of videos makes this task challenging
but also provides ground for leveraging multi-modal inputs (e.g., RGB, Flow, Audio). Most previous works utilize
the multi-modal information by either aligning each modality individually or learning representation via cross-modal
self-supervision. Different from previous works, we find that
the cross-domain alignment can be more effectively done by
using cross-modal interaction first. Cross-modal knowledge
interaction allows other modalities to supplement missing
transferable information because of the cross-modal complementarity. Also, the most transferable aspects of data
can be highlighted using cross-modal consensus.
In this work, we present a novel model that jointly considers these two characteristics for domain adaptive action
recognition. We achieve this by implementing two modules,
where the first module exchanges complementary transferable information across modalities through the semantic
space, and the second module finds the most transferable
spatial region based on the consensus of all modalities. Extensive experiments validate that our proposed method can
significantly outperform state-of-the-art methods on multiple benchmark datasets, including the complex fine-grained
dataset EPIC-Kitchens-100.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) models aim at
learning features on the source dataset that can also be used
on the target dataset. Due to its potential in reducing the
necessity of large-scale labeling, UDA has been extensively
explored for tasks such as image recognition [33,49,52,58],
semantic segmentation [3, 64] and object detection [5, 8].
With one additional temporal dimension, video data is
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Different from existing UDA works that directly align
the multi-modal inputs (a), we find that it is more effective to first
enhance the transferability of each modality by cross-modal interaction, and then perform cross-domain alignment (b).

more complex than image data, and the domain gap not
only resides in the appearance difference of environments
but also in the motion variance when different people perform the same action. This prevents the direct application
of image-based domain adaptation methods on the domain
adaptive action recognition task [6, 20]. One direction to
address this complexity is to use additional modality information (e.g. optical flow, audio). Other than directly
combining multi-modal inputs [38], recent works add selfsupervised modality alignment to implicitly learn properties
of source and target data [24,36,47]. However, since the objectives of cross-modal alignment and cross-domain alignment are not perfectly consistent, simultaneously aligning
modality and aligning domain can distract the learning target, i.e., minimizing the domain discrepancy.
Due to different characteristics, the transferability (i.e.,
invariance of feature across domains) of each modality lies
in different and complementary perspectives. For example,
for an action “wash cup” on the target domain, since the
sound of water is similar across domains, the audio modality is more transferable to determine the verb “wash” of the
action. Meanwhile, although RGB cannot perform as good
as audio when recognizing the verb on the target domain,
it can well recognize the noun “cup” on the target domain
based on its domain-transferable appearance knowledge. If

14722

