Bailando: 3D Dance Generation by Actor-Critic GPT
with Choreographic Memory
Li Siyao1
Quan Wang4

Weijiang Yu2
Tianpei Gu3,4
Chunze Lin4
4
1
Chen Qian
Chen Change Loy
Ziwei Liu1 B
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
2
Sun Yat-Sen University 3 UCLA 4 SenseTime Research

siyao002@e.ntu.edu.sg

weijiangyu8@gmail.com

{linchunze, wangquan, qianchen}@sensetime.com

gutianpei@ucla.edu

{ccloy, ziwei.liu}@ntu.edu.sg

Breaking: facile toprock

Ballet jazz: pirouette

House dance: energetic up-down

Middle hip-hop: casual steps

Figure 1: Dance examples generated by our proposed method on various types of music. The character is from Mixamo [1]

Abstract
Driving 3D characters to dance following a piece of music is highly challenging due to the spatial constraints applied to poses by choreography norms. In addition, the
generated dance sequence also needs to maintain temporal coherency with different music genres. To tackle these
challenges, we propose a novel music-to-dance framework,
Bailando, with two powerful components: 1) a choreographic memory that learns to summarize meaningful dancing units from 3D pose sequence to a quantized codebook, 2) an actor-critic Generative Pre-trained Transformer
(GPT) that composes these units to a fluent dance coherent to the music. With the learned choreographic memory, dance generation is realized on the quantized units
that meet high choreography standards, such that the generated dancing sequences are confined within the spatial
constraints. To achieve synchronized alignment between
diverse motion tempos and music beats, we introduce an
actor-critic-based reinforcement learning scheme to the
GPT with a newly-designed beat-align reward function.
Extensive experiments on the standard benchmark demonstrate that our proposed framework achieves state-of-theart performance both qualitatively and quantitatively. Notably, the learned choreographic memory is shown to discover human-interpretable dancing-style poses in an unsupervised manner. Code and video demo are available at
https://github.com/lisiyao21/Bailando/.
B Corresponding author

1. Introduction
Music-conditioned 3D dance generation is an important
task for its huge potential to facilitate a variety of real-world
applications, e.g., assisting human artists choreograph and
driving virtual characters performance. However, to produce
satisfactory dancing sequence on given music is still very
difficult due to two main challenges: 1) Spatial constraint:
Not all the physically feasible 3D human poses are applicable for dance. The subspace of dancing-style poses has
stricter positional standards on body, and is selective to be
visually expressive and emotionally infectious based on the
choreography norms. 2) Temporal coherency with music:
The generated dancing sequence should be consistent with
the music rhythm on various genres of beats, while keeping
the whole movements fluent.
Most existing dance generation studies intend to solve
the two challenges both in a single ingeniously designed
network that directly maps music to 3D joint sequence in
high-dimensional continuous space [3, 19, 37, 11, 2, 30].
However, such methods are usually unstable in practice and
are prone to regress to nonstandard poses beyond the dancing
subspace, e.g., freezing or meaningless swaying. Because
there is no explicit constraints on target domain to restrict
the synthesized dance to be spatially qualified. To deal
with the spatial constraint, some works collect real dancing
clips as dance unit and choreograph by splicing these units
[43, 18]. While these methods guarantee the spatial quality
of generated dance by directly manipulating on real data, the
collection of dance units costs tremendous manual efforts,
and they are not compatible with different rhythms. In addi-

11050

