Fair Contrastive Learning for Facial Attribute Classiﬁcation
Sungho Park1

Jewook Lee1

Pilhyeon Lee1

1

Yonsei University

Sunhee Hwang2
2

LG Uplus

3

Dohyung Kim3

Hyeran Byun1 *

SK Inc.

 qkrtjdgh18@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Learning visual representation of high quality is essential
for image classiﬁcation. Recently, a series of contrastive
representation learning methods have achieved preeminent
success. Particularly, SupCon [18] outperformed the dominant methods based on cross-entropy loss in representation
learning. However, we notice that there could be potential
ethical risks in supervised contrastive learning. In this paper,
we for the ﬁrst time analyze unfairness caused by supervised
contrastive learning and propose a new Fair Supervised Contrastive Loss (FSCL) for fair visual representation learning.
Inheriting the philosophy of supervised contrastive learning,
it encourages representation of the same class to be closer
to each other than that of different classes, while ensuring
fairness by penalizing the inclusion of sensitive attribute
information in representation. In addition, we introduce a
group-wise normalization to diminish the disparities of intragroup compactness and inter-class separability between demographic groups that arouse unfair classiﬁcation. Through
extensive experiments on CelebA and UTK Face, we validate
that the proposed method signiﬁcantly outperforms SupCon
and existing state-of-the-art methods in terms of the trade-off
between top-1 accuracy and fairness. Moreover, our method
is robust to the intensity of data bias and effectively works
in incomplete supervised settings. Our code is available at
https://github.com/sungho-CoolG/FSCL.

1. Introduction
Learning powerful visual representation is important for
reliable performance in image classiﬁcation. For a long time,
most work has relied on cross-entropy loss to learn the representation due to its strong performance [4, 11, 34, 41].
Meanwhile, recent studies based on contrastive learning
have been bringing a new paradigm for representation learning [2, 10, 12, 36, 40]. They effectively learn visual representation by drawing positive pairs and pushing away negative
* Corresponding author.

ones in the high-dimensional space. Despite being originally introduced for unsupervised learning, the contrastive
learning strategy proves to be effective in various vision
ﬁelds [14, 22, 23]. Particularly, SupCon [18] achieves better
top-1 accuracy than the state-of-the-art methods based on
the cross-entropy loss on ImageNet [32] by simply grafting
the contrastive loss to the supervised representation learning.
In this paper, we point out that the contrastive loss may
pose potential ethical risks. Despite exhibiting strong performance, it has been underexplored in consideration of fairness
which means that the outputs from a model should not be
discriminatory in terms of sensitive attributes, such as ethnicity, gender, and age. It is a crucial ethical topic and should
be diagnosed in order for the model to be leveraged in the
real world [5, 26]. To this end, we analyze the representative
contrastive learning model (SupCon) from two major perspectives causing unfairness and propose a new contrastive
loss to address both of them.
Learning sensitive attribute information is one of the principal causes of unfairness [3, 13, 25, 35]. It incurs unfair
classiﬁcation by inducing a classiﬁer to determine a decision boundary based on undesirable grounds (i.e., sensitive
attributes) [19, 28]. From this point of view, we demonstrate
that learning sensitive attribute information leads to the decrease of SupCon loss on the biased dataset, although the
desired behavior is to exclusively learn target class information. Consequently, a model learns both kinds of information
to minimize the loss, which eventually aggravates unfairness.
To solve the problem, we propose a Fair Supervised Contrastive Loss (FSCL) which prevents encoder networks from
learning sensitive attribute information. Basically, it inherits
the spirit of supervised contrastive learning that encourages
an anchor to be more similar to samples of the same class
(i.e., positive samples) than those of other classes (i.e., negative samples). Simultaneously, we limit negative samples
to only those having the same sensitive attribute with the
anchor among them. In this way, we ensure that learning sensitive attribute information no longer helps the contrastive
learning. Rather, it hinders optimizing the loss by increasing
the similarity between the anchor and negative samples.

10389

