Differentiable Dynamics for Articulated 3d Human Motion Reconstruction
Erik Gärtner1,2

Mykhaylo Andriluka1
1

Erwin Coumans1

Cristian Sminchisescu1

Google Research, 2 Lund University
erik.gartner@math.lth.se

{mykhayloa,erwincoumans,sminchisescu}@google.com

Abstract
We introduce DiffPhy, a differentiable physics-based
model for articulated 3d human motion reconstruction from
video. Applications of physics-based reasoning in human
motion analysis have so far been limited, both by the complexity of constructing adequate physical models of articulated human motion, and by the formidable challenges
of performing stable and efficient inference with physics
in the loop. We jointly address such modeling and inference challenges by proposing an approach that combines
a physically plausible body representation with anatomical joint limits, a differentiable physics simulator, and optimization techniques that ensure good performance and robustness to suboptimal local optima. In contrast to several recent methods [39, 42, 55], our approach readily supports full-body contact including interactions with objects
in the scene. Most importantly, our model connects endto-end with images, thus supporting direct gradient-based
physics optimization by means of image-based loss functions. We validate the model by demonstrating that it can
accurately reconstruct physically plausible 3d human motion from monocular video, both on public benchmarks with
available 3d ground-truth, and on videos from the internet.

1. Introduction
We seek to contribute to the development of physicsbased methodology as one of the building blocks in constructing accurate and robust 3d visual human sensing systems. Incorporating the laws of physics into the visual reasoning process is appealing as it promotes the plausibility of
estimated motion and facilitates more efficient use of training examples [9]. We focus on articulated human motion
as an epitome of a real-world prediction task that is both
well studied and challenging. Existing state-of-the-art approaches demonstrate relatively high accuracy in terms of
joint position estimation metrics [23, 24, 54, 62]. However,

predictions can sometimes be physically implausible, even
for simple motions such as walking and running. For instance, estimates can include unreasonably abrupt transitions in world space, or artifacts such as foot skating or
non-equilibrium states [39,42]. Many methods are typically
trained on large motion capture datasets and encounter difficulties when tested on motions not well represented in those
training sets. Arguably, imposing some form of physicsbased generally valid prior on the articulated motion estimates should greatly improve the plausibility of results.
However, physics-based reasoning comes at the cost of
substantial modeling and inference complexity. Typically,
physics-based articulated estimation methods rely on rigid
body dynamics (RBD) [10, 44], a formulation that introduces many auxiliary variables corresponding to forces acting at the body joints at each time step. Moreover, physical
contact results in non-smooth effects where small changes
to model parameters might result in substantially different
motions. Therefore inferring physics variables given the
inherent uncertainty in monocular video, and under contact discontinuities, becomes significantly difficult, algorithmically and computationally. Despite such challenges,
a number of recent methods successfully apply physicsbased constraints for articulated human motion estimation
[2, 39, 42, 59]. One possibility to cope with modeling complexity, explored in recent work, is to simplify the physics
and model contacts only between the body and the feet
[39, 42, 55]. Others use auxiliary external forces applied
at the body to compensate for modeling error [42, 59].
In this paper, we aim to broaden the methodology
for physics-based articulated human motion estimation.
Specifically, we demonstrate that we can successfully leverage recent progress in differentiable simulation [17, 19, 52]
in order to incorporate physics-based constraints into the articulated 3d human motion reconstruction. Our approach,
DiffPhy, relies on gradient-based optimization, connects
end-to-end with images, and does not require simplifying
assumptions on contacts or the introduction of external nonphysical residual forces.

13190

