Maintaining Reasoning Consistency in
Compositional Visual Question Answering
Chenchen Jing1 , Yunde Jia1 , Yuwei Wu1∗, Xinyu Liu1 , Qi Wu2
1
Beijing Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology,
School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
2
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision, University of Adelaide, Australia
{chenchen.jing,jiayunde,wuyuwei,liuxinyu18}@bit.edu.cn, qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
A compositional question refers to a question that contains multiple visual concepts (e.g., objects, attributes, and
relationships) and requires compositional reasoning to answer. Existing VQA models can answer a compositional
question well, but cannot work well in terms of reasoning
consistency in answering the compositional question and
its sub-questions. For example, a compositional question
for an image is: “Are there any elephants to the right of the
white bird?” and one of its sub-questions is “ Is any bird
visible in the scene?”. The models may answer “yes” to the
compositional question, but “no” to the sub-question. This
paper presents a dialog-like reasoning method for maintaining reasoning consistency in answering a compositional
question and its sub-questions. Our method integrates the
reasoning processes for the sub-questions into the reasoning process for the compositional question like a dialog
task, and uses a consistency constraint to penalize inconsistent answer predictions. In order to enable quantitative
evaluation of reasoning consistency, we construct a GQASub dataset based on the well-organized GQA dataset. Experimental results on the GQA dataset and the GQA-Sub
dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
Compositional visual question answering (VQA) [3, 9,
27] is the task of providing an answer to a compositional
question about an image based on the content of the image.
A compositional question refers to a question that contains
multiple visual concepts (e.g., objects, attributes, and relationships). The task requires a comprehensive understanding of the multi-modal inputs and compositional relational
reasoning based on the understanding.
∗ corresponding author

LCGN

MMN

Q: Are there any elephants to the
right of the white bird? (GT: yes)

yes

yes

Sub-Q1: Is any bird visible in the
scene? (GT: yes)

no

no

Sub-Q2: What the white animal is
called? (GT: bird)

elephant elephant

(a)
LCGN

MMN

Q: Is the train to the right or to the
left of the black vehicle? (GT: left)

left

left

Sub-Q1: Is there a vehicle that is
black in this image? (GT: yes)

no

no

Sub-Q2: What color does the
vehicle have? (GT: black)

green

white

Sub-Q3: Do you see a train?
(GT: yes)

yes

yes

(b)

Figure 1. Qualitative examples showing the inconsistency of existing compositional VQA models. For each example, we show
an image on the left side. A compositional question (Q) and its
sub-questions (Sub-Q) with ground-truth answers and predicted
answers of two reasoning models (i.e., the LCGN [9] and the
MMN [4]) are shown on the right side.

Existing reasoning models for compositional VQA can
answer a compositional question well, but cannot work well
in terms of reasoning consistency in answering the compositional question and its sub-questions. A compositional
question usually contains various known visual concepts in
the image. To answer the question, reasoning models are
supposed to infer unknown concepts based on the known
concepts. For a compositional question “ Are there any elephants to the right of the white bird?” (shown in Fig. 1
(a)), the known concepts are “white” and “bird”, while the
unknown concepts are “elephants” and “to the right of”.
Obviously, the compositional question reveals answers to
sub-questions about these known concepts, such as “ Is any
bird visible in the scene?”, and “What the white animal is
called?”. The question requires a stronger reasoning abil-

5099

