Kernelized Few-shot Object Detection with Efficient Integral Aggregation
Shan Zhang*,† , Lei Wang♦ , Naila Murray♣ , Piotr Koniusz*,§,†
†
Australian National University ♦ University of Wollongong § Data61/CSIRO ♣ Meta AI Research
†

firstname.lastname@anu.edu.au, ♦ leiw@uow.edu.au, ♣ murrayn@fb.com

Abstract
We design a Kernelized Few-shot Object Detector by
leveraging kernelized matrices computed over multiple proposal regions, which yield expressive non-linear representations whose model complexity is learned on the fly. Our
pipeline contains several modules. An Encoding Network
encodes support and query images. Our Kernelized Autocorrelation unit forms the linear, polynomial and RBF kernelized representations from features extracted within support regions of support images. These features are then
cross-correlated against features of a query image to obtain
attention weights, and generate query proposal regions via
an Attention Region Proposal Net. As the query proposal
regions are many, each described by the linear, polynomial and RBF kernelized matrices, their formation is costly
but that cost is reduced by our proposed Integral Regionof-Interest Aggregation unit. Finally, the Multi-head Relation Net combines all kernelized (second-order) representations with the first-order feature maps to learn supportquery class relations and locations. We outperform the state
of the art on novel classes by 3.8%, 5.4% and 5.7% mAP on
PASCAL VOC 2007, FSOD, and COCO.

1. Introduction
CNN object detectors [8, 29–31] require thousands of
manually annotated images for training. Their performance
drops during adaptation to novel classes if samples are few.
In contrast, Few-shot Learning (FSL) methods rapidly
adapt to new visual concepts [39, 41, 43] but off-the-shelf
FSL methods perform classification rather than Few-shot
Object Detection (FSOD). As queries in FSOD contain multiple objects of various categories and FSOD detectors have
to predict class labels and locations of objects in a query image, effective techniques capturing query-support similarities across multiple Regions-of-Interest (RoI) are required.
FSOD models [2, 6, 11, 12, 52, 58] are trained with socalled training episodes containing samples of common ob* Equal contribution. PK is the corresponding author.
Code: https://github.com/ZS123-lang/KFSOD.

jects (i.e. base classes). Testing episodes contain support
images of rare objects (i.e. novel classes) and query images in which these rare objects must be recognized/localized. Fan et al. [6] introduced into FSOD a Region Proposal
Network (RPN), termed Attention RPN (ARPN)1 . ARPN
cross-correlates average-pooled features from support regions with features of the query image, which produces an
attention map over the feature tensor of query image. However, average pooling (a first-order statistic) retains less information compared to higher-order statistics. PNSD [58]
improves [6] by second-order pooling but is limited to socalled linear correlations (autocorrelation matrix). To address this limitation, we use kernelized covariance matrices [57] and Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS)
kernels [38] which capture non-linear patterns. Kernels induce regularization e.g., an RBF kernel with a small (resp.
large) radius captures a complex (resp. simple) decision
boundary. However, as generating kernel matrices is computationally expensive, they are rarely used in detection.
We propose a novel feature representation which leverages the expressiveness and regularization capabilities of
kernels, while enjoying an efficient implementation. The
key to this efficiency is a novel Integral Region-of-Interest
Aggregation (IRA) scheme for fast kernelization. We further accelerate IRA by count sketching [47], an unsupervised dimensionality reduction technique with a favourable
property of implicitly performing feature augmentations.
As the variance introduced by sketching is inverselyproportional to its size, it boosts the accuracy and computational speed, as described in Section 4. Our pipeline is
shown in Figure 1. Our contributions are listed below:
i. We propose two types of kernelized representations
used conjointly for FSOD that capture non-linear correlation patterns, obtained from candidate regions by
computationally efficient Integral Region-of-Interest
Aggregation (IRA). The performance and speed of IRA
are boosted with count sketching and its inverse to facilitate the practical use of kernelization in FSOD (generating hundreds of kernels per image).
1 PSND [58] calls this module Hyper Attention RPN (HARPN) but
FSOD-ARPN [6] calls it ARPN. We adopt the ARPN name for brevity.

19207

