GradViT: Gradient Inversion of Vision Transformers
Ali Hatamizadeh˚ , Hongxu Yin˚ , Holger Roth, Wenqi Li,
Jan Kautz, Daguang Xu: , and Pavlo Molchanov:
NVIDIA
{ahatamizadeh, dannyy, hroth, wenqil, jkautz, daguangx, pmolchanov}@nvidia.com

In this work we demonstrate the vulnerability of vision
transformers (ViTs) to gradient-based inversion attacks. During this attack, the original data batch is reconstructed given
model weights and the corresponding gradients. We introduce a method, named GradViT, that optimizes random noise
into naturally looking images via an iterative process. The
optimization objective consists of (i) a loss on matching the
gradients, (ii) image prior in the form of distance to batchnormalization statistics of a pretrained CNN model, and (iii)
a total variation regularization on patches to guide correct
recovery locations. We propose a unique loss scheduling
function to overcome local minima during optimization. We
evaluate GadViT on ImageNet1K and MS-Celeb-1M datasets,
and observe unprecedentedly high fidelity and closeness to
the original (hidden) data. During the analysis we find that
vision transformers are significantly more vulnerable than
previously studied CNNs due to the presence of the attention
mechanism. Our method demonstrates new state-of-the-art
results for gradient inversion in both qualitative and quantitative metrics. Project page at https://gradvit.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Vision Transformers (ViTs) [8] have achieved state-ofthe-art performance in a number of vision tasks such as
image classification [39], object detection [6] and semantic
segmentation [5]. In ViT-based models, visual features are
split into patches and projected into an embedding space. A
series of repeating transformer encoder layers, consisting
of alternating Multi-head Self-Attention (MSA) and MultiLayer Perceptron (MLP) blocks extract feature representation from the embedded tokens for downstream tasks (e.g.,
classification). Recent studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of ViTs in learning uniform local and global
spatial dependencies [31]. In addition, ViTs have a great
˚ Equal contribution. :Equal advising.

Training Data (Private)

Workers

Abstract

Gradient
Updates

Parameter Server
GradViT

Vision Transformer Gradient Inversion (Recovery)
Global Model

1

(a) Recovering data from vision transformer gradient unveils intricate details.
Original

Gradient Recovery

GradInv. [37] (RN-50)

GradInv. [37] (ViT)

GradViT (VIT) - ours

(b) GradViT improves noticeably over prior art. Example within a batch of size 8.

Figure 1. Inverting gradients for image recovery. We show vision
transformer gradients encode a surprising amount of information
such that high-fidelity original image batches of high resolution can
be recovered, see 112 ˆ 112 pixel MS-Celeb-1M and 224 ˆ 224
pixel ImageNet1K sample recovery above and more in experiments.
Our method, GradViT, yields the first successful attempt to invert
ViT gradients, not achievable by previous state-of-the-art methods.
We demonstrate that ViTs, despite lacking batchnorm layers, suffer
even more data leakage compared to CNNs. As insights we show
that ViT gradients (i) encode uneven original information across
layers, and (ii) attention is all that reveals.

capability in learning pre-text tasks and can be scaled for
distributed, collaborative, or federated learning scenarios. In
this work, we study vulnerability of sharing ViT’s gradients
in the above mentioned settings.
Recent efforts [9, 37, 43] have demonstrated the vulnerability of convolutional neural networks (CNN) to gradientbased inversion attacks. In such attacks, a malicious party
can intercept local model gradients and reconstruct private
training data in an optimization-based scheme via matching
the compromised gradients. Most methods are limited to
small image resolutions or non-linearity constraints amid the

10021

