Exploiting Explainable Metrics for Augmented SGD
Mahdi S. Hosseini1 * Mathieu Tuli2 * Konstantinos N. Plataniotis2
1
University of New Brunswick 2 University of Toronto
Code:https://github.com/mahdihosseini/RMSGD

Abstract
Explaining the generalization characteristics of deep
learning is an emerging topic in advanced machine learning.
There are several unanswered questions about how learning
under stochastic optimization really works and why certain
strategies are better than others. In this paper, we address
the following question: can we probe intermediate layers of
a deep neural network to identify and quantify the learning
quality of each layer? With this question in mind, we propose new explainability metrics that measure the redundant
information in a network’s layers using a low-rank factorization framework and quantify a complexity measure that
is highly correlated with the generalization performance of
a given optimizer, network, and dataset. We subsequently
exploit these metrics to augment the Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) optimizer by adaptively adjusting the learning
rate in each layer to improve in generalization performance.
Our augmented SGD – dubbed RMSGD – introduces minimal computational overhead compared to SOTA methods
and outperforms them by exhibiting strong generalization
characteristics across application, architecture, and dataset.

1. Introduction
The task of predicting network generalization performance using some measure of complexity based on training
data is an emerging topic in the field of machine learning.
Development of such “explainability” metrics is vitally important in order to understand and better explain the learning mechanisms involved in training of a given optimizer,
network, and dataset. Identifying the causal relationship
between some metric and generalization gap (or even testing
accuracy directly) in order to select optimal network topologies or tune hyper-parameters is an important problem and
actively researched today [10, 22, 23, 29, 36].
While the field of metric development for predicting generalization performance is growing (see related works in
* Equally major contribution

section 2), our interest in this work is to exploit such explainability metrics to augment the training of deep neural
networks (DNNS). We achieve this by defining new metrics
– stable rank, condition number, and a quality measure – derived from the intermediate layers of DNNS during training
to access the true knowledge in the underlying weights and
express how well the network layers are functioning as highquality autoencoders for knowledge representation. Using
these metrics, we exploit their ability to quantify learning
in order to augment stochastic gradient descent (SGD) by
dynamically adjusting the learning rate.
From a different lens, this work also sheds light on the behaviour of commonly practiced hyper-parameter tuning techniques like learning rate scheduling through decay methods
[12, 14, 17, 32, 33, 57] or functional methods [16, 32, 41, 42].
Little is understood about such methods and why they really
work and their use becomes more like alchemy rather than
analytical/empirical reasoning. We highlight how our metrics provide reasonable explanation to these strategies and
also how they can be used in a simple optimization framework to augment SGD and gain performance. Our main
contributions are as follows:
[C1] We introduce new explainability metrics derived
using training data that quantify layer-level learning of neural
networks and are robust to the randomness of initialization.
[C2] We use these metrics to explain the training mechanisms of neural networks for various optimizers and datasets,
and predict generalization characteristics in deep learning.
[C3] We exploit these metrics to augment SGD and introduce our new RMSGD optimizer, which gains considerable
performance improvements at minimal computational cost
and generalizes well across experimental configuration.

2. Related Works
A variety of complexity measures have been recently
introduced for predicting network generalization such as
ℓp -norm signatures from network weights in [36], margin
distribution by measuring the distance between network
training and decision bounds [22], and a gradient signal-tonoise-ratio (GSNR) measure from the evolution of training
weights [29]. A more comprehensive analysis of related

10296

