Global-Aware Registration of Less-Overlap RGB-D Scans
Che Sun, Yunde Jia, Yi Guo, and Yuwei Wu*
Beijing Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology, School of Computer Science,
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, 100081, China.
{sunche,jiayunde,guoyi,wuyuwei}@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose a novel method of registering less-overlap
RGB-D scans. Our method learns global information of a
scene to construct a panorama, and aligns RGB-D scans
to the panorama to perform registration. Different from
existing methods that use local feature points to register
less-overlap RGB-D scans and mismatch too much, we use
global information to guide the registration, thereby alleviating the mismatching problem by preserving global consistency of alignments. To this end, we build a scene inference
network to construct the panorama representing global information. We introduce a reinforcement learning strategy
to iteratively align RGB-D scans with the panorama and refine the panorama representation, which reduces the noise
of global information and preserves global consistency of
both geometric and photometric alignments. Experimental
results on benchmark datasets including SUNCG, Matterport, and ScanNet show the superiority of our method.

1. Introduction
Registering RGB-D scans is the basis of 3D reconstruction and 3D modeling, and has been increasingly studied
[5,9,19,26]. Most existing methods [27,29] usually require
a large overlap (≥ 70%) to achieve good registration results.
However, in practice, there will inevitably appear to be lessoverlap RGB-D scans when cameras are moved suddenly
and rapidly, or multiple cameras are deployed in less or no
co-visible regions. Rescanning can compensate for the lack
of overlap of less-overlap scans [1, 15], but it is somewhat
costly and inefficient. Therefore, many researchers have
been initiated to investigate directly registering less-overlap
scans.
Existing methods [30, 31] use scene completion strategies and the conventional three-step paradigm (i.e., feature
extraction, feature matching, and pose estimation) to register less-overlap scans. However, these methods do not work
* Corresponding author

well in registration of blurred and texture-less regions that
commonly appear in the completing scene images, because
the local feature points they used for matching only contain local neighborhood information around the points. The
local neighborhood information is often similar with less
discriminative [14, 25], especially in blurred and textureless regions. Therefore, local feature points are prone to
be mismatched, and further incur incorrect pose estimation
and registration. In this paper, we propose to use global information (e.g., scene layout and objects’ surroundings) of
a scene to guide the registration. We align the less-overlap
scans with the scene globally in a jigsaw-like manner and
preserve global consistency of both geometric and photometric alignments, thereby alleviating the problem caused
by less discriminative local feature points.
Using global information to register less-overlap scans
is non-trivial. Since the global information is acquired
only based on less-overlap RGB-D scans and their completion, much noise will be produced from the unaligned
scans and unreliable completion. In particular, we have to
face the chicken-and-egg problem: global information relies on good alignments of scans, and aligning scans relies
on good global information. Many methods [2, 29] adopt
a simple iterative strategy to solve the problem by aligning
scans merely based on current global information and refining global information, iteratively. However, the simple
iterative strategy ignores the impact of future refined global
information on scan alignments. This greedy strategy may
lead to suboptimal solutions of alignments, thus obtaining
global information with much noise. The noise degrades
the fidelity of global information, remaining a significant
challenge in the registration of less-overlap scans.
To tackle the challenge, we present a global-aware registration method of less-overlap RGB-D scans by jointly reducing noise and improving alignments in a reinforcement
learning process. We use reinforcement learning to align
RGB-D scans with the scene on the basis of both current and
future global information, and refine the information based
on the alignment. Our method makes full use of global information and improves its fidelity by trial-and-error learn-

6357

