How Good Is Aesthetic Ability of a Fashion Model?
Xingxing Zou1,3 , Kaicheng Pang1,3 , Wen Zhang2 , Waikeung Wong3,1∗
1
Laboratory for Artificial Intelligence in Design, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 2 Amazon.com
3
Institute of Textiles and Clothing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
1
{aemika.zou,16106013g}@connect.polyu.hk, calvin.wong@polyu.edu.hk, 2 wenzhaw@amazon.com

Abstract
We introduce A100 (Aesthetic 100) to assess the aesthetic ability of the fashion compatibility models. To date,
it is the first work to address the AI model’s aesthetic
ability with detailed characterization based on the professional fashion domain knowledge. A100 has several desirable characteristics: 1. Completeness. It covers all
types of standards in the fashion aesthetic system through
two tests, namely LAT (Liberalism Aesthetic Test) and AAT
(Academicism Aesthetic Test); 2. Reliability. It is training data agnostic and consistent with major indicators. It
provides a fair and objective judgment for model comparison. 3. Explainability. Better than all previous indicators,
the A100 further identifies essential characteristics of fashion aesthetics, thus showing the model’s performance on
more fine-grained dimensions, such as Color, Balance, Material, etc. Experimental results prove the advance of the
A100 in the aforementioned aspects. All data can be found
at https://github.com/AemikaChow/AiDLabfAshIon-Data.

LAT: collective consensus

Model 2 is better
than Model 1

?

…

LATs

A100

color

Model 1

Model 2

mLATS

AATs

Model 1

Model 2

Overall Performance

?
…

occasion
?

…

AAT: domain knowledge

Characteristic Performance
Model 2 is worse
than Model 1
in Occasion Index

Figure 1. Overview. We introduce the A100 (Aesthetic 100) for
fashion compatibility model evaluation. The LAT and AAT reflect
the overall performance of fashion compatibility models covering
all types of aesthetic standards in fashion. Meanwhile, the A100
can also indicate the characteristic performance, which is not always aligned with the overall performance.

1. Introduction
Fashion compatibility learning is a task to measure the
compatibility among a set of fashion items [2, 3, 11, 12, 18,
28, 30, 31]. Utilizing the aesthetic ability of these methods
for cross-selling is the most common strategy for online retailers. Naturally, a good indicator of a model’s aesthetic
ability is vital for both method improvement and real-world
fashion applications. Current practices to evaluate the fashion compatibility models most focus on retrieving or ranking performance such as Recall [8], mAP [15], MRR [17],
etc. AUC [26] is the commonly adopted metric to evaluate
the compatibility classification accuracy. FITB (Fill-in-theblack) accuracy [9] is introduced to evaluate fashion recommendation methods. However, none of the existing indicators focus on reflecting the model’s aesthetic ability [21,32].
* Corresponding author.

The aesthetic ability here refers to how the model can
understand fashion items’ compatibility and perception of
their beauty. Generally, aesthetic system in fashion consists
of two types standard: Bottom-up and Top-down [6,7,10].
The Bottom-up aesthetic means that the fashion from the
crowd further affects the mainstream. This type of standard
is a collective consensus that will be formed when the number of people agreeing on one thing is large enough. We
emphasize that it is a large number of people have a consensus on the same thing. On the contrary, the Top-down aesthetic means fashion from professional knowledge and will
be widely accepted by the crowd from its essence. This kind
of standard faithfully follows the created beauty according
to domain knowledge. The Bottom-up aesthetic is a kind
of collective consensus, and thus, the public will accept it
by nature, while the Top-down aesthetic can be regarded as

21200

