SurfEmb: Dense and Continuous Correspondence Distributions
for Object Pose Estimation with Learnt Surface Embeddings
Rasmus Laurvig Haugaard
University of Southern Denmark

Anders Glent Buch
University of Southern Denmark

rlha@mmmi.sdu.dk

anbu@mmmi.sdu.dk

Abstract
query
model

q

k+
key
model

contrastive loss

We present an approach to learn dense, continuous 2D3D correspondence distributions over the surface of objects from data with no prior knowledge of visual ambiguities like symmetry. We also present a new method for 6D
pose estimation of rigid objects using the learnt distributions to sample, score and refine pose hypotheses. The correspondence distributions are learnt with a contrastive loss,
represented in object-specific latent spaces by an encoderdecoder query model and a small fully connected key model.
Our method is unsupervised with respect to visual ambiguities, yet we show that the query- and key models learn to
represent accurate multi-modal surface distributions. Our
pose estimation method improves the state-of-the-art significantly on the comprehensive BOP Challenge, trained
purely on synthetic data, even compared with methods
trained on real data. The project site is at surfemb.github.io.

k-

Figure 1. Proposed method for learning 2D-3D correspondence
distributions. An image crop is fed through a query model, providing a query image. Visible object coordinates under the ground
truth pose are fed through a key model to provide positive keys,
and uniformly sampled object points are fed through the same key
model to provide negative keys for contrastive learning.

1. Introduction
Establishing 2D-3D correspondences is a core problem
in computer vision. For an image of an object with no visual
ambiguity, a 3D object point can in theory be uniquely identified for a 2D point in the image. However, under visual
ambiguities caused by symmetry, occlusion, lighting, etc.,
there can be a set of possible 3D correspondences. Ideally,
we would have not just a best guess, but a full distribution
over possible correspondences. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to present such distributions. We learn
the distributions implicitly from data with no information
about symmetries or other ambiguities.
There is a wide range of pose estimation methods for
rigid objects. Many establish 2D-3D correspondences
[12, 21, 25, 26, 28, 31] followed by PnP-RANSAC [9], and
mainly differ in how they establish correspondences. Some
methods establish correspondences for a fixed set of object
keypoints [26, 28] while others establish dense (pixel-wise)

correspondences [5, 12, 21, 25, 31]. Regressing coordinates
directly [5, 21, 25, 28, 31] assumes a uni-modal distribution,
which is problematic in case of visual ambiguities, leading most of them to handle global symmetries explicitly.
This, however, only handles global symmetries, not other
kinds of visual ambiguity. A recent approach [12] handles
ambiguities implicitly by estimating a probability distribution over surface fragments. This model is able to represent
multi-modal distributions, but the representation is limited
by the computational cost of representing a large amount of
surface fragments. They mitigate this by choosing 64 fragments and regressing a within-fragment offset, but this still
amounts to 256 output channels per object in their encoderdecoder network, and their representation is effectively reduced to a discrete probability distribution over 64 refined
object coordinates.
Another recent work [23] proposes to establish dense
2D-3D correspondences using continuous surface embed-

6749

