Deformable Sprites for Unsupervised Video Decomposition
Vickie Ye1

Input:
Video with Flow

Zhengqi Li2
Richard Tucker2
Angjoo Kanazawa1
1
2
University of California, Berkeley
Google
Output: Deformable Sprites
Per-frame Masks & Transforms
Layer 1

Propagated Edits

Global Sprites

Layer 2

Noah Snavely2

Layer 1

Edits
Layer 2

Figure 1. Video Decomposition with Deformable Sprites. Given an RGB video and its optical flow (left), we present a method that
decomposes the video into layers of persistent motion groups. We represent each group as a Deformable Sprite (center), which consists of an
RGB sprite image, and masks and non-rigid transforms mapping the sprite to each frame. We fit Deformable Sprites to each input video
independently without any pre-training or user input. The resulting decomposition captures long-term correspondences of sprites over time,
enabling effects such as propagating edits on the sprite across the entire video (right). We show full videos of our results at the project site.

Abstract
We describe a method to extract persistent elements of
a dynamic scene from an input video. We represent each
scene element as a Deformable Sprite consisting of three
components: 1) a 2D texture image for the entire video, 2)
per-frame masks for the element, and 3) non-rigid deformations that map the texture image into each video frame. The
resulting decomposition allows for applications such as consistent video editing. Deformable Sprites are a type of video
auto-encoder model that is optimized on individual videos,
and does not require training on a large dataset, nor does
it rely on pre-trained models. Moreover, our method does
not require object masks or other user input, and discovers
moving objects of a wider variety than previous work. We
evaluate our approach on standard video datasets and show
qualitative results on a diverse array of Internet videos.

1. Introduction
When we observe a video of a dynamic scene, such as
the bear video in Fig. 1, we do not see a disjoint set of pixels
over time, but rather a bear walking in a zoo. However,
computer vision methods often represent videos as 3D raster

pixel grids. While this low-level representation is convenient
for processing on hardware, it does not capture our intuitive
notion of high-level objects moving through a 3D scene.
Moving layers are an alternative representation proposed
in the seminal work of Wang & Adelson, in which scene
elements are modeled as persistent image layers that transform over time to compose each video frame [34]. Such
layered representations capture the idea that there are persistent motion groups that move smoothly in the scene, while
still accounting for sharp edges that result from occlusions.
However, these classic methods were limited by machinery
of the time to relatively simple motions and scenes.
Inspired by these classic ideas [10, 26, 34], we present a
new approach that decomposes videos of complex dynamic
scenes into sets of persistent motion groups. We do so by
introducing Deformable Sprites (Fig. 1, center), representation of motion groups across an entire video. A Deformable
Sprite for a motion group consists of three key components:
1) a canonical texture image, or sprite, describing the group’s
appearance over all input frames, 2) masks locating the group
in each input frame, and 3) a non-rigid geometric transformation that maps each sprite into each frame. The resulting
decomposition captures the correspondences of each motion
group across the entire video, such that modifications of the

2657

