Exploring Denoised Cross-video Contrast for Weakly-supervised Temporal
Action Localization

1

Jingjing Li1,† , Tianyu Yang2,† , Wei Ji1,∗ , Jue Wang2 , Li Cheng1
University of Alberta, Canada 2 Tencent AI Lab, Shenzhen, China

{jingjin1, wji3, lcheng5}@ualberta.ca, tianyu-yang@outlook.com, arphid@gmail.com

Abstract
Weakly-supervised temporal action localization aims to
localize actions in untrimmed videos with only video-level
labels. Most existing methods address this problem with a
“localization-by-classification” pipeline that localizes action regions based on snippet-wise classification sequences.
Snippet-wise classifications are unfortunately error prone
due to the sparsity of video-level labels. Inspired by recent
success in unsupervised contrastive representation learning, we propose a novel denoised cross-video contrastive algorithm, aiming to enhance the feature discrimination ability of video snippets for accurate temporal action localization in the weakly-supervised setting. This is enabled by
three key designs: 1) an effective pseudo-label denoising
module to alleviate the side effects caused by noisy contrastive features, 2) an efficient region-level feature contrast strategy with a region-level memory bank to capture
“global” contrast across the entire dataset, and 3) a diverse
contrastive learning strategy to enable action-background
separation as well as intra-class compactness & inter-class
separability. Extensive experiments on THUMOS14 and
ActivityNet v1.3 demonstrate the superior performance of
our approach.

1. Introduction
As a fundamental yet challenging computer vision task,
temporal action localization aims to localize the occurrences of prescribed action categories in untrimmed videos.
It has received extensive research attention due to its wide
applications in surveillance [49], video summarization [32],
and highlight detection [55], etc. Many existing methods [4, 7, 28, 43, 56, 66, 68] are based on fully-supervised
training, which rely heavily on densely annotated frame labels that are typically laborious and time-consuming to acquire. On the other hand, it is much easier for users to
provide video-level tags describing scene context and content. This naturally gives rise to the weakly-supervised temJingjing Li does this work during an internship at Tencent AI Lab.
† Equal contribution. ∗ Corresponding author.

poral action localization, or WS-TAL, where cheap videolevel tags are utilized as an alternative supervision signal [38,41,50]. Most existing WS-TAL methods [18,25,38,
39, 41, 50, 60, 64] follow a “localization-by-classification”
pipeline: a snippet-wise classification is carried out over
time to generate the Temporal Class Activation Sequence,
also called T-CAS or T-CAM [38, 41]; this is followed by
selecting snippets with high responses to localize the plausible action regions. Given the sparsity nature of video-level
labels, however, snippet-wise classifications are often errorprone, which may severely damage the final localization
performance.
To learn a good T-CAS for action localization, it becomes crucial to enhance the feature discrimination ability of various video snippets in snippet-wise classification.
Generally, the snippet feature embedding space is expected
to satisfy two properties: 1) action snippets should be separable from the background snippets that do not belong to
any action classes, i.e., action-background separation; 2)
action snippets from a same class should be closer than
those from different classes, i.e., intra-class compactness
& inter-class separability. This has led to several prior
studies [36, 41, 64] exploring deep metric learning [15, 26]
or contrastive learning [5] to foster learning discriminative
features. As illustrated in Fig. 1 (a) & (b), their focus is
mostly on action-background separation, by pushing action
features of a specific class to be close and pulling action
features away from the background ones, either within individual videos [64], or within a carefully-designed minibatch [36, 41]. They unfortunately fail to capture the interclass separability, and ignore the useful “global” contrast
across training videos in the entire dataset. Given the lack
of frame-level annotations, snippet-wise pseudo-labels [64]
or attention-based mechanisms [36, 41] are often used internally as a substitute. As illustrated in Fig. 1 (a), actionbackground separation is performed based on pseudo-labels
over the snippets of each video. In Fig. 1 (b), attentionpooled video-level features from a mini-batch are engaged
in the feature contrastive training process. Due to the noisy
pseudo-labels or false activations in the learned attention se-

19914

