APRIL: Finding the Achilles’ Heel on Privacy for Vision Transformers
Jiahao Lu1,2 , Xi Sheryl Zhang1 , Tianli Zhao1,2 , Xiangyu He1,2 , Jian Cheng1
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{lujiahao2019, xi.zhang, zhaotianli2019}@ia.ac.cn;{xiangyu.he, jcheng}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Federated learning frameworks typically require collaborators to share their local gradient updates of a common
model instead of sharing training data to preserve privacy.
However, prior works on Gradient Leakage Attacks showed
that private training data can be revealed from gradients.
So far almost all relevant works base their attacks on fullyconnected or convolutional neural networks. Given the recent overwhelmingly rising trend of adapting Transformers
to solve multifarious vision tasks, it is highly valuable to
investigate the privacy risk of vision transformers. In this
paper, we analyse the gradient leakage risk of self-attention
based mechanism in both theoretical and practical manners. Particularly, we propose APRIL - Attention PRIvacy
Leakage, which poses a strong threat to self-attention inspired models such as ViT. Showing how vision Transformers are at the risk of privacy leakage via gradients,
we urge the signiﬁcance of designing privacy-safer Transformer models and defending schemes.

1. Introduction
Federated or collaborative learning [25] have been gaining massive attention from both academia [20, 21] and industry [7, 19]. For the purpose of privacy-preserving, the
typical federated learning keeps local training data private
and trains a global model by sharing its gradients collaboratively. By avoiding to transmit the raw data directly to
a central server, the learning paradigm is widely believed
to offer sufﬁcient privacy. Thereby, it has been employed
in real-world applications, especially when user privacy is
highly sensitive, e.g. hospital data [2, 18].
Whilst this setting prevents direct privacy leakage by
keeping training data invisible to collaborators, a recent line
of the works [12, 16, 39, 41, 43, 44] demonstrates that it is
possible to (partially) recover private training data from the
model gradients. This attack dubbed gradient leakage or
gradient inversion poses a severe threat to the federated
learning systems. The previous works primarily focus on
10051

inverting gradients from fully connected networks (FCNs)
or convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Particularly, Yin
et al. [39] recover images with high ﬁdelity relying on gradient matching with BatchNorm layer statistics; Zhu et al.
[43] theoretically analyse the risk of certain architectures
to enable the full recovery. One intriguing question of our
interest is that, does gradient privacy leakage occur in the
context of architectures other than FCNs and CNNs?
The recent years have witnessed a surge of methods of
Transformer [32]. As an inherently different architecture,
Transformer can build large scale contextual representation models, and achieve impressive results in a broad set
of natural language tasks. For instance, huge pre-trained
language models including BERT [8], XLNet [38], GPT3 [3], Megatron-LM [30], and so forth are established on
the basis of Transformers. Inspired by the success, original works [1, 6, 29, 33] seek to the feasibility of leveraging
self-attention mechanism with convolutional layers to vision tasks. Then, DETR [4] makes pioneering progress to
use Transformer in object detection and ViT [10] resoundingly succeeds in image classiﬁcation with a pure Transformer architecture. Coming after ViT, dozens of works
manage to integrate Transformer into various computer vision tasks [11, 22–24, 35–37, 40]. Notably, vision Transformers are known to be extremely data-hungry [10], which
makes the large-scale learning in the federated fashion more
favorable.
Despite the rapid progress aforementioned, there is a
high chance that vision Transformers suffer the gradient
leakage risk. Nevertheless, the line of the study on this
privacy issue is absent. Although the prior work [16] provides an attack algorithm to recover private training data for
a Transformer-based language model via an optimization
process, the inherent reason of Transformer’s vulnerability
is unclear. Different with leakage on Transformer in natural
language tasks [16], we claim that vision Transformers with
the position embedding not only encodes positional information for patches but also enables gradient inversion from
the layer. In this paper, we introduce a novel analytic gradient leakage to reveal why vision Transformers are easy to be

