GANSeg: Learning to Segment by Unsupervised Hierarchical Image Generation
Xingzhe He
Bastian Wandt
Helge Rhodin
University of British Columbia
{xingzhe, wandt, rhodin}@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
Segmenting an image into its parts is a common preprocess for high-level vision tasks such as image editing.
However, annotating masks for supervised training is expensive. Weakly-supervised and unsupervised methods exist, but they depend on the comparison of pairs of images, such as from multi-views, frames of videos, and image augmentation, which limit their applicability. To address this, we propose a GAN-based approach that generates images conditioned on latent masks, thereby alleviating
full or weak annotations required by previous approaches.
We show that such mask-conditioned image generation can
be learned faithfully when conditioning the masks in a hierarchical manner on 2D latent points that define the position of parts explicitly. Without requiring supervision of
masks or points, this strategy increases robustness of mask
to viewpoint and object position changes. It also lets us
generate image-mask pairs for training a segmentation network, which outperforms state-of-the-art unsupervised segmentation methods on established benchmarks. Code can
be found at https://github.com/xingzhehe/GANSeg.

1. Introduction
This paper tackles the problem of unsupervised part segmentation. Discovering object parts in images is a fundamental problem in computer vision as parts provide an
intermediate representation that is robust to object appearance and pose variation [17, 48]. Many high-level tasks
benefit from part representations, such as 3D reconstruction [31, 67], pose estimation [27, 42], and image editing
[14, 66]. Keypoints and part segmentation maps are among
the most commonly used forms. However, their supervised
training [12, 43, 56] requires pixel-level annotations for every new application domain since labels hardly generalize
to other object categories and the number of parts and their
granularity vary across tasks.
On the side of keypoint detection, several unsupervised
detectors exist [20, 64] but segmentation methods are still
in their infancy [17, 32]. Segmenting parts without pixel-

level annotation is difficult because it requires disentangling
parts from other parts and the foreground from the background. Existing unsupervised1 methods mainly follow the
same strategy as applied for unsupervised keypoint detection [52]. Real images are transformed by an affine map
or a thin plate spline to find those parts that are equivariant under the known deformation. For precise reconstruction they require additional information, such as saliency
maps [17] or assume the objects to be consistently centered [32], which is constraining. For example, when applied to face datasets [33], the neck and shoulders are often
ignored although part of almost every image.
Our goal is to improve the unsupervised part segmentation task. We propose to first train a generative adversarial network (GAN) [10] to generate images that are internally conditioned on latent masks. This GAN formulation
alleviates the dependency on image pairs and pre-defined
image transformation in existing autoencoder networks. In
this way, the network learns the part distribution from the
dataset instead of from pre-defined image transformations.
Subsequently, we use the generator to synthesize virtually
infinite mask-image pairs for training a segmentation network. Figure 1 provides an overview of our model.
The key question we address is how to design a GAN
that generates images with part segmentation masks that
are meaningful, i.e., group pixels into regions that typically
move together and have shared appearance across images.
We start from a backbone architecture that is borrowed from
supervised segmentation networks [3, 43] and the GAN
strategy is inspired by its recent application to unsupervised
keypoint detection [14]. Our innovation is the hierarchical
generation of the image via multiple abstraction levels, including the use of masks. In the first level, we use Gaussian
noise to generate part appearance embeddings and a set of
2D latent points. Unlike [14] which continues straight from
points to image generation, we first group points to define
the position and the scale of each part. In the second abstraction level, we use a part-relative positional encoding to
1 Most existing literature refers to unsupervised when training on single
images without annotation, and self-supervised when training on auxiliary
tasks using multi-views or videos. We follow this convention.

1225

