Open-World Instance Segmentation:
Exploiting Pseudo Ground Truth From Learned Pairwise Affinity
Weiyao Wang† , Matt Feiszli† , Heng Wang† , Jitendra Malik†§ , Du Tran†
†
Meta AI Research § UC Berkeley
{weiyaowang,mdf,hengwang,trandu}@fb.com, malik@berkeley.edu

Figure 1. Comparison of GGN with different baselines. (a) an input image from ADE20K [61] (upper row) with the ground truth
object masks overlaid (lower row). Three different approaches: (b) Selective Search (SS) [51], (c) Mask R-CNN [22], and (d) our Generic
Grouping Network (GGN) are applied on the same image to predict the top 100 proposals. The upper images provide all top-100 proposals
predicted by three approaches with false and true positive proposals visualized in red and green boxes, respectively. The lower images
provide only true positive proposals. The number of true positive proposals or ground truth objects are denoted in parentheses. Among 20
ground truth objects, SS recalls only 4, Mask R-CNN detects 5, and GGN retrieves 14. SS is a bottom-up non-parametric approach, thus
has no notion of objectness. Mask R-CNN can make whole object proposals; however it still fails to detect objects that are not seen during
training. Our GGN can predict whole object proposals and generalize to unseen categories.

Abstract
Open-world instance segmentation is the task of grouping pixels into object instances without any pre-determined
taxonomy. This is challenging, as state-of-the-art methods rely on explicit class semantics obtained from large labeled datasets, and out-of-domain evaluation performance
drops significantly. Here we propose a novel approach for
mask proposals, Generic Grouping Networks (GGNs), constructed without semantic supervision. Our approach combines a local measure of pixel affinity with instance-level
mask supervision, producing a training regimen designed
to make the model as generic as the data diversity allows.
We introduce a method for predicting Pairwise Affinities
(PA), a learned local relationship between pairs of pixels.
PA generalizes very well to unseen categories. From PA

we construct a large set of pseudo-ground-truth instance
masks; combined with human-annotated instance masks
we train GGNs and significantly outperform the SOTA on
open-world instance segmentation on various benchmarks
including COCO, LVIS, ADE20K, and UVO.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation is the task of grouping pixels into
object instances [22]. In the closed-world setup, the task
is to detect and segment objects from a predefined taxonomy. In contrast, the open-world setting requires segmenting objects of arbitrary categories. For a model trained in
a closed-world setup, this means segmenting not only the
“seen” categories (those presented at training time) but also

4422

