StyleT2I: Toward Compositional and High-Fidelity Text-to-Image Synthesis
Zhiheng Li1,2 , Martin Renqiang Min1 , Kai Li1 , and Chenliang Xu2
1
NEC Laboratories America, 2 University of Rochester
{renqiang,kaili}@nec-labs.com, {zhiheng.li,chenliang.xu}@rochester.edu

ControlGAN DAE-GAN

Abstract
Although progress has been made for text-to-image synthesis, previous methods fall short of generalizing to unseen
or underrepresented attribute compositions in the input text.
Lacking compositionality could have severe implications for
robustness and fairness, e.g., inability to synthesize the face
images of underrepresented demographic groups. In this
paper, we introduce a new framework, StyleT2I, to improve
the compositionality of text-to-image synthesis. Specifically,
we propose a CLIP-guided Contrastive Loss to better distinguish different compositions among different sentences.
To further improve the compositionality, we design a novel
Semantic Matching Loss and a Spatial Constraint to identify
attributes’ latent directions for intended spatial region manipulations, leading to better disentangled latent representations of attributes. Based on the identified latent directions of
attributes, we propose Compositional Attribute Adjustment
to adjust the latent code, resulting in better compositionality
of image synthesis. In addition, we leverage the ℓ2 -norm
regularization of identified latent directions (norm penalty)
to strike a nice balance between image-text alignment and
image fidelity. In the experiments, we devise a new dataset
split and an evaluation metric to evaluate the compositionality of text-to-image synthesis models. The results show that
StyleT2I outperforms previous approaches in terms of the
consistency between the input text and synthesized images
and achieves higher fidelity.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image synthesis is a task to synthesize an image
conditioned on given input text, which enables many downstream applications, such as art creation, computer-aided
design, and training data generation for augmentation. Although progress has been made for this task, the compositionality aspect is overlooked by many previous methods [39].
As shown in Fig. 1, the input text “he1 is wearing lipstick”
describes an intersectional group [3] between two attributes—
1 In this work, the gender and gender pronouns denote the visually
perceived gender, which does not indicate one’s actual gender identity.

TediGAN StyleT2I (Ours)

Text Input:
“He is wearing lipstick.”

he
Attribute
Composition wearing
lipstick

High Fidelity

✅

✅

❌

✅

❌

❌

✅

✅

❌

❌

✅

✅

Figure 1. When the text input contains underrepresented compositions of attributes, e.g., (he, wearing lipstick), in the dataset,
previous methods [30,51,64] incorrectly generate the attributes with
poor image quality. In contrast, StyleT2I achieves better compositionality and high-fidelity text-to-image synthesis results.

“he” and “wearing lipstick,” which is underrepresented in a
face dataset [18]. The previous approaches [30,51,64] fail
to correctly synthesize the image, which could be caused by
overfitting to the overrepresented compositions, e.g., (“she”,
“wearing lipstick”) and (“he”, not “wearing lipstick”), in the
dataset. This leads to severe robustness and fairness issues
by inheriting biases and stereotypes from the dataset. Therefore, it is imperative to improve the text-to-image synthesis
results in the aspect of compositionality.
The crux of the compositionality problem is to prevent
models from simply memorizing the compositions in the
training data. First, in terms of the objective function, some
previous methods [64,65] simply minimize the feature distance between pairwise matched image and text, leading
to poor generalizability. In contrast, we propose a CLIPguided Contrastive Loss to let the network better distinguish
different compositions among different sentences, in which
CLIP (Contrastive Language–Image Pre-training) [47] is pretrained on large-scale matched image-text pairs as a foundation model [2]. Second, the compositional text-to-image
model needs to be sensitive to each independent attribute
described in the text. Most previous methods [30,68,71,75]
mainly resort to attention mechanism [60], which focuses
more on the correspondence between words and image features but falls short of separating individual attributes from
a composition. Unlike previous approaches, our key idea
is to identify disentangled representations [6,14] in the la-

18197

