Self-supervised Neural Articulated Shape and Appearance Models
Fangyin Wei1∗
Rohan Chabra2
Lingni Ma2
Szymon Rusinkiewicz1
Chris Sweeney2
1

Princeton University

Christoph Lassner2
Richard Newcombe2
2

Michael Zollhoefer2
Mira Slavcheva2

Reality Labs Research

Figure 1. Our self-supervised method learns the shape and appearance of articulated object classes. After training from multi-view synthetic
images of different states of object instances, our model can reconstruct and animate objects from static real-world images. Left: input real
views of a static object. Middle: 3D reconstruction with shape and color. Right: animation driven by the learned articulation codes.

Abstract
Learning geometry, motion, and appearance priors of
object classes is important for the solution of a large variety of computer vision problems. While the majority of
approaches has focused on static objects, dynamic objects,
especially with controllable articulation, are less explored.
We propose a novel approach for learning a representation of the geometry, appearance, and motion of a class of
articulated objects given only a set of color images as input. In a self-supervised manner, our novel representation
learns shape, appearance, and articulation codes that enable independent control of these semantic dimensions. Our
model is trained end-to-end without requiring any articulation annotations. Experiments show that our approach
performs well for different joint types, such as revolute and
prismatic joints, as well as different combinations of these
joints. Compared to state of the art that uses direct 3D
supervision and does not output appearance, we recover
more faithful geometry and appearance from 2D observations only. In addition, our representation enables a large
variety of applications, such as few-shot reconstruction, the
generation of novel articulations, and novel view-synthesis.
Project page: https://weify627.github.io/nasam/.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing articulated 3D objects from image observations in terms of their underlying geometry, kinemat∗ Work done during internship at Reality Labs Research.

ics, and appearance is one of the fundamental problems of
computer vision with many important applications, e.g. in
robotics and augmented/virtual reality. This inverse graphics problem is highly challenging and of underconstrained
nature, since image formation, i.e., mapping from the 3D
world to discrete 2D pixel measurements, tightly entangles
all visible properties of an object—and finding non-visible
properties, such as kinematics, requires additional information such as information over time.
Most approaches that tackle this inverse problem rely on
object/class-specific priors learned from large datasets with
available 3D ground truth, which are challenging and expensive to collect. The learned manifold of shape, appearance, and motion is often encoded via a low-dimensional
latent space. In the devised approaches, this learned lowdimensional prior is then used to better constrain the inverse
reconstruction problem.
The majority of previous techniques in the literature has
focused on reconstructing classes of static objects; dynamic
objects, especially with controllable articulation, are less
explored. For example, occupancy networks condition the
decision boundary of a neural classifier on a shape code
to represent a class of static objects [32]. Approaches
such as DeepSDF follow a similar principle, but employ
a learned continuous signed distance field (SDF) [41] to
model the object’s surface implicitly as the zero level-set
of a coordinate-based neural network. DISN [59] further
improves this technique and can recover more details. All
the mentioned approaches require dense 3D ground truth
geometry for training and do not model object appearance.
One exception is IDR [70] which employs inverse differ-

15816

