Forecasting from LiDAR via Future Object Detection
Neehar Peri1* Jonathon Luiten1,2 Mengtian Li1 Aljoša Ošep1,3 Laura Leal-Taixé3,4 Deva Ramanan1,4
1

Carnegie Mellon University

2

RWTH Aachen University

3

TUM Munich

4

Argo AI

{nperi,jluiten,mengtial,aosep,deva}@andrew.cmu.edu, leal.taixe@tum.de

Abstract
Object detection and forecasting are fundamental components of embodied perception. These two problems, however, are largely studied in isolation by the community. In
this paper, we propose an end-to-end approach for detection
and motion forecasting based on raw sensor measurement
as opposed to ground truth tracks. Instead of predicting the
current frame locations and forecasting forward in time, we
directly predict future object locations and backcast to determine where each trajectory began. Our approach not
only improves overall accuracy compared to other modular
or end-to-end baselines, it also prompts us to rethink the
role of explicit tracking for embodied perception. Additionally, by linking future and current locations in a many-toone manner, our approach is able to reason about multiple
futures, a capability that was previously considered difficult
for end-to-end approaches. We conduct extensive experiments on the popular nuScenes dataset and demonstrate the
empirical effectiveness of our approach. In addition, we investigate the appropriateness of reusing standard forecasting metrics for an end-to-end setup, and find a number of
limitations which allow us to build simple baselines to game
these metrics. We address this issue with a novel set of joint
forecasting and detection metrics that extend the commonly
used AP metrics from the detection community to measuring forecasting accuracy. Our code is available on GitHub.

1. Introduction
Object detection and forecasting are fundamental components of embodied perception that are often studied independently. In this paper we rethink the methods and metrics
for trajectory forecasting from LiDAR sensor data. Trajectory forecasting is a critical perception task for autonomous
robot navigation, thus building meaningful evaluation metrics and robust methods is of utmost importance.
Traditional trajectory forecasting methods [6, 9, 47] de* Work done during an internship at Argo AI

a)

Detect, Track, Forecast

LiDAR Sequence

Detection

b)

End-to-End Forecasting

Tracking

LiDAR Sequence

Forecasting

Forecasting
Object Detection +
Offset Prediction

c)

This Work: Forecasting as Future Object Detection
Multi-Future
Forecasting

LiDAR Sequence

(Future) Object
Detection +
Backcasting

Figure 1. (a) Current stage-wise methods independently address
the problems of detection, tracking, and forecasting, allowing for
compounding errors in the full pipeline. Each sub-module incorrectly assumes that its input will be perfect, leading to further integration errors. In contrast to current forecasting methods that use
object tracks as input, end-to-end forecasting directly from LiDAR
sensory data (b) streamlines forecasting pipelines. To this end, we
propose FutureDet (c), an end-to-end model capable of forecasting
multiple-future trajectories directly from LiDAR via future object
detection. We show that our end-to-end pipeline improves upon
state-of-the-art three-stage and end-to-end methods.

tect [44–46] and track [23, 48, 50] objects in 3D LiDAR
scans to obtain past trajectories (Fig. 1a). These can be
used in conjunction with auto-regressive forecasting methods [1, 20, 22, 43] to estimate the future actions of surrounding agents. Recent efforts [33, 37, 51] streamline such
multi-stage perception stacks and train multi-task neural
networks to jointly detect, track and forecast object positions directly from raw sensor data (Fig. 1b). However,
such end-to-end approaches tend to predict only a single
future trajectory for each object, not accounting for future
uncertainty. This is not surprising as estimating multiple futures is a significant challenge in forecasting, requiring machinery such as multiple-choice-loss [5] or generative models [2, 10, 11, 20, 22, 25, 29, 42].
We rethink the forecasting task and propose FutureDet,
an approach that reframes forecasting as the task of fu-

17202

