Deformable Video Transformer
Jue Wang1 Lorenzo Torresani1,2
1
Facebook AI Research 2 Dartmouth

Abstract
Video transformers have recently emerged as an effective alternative to convolutional networks for action classification. However, most prior video transformers adopt
either global space-time attention or hand-defined strategies to compare patches within and across frames. These
fixed attention schemes not only have high computational
cost but, by comparing patches at predetermined locations, they neglect the motion dynamics in the video. In
this paper, we introduce the Deformable Video Transformer
(DVT), which dynamically predicts a small subset of video
patches to attend for each query location based on motion information, thus allowing the model to decide where
to look in the video based on correspondences across
frames. Crucially, these motion-based correspondences are
obtained at zero-cost from information stored in the compressed format of the video. Our deformable attention
mechanism is optimized directly with respect to classification performance, thus eliminating the need for suboptimal
hand-design of attention strategies. Experiments on four
large-scale video benchmarks (Kinetics-400, SomethingSomething-V2, EPIC-KITCHENS and Diving-48) demonstrate that, compared to existing video transformers, our
model achieves higher accuracy at the same or lower computational cost, and it attains state-of-the-art results on
these four datasets.

1. Introduction
Although transformers [39] were originally proposed to
address NLP problems, they have quickly gained popularity in computer vision after the introduction of the Vision
Transformer (ViT) [9]. Compared to CNN architectures,
which can model pixel dependencies only within the small
receptive fields of convolutional filters, ViTs offer the benefit of capturing longer-range dependencies. This is achieved
by means of the self-attention operation, which entails comparing features extracted from image patches at different
locations. The downside of self-attention is that it causes
a high computational cost if executed globally over all pairs
of image patches. In fact, the complexity of global self-

Figure 1. Computational cost vs classification accuracy on K400
for video transformers pretrained on ImageNet-21K. Red diamonds denote models employing our proposed attention scheme
(DVT). Our method achieves consistently better accuracy and
lower computational cost compared to prior attention strategies
(Tformer [5], ViViT [2], Mformer [31]). Text tags next to markers
specify video transformer architectures and clip sizes.

attention is O(S 2 ) where S is the number of patches, which
can be in the thousands.
In the case of videos, global self-attention becomes especially costly, since the number of patches to consider scales
linearly with the number of frames T in the clip. Thus, the
cost becomes quadratic in the space-time resolution, i.e.,
O(S 2 T 2 ). Exhaustive comparison of all space-time pairs of
patches in a video is not only prohibitively costly but also
highly redundant, since adjacent frames are likely to contain strongly correlated information. One way to reduce the
computational cost is to limit the temporal attention to compare only pairs of patches in different frames but at the same
spatial location [2, 5]. The complexity becomes O(S 2 T ).
However, this form of attention forces the model to perform
temporal reasoning by looking through 1-dimensional “time
tubes” of individual patches. Unfortunately, due to camera
and object motion, the scene region projected onto a particular patch in frame t may be completely unrelated to the
scene information captured in the same patch at a different time t′ . For example, the object appearing in the patch
at time t may have moved outside that patch in frame t′ ,
thus rendering the recovery of motion information impossible and making the comparison between the two patches

14053

