Convolutions for Spatial Interaction Modeling
Zhaoen Su, Chao Wang, David Bradley, Carlos Vallespi-Gonzalez
Carl Wellington, Nemanja Djuric
{suzhaoen, chao.wang, dbradley, cvallespi, cwellington, ndjuric}@aurora.tech

Abstract
In many different fields interactions between objects play
a critical role in determining their behavior. Graph neural
networks (GNNs) have emerged as a powerful tool for modeling interactions, although often at the cost of adding considerable complexity and latency. In this paper, we consider
the problem of spatial interaction modeling in the context
of predicting the motion of actors around autonomous vehicles, and investigate alternatives to GNNs. We revisit 2D
convolutions and show that they can demonstrate comparable performance to graph networks in modeling spatial
interactions with lower latency, thus providing an effective
and efficient alternative in time-critical systems. Moreover,
we propose a novel interaction loss to further improve the
interaction modeling of the considered methods.

1. INTRODUCTION
Interactions or relations between objects are critical for
understanding both the individual behaviors and collective
properties of many systems. Conceptually, these interactions can be modeled with graph structures that comprise
a set of objects (nodes) and their relationships (edges).
By applying deep learning techniques, graph neural networks (GNNs) have demonstrated great expressive power
in modeling interactions in various fields, including physical science [3,12,30,33], social science [17,23], knowledge
graphs [16], and other research areas [20, 26, 28, 37].
Some of the interactions strongly depend on geometries,
such as the Euclidean distance and relative directions between objects, which in this work is referred to as spatial
interactions. One problem where spatial interaction is critical is motion forecasting, a key task in the fields of computer
vision, robotics in general and autonomous driving (AD) in
particular. Specifically, anticipating the future movements
of an object requires understanding not only its history, but
also the object’s interactions with other objects and its environment. These interactions strongly depend on relative
spatial features between objects, such as their relative locations, orientations, and velocities.

Graphs have achieved success in modeling spatial interaction [22,31,32,34]. Features of individual objects are typically encoded into attributes of graph nodes, and the graph
edges are built by passing node attributes and the relative
geometries of the node pair through a mapping function.
GNNs follow a message passing scheme, where each node
aggregates features of its neighboring nodes to compute its
new node attributes. These approaches have two characteristics, as seen in the experimental section: (1) the relative
spatial features are not represented implicitly in the graph
and need to be handcrafted into the graph edge features; (2)
even a single iteration of GNN may be slower than convolutional neural networks (CNNs), which makes GNNs less
suitable for applications in fields such as AD where fast inference is safety-critical.
Alternatively, data structures for 2D or 3D convolutional
operations are presented in common grid forms, such as
through voxelization in 3D, rasterization in 2D bird’s-eye
view (BEV), or as intermediate CNN features. Importantly,
spatial relations are intrinsically represented in these Euclidean space. Thus, they theoretically allow spatial relations between objects to be learned by CNNs with sufficiently large receptive fields [11]. In other words, CNNs
have the potential to model spatial interactions. However,
even though deep CNN backbones with large receptive
fields are widely utilized in trajectory forecasting models,
research has shown that adding a GNN after a CNN backbone can still improve interaction modeling [4,31,32]. This
suggests the CNN backbones often do not fulfill their theoretical potential in modeling spatial interactions between
the traffic actors.
In this work, we consider spatial interaction modeling through 2D convolutions and compare them to GNNs
within the context of motion forecasting for AD. A key determinant of future motion for other drivers is the avoidance of collisions, which represents a critical interaction
that we model explicitly. Collisions can be approximated as
geometric overlapping, which provides unambiguous definitions for interaction metrics. We evaluate the methods on
large-scale real-world AD data to draw general conclusions.
Our contributions are summarized below:

6583

