DeeCap: Dynamic Early Exiting for Efficient Image Captioning
Zhengcong Fei 1,2 ,* Xu Yan 1,2 , Shuhui Wang 1,3†, Qi Tian 4
1
Key Lab of Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China 4 Huawei Cloud & AI, China
{feizhengcong, yanxu19s, wangshuhui}@ict.ac.cn, tian.qi1@huawei.com

Abstract
Both accuracy and efficiency are crucial for image captioning in real-world scenarios. Although Transformerbased models have gained significant improved captioning
performance, their computational cost is very high. A feasible way to reduce the time complexity is to exit the prediction early in internal decoding layers without passing the
entire model. However, it is not straightforward to devise
early exiting into image captioning due to the following issues. On one hand, the representation in shallow layers
lacks high-level semantic and sufficient cross-modal fusion
information for accurate prediction. On the other hand,
the exiting decisions made by internal classifiers are unreliable sometimes. To solve these issues, we propose DeeCap
framework for efficient image captioning, which dynamically selects proper-sized decoding layers from a global
perspective to exit early. The key to successful early exiting
lies in the specially designed imitation learning mechanism,
which predicts the deep layer activation with shallow layer
features. By deliberately merging the imitation learning
into the whole image captioning architecture, the imitated
deep layer representation can mitigate the loss brought by
the missing of actual deep layers when early exiting is undertaken, resulting in significant reduction in calculation
cost with small sacrifice of accuracy. Experiments on the
MS COCO and Flickr30k datasets demonstrate the DeeCap
can achieve competitive performances with 4× speed-up.
Code is available at: https://github.com/feizc/DeeCap.

1. Introduction
Image captioning aims to generate a textual description
for a given image. It requires not only to identify what visual objects the image contains but also to explain their relationship [4]. Recently, encoder-decoder framework has
* Intern at Meituan.
† The corresponding author.

A little girl is
getting ready to
blow out a candle on
a small dessert

Encoder Layer 1

Encoder Layer 2

Decoder Layer N

...

...

Decoder Layer 2

Encoder Layer N

Decoder Layer 1

Visual Encoder

Caption Decoder

Figure 1. Conceptual workflow of early exiting in image captioning system, which adjusts the number of passed decoder layers,
allowing for reduction of computational costs yet facing a performance bottleneck. Yellow circles are internal classification, and
red arrows denote tokens exiting early at different decoder layers.

achieved great progress [2, 6, 8, 14, 22, 50, 55, 56, 60, 61],
which generates sentence through modeling the next word
conditioned on both the image and generated sub-sentence.
Moreover, Transformer architecture [48] is introduced to
implicitly relate semantic information through dot-product
attention and achieves state-of-the-art performances [10,28,
33,36,37,62]. Although these models achieve more promising results, the low inference speed hinders their application
to many real-time applications [20].
A growing number of studies emerged recently focusing on improving its efficiency. Inspired by the parallelism of Transformer [19], one straight forward strategy
is the non-autoregressive decoding [12, 58], which predicts the entire sentence in one shot. Numerous works
follow this line, e.g., iterative refinement [13, 16, 23], la-

12216

