Detecting Deepfakes with Self-Blended Images
Kaede Shiohara Toshihiko Yamasaki
The University of Tokyo
{shiohara, yamasaki}@cvm.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
Collection

In this paper, we present novel synthetic training data
called self-blended images (SBIs) to detect deepfakes. SBIs
are generated by blending pseudo source and target images
from single pristine images, reproducing common forgery
artifacts (e.g., blending boundaries and statistical inconsistencies between source and target images). The key idea
behind SBIs is that more general and hardly recognizable
fake samples encourage classifiers to learn generic and
robust representations without overfitting to manipulationspecific artifacts. We compare our approach with state-ofthe-art methods on FF++, CDF, DFD, DFDC, DFDCP,
and FFIW datasets by following the standard cross-dataset
and cross-manipulation protocols. Extensive experiments
show that our method improves the model generalization
to unknown manipulations and scenes. In particular, on
DFDC and DFDCP where existing methods suffer from
the domain gap between the training and test sets, our
approach outperforms the baseline by 4.90% and 11.78%
points in the cross-dataset evaluation, respectively. Code
is available at https://github.com/mapooon/
SelfBlendedImages.

1. Introduction
The recent rapid advancement of generative adversarial
networks [10, 25, 31, 32, 45, 51, 63] (GAN) in computer vision has made it possible to generate realistic facial images. In particular, techniques called deepfake manipulating the identity, expression, or attributes of a subject are
used for entertainment purposes, e.g., smartphone applications or movies; however, they can also be used for malicious purposes, e.g., to create fake news or to falsify evidence. Therefore, the vision community is keenly working
on deepfake detection techniques.
Most previous detection methods [8,16,26,30,36,48,53,
64] perform well on the in-dataset scenario where they detect forgeries they learned in training; however, some studies [15,21,33,61] have found that the detection performance
significantly drops in the cross-dataset scenario where fake

Previous methods blending different faces
Landmark
matching
Source image

Blended image

Base image

Target image

Our method blending a same face

Transformation
Source image

Base image

Self-blended image

Transformation
Target image

Figure 1. Overview of fake sample synthesis. Previous methods
blend two distinct faces and generate artifacts based on a gap between selected source and target images. By contrast, our method
blends slightly changed faces from a single image and generate
artifacts actively by transformations. In this example, we apply a
color jitter, sharpening, resize, and translation to the source image
and no transformations to the target image.

samples are forged by unknown manipulations.
One of the most effective solutions to this problem is to
train models with synthetic data, which encourages models to learn generic representations for deepfake detection.
For example, facial regions are blurred to reproduce a quality degradation of GAN-synthesized source images [41],
blended images are generated from pairs of two pristine images to reproduce blending artifacts [39, 65]. However, the
quality of deepfakes has improved over the years, which
has caused the former method to fail on recent benchmarks [42, 52]. Although the latter methods perform well
on some datasets [2, 42], low-quality videos in more challenging datasets [19, 20] where artifacts are hardly recog-

18720

