Leveraging Equivariant Features for Absolute Pose Regression
Mohamed Adel Musallam

Vincent Gaudillière

Miguel Ortiz del Castillo

mohamed.ali@uni.lu

vincent.gaudilliere@uni.lu

miguel.ortizdelcastillo@uni.lu

Kassem Al Ismaeil

Djamila Aouada

kassem.alismaeil@gmail.com

djamila.aouada@uni.lu

Interdisciplinary Center for Security, Reliability and Trust (SnT)
University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg

Abstract
While end-to-end approaches have achieved state-ofthe-art performance in many perception tasks, they are not
yet able to compete with 3D geometry-based methods in
pose estimation. Moreover, absolute pose regression has
been shown to be more related to image retrieval. As a
result, we hypothesize that the statistical features learned
by classical Convolutional Neural Networks do not carry
enough geometric information to reliably solve this inherently geometric task. In this paper, we demonstrate how a
translation and rotation equivariant Convolutional Neural
Network directly induces representations of camera motions
into the feature space. We then show that this geometric
property allows for implicitly augmenting the training data
under a whole group of image plane-preserving transformations. Therefore, we argue that directly learning equivariant features is preferable than learning data-intensive
intermediate representations. Comprehensive experimental
validation demonstrates that our lightweight model outperforms existing ones on standard datasets.1

1. Introduction
In computer vision, camera pose estimation, and its reference frame inverse, i.e., object pose estimation, have been
extensively studied over the last decades [38, 42, 54].
Traditionally, pose estimation has been addressed using
3D geometry. In practice, a set of 2D-3D feature correspondences is generated, then statistically leveraged to recover
the camera pose [18, 39, 49, 64]. More recently, direct Absolute Pose Regression (APR) approaches have been introduced, drawing upon early successes of deep learning [1].
1 This work was funded by the Luxembourg National Research Fund
(FNR), under the project reference BRIDGES2020/IS/14755859/MEETA/Aouada, and by LMO (https://www.lmo.space).

Figure 1. Illustration of our approach - Our method adopts a
translation and rotation-equivariant convolutional neural network
to extract geometry-aware features that directly encode camera
planar motions R, t. While camera moves, equivariance of the
(I)
proposed feature extractor F leads to explicit image (ϕR,t ) and
(F)

feature (ϕR,t ) changes. This property is leveraged to propose a
more efficient solution to the absolute pose regression problem.

These methods consist in directly mapping an image to its
pose using a suitably trained Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN). Therefore, end-to-end trainable methods have the
advantage of providing fully differentiable results, enabling
the optimization of all parameters in a comprehensive manner. Moreover, predictions are achieved at a steady speed
and power consumption, whereas RANdom SAmple Consensus (RANSAC)-based methods [18] are less predictable

6876

