Learning with Twin Noisy Labels for Visible-Infrared Person Re-Identification
Mouxing Yang1 , Zhenyu Huang1 , Peng Hu1 , Taihao Li2 , Jiancheng Lv1 , Xi Peng1 *
1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University.
2
Zhejiang Lab, China.
{yangmouxing, zyhuang.gm, penghu.ml, pengx.gm}@gmail.com;
lith@zhejianglab.com; lvjiancheng@scu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we study an untouched problem in visibleinfrared person re-identification (VI-ReID), namely, Twin
Noise Labels (TNL) which refers to as noisy annotation and
correspondence. In brief, on the one hand, it is inevitable
to annotate some persons with the wrong identity due to the
complexity in data collection and annotation, e.g., the poor
recognizability in the infrared modality. On the other hand,
the wrongly annotated data in a single modality will eventually contaminate the cross-modal correspondence, thus
leading to noisy correspondence. To solve the TNL problem, we propose a novel method for robust VI-ReID, termed
DuAlly Robust Training (DART). In brief, DART first computes the clean confidence of annotations by resorting to
the memorization effect of deep neural networks. Then, the
proposed method rectifies the noisy correspondence with the
estimated confidence and further divides the data into four
groups for further utilizations. Finally, DART employs a
novel dually robust loss consisting of a soft identification
loss and an adaptive quadruplet loss to achieve robustness
on the noisy annotation and noisy correspondence. Extensive experiments on SYSU-MM01 and RegDB datasets verify the effectiveness of our method against the twin noisy
labels compared with five state-of-the-art methods. The
code could be accessed from https://github.com/
XLearning-SCU/2022-CVPR-DART.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) aims to match a specified
person from the gallery set. However, most existing person Re-ID methods [3, 4, 28, 32–34] only focus on searching RGB images captured by visible cameras, which might
fail to achieve encouraging results under poor illumination
environments (e.g., at night). To solve this problem, some
visible-infrared person re-identification (VI-ReID) meth* Corresponding author

V11

1

V1

1

V2

2

V1

2

V2

R11: TP

V11

R21: TN

V11

R11

R 12
Visible Modality

2

R1

2

R2

R12 : FP

Infrared Modality

(a) Noisy Annotations

R11: TP

R22: FN

V11

R21: TN

R12 : FP

Pull

R22: FN
Push

(b) Noisy Correspondence

Figure 1. The twin noisy labels in VI-ReID. In the figure, Vji /Rji
denotes sample i with the annotated identity j from the visual/infrared modality, and the color indicates the latent correct
identity. (a) Noisy annotations: due to the poor recognizability in
the infrared modality, samples 2 of identity 1 and 2 will be mixed
up thus being wrongly annotated with identity 2 and 1, respectively, i.e., R12 and R22 are noisy annotations. (b) Noisy correspondence: as the cross-modal pairs are constructed resorting to the annotations, both the positive and negative pairs might be false due
to noisy annotations, leading to the mismatching phenomenons.
With such noisy correspondences, the false-positive and -negative
would be wrongly pulled and pushed during training, respectively.

ods [17, 18, 23, 26, 29] have been proposed to find the corresponding identities across two modalities. More specifically, these methods usually leverage the identity annotations to establish the cross-modal correspondence so that
the identity-aware discrimination is enlarged and the crossmodal discrepancy is eliminated.
Although VI-ReID has achieved promising performance,
its success heavily relies on high-quality annotated data.
In practice, however, it is daunting and even impossible
to precisely annotate all samples due to the poor recognizability, especially the color information is lost in the
infrared modality as shown in Fig. 1(a). As a result, it
is inevitable to result in noisy annotations (NA) problem,
thus degrading the performance of ReID models. Although
some studies [30, 31] have devoted to mitigating the perfor-

14308

