Which images to label for few-shot medical landmark detection?
Quan Quan1 Qingsong Yao1 Jun Li1 S.Kevin Zhou2,1
1
Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy
of Sciences (CAS), Institute of Computing Technology
2
University of Science and Technology of China

Abstract

1. Introduction
It is widely known that the success of deep learning relies on data availability. Learning from datasets of a larger
quantity and higher quality likely brings a higher performance and better generalization for neural networks. Yet,
the labeling of datasets needs well-trained, highly-engaged
radiologists for medical image analysis tasks [48,49], which
is especially challenging as physicians are costly and busy.
To alleviate this problem, many researchers [3,17,19,34]
utilize labeled data together with unlabeled data in a semisupervised style to boost performance. A classic method
is mean teacher [17, 34], which aggregates multiple predictions of unlabeled data by a teacher model pre-trained from

0.12
0.10

Quantity (%)

The success of deep learning methods relies on the availability of well-labeled large-scale datasets. However, for
medical images, annotating such abundant training data often requires experienced radiologists and consumes their
limited time. Few-shot learning is developed to alleviate
this burden, which achieves competitive performances with
only several labeled data. However, a crucial yet previously overlooked problem in few-shot learning is about the
selection of template images for annotation before learning, which affects the final performance. We herein propose
a novel Sample Choosing Policy (SCP) to select “the most
worthy” images for annotation, in the context of few-shot
medical landmark detection. SCP consists of three parts:
1) Self-supervised training for building a pre-trained deep
model to extract features from radiological images, 2) Key
Point Proposal for localizing informative patches, and 3)
Representative Score Estimation for searching the most representative samples or templates. The advantage of SCP
is demonstrated by various experiments on three widelyused public datasets. For one-shot medical landmark detection, its use reduces the mean radial errors on Cephalometric and HandXray datasets by 14.2% (from 3.595mm to
3.083mm) and 35.5% (4.114mm to 2.653mm), respectively.

0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.1 4.2 4.3 4.4

Mean Radial Error (MRE)

Figure 1. The distribution of the mean radial error (MRE) when
choosing a different image as a template in one-shot medical landmark detection task. The x-axis refers to MRE and the y-axis
refers to the percentage of MRE lying in the corresponding ranges.
Evidently, the choice of template affects the performance significantly.

labeled data. The aggregated results work as more reliable
pseudo labels for unlabeled data in rest part of the method.
Another group of researchers, aiming to achieve a high performance at a low labeling cost, propose a strategy to select instances for annotation incrementally [15, 31, 35, 45].
The basic idea is to first train a model with few labeled
data, and then use the model to select instances from unlabeled data iteratively, which are annotated by specialists for the next round of training. Meanwhile, some researchers attempt to drain all potential of limited labeled
data. With the power of self-training and self-supervised
learning [1,4,24,39,43,47,51], it is possible to develop a robust, few-shot model even with several labeled samples. For
example, Yao et al. [42] introduce a self-supervised proxy
task that matches multi-layers features from images with
different augmentations in the training stage, and use a single image as the template, whose patches centered at landmarks are matched with target images to make predictions.
However, during our research following the work of
[42], we observe an interesting phenomenon (see Figure 1).
The template choice highly impacts the final performance.

20606

