Graph-based Spatial Transformer with Memory Replay for Multi-future
Pedestrian Trajectory Prediction
Lihuan Li1 Maurice Pagnucco1 Yang Song1
1
University of New South Wales, Australia
lihuanli80@gmail.com

{morri,yang.song1}@unsw.edu.au

Abstract
Pedestrian trajectory prediction is an essential and challenging task for a variety of real-life applications such as
autonomous driving and robotic motion planning. Besides
generating a single future path, predicting multiple plausible future paths is becoming popular in some recent work
on trajectory prediction. However, existing methods typically emphasize spatial interactions between pedestrians
and surrounding areas but ignore the smoothness and temporal consistency of predictions. Our model aims to forecast multiple paths based on a historical trajectory by modeling multi-scale graph-based spatial transformers combined with a trajectory smoothing algorithm named “Memory Replay” utilizing a memory graph. Our method can
comprehensively exploit the spatial information as well as
correct the temporally inconsistent trajectories (e.g., sharp
turns). We also propose a new evaluation metric named
“Percentage of Trajectory Usage” to evaluate the comprehensiveness of diverse multi-future predictions. Our extensive experiments show that the proposed model achieves
state-of-the-art performance on multi-future prediction and
competitive results for single-future prediction. Code released at https://github.com/Jacobieee/ST-MR.

1. Introduction
Trajectory prediction is an indispensable part of social
behavior analysis for a variety of applications including
autonomous driving [5, 49], motion tracking [28, 34] and
robotic systems [33]. Such tasks require a high-level understanding of videos and human social behaviors to precisely
forecast the future locations of pedestrians based on the observed trajectories and scenes.
Trajectory prediction requires simultaneous processing
of spatial and temporal information. While walking paths
naturally exhibit a temporal consistency, it is also important to model spatial interactions among pedestrians such
as talking, grouping and avoiding collisions. Other objects

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Illustration of multi-future trajectory prediction and existing issues. The yellow and green lines are the observed and
ground truth trajectories. (a) Multiple future trajectories (red arrows) influenced by different intentions and destinations. (b) Multiple options of paths (orange arrows) heading to the same destination. (c) An imperfect prediction (with heatmap) in Multiverse [24] that goes through a vehicle. (d) An imperfect prediction
(with heatmap in the red circle) in Multiverse [24] that violates
temporal consistency.

in a scene also affect the future paths, as pedestrians tend
to avoid obstacles (e.g., street lamps, trees, vehicles) or unnecessary change of paths (e.g., walk from the pavement to
the middle of the road). However, reactions to spatial interactions may also undermine the original intentions based
on temporal information. Even if both of them are properly
processed, it is still a conundrum to predict spatially reasonable trajectories while conforming to temporal consistency.
Real-world datasets [2, 19, 30] have enabled the research
on trajectory prediction and current approaches [11, 25]
have made great progress on single-future trajectory prediction, where the predicted trajectories are evaluated against
the ground truth trajectories recorded in the videos. However, the human mind is capricious and realistic situations
are complicated. Given an observed trajectory, there can be
multiple different destinations and multiple plausible future
trajectories. Fig. 1(a) demonstrates that multiple intentions

2231

