Towards End-to-End Unified Scene Text Detection and Layout Analysis
Shangbang Long, Siyang Qin, Dmitry Panteleev, Alessandro Bissacco, Yasuhisa Fujii, Michalis Raptis
Google Research
{longshangbang,qinb,dpantele,bissacco,yasuhisaf,mraptis}@google.com

Abstract
Scene text detection and document layout analysis have
long been treated as two separate tasks in different image domains. In this paper, we bring them together and
introduce the task of unified scene text detection and layout analysis. The first hierarchical scene text dataset is
introduced to enable this novel research task. We also
propose a novel method that is able to simultaneously detect scene text and form text clusters in a unified way.
Comprehensive experiments show that our unified model
achieves better performance than multiple well-designed
baseline methods. Additionally, this model achieves stateof-the-art results on multiple scene text detection datasets
without the need of complex post-processing. Dataset and
code: https://github.com/google-researchdatasets/hiertext.

1. Introduction
The ability to read and understand text in natural scenes
and digital documents plays an important role in anthropocentric applications of computer vision. While state-ofthe-art text detection systems such as [44,61] excel at localizing individual text entities, visual text understanding [2]
requires comprehension of the semantic and geometric layout [5, 7] of the textual content. In the current literature,
most works focus on the individual tasks of text entities
detection [3, 18, 61] and layout analysis [26, 58] in a separate way, devoting all the power of deep learning models
to task-specific performance. We argue that joint treatment
of these two closely related problems can result not only in
simpler and more efficient models, but also models that are
more accurate across all tasks. Additionally, an all-in-one,
unified text and layout detection architecture can become
indispensable for text reasoning tasks such as text-based
VQA [4, 47] and image captioning [57].
The division between text detection and geometric layout
analysis tasks has led to parallel and separate research directions. Text detectors [14, 18, 40, 61] usually treat word-level
annotations, i.e. sequence of characters not interrupted by

Figure 1. Top: We introduce the task of unified text detection and
layout analysis, and collect a dataset called HierText with hierarchical annotations. Blue boxes are word level bounding boxes.
Yellow boundaries mark the ground-truth clustering of text. Linelevel annotations and transcriptions are not visualized to avoid
overcrowding. Bottom: We propose an end-to-end model called
Unified Detector which can simultaneously detect text as masks
and further group them into clusters. The model produces masks
for text detection and an affinity matrix to cluster text lines, both
in an end-to-end fashion without complex post-processing. We
visualize the layout analysis results by coloring text line masks
according to their clusters.

space, as the only supervision signal. Conversely, geometric
layout analysis algorithms [2, 26, 54, 58, 62] focus on digital
documents and either assume word-level text information
as given [2, 54, 58] or directly predict geometric structures
without reasoning for their atomic elements [62]. We ask:
Can there be a reconciliation of text entity detection and
geometric layout analysis? Can geometric layout analysis
target both natural scenes and digital documents? These
questions are important given their relevance in real-world

1049

