BodyGAN: General-purpose Controllable Neural Human Body Generation
Chaojie Yang1,∗, Hanhui Li2,∗, Shengjie Wu1 , Shengkai Zhang1 , Haonan Yan1 ,
Nianhong Jiao1 , Jie Tang1 , Runnan Zhou1 , Xiaodan Liang2,†, Tianxiang Zheng1,†
1
Beijing Momo Technology Co., Ltd. 2 Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
{1360546528,1421901449}@qq.com, {wu.shengjie24,double4tar,xdliang328,zhengtianxiang1128}@gmail.com,
lihanhui@mail3.sysu.edu.cn, songkey@pku.edu.cn, jnhrhythm@tju.edu.cn,chinatszrn@163.com

Abstract
Recent advances in generative adversarial networks
(GANs) have provided potential solutions for photorealistic human image synthesis. However, the explicit and
individual control of synthesis over multiple factors, such as
poses, body shapes, and skin colors, remains difﬁcult for existing methods. This is because current methods mainly rely
on a single pose/appearance model, which is limited in disentangling various poses and appearance in human images.
In addition, such a unimodal strategy is prone to causing
severe artifacts in the generated images like color distortions and unrealistic textures. To tackle these issues, this
paper proposes a multi-factor conditioned method dubbed
BodyGAN. Speciﬁcally, given a source image, our BodyGAN aims at capturing the characteristics of the human
body from multiple aspects: (i) A pose encoding branch
consisting of three hybrid subnetworks is adopted, to generate the semantic segmentation based representation, the 3D
surface based representation, and the key point based representation of the human body, respectively. (ii) Based on
the segmentation results, an appearance encoding branch
is used to obtain the appearance information of the human
body parts. (iii) The outputs of these two branches are represented by user-editable condition maps, which are then
processed by a generator to predict the synthesized image.
In this way, our BodyGAN can achieve the ﬁne-grained disentanglement of pose, body shape, and appearance, and
consequently enable the explicit and effective control of synthesis with diverse conditions. Extensive experiments on
multiple datasets and a comprehensive user study show that
our BodyGAN achieves the state-of-the-art performance.









Figure 1. We propose BodyGAN, i.e., a general approach for synthesizing photo-realistic human body with explicit control over
multiple factors: (a) Body pose and shape. (b) Skin colors. (c)
Hidden face and cartoon. (d) Marble and bronze sculptures. The
source pictures are shown in the top right corners.

and illumination distributions. As there are a large number
of application scenarios that rely on the high-quality and
controllable human image generation, such as virtual try-on
and virtual reality, extensive research has been conducted to
tackle this problem. For instance, in recent research on virtual try-on [33, 47], both mask based methods [35, 37] and
mask-free methods [25, 42] have been explored to generate
images of the human body with target clothes. However,
these methods consider the human body and clothes together as the whole target, and adopt the end-to-end generation
manner, which leads to poor results and artifacts on human
body parts, such as unnatural texture patterns, loss of details and color distortions. Meanwhile, a few skin completion
methods [23,43] target at the generation of face skin. There
are also algorithms [5, 18, 28, 30] generating faces based on
contour sketches. Nevertheless, considering that the human

1. Introduction
Realistic human body image generation is a challenging problem, due to the complex textures, diverse poses
∗ : These authors contribute equally.
† : Corresponding authors.

7733

