EvUnroll: Neuromorphic Events based Rolling Shutter Image Correction
Xinyu Zhou1#
1

Peiqi Duan1#

Yi Ma1

Boxin Shi1,2,3

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2

Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Peking University

3

Beijing Academy of Artiﬁcial Intelligence

RS correction

Input RS frame

Input event frame

Ground truth

DSUN [26]

JCD [54]

Ours

RS + event
hybrid image system

time

Figure 1: Left (illustration): We build a hybrid imaging system consisting of a rolling shutter (RS) sensor and an event sensor.
The event sensor encodes motion and intensity change information, which are well explored by the proposed EvUnroll
network to correct the edge distortion (e.g., rotating blades) and restore the intra-frame region occlusion (e.g., occluded logo)
in RS images. Right (example result): RS correction results comparison among DSUN [26], JCD [54], and our method.

Abstract
This paper proposes to use neuromorphic events for correcting rolling shutter (RS) images as consecutive global
shutter (GS) frames. RS effect introduces edge distortion
and region occlusion into images caused by row-wise readout of CMOS sensors. We introduce a novel computational imaging setup consisting of an RS sensor and an
event sensor, and propose a neural network called EvUnroll to solve this problem by exploring the high-temporalresolution property of events. We use events to bridge
a spatio-temporal connection between RS and GS, establish a ﬂow estimation module to correct edge distortions,
and design a synthesis-based restoration module to restore
occluded regions. The results of two branches are fused
through a reﬁning module to generate corrected GS images.
We further propose datasets captured by a high-speed camera and an RS-Event hybrid camera system for training and
testing our network. Experimental results on both public
and proposed datasets show a systematic performance improvement compared to state-of-the-art methods.
# Contributed equally to this work as ﬁrst authors

Corresponding author: shiboxin@pku.edu.cn
Project page: https://github.com/zxyemo/EvUnroll

1. Introduction
CMOS imaging sensors are the mainstream choice for
mobile phones and machine vision cameras due to low
power consumption and cost [15]. However, commonly
row-by-row readout scheme of CMOS sensors will always
cause the rolling shutter (RS) effect (also known as the jelly
effect) for captured images in scenes with camera or local
object motion. Compared with the global shutter (GS) sensor that synchronizes the exposure period of each pixel, RS
effects limit the applicability of CMOS sensors in consumer
or industrial applications due to edge distortion and region
occlusion [14, 22, 24, 54]. As such, the RS correction is a
way to make up for such deﬁciencies.
A well-known challenge for RS correction is to estimate
the transformation between RS and GS images [22, 26, 54].
Unlike many image restoration tasks (such as video frame
interpolation [16, 32, 36] and image deblurring [17, 23])
which assume that the edge structures of local areas remain
unchanged, RS correction needs to deal with the edge distortion. To address this problem, geometric model based
methods [2, 12, 12, 29, 39] simplify the RS to GS (RS2GS)
transformation via different assumptions, such as the scene
is static [29, 30] and straight lines keep straight [43], and
employ homography mixture or camera pose estimation to

17775

