RegNeRF: Regularizing Neural Radiance Fields
for View Synthesis from Sparse Inputs
Michael Niemeyer1,2,3 * Jonathan T. Barron3 Ben Mildenhall3
Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi3 Andreas Geiger1,2 Noha Radwan3
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen 2 University of Tübingen
3
Google Research
{firstname.lastname}@tue.mpg.de

{barron, bmild, msajjadi, noharadwan}@google.com

https://m-niemeyer.github.io/regnerf

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) have emerged as a powerful representation for the task of novel view synthesis
due to their simplicity and state-of-the-art performance.
Though NeRF can produce photorealistic renderings of unseen viewpoints when many input views are available, its
performance drops significantly when this number is reduced. We observe that the majority of artifacts in sparse
input scenarios are caused by errors in the estimated scene
geometry, and by divergent behavior at the start of training.
We address this by regularizing the geometry and appearance of patches rendered from unobserved viewpoints, and
annealing the ray sampling space during training. We additionally use a normalizing flow model to regularize the
color of unobserved viewpoints. Our model outperforms
not only other methods that optimize over a single scene,
but in many cases also conditional models that are extensively pre-trained on large multi-view datasets.

1. Introduction
Coordinate-based neural representations [7, 34, 35, 44]
have gained increasing popularity in the field of 3D vision. In particular, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [37]
have emerged as a powerful representation for the task of
novel view synthesis, where the goal is to render unseen
viewpoints of a scene from a given set of input images.
Though NeRF achieves state-of-the-art performance, it
requires dense coverage of the scene. However, in realworld applications such as AR/VR, autonomous driving,
and robotics, the input is typically much sparser, with only
few views of any particular object or region available per
* The work was primarily done during an internship at Google.

(a) Sparse Set of 3 Input Images

(b) Novel Views Synthesized by mip-NeRF [2]

(c) Same Novel Views Synthesized by Our Method

Figure 1. View Synthesis from Sparse Inputs. While Neural
Radiance Fields (NeRF) allow for state-of-the-art view synthesis if many input images are provided, results degrade when only
few views are available (1b). In contrast, even with sparse inputs
our novel regularization and optimization strategy leads to 3Dconsistent representations that render realistic novel views (1c).

scene. In this sparse setting, the quality of NeRF’s rendered
novel views drops significantly (see Fig. 1).
Several works have proposed conditional models to overcome these limitations [6, 8, 30, 56, 58, 62]. These models
require expensive pre-training, i.e. training the model on
large-scale datasets of many scenes with multi-view images
and camera pose annotations, as opposed to test-time optimization which is done from scratch for a given test scene.
At test time, novel views can be generated from only a few
input images through amortized inference, optionally combined with per scene test time fine-tuning. Though these
models achieve promising results, obtaining the necessary

5480

