Multi-marginal Contrastive Learning for Multi-label Subcellular Protein
Localization
Ziyi Liu, Zengmao Wang*, Bo Du*
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering, Wuhan, China
{ziyiliu, wangzengmao, dubo}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Protein subcellular localization(PSL) is an important
task to study human cell functions and cancer pathogenesis. It has attracted great attention in the computer vision
community. However, the huge size of immune histochemical (IHC) images, the disorganized location distribution in
different tissue images and the limited training images are
always the challenges for the PSL to learn a strong generalization model with deep learning. In this paper, we propose a deep protein subcellular localization method with
multi-marginal contrastive learning to perceive the same
PSLs in different tissue images and different PSLs within
the same tissue image. In the proposed method, we learn
the representation of an IHC image by fusing the global features from the downsampled images and local features from
the selected patches with the activation map to tackle the
oversize of an IHC image. Then a multi-marginal attention
mechanism is proposed to generate contrastive pairs with
different margins and improve the discriminative features
of PSL patterns effectively. Finally, the ensemble prediction
of each IHC image is obtained with different patches. The
results on the benchmark datasets show that the proposed
method achieves signiﬁcant improvements for the PSL task.

1. Introduction
The protein subcellular localization(PSL) is essential to
interpret and identify the functions of the proteins for revealing the pathology, which can provide valuable information in the target identiﬁcation process for drug discovery [33, 42]. Analyzing the spatial distributions of human
proteins at the subcellular level can help us understand human biology and diseases [14, 27, 32]. For example, the
proteins localizing at mitochondria are likely to have the
* Corresponding author.

20626

Liver

Kidney

Membranous Nuclear

Cytoplasmic

Figure 1. IHC images from liver and kidney show that general
structures from two tissues are quite different. The same proteins
are displayed on both images using chemical dyes. The PSL labels
of both images are nuclear membrane and cytoplasmic. Due to
the dyed proteins in cytoplasmic, most of the images are brown.
The below detailed image shows that proteins also exist on nuclear
membranes.

functions of cellular aerobic respiration and energy producing [13]. It also has demonstrated that the abnormalities of
subcellular locations of protein are potentially involved in
the pathogenesis of many human diseases [8, 22]. Moreover, studying the occurrence of the protein mislocalization
under normal and cancer states can help discover and deﬁne
cancer markers [10].
However, methods that rely on human experts to recognize PSLs, such as wet-lab biological approaches, are timeconsuming and expensive. Machine learning is widely used
in subcellular pattern recognition to make annotations efﬁciently. In the past two decades, many studies have focused on PSL in combination with machine learning techniques [21]. According to the data type for PSL, the related
researches can be roughly divided into two categories: a)
models based on the amino acid sequence and b) models

