Task2Sim: Towards Effective Pre-training and Transfer from Synthetic Data
Samarth Mishra†1 Rameswar Panda2 Cheng Perng Phoo†3 Chun-Fu (Richard) Chen∗2
Leonid Karlinsky2 Kate Saenko1,2
Venkatesh Saligrama1
Rogerio S. Feris2
1
2
3
Boston University
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
Cornell University

Abstract
Pre-training models on Imagenet or other massive
datasets of real images has led to major advances in computer vision, albeit accompanied with shortcomings related
to curation cost, privacy, usage rights, and ethical issues.
In this paper, for the first time, we study the transferability
of pre-trained models based on synthetic data generated by
graphics simulators to downstream tasks from very different
domains. In using such synthetic data for pre-training, we
find that downstream performance on different tasks are favored by different configurations of simulation parameters
(e.g. lighting, object pose, backgrounds, etc.), and that there
is no one-size-fits-all solution. It is thus better to tailor synthetic pre-training data to a specific downstream task, for
best performance. We introduce Task2Sim, a unified model
mapping downstream task representations to optimal simulation parameters to generate synthetic pre-training data
for them. Task2Sim learns this mapping by training to find
the set of best parameters on a set of “seen” tasks. Once
trained, it can then be used to predict best simulation parameters for novel “unseen” tasks in one shot, without requiring additional training. Given a budget in number of
images per class, our extensive experiments with 20 diverse downstream tasks show Task2Sim’s task-adaptive pretraining data results in significantly better downstream performance than non-adaptively choosing simulation parameters on both seen and unseen tasks. It is even competitive
with pre-training on real images from Imagenet.

1. Introduction
Using large-scale labeled (like ImageNet [9]) or weaklylabeled (like JFT-300M [5, 18], Instagram-3.5B [34])
datasets collected from the web has been the go-to approach
for pre-training classifiers for downstream tasks with a relative scarcity of labeled data. Prior works have demonstrated
that as we move to bigger datasets for pre-training, down† Work done as interns at MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
∗ Now affiliated with JPMorgan Chase, FLARE. Work done when Chun-

Fu was at MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab.
Project page : https://samarth4149.github.io/projects/task2sim.html

Synthetic Data Pre-training

Downstream Tasks from Various Domains (Real Images)

...
ChestX

Sketch

Flowers

SVHN

EuroSAT

Figure 1. We explore how synthetic data can be effectively used
for training models that can transfer to a wide range of downstream
tasks from various domains. Is a universal pre-trained model for
all downstream tasks, the best approach?

stream accuracy improves on average [34, 56]. However,
large-scale real image datasets bear the additional cost of
curating labels, in addition to other concerns like privacy or
copyright. Furthermore, large datasets like JFT-300M and
Instagram-3.5B are not publicly available posing a bottleneck in reproducibility and fair comparison of algorithms.
Synthetic images generated via graphics engines provide
an alternative quelling a substantial portion of these concerns. With 3D models and scenes, potentially infinite images can be generated by varying various scene or imagecapture parameters. Although synthetic data has been used
for transfer learning in various specialized tasks [2, 48, 55,
59], there has not been prior research dedicated to its transferability to a range of different recognition tasks from different domains (see Figure 1). In conducting this first of its
kind (to the best of our knowledge) study, we first ask the
question : in synthetic pretraining for different downstream

9194

