MSDN: Mutually Semantic Distillation Network for Zero-Shot Learning
Shiming Chen1 , Ziming Hong1 , Guo-Sen Xie2 , Wenhan Yang3 , Qinmu Peng1 , Kai Wang4 ,
∗
Jian Zhao5 , Xinge You1
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), China
2
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China 3 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
4
National University of Singapore, Singapore 5 Institute of North Electronic Equipment, China
{shimingchen, pengqinmu, youxg}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
The key challenge of zero-shot learning (ZSL) is how to
infer the latent semantic knowledge between visual and attribute features on seen classes, and thus achieving a desirable knowledge transfer to unseen classes. Prior works
either simply align the global features of an image with its
associated class semantic vector or utilize unidirectional attention to learn the limited latent semantic representations,
which could not effectively discover the intrinsic semantic
knowledge (e.g., attribute semantics) between visual and attribute features. To solve the above dilemma, we propose
a Mutually Semantic Distillation Network (MSDN), which
progressively distills the intrinsic semantic representations
between visual and attribute features for ZSL. MSDN incorporates an attribute→visual attention sub-net that learns
attribute-based visual features, and a visual→attribute attention sub-net that learns visual-based attribute features.
By further introducing a semantic distillation loss, the two
mutual attention sub-nets are capable of learning collaboratively and teaching each other throughout the training
process. The proposed MSDN yields significant improvements over the strong baselines, leading to new state-ofthe-art performances on three popular challenging benchmarks. Our codes have been available at: https://
github.com/shiming-chen/MSDN .

1. Introduction
Recently, deep learning performs achievements on object recognition [12, 39, 40]. Based on the prior knowledge
of seen classes, humans possess a remarkable ability to recognize new concepts (classes) using shared and distinct attributes of both seen and unseen classes [17]. Inspired by
this cognitive competence, zero-shot learning (ZSL) is proposed under a challenging image classification setting to
∗ Corresponding author

Seen Classes

hoongzm@gmail.com

Attribute
Descriptions

Semantic
Value

wing color gray

0.6

breast color white

0.7

bill color yellow

0.8

leg color red

0.9

tail color white

0.6

Unseen Class

Semantic Knowledge Transfer
Figure 1. Motivation illustration. An unseen sample shares different partial information with a set of seen samples, and this partial
information is represented as the abundant knowledge of semantic attributes (e.g., “bill color yellow”, “leg color red”). The key
challenge of ZSL is how to infer the latent semantic knowledge between visual and attribute features on seen classes, allowing effective knowledge transfer to unseen classes. As such, properly distilling the intrinsic semantic knowledge/representations (e.g., attribute semantics) between visual and attribute features from seen
to unseen classes is very necessary for ZSL.

mimic the human cognitive process [19, 28]. ZSL aims to
tackle the unseen class recognition problem by transferring
semantic knowledge from seen classes to unseen ones. It is
usually based on the assumption that both seen and unseen
classes can be described through the shared semantic descriptions (e.g., attributes) [18]. Based on the classes that a
model sees in the testing phase, ZSL methods can be categorized into conventional ZSL (CZSL) and generalized ZSL
(GZSL) [44], where CZSL aims to predict unseen classes,
while GZSL can predict both seen and unseen ones.
ZSL has achieved significant progress, with many efforts focus on embedding-based methods, generative methods, and common space learning-based methods. As
shown in Fig. 2 (a), embedding-based methods aim to
learn a visual→semantic mapping to map the visual fea-

7612

