Training Quantised Neural Networks with STE Variants:
the Additive Noise Annealing Algorithm
Matteo Spallanzani1 * Gian Paolo Leonardi2
1

Departement Informationstechnologie und Elektrotechnik, ETH Zürich, Switzerland
2

3

Luca Benini1,3

Dipartimento di Matematica, Università di Trento, Italy

Dipartimento di Ingegneria Elettrica e dell’Informazione, Università di Bologna, Italy

Abstract
Training quantised neural networks (QNNs) is a nondifferentiable optimisation problem since weights and features are output by piecewise constant functions. The standard solution is to apply the straight-through estimator
(STE), using different functions during the inference and
gradient computation steps. Several STE variants have
been proposed in the literature aiming to maximise the task
accuracy of the trained network. In this paper, we analyse STE variants and study their impact on QNN training.
We first observe that most such variants can be modelled
as stochastic regularisations of stair functions; although
this intuitive interpretation is not new, our rigorous discussion generalises to further variants. Then, we analyse
QNNs mixing different regularisations, finding that some
suitably synchronised smoothing of each layer map is required to guarantee pointwise compositional convergence
to the target discontinuous function. Based on these theoretical insights, we propose additive noise annealing (ANA),
a new algorithm to train QNNs encompassing standard STE
and its variants as special cases. When testing ANA on the
CIFAR-10 image classification benchmark, we find that the
major impact on task accuracy is not due to the qualitative
shape of the regularisations but to the proper synchronisation of the different STE variants used in a network, in
accordance with the theoretical results.

of DNNs, which need millions or even billions of parameters and operations to deliver their performance.
Research in tiny machine learning (TinyML) has made
considerable steps towards enabling the deployment of
DNNs on resource-constrained devices. A first class of
techniques aims at making DNNs more efficient in terms of
accuracy-per-parameter or accuracy-per-operation [22, 23].
We refer to these techniques as topological optimisations
since they revolve around achieving higher model efficiency
by changing the structure of DNNs. A second class of approaches has instead focussed on deriving models that leverage the properties of the target deployment platform. These
hardware-related optimisations include hardware-friendly
activation functions [18], weight clustering and weight tensor decomposition [7, 13, 28], and QNNs [10].
QNNs use reduced-precision integer operands to meet
the storage requirements and exploit the optimised support for integer arithmetic of embedded and edge platforms.
With respect to their floating-point counterparts, QNNs typically introduce drops in task accuracy [11]. Several strategies have been proposed to counteract this shortcoming,
ranging from changes to the target QNN’s topology [16,30],
through mixing different data representations and precisions inside the same network [17,24], to learning the shape
of the stair functions used [4, 6, 12]. However, understanding how to propagate gradients through the discontinuous
functions that model quantised operands remains a critical
problem in QNN training.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has rapidly advanced during the last
decade over a wide range of domains, from computer vision
to natural language processing [3, 8]. However, making it
pervasive requires deploying deep neural networks (DNNs)
on embedded or edge devices, i.e., on computing systems
with limited storage, memory, and processing capabilities.
These constraints are at odds with the typical requirements
* Corresponding author: spmatteo@ethz.ch

Background & related work The classical derivative of
a piecewise constant function is zero at all continuity points,
while its distributional derivative is a linear combination of
Dirac’s deltas. Therefore, one can not directly apply the
backpropagation algorithm to train a QNN. The standard
solution to this problem is applying the so-called STE to all
the discontinuous functions in the target QNN [2, 9]. Applying STE amounts to using two different functions during
the forward and backward steps of the learning iteration,

470

