More than Words: In-the-Wild Visually-Driven Prosody for Text-to-Speech
Michael Hassid
Google Research

Michelle Tadmor Ramanovich
Google Research

Brendan Shillingford
DeepMind

hassid@google.com

tadmor@google.com

shillingford@deepmind.com

Miaosen Wang
DeepMind

Ye Jia
Google Research

Tal Remez
Google Research

miaosen@deepmind.com

jiaye@google.com

talremez@google.com

Abstract
In this paper we present VDTTS, a Visually-Driven Textto-Speech model. Motivated by dubbing, VDTTS takes advantage of video frames as an additional input alongside
text, and generates speech that matches the video signal.
We demonstrate how this allows VDTTS to, unlike plain TTS
models, generate speech that not only has prosodic variations like natural pauses and pitch, but is also synchronized
to the input video.
Experimentally, we show our model produces wellsynchronized outputs, approaching the video-speech synchronization quality of the ground-truth, on several challenging benchmarks including “in-the-wild” content from
VoxCeleb2. Supplementary demo videos demonstrating
video-speech synchronization, robustness to speaker ID
swapping, and prosody, presented at the project page.1

1. Introduction
Post-sync, or dubbing (in the film industry), is the process of re-recording dialogue by the original actor in a controlled environment after the filming process to improve audio quality. Sometimes, a replacement actor is used instead
of the original actor when a different voice is desired such
as Darth Vader’s character in Star Wars [1].
Work in the area of automatic audio-visual dubbing often approaches the problem of generating content with synchronized video and speech by (1) applying a text-to-speech
(TTS) system to produce audio from text, then (2) modifying the frames so that the face matches the audio [2]. The
second part of this approach is particularly difficult, as it
requires generation of photorealistic video across arbitrary
filming conditions.
1 Project page:
http://google-research.github.io/lingvo-lab/vdtts

Speech
VDTTS
"it's not an
entitlement
it's a demand"
Figure 1. Given a text and video frames of a speaker, VDTTS
generates speech with prosody that matches the video signal.

In contrast, we extend the TTS setting to input not only
text, but also facial video frames, producing speech that
matches the facial movements of the input video. The result is audio that is not only synchronized to the video but
also retains the original prosody, including pauses and pitch
changes that can be inferred from the video signal, providing a key piece in producing high-quality dubbed videos.
In this work, we present VDTTS, a visually-driven TTS
model. Given text and corresponding video frames of a
speaker speaking, our model is trained to generate the corresponding speech (see Fig. 1). As opposed to standard visual speech recognition models, which focus on the mouth
region [3], we provide the full face to avoid potentially
excluding information pertinent to the speaker’s delivery.
This gives the model enough information to generate speech
which not only matches the video but also recovers aspects
of prosody, such as timing and emotion. Despite not being
explicitly trained to generate speech that is synchronized to
the input video, the learned model still does so.
Our model is comprised of four main components. Text
and video encoders process the inputs, followed by a multisource attention mechanism that connects these to a decoder
that produces mel-spectrograms. A vocoder then produces
waveforms from the mel-spectrograms.
We evaluate the performance of our method on GRID [4]

10587

