Learning Part Segmentation through Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
from Synthetic Vehicles
Qing Liu1 *, Adam Kortylewski1 , Zhishuai Zhang1 , Zizhang Li2†
Mengqi Guo3†, Qihao Liu1 , Xiaoding Yuan4†, Jiteng Mu5†, Weichao Qiu1 , Alan Yuille1
1
Johns Hopkins University 2 Zhejiang University
3
Beihang University 4 Tongji University 5 University of California, San Diego

Abstract
Part segmentations provide a rich and detailed part-level
description of objects. However, their annotation requires
an enormous amount of work, which makes it difficult to
apply standard deep learning methods. In this paper, we
propose the idea of learning part segmentation through unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) from synthetic data.
We first introduce UDA-Part, a comprehensive part segmentation dataset for vehicles that can serve as an adequate
benchmark for UDA1 . In UDA-Part, we label parts on 3D
CAD models which enables us to generate a large set of
annotated synthetic images. We also annotate parts on a
number of real images to provide a real test set. Secondly,
to advance the adaptation of part models trained from the
synthetic data to the real images, we introduce a new UDA
algorithm that leverages the object’s spatial structure to
guide the adaptation process. Our experimental results on
two real test datasets confirm the superiority of our approach over existing works, and demonstrate the promise
of learning part segmentation for general objects from synthetic data. We believe our dataset provides a rich testbed
to study UDA for part segmentation and will help to significantly push forward research in this area.

1. Introduction
Part-based object representations are of key importance
for many computer vision tasks such as object recognition [1, 9, 72, 98], pose estimation [13, 32, 93, 96], action
detection [85], and scene understanding [65, 70, 75]. Currently, part-based approaches often represent objects as a
set of sparse keypoints, because these are easy to annotate
in large-scale datasets for training deep neural networks. By
contrast, part segmentations provide a richer and more detailed part-level object description. Instead of recognizing
specific parts sparsely on the object (e.g., keypoint or part
* Corresponding author: qingliu.research@gmail.com
† This work is done during internship at Johns Hopkins University.
1 https://qliu24.github.io/udapart/

Figure 1. An illustration of learning part segmentation through
unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) from synthetic vehicles.
Based on part annotation on 3D CAD models, we propose to use
UDA to learn from large-scale labeled synthetic samples and unlabeled real images, and the goal is to make accurate part segmentation predictions on real test images.

detection), part segmentation gives a complete description
of an object by assigning every pixel belonging to the object
one and only one part label. This is a lot more challenging
task and requires a much greater annotation effort.
Given their recent success, deep learning methods have
dominated the studies of computer vision, including object segmentation [7, 10, 47]. However, these deep models
usually require a large amount of annotated training data
to achieve satisfying performance. Existing part segmentation datasets mostly contain only a small number of images [9, 74], or define only a small number of parts per object category [74, 97], or focus on a single object category,
such as humans [18, 19, 43, 94] and faces [32, 38, 39]. These
limitations inhibit effective training of standard deep segmentation networks and have largely impeded the development of computer vision models that leverage part information. By contrast, 3D CAD models are available for many
different objects, and, once annotated, can be used to generate large-scale part segmentation datasets automatically.
In this work, we propose to solve part segmentation on
general objects by learning from synthetic data (Figure 1)
and address the problem in two steps. In the first step,
we introduce UDA-Part, a comprehensive part segmentation dataset that can serve as an adequate benchmark for

19140

