Self-supervised Learning of Adversarial Example:
Towards Good Generalizations for Deepfake Detection
Liang Chen1
1

Yong Zhang2∗ Yibing Song2 Lingqiao Liu1∗
The University of Adelaide 2 Tencent AI Lab

Jue Wang2

{liangchen527, zhangyong201303, yibingsong.cv, arphid}@gmail.com
lingqiao.liu@adelaide.edu.au

Baseline

Abstract

Baseline w/ adv. aug.

Baseline w/ adv. aug. & ssl.
79.6

Recent studies in deepfake detection have yielded
promising results when the training and testing face forgeries are from the same dataset. However, the problem
remains challenging when one tries to generalize the detector to forgeries created by unseen methods in the training dataset. This work addresses the generalizable deepfake detection from a simple principle: a generalizable
representation should be sensitive to diverse types of forgeries. Following this principle, we propose to enrich the
“diversity” of forgeries by synthesizing augmented forgeries with a pool of forgery configurations and strengthen
the “sensitivity” to the forgeries by enforcing the model
to predict the forgery configurations. To effectively explore the large forgery augmentation space, we further propose to use the adversarial training strategy to dynamically synthesize the most challenging forgeries to the current model. Through extensive experiments, we show that
the proposed strategies are surprisingly effective (see Figure 1), and they could achieve superior performance than
the current state-of-the-art methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/liangchen527/SLADD.

1. Introduction
The realistic image generation brought by the generative
adversarial network (GAN) raises a security issue that human portraits can be easily substituted to provide malicious
bioinformatics [11, 45, 15, 44, 51, 56, 40, 54, 48]. This
forgery becomes a threat to subject identifications which
have been extensively utilized in digital payment, video
surveillance, and social media. To reduce these risks, there
is an emerging investigation on deepfake detectors to identify face forgeries. Formulated as a binary classification
problem, current detectors [26, 3, 2, 32, 39] perform well
∗ Corresponding authors. This work is done when L. Chen is an intern
in Tencent AI Lab.

Average AUC (%)

78.5
75.1

74.8

74.6
72.6

69.8

70.3
68.4
66.1

65.1

63.8

FF-DF

FF-F2F

FF-FS

Training data

FF-NT

Figure 1. Performance improvements of the proposed strategies for
the baseline model (i.e. Xception [41]). The models are trained on
the four types of data from Faceforensics++ dataset [41] and tested
on CelebDF [28], DFDC [12], and DF1.0 [20] datasets.

when training and testing forgeries are synthesized from the
same dataset and same forgery methods. However, in practice the testing forgeries are usually from unseen datasets
and synthesized by unseen methods. Discrepancies between
training and testing data lead to inferior performance of detectors. There is a performance drop when detectors recognize forgeries outside the training dataset, which brings
challenges to deepfake detectors for practical usage.
Attempts have been made in recent arts to improve the
generalizations. For example, to overcome dataset bias,
some studies [24, 58] suggest data augmentation is an effective tool against poor generalization. These methods
augment training data by synthesizing new face forgeries
with their empirically designed augmentations. However,
their augmentations are with a limited choice of strategy. The lacking of variety may jeopardize the generalization. Meanwhile, intrinsic forgery attributes shared between
forgeries, such as detail discrepancies [30], and frequency
features [39, 29], are also mined broadly with hand-crafted
representations to distinct forgeries. But these attributes
mainly rely on imperceptible image patterns, which are sensitive to post-processing steps, such as compression. They
vary significantly in different datasets, thus leading to large
detection bias and limiting their generalization [60].

18710

