Mimicking the Oracle: An Initial Phase Decorrelation Approach for Class
Incremental Learning
Kuangqi Zhou1
Jian Liang3
Zihang Jiang1
Yujun Shi1 *
2
4
2
Jiashi Feng
Philip Torr
Song Bai
Vincent Y. F. Tan1
1
2
National University of Singapore
ByteDance Inc.
3
4
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS)
University of Oxford
shi.yujun@u.nus.edu

Abstract
Class Incremental Learning (CIL) aims at learning a
classifier in a phase-by-phase manner, in which only data of
a subset of the classes are provided at each phase. Previous
works mainly focus on mitigating forgetting in phases after
the initial one. However, we find that improving CIL at its
initial phase is also a promising direction. Specifically, we
experimentally show that directly encouraging CIL Learner
at the initial phase to output similar representations as the
model jointly trained on all classes can greatly boost the
CIL performance. Motivated by this, we study the difference between a naı̈vely-trained initial-phase model and the
oracle model. Specifically, since one major difference between these two models is the number of training classes,
we investigate how such difference affects the model representations. We find that, with fewer training classes, the
data representations of each class lie in a long and narrow
region; with more training classes, the representations of
each class scatter more uniformly. Inspired by this observation, we propose Class-wise Decorrelation (CwD) that effectively regularizes representations of each class to scatter
more uniformly, thus mimicking the model jointly trained
with all classes (i.e., the oracle model). Our CwD is simple
to implement and easy to plug into existing methods. Extensive experiments on various benchmark datasets show
that CwD consistently and significantly improves the performance of existing state-of-the-art methods by around 1%
to 3%. Code: https://github.com/Yujun-Shi/CwD.

1. Introduction
The ability to continually acquire new knowledge is a
key to achieve artificial intelligence. To enable this ability
for classification models, [8, 12, 19, 20, 26, 29, 33] introduce
* Work done when interning with Song Bai at ByteDance.

vtan@nus.edu.sg

Phase 0:

Phase 1:

(a) Naive Training

(b) Oracle Model (Joint Training)

(c) Directly Mimic Oracle

(d) CwD

Figure 1. Visualization of representations (normalized to the unit
sphere) in a two-phase CIL setting (learning 2 classes for each
phase). (a) Naı̈ve training at the initial phase (a.k.a., phase 0). The
data representations of each class lie in a long and narrow region.
(b) Joint training on all 4 classes (oracle model). The data representations of each class scatter more uniformly. (c) Directly mimicking the oracle model at the initial phase, i.e., training the CIL
learner with a regularization term that enforces the learner to output representation that is similar to the oracle model. This makes
the representations of each class scatter more uniformly (like (b)).
(d) Training at the initial phase with our CwD regularizer, which
also yields uniformly-scattered representations (like (b) and (c)).
Best viewed in color.

and study Class Incremental Learning (CIL). In CIL, training is conducted phase-by-phase, and only data of a subset
of classes are provided at each phase. The goal of CIL is to
perform well on classes learned at the current phase as well
as all previous phases.
The major challenge of CIL is that the model performance on previously learned classes usually degrades
seriously after learning new classes, a.k.a. catastrophic

16722

