Neural Point Light Fields
Julian Ost1

Issam Laradji2
1

Algolux

Alejandro Newell3
2

McGill

3

Yuval Bahat3

Felix Heide 1,3

Princeton University

Abstract
We introduce Neural Point Light Fields that represent
scenes implicitly with a light field living on a sparse point
cloud. Combining differentiable volume rendering with
learned implicit density representations has made it possible to synthesize photo-realistic images for novel views
of small scenes. As neural volumetric rendering methods
require dense sampling of the underlying functional scene
representation, at hundreds of samples along a ray cast
through the volume, they are fundamentally limited to small
scenes with the same objects projected to hundreds of training views. Promoting sparse point clouds to neural implicit
light fields allows us to represent large scenes effectively
with only a single radiance evaluation per ray. These point
light fields are as a function of the ray direction, and local
point feature neighborhood, allowing us to interpolate the
light field conditioned training images without dense object
coverage and parallax. We assess the proposed method for
novel view synthesis on large driving scenarios, where we
synthesize realistic unseen views that existing implicit approaches fail to represent. We validate that Neural Point
Light Fields make it possible to predict videos along unseen
trajectories previously only feasible to generate by explicitly modeling the scene.

1. Introduction
Learning implicit volumetric scene representations has
made it possible to synthesize photo-realistic images of single scenes [20, 24, 27, 39]. The most successful methods combine a conventional volumetric rendering approach
with a coordinate-based neural network that predicts density and radiance [24]. As such, instead of explicitly storing density and radiance in a high-dimensional 5D volume,
these methods represent this volume as a learned function,
that can be further decomposed into radiance and illumination [53, 40, 5]. Although the implicit volumetric representation is highly memory-efficient and differentiable, it also
fundamentally requires sampling the volume, that is evaluating the coordinate-based network, hundreds of times for
each ray for a given pixel. This mandates long training and
small volumetric support inside the volume.

Figure 1: Neural Point Light Fields encode the information of a
Light Field representation of a scene on a point cloud capture. An
image is rendered for each camera ray based on the local encoding
of the Light Field on relevant points.

To tackle these challenges, hybrid representations [13,
19, 15] are used to embed or “bake” local radiance functions on explicit sparse proxy representations such as coarse
voxel grids, point clouds or meshes to enable faster rendering by ignoring empty space. While this approach drastically improves rendering speed at test time, it still requires
volumetric sampling during training. This is because the
scene geometry must be learned during the training process. These methods share the limitations of volumetric
approaches during training and, as such, have also been limited to small scenes that are costly to train. Learning representations for large outdoor scenes is an open challenge.
Unfortunately, approaches that are free of implicit representations do not yet offer an alternative. Specifically,
explicitly storing features on proxy geometry [34, 33, 17]
has not been able to achieve the same quality as volumetric
methods when interpolating a view without a nearby training sample. Existing formulations utilize geometry as a projection canvas combined with features extracted from target
views, and therefore require a large number of input images
near the target view.
In this work, we depart from volumetric models and introduce Neural Point Light Fields, a local implicit representation that encodes a light field on a point cloud. The
proposed representation supports novel view synthesis in

18419

