SGTR: End-to-end Scene Graph Generation with Transformer
Rongjie Li1,3,4 Songyang Zhang 1,3,4 Xuming He1,2
1
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University
2
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
3
Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{lirj2, zhangsy1, hexm}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Scene Graph

Abstract

Man-1

Scene Graph Generation (SGG) remains a challenging
visual understanding task due to its compositional property.
Most previous works adopt a bottom-up two-stage or a pointbased one-stage approach, which often suffers from high
time complexity or sub-optimal designs. In this work, we
propose a novel SGG method to address the aforementioned
issues, formulating the task as a bipartite graph construction
problem. To solve the problem, we develop a transformerbased end-to-end framework that first generates the entity
and predicate proposal set, followed by inferring directed
edges to form the relation triplets. In particular, we develop a new entity-aware predicate representation based on
a structural predicate generator that leverages the compositional property of relationships. Moreover, we design a
graph assembling module to infer the connectivity of the
bipartite scene graph based on our entity-aware structure,
enabling us to generate the scene graph in an end-to-end
manner. Extensive experimental results show that our design
is able to achieve the state-of-the-art or comparable performance on two challenging benchmarks, surpassing most of
the existing approaches and enjoying higher efficiency in
inference. We hope our model can serve as a strong baseline
for the Transformer-based scene graph generation. 1

1. Introduction
Inferring structural properties of a scene, such as the
relationship between entities, is a fundamental visual understanding task. The visual relationship between two entities
can be typically represented by a triple <subject entity, predicate, object entity>. Based on the visual relationships, a
scene can be modeled as a graph structure, with entities as
nodes and predicates as edges, referred to as scene graph.
The scene graph provides a compact structural representation
1 This work was supported by Shanghai Science and Technology Program 21010502700. Code is available: https://github.com/
Scarecrow0/SGTR

Hold

Man-2

Man-3

Horse-1

Entity Proposal
Ride

Next
None

Horse-1

Entity-aware
Predicate Proposal

Man-1

Hold

Man-2

Next

Graph
Assembling

Man-1
Man-2

Man-3

Ride
None

Predicate

Ride
Man-3

Horse-1

Hold
Hold

Next

Horse-1

Entity
Indicators

Bipartite Scene Graph

Figure 1. The illustration of SGTR pipeline paradigm. We
formulate SGG as a bipartite graph construction process. First, the
entity and predicate nodes are generated, respectively. Then we
assemble the bipartite scene graph from two types of nodes.
Hold
for a visual
scene, which has potential applications in many
Next
vision tasks
such as visual question answering [8, 25, 31],
Ride
image captioning
[42, 43] and image retrieval [9].
None
Different from the traditional vision tasks (e.g., object
detection) that focus on entity instances, the main challenge
of scene graph generation (SGG) lies in building an effective
and efficient model for the relations between the entities. The
compositional property of visual relationships induces high
complexity in terms of their constituents, which makes it
difficult to learn a compact representation of the relationship
concept for localization and/or classification.
Most previous works attempt to tackle this problem using
two distinct design patterns: bottom-up two-stage [1, 4, 5, 7,
14, 18, 40, 44] and point-based one-stage design [6, 23]. The
former typically first detects N entity proposals, followed by
predicting the predicate categories of those entity combinations. While this strategy achieves high recalls in discovering
relation instances, its O(N 2 ) predicate proposals not only
incur considerable computation cost but also produce substantial noise in context modeling. In the one-stage methods,
entities and predicates are often extracted separately from

19486

