A Simple Episodic Linear Probe Improves Visual Recognition in the Wild
Yuanzhi Liang* 1,2 , Linchao Zhu2 , Xiaohan Wang3 , and Yi Yang3
1

2

Baidu Research
ReLER Lab, AAII, University of Technology Sydney
3
Zhejiang University

liangyzh18@outlook.com linchao.zhu@uts.edu.au xiaohan.wang@zju.edu.cn yangyics@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Understanding network generalization and feature discrimination is an open research problem in visual recognition. Many studies have been conducted to assess the quality of feature representations. One of the simple strategies
is to utilize a linear probing classifier to quantitatively evaluate the class accuracy under the obtained features. The
typical linear probe is only applied as a proxy at the inference time, but its efficacy in measuring features’ suitability for linear classification is largely neglected in training. In this paper, we propose an episodic linear probing
(ELP) classifier to reflect the generalization of visual representations in an online manner. ELP is trained with detached features from the network and re-initialized episodically. It demonstrates the discriminability of the visual
representations in training. Then, an ELP-suitable Regularization term (ELP-SR) is introduced to reflect the distances of probability distributions between the ELP classifier and the main classifier. ELP-SR leverages a re-scaling
factor to regularize each sample in training, which modulates the loss function adaptively and encourages the features to be discriminative and generalized. We observe significant improvements in three real-world visual recognition
tasks: fine-grained visual classification, long-tailed visual
recognition, and generic object recognition. The performance gains show the effectiveness of our method in improving network generalization and feature discrimination.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved impressive improvements in visual recognition. The neural networks
trained on large-scale visual recognition datasets, e.g., Ima* This work was performed at Baidu Research.

geNet [30], OpenImages [27], demonstrate remarkable generalization capabilities. The learned visual representations
are compact and enjoy strong discriminability. Many works
have been conducted to theoretically explain the rationale
behind deep networks’ generalization [60], but this problem
is still largely unsolved and remains to be investigated.
There are a few analytical tools to probe deep neural
networks’ learning and generalization capabilities. Early
works utilize visualization tools to understand the optimized
parameters or employ dimensionality reduction techniques
to visualize the quality of learned representations [42, 51,
59]. Though helpful, such visualization techniques only
provide qualitative inspections on deep networks [8]. Some
works develop geometric probes to analyze the geometric
properties of object manifold and connect object category
manifolds’ linear separability with the underlying geometric properties [46]. These methods reveal the structure of
memorization from different layers in deep networks but
only probe layer capacity at the inference time, as shown
in Fig. 1 (a).
Another simple strategy is to perform linear probing.
One can use linear probes to evaluate the feature’s quality
quantitatively. Since the discrimination capability of linear classifiers is low, linear classifiers heavily rely on the
quality of the input representation to obtain good classification accuracy [3]. Alain et al. [1] use linear probes to
examine the dynamics of intermediate layers. The linear
probe is a linear classifier taking layer activations as inputs
and measuring the discriminability of the networks. This
linear probe does not affect the training procedure of the
model. Recently, linear probes [3] have been used to evaluate feature generalization in self-supervised visual representation learning. After representation pre-training on pretext
tasks [3], the learned feature extractor is kept fixed. The
linear probe classifier is trained on top of the pre-trained
feature representations. Though conceptually straightforward, linear probes are effective and have been widely used

9559

