Spiking Transformers for Event-based Single Object Tracking
Jiqing Zhang1 , Bo Dong2, , Haiwei Zhang1 , Jianchuan Ding1 , Felix Heide2 , Baocai Yin1 , Xin Yang1,
1
Dalian University of Technology, 2 Princeton University

Abstract
Event-based cameras bring a unique capability to tracking, being able to function in challenging real-world conditions as a direct result of their high temporal resolution and
high dynamic range. These imagers capture events asynchronously that encode rich temporal and spatial information. However, effectively extracting this information from
events remains an open challenge. In this work, we propose a spiking transformer network, STNet, for single object tracking. STNet dynamically extracts and fuses information from both temporal and spatial domains. In particular, the proposed architecture features a transformer
module to provide global spatial information and a spiking neural network (SNN) module for extracting temporal
cues. The spiking threshold of the SNN module is dynamically adjusted based on the statistical cues of the spatial information, which we ﬁnd essential in providing robust SNN
features. We fuse both feature branches dynamically with
a novel cross-domain attention fusion algorithm. Extensive
experiments on three event-based datasets, FE240hz, EED
and VisEvent validate that the proposed STNet outperforms
existing state-of-the-art methods in both tracking accuracy
and speed with a signiﬁcant margin. The code and pretrained models are at https://github.com/JeeKing/CVPR2022_STNet.

KYS

PrDiMP

STARK-S

TransT

STNet

GT

Figure 1. A comparison of our method (STNet) with state-ofthe-art (SOTA) trackers. Unlike existing SOTA approaches, our
method dynamically fuses temporal and spatial cues, resulting in
robust tracking performance.

that conventional imagers struggle with.
Event-based cameras measure per-pixel brightness
changes and output events asynchronously. As a result,
existing CNN-based approaches cannot directly work with
event-based sensors, as they require synchronous input.
Several works proposed to convert asynchronous events
to conventional frames for downstream processing, mainly
based on handcrafted features [27, 34, 41]. Unfortunately,
in contrast to images captured with traditional cameras, the
accumulated event frames are much sparser and lack texture
information. Thus, directly applying CNN-based methods
designed for conventional images does not offer a solution,
as evidenced by extensive experiments in this work.
Recently, a line of works focused on developing
learning-based object tracking approaches tailored to event
frames. Zhang et al. [50] proposed to combine conventional
and event frames with a cross-domain attention fusion algorithm to track objects under different degraded conditions.
However, their approach requires both traditional and accumulated event frames as inputs. More importantly, the approach ignores the rich temporal information encoded in the
event domain. In contrast, another body of work focused on
the event domain only and introduced various event preprocessing approaches to encoding both temporal and spatial
information into the processed event frames [8, 9, 30, 36].
However, these existing approaches do not consider the
downstream network, making it challenging to choose suitable preprocessing methods for a speciﬁc computer vision
task. Perhaps even more importantly, existing methods may
suppress informative events from a downstream network

1. Introduction
Event-based cameras are bio-inspired sensors that offer
attractive properties compared to conventional frame-based
cameras: high temporal resolution (in the order of μs), high
dynamic range (140 dB vs. 60 dB), low power consumption, and high pixel bandwidth (on the order of kHz) resulting in drastically reduced motion blur [18]. With these
unique sensing capabilities, event-based cameras can robustly function in degraded conditions, such as low-light,
fast motion, and high dynamic range scenes. Recently,
event-based cameras have been proposed for object tracking tasks [2,7–9,24,36,38], especially in adverse conditions
 Xin Yang (xinyang@dlut.edu.cn) is the corresponding authors. Xin
Yang and Bo Dong lead this project.

8801

