Learning to Restore 3D Face from In-the-Wild Degraded Images
Zhenyu Zhang1 , Yanhao Ge1 , Ying Tai1 , Xiaoming Huang1 , Chengjie Wang1 ,*
Hao Tang2 , Dongjin Huang3 , Zhifeng Xie3∗
Tencent Youtu Lab, Shanghai, China1
CVL, ETH Zurich, Switzerland2
Shanghai Film Academy of Shanghai University3
zhangjesse@foxmail.com

hao.tang@vision.ee.ethz.ch

halege, yingtai, skyhuang, jasoncjwang@tencent.com

djhuang, zhifeng xie@shu.edu.cn

Abstract

-45瀽

+45瀽

0瀽

Unsup3D

In-the-wild 3D face modelling is a challenging problem
as the predicted facial geometry and texture suffer from a
lack of reliable clues or priors, when the input images are
degraded. To address such a problem, in this paper we propose a novel Learning to Restore (L2R) 3D face framework
for unsupervised high-quality face reconstruction from lowresolution images. Rather than directly reﬁning 2D image
appearance, L2R learns to recover ﬁne-grained 3D details
on the proxy against degradation via extracting generative
facial priors. Concretely, L2R proposes a novel albedo
restoration network to model high-quality 3D facial texture,
in which the diverse guidance from the pre-trained Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) is leveraged to complement the lack of input facial clues. With the ﬁner details of
the restored 3D texture, L2R then learns displacement maps
from scratch to enhance the signiﬁcant facial structure and
geometry. Both of the procedures are mutually optimized
with a novel 3D-aware adversarial loss, which further improves the modelling performance and suppresses the potential uncertainty. Extensive experiments on benchmarks
show that L2R outperforms state-of-the-art methods under
the condition of low-quality inputs, and obtains superior
performances than 2D pre-processed modelling approaches
with limited 3D proxy.

GT

Input

Ours
Unsup3D+DFDNet

LAP

Unsup3D

Unsup3D + DFDNet
LAP+DFDNet

Ours

LAP

LAP + DFDNet

(a) Visual Results of Different Methods

0.7

0.75

0.8

0.85

0.9

0.95

(b) Cross-view Geometry Modelling Accuracy

Figure 1. Experimental analyses among non-parametric methods.
(a) Visual comparison under degraded input. (b) Cross-view scaleinvariant depth error on MICC [5] dataset, where we use the models to predict geometry from the image of the current pose, and
perform testing on images of other two poses. We use DFDNet [37] to preprocess the degraded images. Unsup3D [58] and
LAP [67] suffer from the input degradation, and receive limited
beneﬁt from the 2D appearance enhancing method. In contrast,
our method models more detailed predictions, and shows more robust performance in cross-view validation. Please refer to supplemental materials for more details.

be achieved through optimization on low-dimensional parameters [46, 47]. With the development of deep learning,
recent works utilize neural networks to regress 3DMM parameters from 2D images [45, 70]. Although 3DMM based
approaches are further improved with non-linearity [19, 25,
53–55,60,69] and multi-view consistency [6,10,52,57,61],
they still suffer from several drawbacks: limited amount of
subjects (e.g., BFM [44] with 200 subjects) with controlled
conditions, difﬁculties on building skin details, anatomic
grounded muscles [16] and large variations of identity [71].
As a result, efforts are made on non-parametric modelling for potential ﬂexibility, which regress face normal
or depth directly from an input image without 3DMM assumption [3, 49]. More recent works [42, 58] disentangle a face into intrinsic factors and accomplishes canonical reconstruction in an unsupervised manner via render-

1. Introduction
3D human face reconstruction has been rapidly advanced
during these two decades with applications including human digitalization, animation, and biometrics. The ﬁrst
groundbreaking effort should be the 3D Morphable Model
(3DMM) [8], which provides reasonable geometry assumptions for modelling. Based on this, the reconstruction can
* Chengjie Wang and Zhifeng Xie are corresponding authors

4237

