Memory-augmented Deep Conditional Unfolding Network for Pan-sharpening
Gang Yang1† , Man Zhou2,1† , Keyu Yan2,1 , Aiping Liu1∗ , Xueyang Fu1 , Fan Wang2
1
University of Science and Technology of China, China
2
Hefei Institute of Physical Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
{yg1997, manman, keyu}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {aipingl, xyfu}@ustc.edu.cn, wang fan6@163.com

42.2

Abstract

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of remote sensors, increasing satellite images are available for a wide range of applications such as mapping services, military systems, and
environmental monitoring. Satellites capture multispectral
(MS) and panchromatic (PAN) images simultaneously with
complementary information for each modality that PAN images have a high spatial solution and MS images contain
rich spectral information [15, 36]. In order to obtain the im† Co-first authors contributed equally,* corresponding author.
This work was supported by the USTC Research Funds of the Double
First-Class Initiative (Grant YD2100002004, 2100002003).

42

41.9269

41.8
PSNR

Pan-sharpening aims to obtain high-resolution multispectral (MS) images for remote sensing systems and deep
learning-based methods have achieved remarkable success.
However, most existing methods are designed in a blackbox principle, lacking sufficient interpretability. Additionally, they ignore the different characteristics of each band
of MS images and directly concatenate them with panchromatic (PAN) images, leading to severe copy artifacts [9]. To
address the above issues, we propose an interpretable deep
neural network, namely Memory-augmented Deep Conditional Unfolding Network with two specified core designs.
Firstly, considering the degradation process, it formulates
the Pan-sharpening problem as the minimization of a variational model with denoising-based prior and non-local
auto-regression prior which is capable of searching the
similarities between long-range patches, benefiting the texture enhancement. A novel iteration algorithm with builtin CNNs is exploited for transparent model design. Secondly, to fully explore the potentials of different bands of
MS images, the PAN image is combined with each band of
MS images, selectively providing the high-frequency details
and alleviating the copy artifacts. Extensive experimental
results validate the superiority of the proposed algorithm
against other state-of-the-art methods.

41.6

41.4538

41.4

41.3355
41.1622

41.2
41

PANNET
MSDCNN
SRPPNN

40.8176
40.755

40.8
40.6

PNN

0

GPPNN
MDCUN(Ours)

5

10
Parameters (× 105 )

15

20

Figure 1. Trade-off between parameters and model performance
for Pan-sharpening on WorldViewII dataset.

ages with both high spectral and spatial resolution, the Pansharpening technique that aims to fuse the MS and PAN
images has attracted increasing attention.
The past decades have witnessed the explosive growth
of research works in the Pan-sharpening field, where the focuses include model-based and deep learning (DL)-based
methods. Due to the ill-posed property of Pan-sharpening,
the former usually requires hand-crafted priors to regularize
the solution space of the latent high-resolution (HR) MS images. However, the limited representation ability of handcrafted priors results in unsatisfactory performance when
processing complex scenes. Besides, the traditional methods are challenging in optimization, limiting their practical applications. Inspired by the success of deep neural networks, various DL-based Pan-sharpening algorithms
have been proposed. While they demonstrate superiority in
feature representation and model generalization, the longstanding issue that existing DL-based Pan-sharpening methods suffer from is the lack of interpretability as most of them
are designed in a black-box principle without considering
the rationality of models. Integrating the domain knowledge
with interpretable DL-based models is therefore promising
for improving the Pan-sharpening performance. Additionally, existing methods ignore the different characteristics of
each band of MS images and directly concatenate them with

1788

