Uformer: A General U-Shaped Transformer for Image Restoration
Zhendong Wang1∗ Xiaodong Cun2† Jianmin Bao Wengang Zhou1 Jianzhuang Liu3 Houqiang Li1
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
University of Macau 3 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
Abstract

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of consumer and industry
cameras and smartphones, the requirements of removing
undesired degradation (e.g., noise, blur, rain, and so on) in
images are constantly growing. Recovering genuine images
from their degraded versions, i.e., image restoration, is a
classic task in computer vision. Recent state-of-the-art methods [9, 47, 74, 76, 77] are mostly ConvNets-based, which
achieve impressive results but show a limitation in capturing
∗ Part of this work was done during an internship in Huawei Noah’s Ark

Lab.

† Corresponding author.

39.8
PSNR (dB)

In this paper, we present Uformer, an effective and efficient Transformer-based architecture for image restoration,
in which we build a hierarchical encoder-decoder network
using the Transformer block. In Uformer, there are two
core designs. First, we introduce a novel locally-enhanced
window (LeWin) Transformer block, which performs nonoverlapping window-based self-attention instead of global
self-attention. It significantly reduces the computational
complexity on high resolution feature map while capturing
local context. Second, we propose a learnable multi-scale
restoration modulator in the form of a multi-scale spatial
bias to adjust features in multiple layers of the Uformer
decoder. Our modulator demonstrates superior capability for restoring details for various image restoration tasks
while introducing marginal extra parameters and computational cost. Powered by these two designs, Uformer enjoys a high capability for capturing both local and global
dependencies for image restoration. To evaluate our approach, extensive experiments are conducted on several image restoration tasks, including image denoising, motion
deblurring, defocus deblurring and deraining. Without bells
and whistles, our Uformer achieves superior or comparable performance compared with the state-of-the-art algorithms. The code and models are available at https:
//github.com/ZhendongWang6/Uformer.

Uformer-B
Uformer-S
Uformer-T

39.6

UNet-T

NBNet

MPRNet

UNet-B

MIRNet

UNet-S
CycleISP

39.4

DANet
VDN

101
102
103
Computational cost in log scale (GMACs)
Figure 1. PSNR vs. computational cost on the SIDD dataset [1].

long-range dependencies. To address this problem, several
recent works [31, 39, 83] start to employ single or few selfattention layers in low resolution feature maps due to the
self-attention computational complexity being quadratic to
the feature map size.
In this paper, we aim to leverage the capability of selfattention in feature maps at multi-scale resolutions to recover
more image details. To this end, we present Uformer, an
effective and efficient Transformer-based structure for image
restoration. Uformer is built upon an elegant architecture
UNet [49], wher we modify the convolution layers to Transformer blocks while keeping the same overall hierarchical
encoder-decoder structure and the skip-connections.
We propose two core designs to make Uformer suitable
for image restoration tasks. First, we propose the Locallyenhanced Window (LeWin) Transformer block, which is an
efficient and effective basic component. The LeWin Transformer block performs non-overlapping window-based selfattention instead of global self-attention, which significantly
reduces the computational complexity on high resolution feature maps. Since we build hierarchical feature maps and keep
the window size unchanged, the window-based self-attention
at low resolution is able to capture much more global dependencies. On the other hand, local context is essential for
image restoration, we further introduce a depth-wise convolutional layer between two fully-connected layers of the
feed-forward network in the Transformer block to better capture local context. We also notice that recent works [35, 72]

17683

