Masked Autoencoders Are Scalable Vision Learners
Kaiming He∗,† Xinlei Chen∗ Saining Xie Yanghao Li Piotr Dollár Ross Girshick
∗

equal technical contribution

†

project lead

Facebook AI Research (FAIR)
Abstract

Deep learning has witnessed an explosion of architectures of continuously growing capability and capacity
[33, 25, 57]. Aided by the rapid gains in hardware, models today can easily overfit one million images [13] and
begin to demand hundreds of millions of—often publicly
inaccessible—labeled images [16].
This appetite for data has been successfully addressed in
natural language processing (NLP) by self-supervised pretraining. The solutions, based on autoregressive language
modeling in GPT [47, 48, 4] and masked autoencoding in
BERT [14], are conceptually simple: they remove a portion
of the data and learn to predict the removed content. These
methods now enable training of generalizable NLP models
containing over one hundred billion parameters [4].
The idea of masked autoencoders, a form of more general denoising autoencoders [58], is natural and applicable
in computer vision as well. Indeed, closely related research

decoder

input

target
....

1. Introduction

encoder

....

This paper shows that masked autoencoders (MAE) are
scalable self-supervised learners for computer vision. Our
MAE approach is simple: we mask random patches of the
input image and reconstruct the missing pixels. It is based
on two core designs. First, we develop an asymmetric
encoder-decoder architecture, with an encoder that operates only on the visible subset of patches (without mask tokens), along with a lightweight decoder that reconstructs
the original image from the latent representation and mask
tokens. Second, we find that masking a high proportion
of the input image, e.g., 75%, yields a nontrivial and
meaningful self-supervisory task. Coupling these two designs enables us to train large models efficiently and effectively: we accelerate training (by 3× or more) and improve accuracy. Our scalable approach allows for learning
high-capacity models that generalize well: e.g., a vanilla
ViT-Huge model achieves the best accuracy (87.8%) among
methods that use only ImageNet-1K data. Transfer performance in downstream tasks outperforms supervised pretraining and shows promising scaling behavior.

Figure 1. Our MAE architecture. During pre-training, a large
random subset of image patches (e.g., 75%) is masked out. The
encoder is applied to the small subset of visible patches. Mask
tokens are introduced after the encoder, and the full set of encoded patches and mask tokens is processed by a small decoder
that reconstructs the original image in pixels. After pre-training,
the decoder is discarded and the encoder is applied to uncorrupted
images (full sets of patches) for recognition tasks.

in vision [59, 46] preceded BERT. However, despite significant interest in this idea following the success of BERT,
progress of autoencoding methods in vision lags behind
NLP. We ask: what makes masked autoencoding different
between vision and language? We attempt to answer this
question from the following perspectives:
(i) Until recently, architectures were different. In vision,
convolutional networks [34] were dominant over the last
decade [33]. Convolutions typically operate on regular grids
and it is not straightforward to integrate ‘indicators’ such as
mask tokens [14] or positional embeddings [57] into convolutional networks. This architectural gap, however, has
been addressed with the introduction of Vision Transformers (ViT) [16] and should no longer present an obstacle.
(ii) Information density is different between language
and vision. Languages are human-generated signals that
are highly semantic and information-dense. When training
a model to predict only a few missing words per sentence,
this task appears to induce sophisticated language understanding. Images, on the contrary, are natural signals with
heavy spatial redundancy—e.g., a missing patch can be recovered from neighboring patches with little high-level un-

16000

