Hypergraph-Induced Semantic Tuplet Loss for Deep Metric Learning
Jongin Lim1, 2
Sangdoo Yun3
Seulki Park1
Jin Young Choi1
1
ASRI, Dept. of ECE., Seoul National University
2
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology 3 NAVER AI Lab
{ljin0429,seulki.park,jychoi}@snu.ac.kr

sangdoo.yun@navercorp.com

Abstract

One Semantic Tuplet
Mini-batch

In this paper, we propose Hypergraph-Induced Semantic Tuplet (HIST) loss for deep metric learning that leverages the multilateral semantic relations of multiple samples
to multiple classes via hypergraph modeling. We formulate
deep metric learning as a hypergraph node classification
problem in which each sample in a mini-batch is regarded
as a node and each hyperedge models class-specific semantic relations represented by a semantic tuplet. Unlike previous graph-based losses that only use a bundle of pairwise relations, our HIST loss takes advantage of the multilateral semantic relations provided by the semantic tuplets
through hypergraph modeling. Notably, by leveraging the
rich multilateral semantic relations, HIST loss guides the
embedding model to learn class-discriminative visual semantics, contributing to better generalization performance
and model robustness against input corruptions. Extensive
experiments and ablations provide a strong motivation for
the proposed method and show that our HIST loss leads
to improved feature learning, achieving state-of-the-art results on three widely used benchmarks. Code is available at
https://github.com/ljin0429/HIST.

1. Introduction
Deep metric learning has been extensively studied for a
variety of visual tasks, such as image retrieval [29, 37, 46],
face recognition [25,34,48], person re-identification [4,50],
and few-shot learning [36, 39, 42]. The aim of deep metric
learning is to train a deep embedding network to yield discriminative features whereby the embedded features from
semantically similar images are close to each other while
those from dissimilar ones are far apart. This discerning
capability of the embedding network is mainly achieved
through loss functions, and many attempts have been made
to design optimal loss functions for deep metric learning.
Conventionally, pair-based losses (e.g., Contrastive [5,
14], Triplet [19, 34], and N-pair [37] losses) have been
employed. These minimize the feature distances of posi-

One Hyperedge

1.0
1.0
0.8

Semantic
Relation Matrix

0.1

Hypergraph
Modeling

Figure 1. Our HIST loss utilizes multilateral semantic relations
between every sample and class (marked by color) for a given
mini-batch. A semantic tuplet is defined for a class (e.g., green)
and represents the sample’s semantic relations to the class. Inside
the semantic tuplet, positive samples have definite relation values
(= 1), and negative samples have soft relation values (≤ 1) based
on their likelihood of belonging to the class. Each semantic tuplet
is then modeled as a hyperedge. In this hypergraph, we formulate
a node classification objective. By leveraging multilateral semantic relations, HIST loss enables the embedding network to capture
important visual semantics suitable for deep metric learning.

tive pairs while maximizing those of negative pairs. However, because not all data pairs are informative, pair-based
losses often result in bad convergence [21, 29]. For reliable performance, pair-based losses require elaborate sample mining [15, 17, 49, 53], adding a computational burden. Alternative options are proxy-based [1, 13, 21, 29, 40,
60] and classification-based [26, 32, 44, 45, 48, 54] losses,
which have demonstrated fast convergence and good performance. However, as they associate each data sample only
with representative parameters (i.e., proxies or classification weights), neither proxy-based nor classification-based
losses can leverage relations between data samples, which
can limit the quality of the learned features.
Recently, to resolve the above limitations, several graphbased losses [7,35,55,60] have been proposed that leverage
relations between data samples via graph modeling. These

212

