Motion-aware Contrastive Video Representation Learning via
Foreground-background Merging
Shuangrui Ding1 * Maomao Li2 Tianyu Yang2 Rui Qian3
Haohang Xu1 Qingyi Chen4 Jue Wang2 Hongkai Xiong1†
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Tencent AI Lab
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 4 University of Michigan
{dsr1212, xuhaohang, xionghongkai}@sjtu.edu.cn tianyu-yang@outlook.com
{limaomao07, arphid}@gmail.com qr021@ie.cuhk.edu.hk chenqy@umich.edu

Abstract
In light of the success of contrastive learning in the image domain, current self-supervised video representation
learning methods usually employ contrastive loss to facilitate video representation learning. When naively pulling
two augmented views of a video closer, the model however tends to learn the common static background as a
shortcut but fails to capture the motion information, a phenomenon dubbed as background bias. Such bias makes
the model suffer from weak generalization ability, leading to worse performance on downstream tasks such as
action recognition. To alleviate such bias, we propose
Foreground-background Merging (FAME) to deliberately
compose the moving foreground region of the selected video
onto the static background of others. Specifically, without any off-the-shelf detector, we extract the moving foreground out of background regions via the frame difference and color statistics, and shuffle the background regions among the videos. By leveraging the semantic consistency between the original clips and the fused ones, the
model focuses more on the motion patterns and is debiased from the background shortcut. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that FAME can effectively resist background
cheating and thus achieve the state-of-the-art performance
on downstream tasks across UCF101, HMDB51, and Diving48 datasets. The code and configurations are released at
https://github.com/Mark12Ding/FAME.

1. Introduction
The recent development of deep learning has promoted
a series of applications in videos, such as video recognition [14, 50, 56], video retrieval [16, 66], and video object
* Work done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab.
† Corresponding author. Email: xionghongkai@sjtu.edu.cn.

(a) Results of vanilla contrastive learning.

(b) Results of our approach FAME.

Figure 1. Class-agnostic activation map [3] visualization of important areas. The heatmap indicates how much the pretrained model
attends to the region. Compared to the conventional approach, our
method mitigates the background bias significantly.

segmentation [11, 28, 69]. While various large-scale benchmarks [1, 5, 18] are the key to those successes, the costly
manual annotation involved in fully-supervised methods
excludes the potential utilization of millions of uncurated
videos on the Internet. To further advance the video-related
research, learning video representation in an unsupervised
manner is of great significance and emerges as a general
trend in the computer vision community.
Recently, unsupervised learning in images [9, 40, 49, 58]
has achieved competitive performances compared to their
supervised counterparts, especially with the contrastive
self-supervised learning formulation [7, 24]. The common
idea of contrastive learning is to pull ‘positive’ pairs together in the embedding space and push apart the anchor
from ‘negative’ samples. Due to inaccessibility to the label, a positive pair is usually formed by data augmentations
of the anchor sample while the negative samples come from
other samples. Inspired by these successes, various attempts
have also been made in self-supervised video representation learning [15, 44]. However, we find applying vanilla

9716

