Style-Structure Disentangled Features and Normalizing Flows
for Diverse Icon Colorization
Yuan-kui Li

Yun-Hsuan Lien

Yu-Shuen Wang

National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University

Abstract
We present a colorization network that generates flatcolor icons according to given sketches and semantic colorization styles. Our network contains a style-structure disentangled colorization module and a normalizing flow. The
colorization module transforms a paired sketch image and
style image into a flat-color icon. To enhance network generalization and the quality of icons, we present a pixel-wise
decoder, a global style code, and a contour loss to reduce
color gradients at flat regions and increase color discontinuity at boundaries. The normalizing flow maps Gaussian
vectors to diverse style codes conditioned on the given semantic colorization label. This conditional sampling enables users to control attributes and obtain diverse colorization results. Compared to previous methods built upon
conditional generative adversarial networks, our approach
enjoys the advantages of both high image quality and diversity. To evaluate its effectiveness, we compared the flatcolor icons generated by our approach and recent colorization and image-to-image translation methods on various
conditions. Experiment results verify that our method outperforms state-of-the-arts qualitatively and quantitatively.

1. Introduction
Image colorization aims to generate color images based
on grayscale references, such as monochrome photos
and line arts. Most methods developed for colorizing
monochrome photos are fully automatic because pixels with
various intensities contain fruitful semantics. The networks
can recognize objects and assign proper colors when colorizing images. Line arts, however, contain little semantics
due to sparse structure lines. Moreover, colors in a line art
may not have ground truths, and in some cases, they are not
necessarily meaningful. Accordingly, previous line arts colorization methods require users to provide reference images
or color hits to guide the generated results.

Icons and comics are two types of graphic designs that
are widely used in communication. A step of creating them
is colorization. To save designers’ workload, methods take
sketch images as inputs, which contain only black and white
pixels for representing objects and backgrounds, and determine the color of each pixel. The methods strive to enhance color harmony and vividness and prevent colors from
spreading the boundaries of adjacent objects. Although the
colorization of icons and comics share several similarities,
they are two different designs – structure lines are present
in comics, but they are absent in icons. The structure of an
icon appears because of color discontinuity. Hence, colorizing icons is challenging because methods have to consider
where and what colors to assign and whether the change of
colors exhibits clear and correct structure lines.
Training a conditional generative adversarial network (cGAN) is a way to generate flat-color icons. Sun et al. [35]
trained a c-GAN with two discriminators, which evaluate
the structure and style of icons created by the generator.
Although their generated results are visually appealing, the
images frequently contain gradient colors and fail to present
small features. In addition, it is known that c-GANs suffer
from the diversity problem because the generator often degenerates into a deterministic function.
Inspired by StyleFlow [1], where specifying attributes to
control a generator would degrade image qualities, we discard the framework of c-GAN. Instead, we train an encoderdecoder network to map paired sketch images and style images to flat-color icons using supervised learning. A pixelwise decoder, a global style code, and a contour loss were
introduced to help the network disentangle style and structure features, reduce color gradients at flat regions, and increase color discontinuities at boundaries. We also train a
continuous normalizing flow [10] to sample diverse style
codes conditioned on the given semantic style label [20].
Figure 2 shows the styles that users can choose when using
our system. We concatenate the sampled style codes to the
structure embedding and generate colorization results.
We apply our network to generate flat-color icons con-

11244

