Id-Free Person Similarity Learning
Bing Shuai, Xinyu Li, Kaustav Kundu, Joseph Tighe
AWS AI Labs
{bshuai, xxnl, kaustavk, tighej}@amazon.com

Abstract
Learning a unified person detection and re-identification
model is a key component of modern trackers. However,
training such models usually relies on the availability of
training images / videos that are manually labeled with both
person boxes and their identities. In this work, we explore
training such a model by only using person box annotations,
thus removing the necessity of manually labeling a training
dataset with additional person identity annotation as these
are expensive to collect. To this end, we present a contrastive learning framework to learn person similarity without using manually labeled identity annotations. First, we
apply image-level augmentation to images on public person
detection datasets, based on which we learn a strong model
for general person detection as well as for short-term person re-identification. To learn a model capable of longerterm re-identification, we leverage the natural appearance
evolution of each person in videos to serve as instancelevel appearance augmentation in our contrastive loss formulation. Without access to the target dataset or person
identity annotation, our model achieves competitive results
compared to existing fully-supervised state-of-the-art methods on both person search and person tracking tasks. Our
model also shows promising results for saving the annotation cost that is needed to achieve a certain level of performance on the person search task.

1. Introduction
Detecting and re-identifying people in images and videos
underpins many person understanding tasks [33, 49, 50, 55,
57, 60]. Recent works [42, 47, 50, 55, 60] have converged on
the concept of detecting and re-identifying people simultaneously with a single model due to its higher end-to-end efficiency during inference. Typical learning setups for such
models rely on a set of training images or videos that are annotated with both person boxes and their identities. Unfortunately, the cost of curating such a training set is extremely
high not least because sourcing the right images / videos for
both tasks is costly. More importantly, annotating person

Figure 1. By using only 40% of id annotations on CUHK-SYSU
dataset [49], our similarity pre-trained model outperforms the standard state-of-the-art model trained on all id annotations. Manually
labeled id annotation is not used in similarity pre-training.

identity induces a significant cost overhead, as annotators
have to check against a set of known persons from memory.
Thus, existing training datasets for joint person detection
and re-identification [33, 49, 57] are limited both in scope
and in size.
In this work, we explore learning such a model by using person bounding boxes as our only supervision, so that
we are able to leverage the existing large-scale training sets
for person detection [30, 41]. The core question hinges on
how to learn a good person embedding model from images
only annotated with person boxes. To this end, we adopt the
concept of instance discrimination tasks [8, 19, 22, 48] that
pull together identity embeddings of the same person box
under different image transformations while pushing away
those from other person boxes. This formulation enables
us to jointly train a person detection and identity embedding model. While image-level transformations are able to
capture many expected changes to a person’s appearance
such as scale or lighting changes, they are not able to render
more drastic pose and viewpoint changes which are common in re-identification applications and as such this embedding model is not robust to such appearance variations.

14689

