Image Based Reconstruction of Liquids from 2D Surface Detections
Florian Richter, Ryan K. Orosco, and Michael C. Yip
University of California San Diego
{frichter, rorosco, yip}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
In this work, we present a solution to the challenging
problem of reconstructing liquids from image data. The
challenges in reconstructing liquids, which is not faced in
previous reconstruction works on rigid and deforming surfaces, lies in the inability to use depth sensing and color
features due the variable index of refraction, opacity, and
environmental reflections. Therefore, we limit ourselves to
only surface detections (i.e. binary mask) of liquids as observations and do not assume any prior knowledge on the
liquids properties. A novel optimization problem is posed
which reconstructs the liquid as particles by minimizing the
error between a rendered surface from the particles and the
surface detections while satisfying liquid constraints. Our
solvers to this optimization problem are presented and no
training data is required to apply them. We also propose a
dynamic prediction to seed the reconstruction optimization
from the previous time-step. We test our proposed methods in simulation and on two new liquid datasets which we
open source1 so the broader research community can continue developing in this under explored area.

1. Introduction
To successfully navigate in and interact with the 3D
world we live in, a 3D geometric understanding is required.
The importance of this requirement can be seen by the
numerous advancements in reconstruction methods from
cameras, which is the ideal sensor due to its information
richness and cheap cost. Solutions for surface based reconstruction have been proposed for a variety of scenarios
such as rigid, unknown environments [31] with dynamic objects [21]. The rigidness assumption has also been lifted to
handle deformable surfaces [17, 30]. Breakthrough developments from the reconstruction community have fed into
downstream applications such as robotic manipulation [43]
and surgical tissue tracking [23].
Reconstruction of more complex scenes, such as fluids
however remains an under explored area. Fluids, unlike
1 https://github.com/ucsdarclab/liquid_reconstruction

Figure 1. The top and bottom row figures shows the output of
our proposed method for reconstructing liquid from an endoscopic
camera and a human pouring chocolate milk into a cup respectively. Our reconstruction approach minimizes the 2D surface
detection loss while simultaneously satisfying liquid constraints
without the need for any prior training data. The result is an effective reconstruction technique for liquids that has been validated on
simulated and real-life data as shown here.

rigid and deforming objects, are typically turbulent and can
exhibit translating, shearing, and rotation motions [33]. The
well established Navier-Stokes equations which describe
fluid motion have been applied to generate effective graphic
renderings of fluids [4]. The motions of fluids also differs
depending on if it is a gas or liquid. Gasses are compressible and reconstruction from images has been explored [9].
Liquids, unlike gasses, are in-compressible and for everyday human interactions, rely on a container and gravity to
form their shape (e.g. a mug holding coffee). By fully reconstructing liquids in 3D, automation efforts which replicate human tasks interacting with liquids can be significantly improved such as robot bar tending [44], autonomous
blood suction during surgeries [16], and sewage service
[42]. However, the challenge of reconstructing liquids from

13811

