ImplicitAtlas: Learning Deformable Shape Templates in Medical Imaging
Jiancheng Yang1,2
Udaranga Wickramasinghe2
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China

Abstract
Deep implicit shape models have become popular in the
computer vision community at large but less so for biomedical applications. This is in part because large training
databases do not exist and in part because biomedical annotations are often noisy. In this paper, we show that by
introducing templates within the deep learning pipeline we
can overcome these problems. The proposed framework,
named ImplicitAtlas, represents a shape as a deformation
field from a learned template field, where multiple templates
could be integrated to improve the shape representation capacity at negligible computational cost. Extensive experiments on three medical shape datasets prove the superiority
over current implicit representation methods.

Pascal Fua2
Bingbing Ni1 *
2
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland

Medical Shapes

Application
Shape Completion

Dense Correspondence

Data-Efficient Shape Model
Select

Deform

Learned Multiple Templates Selected Template Deformed Template

1. Introduction
Shape modeling is central to medical image analysis, and
many different approaches to surface representation have
been used for this purpose [16, 36]. In recent years, deep
implicit surfaces [8, 38, 44] have emerged as a powerful alternative to more established methods. This is particularly
true in the field of computer vision at large but less so in the
subfield of biomedical imaging.
This is attributable to the specific challenges posed by
biomedical datasets [27, 56]: For manufactured objects,
there are large datasets [6, 31] that can be used for training purposes of shape models. These do not exist for many
objects of interests in medical imaging, such as the shape
of organs and lesions. Even when medical images and the
corresponding 3D models are available, the models are of
much lower quality due to the complexity and expense of
precise annotation. Furthermore, within a single dataset,
spatial resolution is rarely constant and often anisotropic.
Human errors can result in labeling noise, and organ boundaries are often cropped due to the limitations of imaging
process. Fig. 2 illustrates some of these difficulties.
To address these issues, we propose ImplicitAtlas, a dataefficient implicit shape model for medical imaging. During
training, exemplars represented on discrete grids are taken
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. ImplicitAtlas. We propose a data-efficient shape model
for medical imaging. It represents shapes by deforming one of
several learned templates.

as input, the most common representation in the biomedical imaging, and the model outputs a continuous occupancy grid. Here, an implicit function learns multiple templates, which can undergo non-rigid deformations learned
by another implicit function. As in multi-atlas segmentation [21, 58], the templates make our approach better at
dealing with limited training data and less sensitive to label noise. Thanks to a straight-through estimator (STE) [3],
multiple templates can be learned in an end-to-end fashion at negligible computational cost. Finally, to improve
the data efficiency further, we introduce a convolutional implicit function [9, 45] to extract multi-scale features.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of ImplicitAtlas, we
perform extensive experiments on three medical shape
datasets of liver, hippocampus and pancreas. Our method
outperforms current implicit representation-based methods [12, 38, 45, 72] by considerable margins, especially
when trained in a few-shot learning setting. We also demonstrate several potential applications, such as shape completion from user-supplied point annotations and keypoint la-

15861

