Decoupling Zero-Shot Semantic Segmentation
Jian Ding1,2 , Nan Xue1 , Gui-Song Xia1 ,* Dengxin Dai2
1
CAPTAIN, Wuhan University, China 2 MPI for Informatics, Germany
{jian.ding, xuenan, guisong.xia}@whu.edu.cn, ddai@mpi-inf.mpg.de

image

Abstract
Zero-shot semantic segmentation (ZS3) aims to segment
the novel categories that have not been seen in the training. Existing works formulate ZS3 as a pixel-level zeroshot classification problem, and transfer semantic knowledge from seen classes to unseen ones with the help of language models pre-trained only with texts. While simple, the
pixel-level ZS3 formulation shows the limited capability to
integrate vision-language models that are often pre-trained
with image-text pairs and currently demonstrate great potential for vision tasks. Inspired by the observation that
humans often perform segment-level semantic labeling, we
propose to decouple the ZS3 into two sub-tasks: 1) a classagnostic grouping task to group the pixels into segments. 2)
a zero-shot classification task on segments. The former task
does not involve category information and can be directly
transferred to group pixels for unseen classes. The latter
task performs at segment-level and provides a natural way
to leverage large-scale vision-language models pre-trained
with image-text pairs (e.g. CLIP) for ZS3. Based on the
decoupling formulation, we propose a simple and effective
zero-shot semantic segmentation model, called ZegFormer,
which outperforms the previous methods on ZS3 standard
benchmarks by large margins, e.g., 22 points on the PASCAL VOC and 3 points on the COCO-Stuff in terms of
mIoU for unseen classes. Code will be released at https:
//github.com/dingjiansw101/ZegFormer.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation targets to group an image into
segments with semantic categories. Although remarkable
progress has been made [10, 11, 36, 56, 57, 62], current semantic segmentation models are mostly trained in a supervised manner with a fixed set of predetermined semantic categories, and often require hundreds of samples for
each class. In contrast, humans can distinguish at least
30,000 basic categories [6, 18], and recognize novel categories merely from some high-level descriptions. How to
* Corresponding author

human annotation

(a) an image and its human annotation.
seen:

wood

person

sea

water other

unseen:

river

tree

method
pixel-level
embeddings

frisbee

result

pretrained
language model

pixel-level zero-shot classification

(b) pixel-level zero shot classification
method
segment-level
embeddings
Class-agnostic
grouping

result

pretrained visionlanguage model

segment-level
zero-shot classification

(c) decoupled zero shot segmentation (ours)

Figure 1. ZS3 aims to train a model merely on seen classes and
generalize it to classes that have not been seen in the training (unseen classes). Existing methods formulate it as a pixel-level zeroshot classification problem (b), and use semantic features from a
language model to transfer the knowledge from seen classes to
unseen ones. In contrast, as in (c), we decouple ZS3 into two
sub-tasks: 1) A class-agnostic grouping and 2) A segment-level
zero-shot classification, which enables us to take full advantage of
the pre-trained vision-language model.

achieve human-level ability to recognize stuff and things in
images is one of the ultimate goals in computer vision.
Recent investigations on zero-shot semantic segmentation (ZS3) [7,54] have actually moved towards that ultimate
goal. Following the fully supervised semantic segmentation models [10, 11, 36] and zero-shot classification models [1, 24, 30, 47, 60], these works formulate zero-shot semantic segmentation as a pixel-level zero-shot classification
problem. Although these studies have reported promising
results, two main issues still need to be addressed : (1) They
usually transfer knowledge from seen to unseen classes by
language models [7,27,54] pre-trained only by texts, which

11583

