Learning Modal-Invariant and Temporal-Memory for Video-based
Visible-Infrared Person Re-Identification
Xinyu Lin1 , Jinxing Li1 , Zeyu Ma1 , Huafeng Li2 , Shuang Li2 ,Kaixiong Xu2 , Guangming Lu1 , David Zhang3
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, 2 Kunming University of Science and Technology,
3
The Chinese University of HongKong, Shenzhen.
{linxinyu0327, lijinxing158}@gmail.com, zeyu.ma@stu.hit.edu.cn, hfchina99@163.com,
{shuangli936, xukaixiong99}@gmail.com, luguangm@hit.edu.cn, davidzhang@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
Thanks for the cross-modal retrieval techniques, visibleinfrared (RGB-IR) person re-identification (Re-ID) is
achieved by projecting them into a common space, allowing person Re-ID in 24-hour surveillance systems. However, with respect to the probe-to-gallery, almost all existing RGB-IR based cross-modal person Re-ID methods
focus on image-to-image matching, while the video-tovideo matching which contains much richer spatial- and
temporal-information remains under-explored. In this paper, we primarily study the video-based cross-modal person Re-ID method. To achieve this task, a video-based
RGB-IR dataset is constructed, in which 927 valid identities with 463,259 frames and 21,863 tracklets captured
by 12 RGB/IR cameras are collected. Based on our
constructed dataset, we prove that with the increase of
frames in a tracklet, the performance does meet more
enhancement, demonstrating the significance of video-tovideo matching in RGB-IR person Re-ID. Additionally, a
novel method is further proposed, which not only projects
two modalities to a modal-invariant subspace, but also extracts the temporal-memory for motion-invariant. Thanks
to these two strategies, much better results are achieved on
our video-based cross-modal person Re-ID. The code and
dataset are released at: https://github.com/VCMproject233/MITML.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) [17, 25, 43, 54] focuses
on matching probe pedestrian images with the gallery sets.
Due to multiple views which are non-overlapped, there
are significant changes in human body postures, illumination and backgrounds, leading a large challenge to Re-ID.
Thanks to the rapid development of deep learning, various
Jinxing Li is the Corresponding Author.

similar

discriminative

Figure 1. Advantages of video-based cross-modal person Re-ID.
If two persons enjoy similar appearances, video data can also provide discriminative temporal-information that image data is unavailable. Specifically, the person wearing the black T-shirt is quite
similar to the person wearing the blue T-shirt under the IR camera
(shown in the red box), while their specific arm postures in the
motions give the discriminative features (shown in the green box).

deep end-to-end approaches [3, 22–24] have been studied,
greatly enhancing the Re-ID performance.
Despite the achievement of aforementioned methods,
most of them are heavily dependent on the RGB images,
so that the lighting for the cameras is essential. However,
this constraint is too strict, especially at night, making the
collected RGB data uninformative and failing to achieve
person Re-ID. Fortunately, most surveillance cameras can
automatically switch from RGB to the infrared (IR) mode
if the lighting is unavailable. In contrast to RGB images,
IR images are capable of preserving the information under
invisible lighting and showing pedestrians clearly. Thus, in
order to achieve person Re-ID in 24-hour surveillance systems, the RGB-IR based visible-infrared (cross-modal) person Re-ID [6, 25, 39] provides a promising strategy. For instance, Wu et al. [39] first collected an RGB-IR dataset and
proved the feasibility for these two modalities matching. Inspired by this work, various cross-modal Re-ID works were

20973

