HairCLIP: Design Your Hair by Text and Reference Image
Tianyi Wei1 , Dongdong Chen2,† , Wenbo Zhou1 , Jing Liao3 ,
Zhentao Tan1 , Lu Yuan2 , Weiming Zhang1 , Nenghai Yu1
1

University of Science and Technology of China 2 Microsoft Cloud AI 3 City University of Hong Kong
{bestwty@mail., welbeckz@, tzt@mail., zhangwm@, ynh@}ustc.edu.cn

“Red Hair” +
“Blond Hair” +
“Bob Cut Hairstyle” “Chignon Hairstyle”

“Braid Hairstyle”
“Jewfro Hairstyle”

“Brown Hair”
“Gray Hair”

Input Image

Input Image

cddlyf@gmail.com, jingliao@cityu.edu.hk, luyuan@microsoft.com
“Pink
Hair”

“Pixel Cut
Hairstyle”

+

+

color+ ref

style ref

color ref

style ref

“Purple
Hair”

“Quiff
Hairstyle”

+

+

color
ref
+

style ref

color ref

style ref

Figure 1. Our framework supports hairstyle and color editing individually or jointly, and conditions may be either image or text.

Abstract
Hair editing is an interesting and challenging problem
in computer vision and graphics. Many existing methods
require well-drawn sketches or masks as conditional inputs
for editing, however these interactions are neither straightforward nor efficient. In order to free users from the tedious interaction process, this paper proposes a new hair
editing interaction mode, which enables manipulating hair
attributes individually or jointly based on the texts or reference images provided by users. For this purpose, we
encode the image and text conditions in a shared embedding space and propose a unified hair editing framework
by leveraging the powerful image text representation capability of the Contrastive Language-Image Pre-Training
(CLIP) model. With the carefully designed network structures and loss functions, our framework can perform highquality hair editing in a disentangled manner. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the superiority of our approach in
terms of manipulation accuracy, visual realism of editing
results, and irrelevant attribute preservation.

1. Introduction
Human hair, as the critical yet challenging component of
the face, has long attracted the interest of researchers. In re† Dongdong Chen is the corresponding author. Our code is available
at https://github.com/wty-ustc/HairCLIP

cent years, with the development of deep learning, many
conditional GAN-based hair editing methods [26, 40, 50]
can produce satisfactory editing results. Most of these
methods use well-drawn sketches [20, 40, 50] or masks [26,
40] as the input of image-to-image translation networks to
produce the manipulated results.
However, we think that these interaction types are not
intuitive or user-friendly enough. For example, in order to
edit the hairstyle of one image, users often need to spend
several minutes to draw a good sketch, which greatly limits
the large-scale, automated use of these methods. We therefore wonder “Can we provide another more intuitive and
convenient interaction way, just like human communication
behaviors?”. And the language (or“text”) naturally meets
our requirements.
Benefiting from the development of cross-modal vision
and language representations [28, 37, 38], text-guided image manipulation has become possible. Recently, StyleCLIP [31] has achieved amazing image manipulation results by leveraging the powerful image text representation
capabilities of CLIP [32]. CLIP has an image encoder and
a text encoder, by joint training on 400 million image text
pairs, they can measure the semantic similarity between an
input image and a text description. Based on this observation, StyleCLIP proposes to use them as the loss supervision
to make the manipulated results match the text condition.
Although StyleCLIP inherently supports text description
based hair editing, they are not exactly suitable for our task.
It suffers from the following drawbacks: 1) For each spe-

18072

