Image Animation with Perturbed Masks
Yoav Shalev
Lior Wolf
Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University
yoavshalev@mail.tau.ac.il, wolf@cs.tau.ac.il

Abstract
We present a novel approach for image-animation of a
source image by a driving video, both depicting the same
type of object. We do not assume the existence of pose
models and our method is able to animate arbitrary objects without the knowledge of the object’s structure. Furthermore, both, the driving video and the source image
are only seen during test-time. Our method is based on a
shared mask generator, which separates the foreground object from its background, and captures the object’s general
pose and shape. To control the source of the identity of the
output frame, we employ perturbations to interrupt the unwanted identity information on the driver’s mask. A maskrefinement module then replaces the identity of the driver
with the identity of the source. Conditioned on the source
image, the transformed mask is then decoded by a multiscale generator that renders a realistic image, in which the
content of the source frame is animated by the pose in the
driving video. Due to the lack of fully supervised data, we
train on the task of reconstructing frames from the same
video the source image is taken from. Our method is shown
to greatly outperform the state-of-the-art methods on multiple benchmarks. Our code and samples are available
at https://github.com/itsyoavshalev/Image-Animation-withPerturbed-Masks.

1. Introduction
The ability to reanimate a still image based on a driving
video has been extensively studied in recent years [12, 15,
20]. The developed methods achieve an increased degree
of accuracy in both, maintaining the source identity, as extracted from the source frame, and in replicating the motion
pattern of the driver’s frame. In addition, the recent methods also show good generalization to unseen identities and
are relatively robust, and have fewer artifacts than the older
methods. The relative ease with how these methods can be
applied out-of-the-box has led to their adoption in various
visual effects.
Interestingly, some of the most striking results have been

obtained with model-free methods, i.e., that do not rely, for
example, on post-extraction models [10, 11, 16, 17, 22, 25].
This indicates that such methods can convincingly disentangle shape and identity from motion [7, 13].
There are, however, a few aspects in which such methods still need to improve. First, the generated videos are
with noticeable artifacts. Second, some of the identity of
the source image is lost and replaced by identity elements
from the driving video. Third, the animation of the generated video does not always match the motion in the driver
video.
Here, we propose a method that is preferable to the existing work in terms of motion accuracy, identity and background preservation, and quality of the generated video.
Our method relies on a mask-based representation of the
driving pose and explicit conditioning on the source foreground mask. Source and driver masks are extracted by the
same network. The driver mask goes through an additional
stage that replaces the identity information in the mask.
The reliance on masks has many advantages. First, it
eliminates many of the identity cues from the driving video.
Second, it explicitly models the region that needs to be replaced in the source image. Third, it is common to both
source and driver, thus allowing, with proper augmentation,
to train only on source videos. Fourth, it captures a detailed
description of the object’s pose and shape.
Interestingly, unlike many of the previous methods, we
do not rely on GANs [9] to generate proper outputs from
combinations of different inputs. Instead, we employ an
encoder-decoder, in which the identity is manipulated in order to direct the networks toward employing specific parts
of the information from each input. To summarize, our contributions are: (i) An image animation method that generalizes to unseen identities of the same type, and is able
to animate arbitrary objects better than previous work; (ii)
Innovative use of perturbations over masks, in order to interrupt the driver’s identity, which is then replaced with the
source’s identity by the mask refinement module; (iii) A
comprehensive evaluation of several different applications,
which show a sizable improvement over the current image
animation state-of-the-art.

3647

