iFS-RCNN: An Incremental Few-shot Instance Segmenter
Khoi Nguyen
VinAI Research, Ha Noi, Vietnam

Sinisa Todorovic
Oregon State University, Oregon, USA

ducminhkhoi@gmail.com

sinisa@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
This paper addresses incremental few-shot instance segmentation, where a few examples of new object classes arrive when access to training examples of old classes is not
available anymore, and the goal is to perform well on both
old and new classes. We make two contributions by extending the common Mask-RCNN framework in its second stage
– namely, we specify a new object class classifier based on
the probit function and a new uncertainty-guided boundingbox predictor. The former leverages Bayesian learning to
address a paucity of training examples of new classes. The
latter learns not only to predict object bounding boxes but
also to estimate the uncertainty of the prediction as a guidance for bounding box refinement. We also specify two
new loss functions in terms of the estimated object-class
distribution and bounding-box uncertainty. Our contributions produce significant performance gains on the COCO
dataset over the state of the art – specifically, the gain of
+6 on the new classes and +16 on the old classes in the
AP instance segmentation metric. Furthermore, we are the
first to evaluate the incremental few-shot setting on the more
challenging LVIS dataset.

1. Introduction
This paper addresses the two related problems of incremental few-shot object detection (iFSOD) and instance segmentation (iFSIS). Initially, we are given a large training set
of base object classes, which can be used for pre-training an
instance segmenter. After this pre-training, access to training examples of the base classes becomes unavailable. With
an arrival of a few training examples of new classes, the
goal is to achieve successful object detection and instance
segmentation on both new and base classes. Our key challenges include: how to address a paucity of data for new
classes, and how to train on the new classes such that the
base classes are not “forgotten”.
Tab. 1 compares iFSOD and iFSIS with other related
problems. iFSOD and iFSIS are important problems arising in many applications, where access to old training data

Training
Pre-training on the base classes
MaskRCNN

Class head
Box head
Mask head

Fine-tuning on the new classes
Class weight
distribution

MaskRCNN

Class head
Box head
Mask head

L T R B

Bounding box
uncertainty

Testing on the base and new classes
MaskRCNN

Class head
Box head
Mask head

Figure 1. Our iFS-RCNN is first pre-trained on abundant examples of base classes, and then fine-tuned on a few examples of
new classes. iFS-RCNN modifies the classification head of MaskRCNN by estimating the class-weight distribution via Bayesian
learning. iFS-RCNN modifies the bounding-box head of MaskRCNN by computing uncertainty of predicting the left (L), right
(R), top (T), and bottom (B) sides of the bounding boxes. For testing, the last layers learned on the new classes (diagonal stripes)
are concatenated with the corresponding ones learned on the base
classes (solid color).

becomes unavailable, due to, e.g., privacy and security issues or new legal regulations of data access. Also, they are
critical in applications where limited time budgets prohibit
retraining on both base and new classes.
There is scant work on iFSOD and iFSIS. Following recent FSIS approaches, we use Mask-RCNN [13], and modify its prediction heads, as shown in Fig. 1. Mask-RCNN
is first pre-trained with abundant examples of base classes,
and then fine-tuned on new classes by “freezing” all mod-

7010

