Mask Transfiner for High-Quality Instance Segmentation
Lei Ke1,2 Martin Danelljan1 Xia Li1 Yu-Wing Tai3 Chi-Keung Tang2 Fisher Yu1
1
2
3
ETH Zürich
HKUST
Kuaishou Technology
Quadtree on
Incoherent Regions

Input Image

Abstract

1. Introduction
Advancements in image instance segmentation has
largely been driven by the developments of powerful object detection paradigms. Approaches based on Mask RCNN [12,21,24,28,34] and more recently DETR [15,17,23]
have achieved ever increasing performance on, for instance,
the COCO challenge [33]. While these methods excel in
detection and localization of objects, the problem of efficiently predicting highly accurate segmentation masks has
so far remained elusive.
As shown in Figure 3, there is still a significant gap between the bounding box and segmentation performance of
the recent state-of-the-art methods, especially for the recent query-based methods. This strongly indicates that improvements in mask quality has not kept pace with the advancements detection capability. In Figure 2, the predicted
masks of previous methods are very coarse, most often oversmoothing object boundaries. In fact, efficient and accurate
mask prediction is highly challenging, due to the need for

Incoherence
Detector

Final Mask

Sequence Encoder
FFN

Norm

Coarse Mask

Multi-head Attention

3×

Node Encoder

Base Detector

Pixel Decoder

Two-stage and query-based instance segmentation methods have achieved remarkable results. However, their segmented masks are still very coarse. In this paper, we present
Mask Transfiner for high-quality and efficient instance segmentation. Instead of operating on regular dense tensors,
our Mask Transfiner decomposes and represents the image
regions as a quadtree. Our transformer-based approach
only processes detected error-prone tree nodes and selfcorrects their errors in parallel. While these sparse pixels only constitute a small proportion of the total number,
they are critical to the final mask quality. This allows Mask
Transfiner to predict highly accurate instance masks, at
a low computational cost. Extensive experiments demonstrate that Mask Transfiner outperforms current instance
segmentation methods on three popular benchmarks, significantly improving both two-stage and query-based frameworks by a large margin of +3.0 mask AP on COCO and
BDD100K, and +6.6 boundary AP on Cityscapes. Our code
and trained models are available at https://github.
com/SysCV/transfiner.

Sequential
Quadtree Nodes

Quadtree Transformer
Sequential Mask Labels

Figure 1. We propose Mask Transfiner for high-quality instance
segmentation. It first builds a quadtree based on the sparse incoherent regions on the RoI pyramid and then jointly refines all tree
nodes using the refinement transformer with quadtree attention.

high-resolution deep features, which demands large computational and memory costs [38].
To address these issues, we propose Mask Transfiner,
an efficient transformer-based approach for high-quality instance segmentation. In Figure 1, our approach first identifies error-prone regions, which are mostly strewn along
object boundaries or in high-frequency regions. To this
end, our network learns to detect incoherent regions, defined by the loss of information when downsampling mask
itself. These incoherent pixels are sparsely located, consisting only of a small portion of the total pixels. However, as they are shown to be critical to the final segmentation performance, it allows us to only process small parts of
the high-resolution feature maps in the refinement process.
Thus, we build a hierarchical quadtree [18] to represent and
process the incoherent image pixels at multiple scales.
To refine the mask labels of the incoherent quadtree
nodes, we design an refinement network based on the transformer instead of standard convolutional networks because
they require operating on uniform grids. Our transformer
has three modules: node encoder, sequence encoder and
pixel decoder. The node encoder first enriches the feature
embedding for each incoherent point. The sequence encoder then takes these encoded feature vectors across multiple quadtree levels as input queries. Finally, the pixel decoder predicts their corresponding mask labels. Comparing

4412

