Robust fine-tuning of zero-shot models
Mitchell Wortsman∗
University of Washington

Gabriel Ilharco∗
University of Washington

Jong Wook Kim
OpenAI

mitchnw@cs.washington.edu

gamaga@cs.washington.edu

jongwook@openai.com

Mike Li
Columbia University

Simon Kornblith
Google Research, Brain Team

Rebecca Roelofs
Google Research, Brain Team

mli24@gsb.columbia.edu

skornblith@google.com

rofls@google.com

Raphael Gontijo Lopes
Google Research, Brain Team

Hannaneh Hajishirzi
University of Washington

Ali Farhadi⋆
University of Washington

iraphael@google.com

hannaneh@cs.washington.edu

ali@cs.washington.edu

Hongseok Namkoong⋆
Columbia University

Ludwig Schmidt
University of Washington

namkoong@gsb.columbia.edu

schmidt@cs.washington.edu

Abstract
Large pre-trained models such as CLIP or ALIGN offer consistent accuracy across a range of data distributions when
performing zero-shot inference (i.e., without fine-tuning on
a specific dataset). Although existing fine-tuning methods
substantially improve accuracy on a given target distribution, they often reduce robustness to distribution shifts. We
address this tension by introducing a simple and effective
method for improving robustness while fine-tuning: ensembling the weights of the zero-shot and fine-tuned models
(WiSE-FT). Compared to standard fine-tuning, WiSE-FT provides large accuracy improvements under distribution shift,
while preserving high accuracy on the target distribution.
On ImageNet and five derived distribution shifts, WiSE-FT
improves accuracy under distribution shift by 4 to 6 percentage points (pp) over prior work while increasing ImageNet
accuracy by 1.6 pp. WiSE-FT achieves similarly large robustness gains (2 to 23 pp) on a diverse set of six further
distribution shifts, and accuracy gains of 0.8 to 3.3 pp compared to standard fine-tuning on commonly used transfer
learning datasets. These improvements come at no additional computational cost during fine-tuning or inference.

1. Introduction
A foundational goal of machine learning is to develop models that work reliably across a broad range of data distri∗⋆ These authors contributed equally. ArXiv version: 2109.01903.

butions. Over the past few years, researchers have proposed a variety of distribution shifts on which current algorithmic approaches to enhance robustness yield little to
no gains [68, 95]. While these negative results highlight the
difficulty of learning robust models, large pre-trained models such as CLIP [79], ALIGN [44] and BASIC [75] have
recently demonstrated unprecedented robustness to these
challenging distribution shifts. The success of these models
points towards pre-training on large, heterogeneous datasets
as a promising direction for increasing robustness. However,
an important caveat is that these robustness improvements
are largest in the zero-shot setting, i.e., when the model performs inference without fine-tuning on a target distribution.
In a concrete application, a zero-shot model can be fine-tuned
on extra application-specific data, which often yields large
performance gains on the target distribution. However, in the
experiments of Radford et al. [79] and Pham et al. [75], finetuning comes at the cost of robustness: across several natural
distribution shifts, the accuracy of their fine-tuned models is
lower than that of the original zero-shot model. This leads
to a natural question: Can zero-shot models be fine-tuned
without reducing accuracy under distribution shift?
As pre-trained models are becoming a cornerstone of machine learning, techniques for fine-tuning them on downstream applications are increasingly important. Indeed, the
question of robustly fine-tuning pre-trained models has recently also been raised as an open problem by several authors [3, 9, 75, 79]. Andreassen et al. [3] explored several
fine-tuning approaches but found that none yielded models

7959

