Watch It Move: Unsupervised Discovery of 3D Joints for Re-Posing of
Articulated Objects
Atsuhiro Noguchi†, ‡ * Umar Iqbal† Jonathan Tremblay† Tatsuya Harada‡,§ Orazio Gallo†
†
NVIDIA ‡ The University of Tokyo § RIKEN
Original Frame

New Pose
Ri , ti

(a) Multi-View Video

(b) RGB and Parts Reconstruction

(c) Re-Posing

(d) Other Categories

Figure 1: Our method learns to render novel views of an articulated, moving object by “watching” it move in a multi-view video sequence
with associated foreground masks. Simultaneously, it discovers the object’s parts and joints with no additional supervision. The learned
structure allows us to explicitly re-pose the object, by roto-translating each part around its joint. In (c) and (d) we re-pose objects from
multiple categories to configurations never seen in training, which is possible thanks to the structure we discover from the input videos.

Abstract
Rendering articulated objects while controlling their
poses is critical to applications such as virtual reality or
animation for movies. Manipulating the pose of an object,
however, requires the understanding of its underlying structure, that is, its joints and how they interact with each other.
Unfortunately, assuming the structure to be known, as existing methods do, precludes the ability to work on new object
categories. We propose to learn both the appearance and
the structure of previously unseen articulated objects by observing them move from multiple views, with no joints annotation supervision, or information about the structure. We
observe that 3D points that are static relative to one another
should belong to the same part, and that adjacent parts that
move relative to each other must be connected by a joint.
To leverage this insight, we model the object parts in 3D as
ellipsoids, which allows us to identify joints. We combine
this explicit representation with an implicit one that compensates for the approximation introduced. We show that
our method works for different structures, from quadrupeds,
to single-arm robots, to humans. The code is available at
https://github.com/NVlabs/watch-it-move
and a version of this manuscript that uses animations is at
https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.11347.

1. Introduction
Using images to infer both the appearance and the functional structure of generic, real-world objects is a fundamental goal of computer vision. From a practical stand* Work partially done when Atsuhiro Noguchi was an intern at NVIDIA.

point, it would allow us to render and manipulate physical
objects in the metaverse. But its appeal goes further, as it
requires pushing the boundaries of our ability to learn from
data with no direct supervision.
Our community made dramatic progress towards appearance capture and novel view synthesis, particularly for
static scenes [1, 6, 29, 35, 45, 65, 68]. Several recent methods can also capture dynamic scenes and reenact their motion [28, 39, 43, 54, 56]. We use the term “reenacting” to
highlight that these methods cannot explicitly control the
pose of the dynamic objects. Rather, they replay through
the poses that were observed. Re-posing an articulated
object—i.e., the explicit manipulation of its pose—requires
knowing the location of the joints and how the different
parts of the object interact with each other1 . Learning
to predict the location of joints in 3D is a well-studied
task, at least for humans, and it is generally tackled using
2D [17,18,22,44,55,63] or 3D [16,20,25–27,50,70] ground
truth information. When not using joints supervision, existing pose manipulation methods rely on a predefined model,
that is, a template structure [23, 48]. However, annotations
are expensive and object-specific, which is why they are
only available for limited classes of objects, such as people or faces [15, 41, 47].
We aim at re-posing an articulated object from a category
not seen before, using only a multi-view video and corresponding foreground mask, as shown in Figure 1. Our approach requires no additional supervision, no prior knowledge about the structure, nor networks pre-trained on aux1 Image-to-image translation methods (e.g., [34]) can also re-pose, but
we focus on methods that allow for the explicit definition of the target pose.

3677

