Splicing ViT Features for Semantic Appearance Transfer
Narek Tumanyan∗

Omer Bar-Tal∗

Shai Bagon

Tali Dekel

Weizmann Institute of Science
*Indicates equal contribution.
Project webpage: https://splice-vit.github.io

Appearance

Appearance

Structure

Structure

Output

Appearance

Output

Structure

Appearance

Structure

Output

Output

Figure 1. Given two input images—a source structure image and a target appearance image–our method generates a new image in which
the structure of the source image is preserved, while the visual appearance of the target image is transferred in a semantically aware manner.
That is, objects in the structure image are “painted” with the visual appearance of semantically related objects in the appearance image.
Our method leverages a self-supervised, pre-trained ViT model as an external semantic prior. This allows us to train our generator only on
a single input image pair, without any additional information (e.g., segmentation/correspondences), and without adversarial training. Thus,
our framework can work across a variety of objects and scenes, and can generate high quality results in high resolution (e.g., HD).

Abstract
We present a method for semantically transferring the
visual appearance of one natural image to another. Specifically, our goal is to generate an image in which objects
in a source structure image are “painted” with the visual
appearance of their semantically related objects in a target appearance image. Our method works by training a
generator given only a single structure/appearance image
pair as input. To integrate semantic information into our
framework—a pivotal component in tackling this task—our
key idea is to leverage a pre-trained and fixed Vision Transformer (ViT) model which serves as an external semantic
prior. Specifically, we derive novel representations of structure and appearance extracted from deep ViT features, untwisting them from the learned self-attention modules. We
then establish an objective function that splices the desired structure and appearance representations, interweaving them together in the space of ViT features. Our framework, which we term “Splice”, does not involve adversarial training, nor does it require any additional input information such as semantic segmentation or correspondences,
and can generate high resolution results, e.g., work in HD.
We demonstrate high quality results on a variety of in-thewild image pairs, under significant variations in the number
of objects, their pose and appearance.

1. Introduction
“Rope splicing is the forming of a semi-permanent joint
between two ropes by partly untwisting and then interweaving their strands.” [2]
What is required to transfer the visual appearance between
two semantically related images? Consider for example the
task of transferring the visual appearance of a spotted cow
in a flower field to an image of a red cow in a grass field
(Fig. 1). Conceptually, we have to associate regions in both
images that are semantically related, and transfer the visual
appearance between these matching regions. Additionally,
the target appearance has to be transferred in a realistic manner, while preserving the structure of the source image –
the red cow should be realistically ”painted” with black and
white spots, and the green grass should be covered with yellowish colors. To achieve it under noticeable pose, appearance and shape differences between the two images, semantic information is imperative.
Indeed, with the rise of deep learning and the ability to
learn high-level visual representations from data, new vision tasks and methods under the umbrella of “visual appearance transfer” have emerged. For example, the imageto-image translation trend aims at translating a source image
from one domain to another target domain. To achieve that,
most methods use generative adversarial networks (GANs),
10748

