Causality Inspired Representation Learning for Domain Generalization
1

Fangrui Lv
1

2

Jian Liang

1,∗

Shuang Li

Beijing Institute of Technology, China
1
2

2

Bin Zang

1

Chi Harold Liu

Alibaba Group, China

3

Ziteng Wang

3

2

Di Liu

Yizhun Medical AI Co., Ltd, China

{fangruilv,shuangli,binzang}@bit.edu.cn, liuchi02@gmail.com

{xuelang.lj,wendi.ld}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Domain generalization (DG) is essentially an out-ofdistribution problem, aiming to generalize the knowledge
learned from multiple source domains to an unseen target
domain. The mainstream is to leverage statistical models to
model the dependence between data and labels, intending to
learn representations independent of domain. Nevertheless,
the statistical models are superficial descriptions of reality
since they are only required to model dependence instead
of the intrinsic causal mechanism. When the dependence
changes with the target distribution, the statistic models
may fail to generalize. In this regard, we introduce a general structural causal model to formalize the DG problem.
Specifically, we assume that each input is constructed from
a mix of causal factors (whose relationship with the label is
invariant across domains) and non-causal factors (categoryindependent), and only the former cause the classification
judgments. Our goal is to extract the causal factors from
inputs and then reconstruct the invariant causal mechanisms.
However, the theoretical idea is far from practical of DG
since the required causal/non-causal factors are unobserved.
We highlight that ideal causal factors should meet three basic
properties: separated from the non-causal ones, jointly independent, and causally sufficient for the classification. Based
on that, we propose a Causality Inspired Representation
Learning (CIRL) algorithm that enforces the representations
to satisfy the above properties and then uses them to simulate the causal factors, which yields improved generalization
ability. Extensive experimental results on several widely
1
used datasets verify the effectiveness of our approach.

1. Introduction
In recent years, with the increasing complexity of tasks
in real world, out-of-distribution (OOD) problem has raised
a severe challenge for deep neural networks based on the
1

1

∗ Corresponding author.
Code is available at "https://github.com/BIT-DA/CIRL".

3

ziteng.wang@yizhun-ai.com

i.i.d. hypothesis [23, 24, 30]. Directly applying the model
trained on source domain to an unseen target domain with
different distribution typically suffers from a catastrophic
performance degradation [13, 29, 31, 57]. In order to deal
with the domain shift problem, Domain Generalization (DG)
has attracted increasing attention, which aims to generalize
the knowledge extracted from multiple source domains to an
unseen target domain [2, 20, 22, 35].
In order to improve generalization capability, many DG
methods have been proposed, which can be roughly categorized into invariant representation learning [9, 22, 25, 34],
domain augmentation [53,59,63,66], meta-learning [2,6,21],
etc. Though promising results have been achieved, there exists one intrinsic problem with them. These efforts merely try
to make up for the problems caused by OOD data and model
the statistical dependence between data and labels without
explaining the underlying causal mechanisms. It has been
argued recently [43] that such practices may not be sufficient, and generalizing well outside the i.i.d. setting requires
learning not mere statistical dependence between variables,
but an underlying causal model [3, 39, 42, 43, 49, 54]. For
instance, in an image classification task, it is very likely
that all the giraffes are on the grass, showing high statistical
dependence, which could easily mislead the model to make
wrong predictions when the background varies in target domain. After all, the characteristics of giraffes such as head,
neck, etc., instead of the background make a giraffe giraffe.
In this paper, we introduce a structural causal
model (SCM) [48] to formalize the DG problem,
aiming to excavate the
intrinsic causal mechanisms between data and
labels, and achieve better generalization ability.
Specifically, we assume
the category-related infor-

8046

S

U
X

Y

Figure 1. SCM of DG. The solid
arrow indicates that the parent
node causes the child one; while
the dash arrow means there exists statistical dependence.

