Pooling Revisited: Your Receptive Field is Suboptimal
Dong-Hwan Jang1
Sanghyeok Chu1
Joonhyuk Kim1
Bohyung Han1,2
1
1
2
ECE & ASRI & IPAI, Seoul National University
{jh01120, sanghyeok.chu, kjh42551, bhhan}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract

Researchers have been investigating powerful and efﬁcient operations applicable to deep neural networks, which
include convolutions, normalizations, and activation functions. However, they have not paid much attention to pooling operations despite their simplicity and effectiveness in
aggregating local features. The size and shape of a receptive ﬁeld are critical; too small or large a receptive
ﬁeld may not be able to effectively recognize large or
small objects, respectively. The receptive ﬁeld is determined by several factors in deep neural networks such as
the depth of a model, strides of operations, types of convolutions, etc. To design an efﬁcient receptive ﬁeld of an
operation, variants of convolution operations [5, 29, 43] or
special architectures with multi-resolution branches [11,
44] are widely adopted. However, these approaches rely
on delicately human-engineered hyperparameters or timeconsuming neural architecture search [46, 47].
To alleviate the suboptimality of human-engineered architectures and operations, we propose Dynamically Optimized Pooling operation (DynOPool), which is a learnable
resizing module that replaces standard resizing operations.
The proposed module ﬁnds the optimal scale factor of the
receptive ﬁeld for the operations learned on a dataset, and,
consequently, resizes the intermediate feature maps in a network to proper sizes and shapes. This relieves us from the
delicate design of hyperparameters such as stride of convolution ﬁlters and pooling operators.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:

The size and shape of the receptive ﬁeld determine how
the network aggregates local features, and affect the overall performance of a model considerably. Many components in a neural network, such as depth, kernel sizes, and
strides for convolution and pooling, inﬂuence the receptive ﬁeld. However, they still rely on hyperparameters, and
the receptive ﬁelds of existing models result in suboptimal
shapes and sizes. Hence, we propose a simple yet effective
Dynamically Optimized Pooling operation, referred to as
DynOPool, which learns the optimized scale factors of feature maps end-to-end. Moreover, DynOPool determines the
proper resolution of a feature map by learning the desirable
size and shape of its receptive ﬁeld, which allows an operator in a deeper layer to observe an input image in the optimal scale. Any kind of resizing modules in a deep neural
network can be replaced by DynOPool with minimal cost.
Also, DynOPool controls the complexity of the model by introducing an additional loss term that constrains computational cost. Our experiments show that the models equipped
with the proposed learnable resizing module outperform the
baseline algorithms on multiple datasets in image classiﬁcation and semantic segmentation.

1. Introduction
Despite the unprecedented success of deep neural networks in various applications including computer vision [12, 24, 39, 40], natural language processing [6, 33],
robotics [21], and bioinformatics [16], the design of the optimal network architecture is still a challenging problem.
While several handcrafted models exhibit impressive performance in various domains, there have been substantial
efforts to identify the optimal neural network architecture
with associated operations automatically [17, 18, 22, 41].
However, hand-engineered architectures are prone to be
suboptimal and suffer from weak generalizability while the
approaches based on neural architecture search either incur
a huge amount of training cost or achieve minor improvement due to limited search space.

• Our work tackles the limitations of existing scaling operators in deep neural networks that depend on predetermined hyperparameters. We point out the importance of ﬁnding the optimal spatial resolutions and receptive ﬁelds in intermediate feature maps, which are
still under-explored in designing neural architectures.
• We propose DynOPool, a learnable resizing module
that ﬁnds the optimal scale factors and receptive ﬁelds
of intermediate feature maps. DynOPool identiﬁes the
best resolution and receptive ﬁeld of a certain layer using a learned scaling factor and propagates the information to the subsequent ones leading to scale opti549

