Sketching without Worrying: Noise-Tolerant Sketch-Based Image Retrieval
Ayan Kumar Bhunia1
Subhadeep Koley1,2 Abdullah Faiz Ur Rahman Khilji* Aneeshan Sain1,2
Pinaki Nath Chowdhury1,2 Tao Xiang1,2 Yi-Zhe Song1,2
1
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom.
2
iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence.
{a.bhunia, s.koley, a.sain, p.chowdhury, t.xiang, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
Sketching enables many exciting applications, notably,
image retrieval. The fear-to-sketch problem (i.e., “I can’t
sketch”) has however proven to be fatal for its widespread
adoption. This paper tackles this “fear” head on, and for
the first time, proposes an auxiliary module for existing retrieval models that predominantly lets the users sketch without having to worry. We first conducted a pilot study that
revealed the secret lies in the existence of noisy strokes, but
not so much of the “I can’t sketch”. We consequently design
a stroke subset selector that detects noisy strokes, leaving
only those which make a positive contribution towards successful retrieval. Our Reinforcement Learning based formulation quantifies the importance of each stroke present
in a given subset, based on the extent to which that stroke
contributes to retrieval. When combined with pre-trained
retrieval models as a pre-processing module, we achieve a
significant gain of 8%-10% over standard baselines and in
turn report new state-of-the-art performance. Last but not
least, we demonstrate the selector once trained, can also be
used in a plug-and-play manner to empower various sketch
applications in ways that were not previously possible.

1. Introduction
Thanks to the convenience of interactive touchscreen devices, sketch-based image retrieval (SBIR) [11, 12, 14, 38]
has emerged as a practical means of image research that
is complementary to the conventional text-based retrieval
[25]. Although initially developed for a category-level setting [42, 36, 59], of late SBIR has undertaken a fine-grained
shift to better reflect the inherent fine-grained characteristics
(pose, appearance detail, etc) of sketches [46, 56, 7].
Despite great strides made [3, 33, 10], the fear-to-sketch
has proven to be fatal for its omnipresence – a “I can’t
sketch” reply is often the end of it. This “fear” is predominant for fine-grained SBIR (FG-SBIR), where the system
dictates users to produce even more faithful and diligent
* Interned with SketchX

Figure 1: (a) While the average ranking percentile increases
as the sketching proceeds from starting towards completion,
unwanted sudden drops have been noticed for many individual sketches due to noisy/irrelevant strokes drawn. (b) The
same thing is visualised with number of samples in the third
axis to get an overall statistics on QMUL-Shoe-V2 dataset.
sketches than that required for category-level retrieval [11].
In this paper, we tackle this “fear” head-on and propose for the first time a pre-processing module for FG-SBIR
that essentially let the users sketch without the worry of “I
can’t”. We first experimentally show that, in most cases it
is not about how bad a sketch is – most can sketch (even a
rough outline) – the devil lies in the fact that users typically
draw irrelevant (noisy) strokes that are detrimental to the
overall retrieval performance (see Section 3). This observation has largely inspired us to alleviate the “can’t sketch”
problem by eliminating the noisy strokes through selecting
an optimal subset that can lead to effective retrieval.
This problem might sound trivial enough – e.g., how
about considering all possible stroke subsets as training
samples to gain model invariance against noisy strokes? Albeit theoretically possible, the highly complex nature of this
process (i.e., O(2N )) quickly renders this naive solution
infeasible, especially when the number of strokes in freehand sketches can range from an average of N = 9 to a
max of N = 15 in fine-grained SBIR datasets (QMULShoeV2/ChairV2 [56, 46]). Most importantly, augmenting
the training data by random stroke dropping would lead to
a noisy gradient during training. This is because out of all
possible subsets, many of these augmented sketch subsets

999

