Multi-instance Point Cloud Registration by Efficient Correspondence Clustering
Weixuan Tang and Danping Zou*
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Navigation and Location Based Services
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,China
{weixuantang,dpzou}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
We address the problem of estimating the poses of multiple instances of the source point cloud within a target
point cloud. Existing solutions require sampling a lot of
hypotheses to detect possible instances and reject the outliers, whose robustness and efficiency degrade notably when
the number of instances and outliers increase. We propose
to directly group the set of noisy correspondences into different clusters based on a distance invariance matrix. The
instances and outliers are automatically identified through
clustering. Our method is robust and fast. We evaluated
our method on both synthetic and real-world datasets. The
results show that our approach can correctly register up to
20 instances with an F1 score of 90.46% in the presence
of 70% outliers, which performs significantly better and
at least 10× faster than existing methods. (Source code :
https://github.com/SJTU-ViSYS/multi-instant-reg)

1. Introduction
Three-dimensional point cloud registration [12] [48] [45]
mainly focuses on estimating one single transformation between the source point cloud and the target point cloud.
However, we may sometimes want to estimate multiple
transformations between point clouds. For instance, we
have a 3D scan of an object and may want to find the poses
of the same objects on the table within the target point cloud
as shown in Figure 1. This problem, named multi-instance
point cloud registration here, has been less investigated in
the literature. It is non-trivial to extend existing point cloud
registration methods to solve this problem.
The major challenge is to identify different clusters
of corresponding points belonging to different instances
within the set of noisy correspondences. One solution is
to adopt a 3D object detector or apply instance segmentation to the target point cloud. After that, the pose of each
* Corresponding author. This work was supported by National Science
Foundation of China (62073214).

instance can be estimated by a conventional point cloud registration method. However, this approach needs to train a
detector or a segmentation network [39] [25] for specific objects or classes, which does not apply to unknown objects or
arbitrary 3D scans. Another solution is via multi-model fitting [32] [33] [34] or [35] [29] [11]. Existing multi-model
fitting methods rely on sampling valid hypotheses, which
involves a large number of sampling steps when the number of models or the outlier ratio becomes high, making the
efficiency and robustness of those algorithms drop drastically.

Figure 1. Multi-instance point cloud registration: Given a source
point cloud of an object, multi-instance registration needs to estimate the pose of each object within the target point cloud.

In this paper, we propose a robust and efficient solution to the multi-instance 3D registration problem. The key
idea is to directly group the corresponding points into different clusters according to a distance invariance matrix.
Specifically, the matrix is constructed by checking the distance consistency between each pair of correspondences after the point correspondences have been obtained by feature matching using descriptors like D3Feat [7], PREDATOR [26], or SIFT [31]. We find that the row or column
vector of this matrix has a powerful representation capability that can be used for identifying the set of correspondences from a particular instance. We hence apply a simple
and efficient clustering algorithm to divide those correspondences into cliques. The clustering is further refined by a
few recursive steps involving merging similar clusters and
re-assigning cluster ids to each correspondence. Finally,
both the outliers and the inliers of each instance are automatically identified by a simple ranking strategy.

6667

