Fourier Document Restoration for
Robust Document Dewarping and Recognition
Chuhui Xue1 , Zichen Tian1 , Fangneng Zhan1 , Shijian Lu1 , Song Bai2
1
Nanyang Technological University, 2 ByteDance
xuec0003@e.ntu.edu.sg, {zichen.tian,shijian.lu,fnzhan}@ntu.edu.sg, songbai.site@gmail.com

Existing Pipelines

Proposed Pipeline

Input
Image

Input
Image

Network

Network

Loss

Predicted 3D
Coordinates

Input Image

By DewarpNet

By FDRNet

Ground-Truth

TPS

GT 3D
Coordinates
Dewarped
Image

Mapping
Loss

Dewarped
Image

Scan Image
(HF)

Dewarped
Image (HF)

Figure 1. Existing document dewarping and the proposed FDRNet: Existing document dewarping learns to predict 3D coordinates
of each pixel in camera document for dewarping, which often struggle when handling documents with irregular distortions or large depth
variations as shown in column 2 in the right graph. FDRNet instead focuses on the high-frequency components of document contents
and learns to dewarp the whole document with Thin-Plate Spline (TPS) transformation. It is robust to irregular deformations and depth
variations as shown in column 3 in the right graph, and requires much less simply annotated training data.

Abstract
State-of-the-art document dewarping techniques learn to
predict 3-dimensional information of documents which are
prone to errors while dealing with documents with irregular distortions or large variations in depth. This paper
presents FDRNet, a Fourier Document Restoration Network
that can restore documents with different distortions and
improve document recognition in a reliable and simpler
manner. FDRNet focuses on high-frequency components
in the Fourier space that capture most structural information but are largely free of degradation in appearance. It
dewarps documents by a flexible Thin-Plate Spline transformation which can handle various deformations effectively without requiring deformation annotations in training. These features allow FDRNet to learn from a small
amount of simply labeled training images, and the learned

model can dewarp documents with complex geometric distortion and recognize the restored texts accurately. To facilitate document restoration research, we create a benchmark
dataset consisting of over one thousand camera documents
with different types of geometric and photometric distortion. Extensive experiments show that FDRNet outperforms
the state-of-the-art by large margins on both dewarping and
text recognition tasks. In addition, FDRNet requires a small
amount of simply labeled training data and is easy to deploy. The proposed dataset is available at https://sgvilab.github.io/event/warpdoc/.

1. Introduction
Automated document recognition is critical in many applications such as library digitization, office automation, e-

4573

