Towards An End-to-End Framework for Flow-Guided Video Inpainting
Zhen Li1∗ Cheng-Ze Lu1∗ Jianhua Qin2 Chun-Le Guo1† Ming-Ming Cheng1
1
TMCC, CS, Nankai University 2 Hisilicon Technologies Co. Ltd.
zhenli1031@gmail.com, czlu919@outlook.com, qinjianhua@hisilicon.com
{guochunle, cmm}@nankai.edu.cn
Flow-based methods

Abstract
Optical flow, which captures motion information across
frames, is exploited in recent video inpainting methods
through propagating pixels along its trajectories. However,
the hand-crafted flow-based processes in these methods are
applied separately to form the whole inpainting pipeline.
Thus, these methods are less efficient and rely heavily on
the intermediate results from earlier stages. In this paper, we propose an End-to-End framework for Flow-Guided
Video Inpainting (E2 FGVI) through elaborately designed
three trainable modules, namely, flow completion, feature
propagation, and content hallucination modules. The three
modules correspond with the three stages of previous flowbased methods but can be jointly optimized, leading to a
more efficient and effective inpainting process. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art methods both qualitatively and quantitatively and shows promising efficiency. The code is available at https://github.com/MCG-NKU/E2FGVI.

1. Introduction
Video inpainting aims to fill up the “corrupted” regions
with plausible and coherent content throughout video clips.
It is widely applied to real-world applications such as object removal [16], video restoration [28], and video completion [7, 39]. Despite the significant progress made in image inpainting [42, 59, 60], video inpainting remains full of
challenges due to the complex video scenarios and deteriorated video frames. Directly performing image inpainting
on each frame independently tends to generate temporally
inconsistent videos and results in severe artifacts. Both spatial structure and temporal coherence are required to be considered in high-quality video inpainting. Recent progress in
deep learning motivates researchers to exploit more effective solutions [7, 8, 17, 23, 28, 33, 38, 49, 56, 62].
Among them, typical flow-based methods [17, 56] consider video inpainting as a pixel propagation problem to
naturally preserve the temporal coherence. As shown in
∗ Equal contribution
† C.L. Guo is the corresponding author.

Input

Flow
completion

Pixel

propagation

Content
hallucination

Output

Ours
Input

Flow
completion

Masked Frames

Feature

propagation

(a)
FGVC

Content
hallucination

Output

Ours

(b)

Figure 1. (a) The general pipelines of flow-based methods [17,56]
and ours. While previous flow-based methods conduct the three
stages separately, our corresponding modules work in an end-toend manner. (b) A qualitative comparison of our approach with a
state-of-the-art flow-based method FGVC [17]. Due to the error
accumulation and ignoring temporal information during content
hallucination, FGVC fails to generate faithful and temporally consistent results compared with our method.

Fig. 1 (a), these methods can be decomposed into three
inter-related stages. (1) Flow completion: The estimated
optical flow needs to be completed first because the absence of flow fields in corrupted regions will influence the
latter processes. (2) Pixel propagation: They fill the holes
in corrupted videos by bidirectionally propagating pixels in
the visible areas with the guidance of the completed optical flow. (3) Content hallucination: After propagation, the
remaining missing regions can be hallucinated by a pretrained image inpainting network [59, 60].
Unfortunately, even though impressive results can be obtained, the whole flow-based inpainting process must be
carried out separately as many hand-crafted operations (e.g.,
Poisson blending, solving sparse linear equations, and indexing per-pixel flow trajectories) are involved in the first
two stages. The isolated processes raise two main problems.
One is that the errors that occur at earlier stages would be

17562

