BigDatasetGAN: Synthesizing ImageNet with Pixel-wise Annotations
Daiqing Li 1
Huan Ling1,2,3
Karsten Kreis1 Sanja Fidler1,2,3
1

NVIDIA

2

University of Toronto

3

Seung Wook Kim1,2,3
Antonio Torralba4

Vector Institute

4

MIT

{daiqingl,huling,seungwookk,kkreis,sfidler}@nvidia.com, torralba@mit.edu

Figure 1. Our synthesized pixel-wise labeled ImageNet dataset. We sample both images and masks for each of the 1k ImageNet classes.

Abstract
Annotating images with pixel-wise labels is a timeconsuming and costly process. Recently, DatasetGAN [78]
showcased a promising alternative – to synthesize a large
labeled dataset via a generative adversarial network (GAN)
by exploiting a small set of manually labeled, GANgenerated images. Here, we scale DatasetGAN to ImageNet scale of class diversity. We take image samples from
the class-conditional generative model BigGAN [5] trained
on ImageNet, and manually annotate only 5 images per
class, for all 1k classes. By training an effective feature
segmentation architecture on top of BigGAN, we turn BigGAN into a labeled dataset generator. We further show that
VQGAN [18] can similarly serve as a dataset generator,
leveraging the already annotated data. We create a new
ImageNet benchmark by labeling an additional set of real
images and evaluate segmentation performance in a variety
of settings. Through an extensive ablation study, we show
big gains in leveraging a large generated dataset to train
different supervised and self-supervised backbone models
on pixel-wise tasks. Furthermore, we demonstrate that using our synthesized datasets for pre-training leads to improvements over standard ImageNet pre-training on several
downstream datasets, such as PASCAL-VOC, MS-COCO,
Cityscapes and chest X-ray, as well as tasks (detection, segmentation). Our benchmark will be made public and maintain a leaderboard for this challenging task. Project Page:
https://nv-tlabs.github.io/big-datasetgan/

1. Introduction
The ImageNet dataset [65] has served as a cornerstone
of modern computer vision and deep learning. It is used as
a testbed for innovating in the domain of large-scale classification, and has enabled incredible advancements over the
years [15, 29, 42, 67]. Importantly, it has also been com-

monly used for pre-training backbone models, with either
supervised or recently self-supervised pre-training, leading
to almost guaranteed performance gains on a plethora of
downstream datasets and tasks [24, 77]. ImageNet contains
a million images with 1000-way classification labels. This
huge class diversity is what makes pre-trained networks
generalize well to a variety of downstream applications.
In this paper, we aim to enhance ImageNet with pixelwise labels, to enable large-scale multi-class segmentation challenges and offer opportunities for new pre-training
strategies for dense downstream prediction tasks. However,
instead of manually labeling masks for 1M images, which
is time-consuming and costly, we instead synthesize high
quality labeled data at a fraction of the cost.
We build on top of DatasetGAN [78], which introduced a
simple idea: to manually annotate a very small set of GANgenerated images with pixel-wise labels, and add a shallow
segmentation branch on top of the GAN’s feature maps,
which is trained on this small dataset. It was shown that
the generator’s feature maps are incredibly powerful and semantically meaningful, and allow the segmentation branch
to produce very accurate labels for new random samples
from the GAN. This means that the GAN is successfully
re-purposed as a dataset generator, producing samples in
the form of images and their pixel-wise labels. The authors
showed that synthesizing a large dataset and using it to train
downstream segmentation networks leads to extremely high
performance at only a fraction of the labeling cost. However, DatasetGAN utilized StyleGAN [38] as the generative
model, which is limited to single class modeling.
We make several contributions: (i) we propose a novel
dataset synthesis method to scale DatasetGAN to the ImageNet scale with minimal human labeling effort. Specifically, we adopt the class-conditional generative model Big-

21330

