Lite Vision Transformer with Enhanced Self-Attention
Chenglin Yang1 ,* Yilin Wang2( ) , Jianming Zhang2 , He Zhang2 , Zijun Wei2 , Zhe Lin2 , Alan Yuille1
1
Johns Hopkins University 2 Adobe Inc.
{chenglin.yangw,alan.l.yuille}@gmail.com

{yilwang,jianmzha,hezhan,zwei,zlin}@adobe.com

Abstract
Despite the impressive representation capacity of vision
transformer models, current light-weight vision transformer
models still suffer from inconsistent and incorrect dense
predictions at local regions. We suspect that the power
of their self-attention mechanism is limited in shallower
and thinner networks. We propose Lite Vision Transformer
(LVT), a novel light-weight transformer network with two
enhanced self-attention mechanisms to improve the model
performances for mobile deployment. For the low-level features, we introduce Convolutional Self-Attention (CSA). Unlike previous approaches of merging convolution and selfattention, CSA introduces local self-attention into the convolution within a kernel of size 3×3 to enrich low-level features in the first stage of LVT. For the high-level features, we
propose Recursive Atrous Self-Attention (RASA), which utilizes the multi-scale context when calculating the similarity
map and a recursive mechanism to increase the representation capability with marginal extra parameter cost. The
superiority of LVT is demonstrated on ImageNet recognition, ADE20K semantic segmentation, and COCO panoptic
segmentation. The code is made publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
Transformer-based architectures have achieved remarkable success most recently, they demonstrated superior performances on a variety of vision tasks, including visual
recognition [65], object detection [38, 56], semantic segmentation [10, 60] and etc [32, 54, 55].
Inspired by the success of the self-attention module in
the Natural Language Processing (NLP) community [53],
Dosovitskiy [18] first propose a transformer-based network
for computer vision, where the key idea is to split the image
into patches so that it can be linearly embedded with positional embedding. To reduce the computational complexity introduced by [18], Swin-Transformer [38] upgrades
* Work done while an intern at Adobe.
1 https://github.com/Chenglin-Yang/LVT

Image

MobileNetV2

PVTv2-B0

LVT

Figure 1. Mobile COCO panoptic segmentation. The model needs
to recognize, localize, and segment both objects and stuffs at the
same time. All the methods have less than 5.5M parameters with
same training and testing process under panoptic FPN framework.
The only difference is the choice of encoder architecture. Lite
Vision Transformer (LVT) leads to the best results with significant
improvement over the accuracy and coherency of the labels.

the architecture by limiting the computational cost of selfattention with local non-overlapping windows. Additionally, the hierarchical feature representations are introduced
to leverage features from different scales for better representation capability. On the other hand, PVT [56, 57] proposes spatial-reduction attention (SRA) to reduce the computational cost. It also removes the positional embedding
by inserting depth-wise convolution into the feed forward
network (FFN) that follows the self-attention layer. Both
Swin-Transformer and PVT have demonstrated their effectiveness for downstream vision tasks. However, when scaling down the model to a mobile friendly size, there is also a
significant performance degradation.
In this work, we focus on designing a light yet effective vision transformer for mobile applications [47]. More
specifically, we introduce a Lite Vision Transformer (LVT)
backbone with two novel self-attention layers to pursue both

11998

