MViTv2: Improved Multiscale Vision Transformers
for Classification and Detection
Yanghao Li *, 1
Chao-Yuan Wu *, 1
Haoqi Fan 1
1, 2
1
1, 2
Karttikeya Mangalam
Bo Xiong
Jitendra Malik
Christoph Feichtenhofer *, 1
∗

1

equal technical contribution
2

Facebook AI Research

UC Berkeley

Abstract
In this paper, we study Multiscale Vision Transformers
(MViTv2) as a unified architecture for image and video
classification, as well as object detection. We present an
improved version of MViT that incorporates decomposed
relative positional embeddings and residual pooling connections. We instantiate this architecture in five sizes and
evaluate it for ImageNet classification, COCO detection
and Kinetics video recognition where it outperforms prior
work. We further compare MViTv2s’ pooling attention to
window attention mechanisms where it outperforms the latter
in accuracy/compute. Without bells-and-whistles, MViTv2
has state-of-the-art performance in 3 domains: 88.8% accuracy on ImageNet classification, 58.7 APbox on COCO
object detection as well as 86.1% on Kinetics-400 video
classification. Code and models are available at https:
//github.com/facebookresearch/mvit.

1. Introduction
Designing architectures for different visual recognition
tasks has been historically difficult and the most widely
adopted ones have been the ones that combine simplicity
and efficacy, e.g. VGGNet [67] and ResNet [37]. More
recently Vision Transformers (ViT) [17] have shown promising performance and are rivaling convolutional neural networks (CNN) and a wide range of modifications have recently been proposed to apply them to different vision
tasks [1, 2, 21, 55, 68, 73, 78, 90].
While ViT [17] is popular in image classification, its
usage for high-resolution object detection and space-time
video understanding tasks remains challenging. The density of visual signals poses severe challenges in compute
and memory requirements as these scale quadratically in
complexity within the self-attention blocks of Transformerbased [76] models. The community has approached this
burden with different strategies: Two popular ones are (1)
local attention computation within a window [55] for object
detection and (2) pooling attention that locally aggregates
features before computing self-attention in video tasks [21].

(a) Image classification

(b) Object detection

(c) Video recognition

Figure 1. Our MViTv2 is a multiscale transformer with state-ofthe-art performance across three visual recognition tasks.

The latter fuels Multiscale Vision Transformers
(MViT) [21], an architecture that extends ViT in a simple
way: instead of having a fixed resolution throughout the network, it has a feature hierarchy with multiple stages starting
from high-resolution to low-resolution. MViT is designed
for video tasks where it has state-of-the-art performance.
In this paper, we develop two simple technical improvements to further increase its performance and study MViT as
a single model family for visual recognition across 3 tasks:
image classification, object detection and video classification, in order to understand if it can serve as a general vision
backbone for spatial as well as spatiotemporal recognition
tasks (see Fig. 1). Our empirical study leads to an improved
architecture (MViTv2) and encompasses the following:
(i) We create strong baselines that improve pooling attention along two axes: (a) shift-invariant positional embeddings using decomposed location distances to inject position
information in Transformer blocks; (b) a residual pooling
connection to compensate the effect of pooling strides in
attention computation. Our simple-yet-effective upgrades
lead to significantly better results.
(ii) Using the improved structure of MViT, we employ
a standard dense prediction framework: Mask R-CNN [36]
with Feature Pyramid Networks (FPN) [53] and apply it to
object detection and instance segmentation.

4804

