All-In-One Image Restoration for Unknown Corruption
Boyun Li1 , Xiao Liu2 , Peng Hu1 , Zhongqin Wu2 , Jiancheng Lv1 , Xi Peng1∗
1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University.
2
TAL Education, China.
{liboyun.gm, penghu.ml, pengx.gm}@gmail.com; {liuxiao15, wuzhongqin}@tal.com;
lvjiancheng@scu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we study a challenging problem in image
restoration, namely, how to develop an all-in-one method
that could recover images from a variety of unknown corruption types and levels. To this end, we propose an All-inone Image Restoration Network (AirNet) consisting of two
neural modules, named Contrastive-Based Degraded Encoder (CBDE) and Degradation-Guided Restoration Network (DGRN). The major advantages of AirNet are twofold. First, it is an all-in-one solution which could recover
various degraded images in one network. Second, AirNet is
free from the prior of the corruption types and levels, which
just uses the observed corrupted image to perform inference. These two advantages enable AirNet to enjoy better flexibility and higher economy in real world scenarios
wherein the priors on the corruptions are hard to know and
the degradation will change with space and time. Extensive experimental results show the proposed method outperforms 17 image restoration baselines on four challenging
datasets. The code is available at https://github.
com/XLearning-SCU/2022-CVPR-AirNet.

1. Introduction
Single image restoration aims to generate a visually
pleasant high-quality image from a given degraded correspondence, e.g., noisy, rainy or hazy image. During past
years, image restoration has been widely used in a number
of real world applications, ranging from autopilot to medical imaging and surveillance.
Although promising results have been achieved in a
specific area, such as denosing [5, 27, 40, 53–55], deblurring [12, 32–34], deraining [10, 11, 17, 46, 50, 52] and dehazing [1, 7, 9, 15, 19, 35, 37, 38], image restoration has encountered the following obstacles in practice. On the one
hand, it is necessary to know the correct corruption (i.e.,
∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1. Illustrations of our basic idea. As shown, most of the
existing multiple degradations methods handle each corruption by
sending the input into a specifically designed head and using the
output of the corresponding tail. Thus, they require the corruption
information in advance to specify the corrected head and tail. Differently, our all-in-one image restoration network (AirNet) is free
from the prior of corruption types and levels, thus enjoying better
flexibility and higher economy in real world scenarios.

degradation) for selecting a competitive model because almost all existing approaches could handle a specific degradation only. Once the degradation type even corruption ratio
changed, the model would achieve undesirable performance
due to the inconsistency between the real case and the prior
adopted for model construction or training. On the other
hand, the degradation usually changes in complex environment, e.g., self-driving cars may suffer from the rainy and
hazy weather consecutively even simultaneously. In summary, it is highly expected to develop an all-in-one method
that is able to recover images from a variety of unknown1
corruption types and levels, as shown in Figure 1. To the
best of our knowledge, such a unspecific image restoration
1 Noticed, in this paper, the “unknown” refers to unspecific rather than

unseen corruptions, and the “multiple degradations” refers to that a given
image only contain a degradation but the data set will contain multiple
degradations.

17452

