SceneSqueezer: Learning to Compress Scene for Camera Relocalization
Luwei Yang1 * Rakesh Shrestha1 * Wenbo Li2 Shuaicheng Liu3
Guofeng Zhang2 Zhaopeng Cui2† Ping Tan1,4†
1
3

Simon Fraser University 2 State Key Lab of CAD & CG, Zhejiang University
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China 4 Alibaba XR Lab

{luweiy, rakeshs, pingtan}@sfu.ca, {wenboli, zhangguofeng, zhpcui}@zju.edu.cn,
liushuaicheng@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Standard visual localization methods build a priori 3D
model of a scene which is used to establish correspondences against the 2D keypoints in a query image. Storing these pre-built 3D scene models can be prohibitively
expensive for large-scale environments, especially on mobile devices with limited storage and communication bandwidth. We design a novel framework that compresses a
scene while still maintaining localization accuracy. The
scene is compressed in three stages: first, the database
frames are clustered using pairwise co-visibility information. Then, a learned point selection module prunes the
points in each cluster taking into account the final pose estimation accuracy. In the final stage, the features of the
selected points are further compressed using learned quantization. Query image registration is done using only the
compressed scene points. To the best of our knowledge, we
are the first to propose learned scene compression for visual
localization. We also demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our method on various outdoor datasets where
it can perform accurate localization with low memory consumption.

1. Introduction
Visual localization aims to estimate the camera pose
(i.e., position and rotation) of an RGB query image with
respect to a known 3D scene. This is a fundamental problem in 3D computer vision with various applications such as
autonomous driving, augmented reality, indoor navigation,
etc. Classical visual localization methods build 3D point
cloud models of the scene beforehand, where each point is
associated with one or more image descriptors, which are
used to match against the 2D points detected in the query
* Equal contribution, † Corresponding authors

Project Page: sfu-gruvi-3dv.github.com/s_squeezer

image. Once the 2D-3D correspondences are established,
robust pose estimation [11, 19] can be applied to recover
the camera pose. Retaining the pre-built 3D scene models costs expensive memory usage for large-scale environments, especially when deploying on mobile devices with
limited storage. Thus, many methods have been proposed
to compress 3D scene models to improve scalability while
maintaining localization accuracy.
Previous 3D scene compression methods can be roughly
divided into three categories. The first category [7, 39]
compresses the descriptors of 3D points using quantization, inevitably sacrificing the distinctiveness of the features while offering only a limited amount of compression. The second are learning-based visual localization
methods [14, 16, 49]. Without explicitly storing a 3D scene
model, they directly regress the camera pose or scene coordinates of each pixel via deep neural networks, which can
be considered as a special type of scene compression as the
network weights encode the 3D scene information. However, these methods either have low accuracy or generalize poorly. The third and the most common category compresses the 3D models by carefully selecting a subset of 3D
points based on certain handcrafted criteria which generally include spatial coverage and visual distinctiveness of
the selected points [6,23,27]. However, these criteria fail to
directly consider the impact of the compression on the final
pose estimation. Manually designing rules to select points
is known to be a challenging problem for both absolute and
relative pose estimation [13].
Motivated by the latest hierarchical localization methods [36, 38] which lead the benchmarks for visual localization, we propose a novel hierarchical strategy for 3D
scene compression. Specifically, we compress the 3D scene
model in three levels. At the coarse level, we conduct
database image clustering and divide the scene into multiple
clusters, enabling us to compress the clusters individually.
This also speeds up localization by limiting the matching

8259

