Neural Reflectance for Shape Recovery with Shadow Handling
Junxuan Li 1,2 ,
Hongdong Li 1
Australian National University 1
Data61, CSIRO 2
{junxuan.li, hongdong.li}@anu.edu.au
Abstract
This paper aims at recovering the shape of a scene with
unknown, non-Lambertian, and possibly spatially-varying
surface materials. When the shape of the object is highly
complex and that shadows cast on the surface, the task becomes very challenging. To overcome these challenges, we
propose a coordinate-based deep MLP (multilayer perceptron) to parameterize both the unknown 3D shape and the
unknown reflectance at every surface point. This network
is able to leverage the observed photometric variance and
shadows on the surface, and recover both surface shape and
general non-Lambertian reflectance. We explicitly predict
cast shadows, mitigating possible artifacts on these shadowing regions, leading to higher estimation accuracy. Our
framework is entirely self-supervised, in the sense that it requires neither ground truth shape nor BRDF. Tests on realworld images demonstrate that our method outperform existing methods by a significant margin. Thanks to the small
size of the MLP-net, our method is an order of magnitude
faster than previous CNN-based methods.

1. Introduction
Recovering the 3D shape of a non-Lambertian object
from its multiple photometric images taken by a fixed camera remains a challenging task. The diverse nature of
real-world materials manifests a wide range of specularities on the surface, impeding traditional photometric methods [12, 20, 31, 32]. Moreover, shadows commonly appear
in non-convex objects occluding part of the object surface,
hindering surface normal estimation. Previous attempts to
handle shadows often rely on a rather restrictive Lambertian
assumption [5]. The problem becomes much complicated if
both specularities and shadows appear on the surface.
With the recent advent of deep learning, tremendous progresses have been made in many computer vision problems,
and there is no exception for photometric 3D reconstruction [6, 11, 15, 16, 23, 33]. Current existing deep learning
methods often tackle the problem in a supervised training
manner. The underlying physics principle of image for-

mation are not duly utilized. In addition, the lack of interpretability of deep learning methods prevents leveraging
the interactions between object appearance and surface normals. Despite various synthetic datasets with augmentation
strategies [7,11,16,23], it remains an open challenge to process real-world images with both specularities and shadows.
In this paper, we propose an unsupervised neural network method that overcomes the issues mentioned above.
Our framework takes the image coordinates corresponding
to a surface point as the input, and directly outputs the surface normal, reflectance parameters (i.e. diffuse albedo and
specular parameters), and depth at that surface point. We
proposed a series of neural specular basis functions to account for the different types of specularities in the realworld. Our neural bases provide the parameterization for
the surface reflectance and fit the object’s appearance to obtain the accurate surface normal. Furthermore, our framework explicitly parameterizes the shadowed regions by tracing through the estimated depth map. These shadowed regions are then excluded from computation in order to avoid
possible rendering artifacts. Following the inverse graphics rendering idea, we use the estimated surface normal and
neural reflectance to re-render the pixel intensities of the
surface point under different light directions. Our framework is optimized by minimizing the difference between
the reconstructed and observed images during the inference
time. Therefore, there is no need for any ground truth data
or pre-training. Our method outperforms both the supervised and self-supervised state-of-the-art methods on the
challenging real-world dataset of DiLiGenT [24]. Compared to other self-supervised deep methods [13, 26], our
framework is ten times faster.

2. Related Work
Conventional approaches: The photometric stereo is
firstly introduced by Woodham [30], which assumes the surface of the objects to be Lambertian and convex to avoid the
specular effects and shadows. This problem can therefore
be solved in a closed-form manner by least-squares. The
above strict assumptions were gradually liberalized by later
studies [12, 20, 21, 31, 32]. These methods can tolerate the

16221

