Learning of Global Objective for Network Flow in Multi-Object Tracking
Shuai Li1
1

Yu Kong1

Hamid Rezatofighi2

Rochester Institute of Technology

{sl6009, Yu.Kong}@rit.edu

Abstract
This paper concerns the problem of multi-object tracking based on the min-cost flow (MCF) formulation, which
is conventionally studied as an instance of linear program.
Given its computationally tractable inference, the success
of MCF tracking largely relies on the learned cost function of underlying linear program. Most previous studies
focus on learning the cost function by only taking into account two frames during training, therefore the learned cost
function is sub-optimal for MCF where a multi-frame data
association must be considered during inference. In order
to address this problem, in this paper we propose a novel
differentiable framework that ties training and inference together during learning by solving a bi-level optimization
problem, where the lower-level solves a linear program
and the upper-level contains a loss function that incorporates global tracking result. By back-propagating the loss
through differentiable layers via gradient descent, the globally parameterized cost function is explicitly learned and
regularized. With this approach, we are able to learn a
better objective for global MCF tracking. As a result, we
achieve competitive performances compared to the current
state-of-the-art methods on the popular multi-object tracking benchmarks such as MOT16, MOT17 and MOT20.

1. Introduction
While being a classical problem, multi-object tracking
(MOT) [37,52] has been yet one of the most active research
areas in computer vision, as being a fundamental basic-level
perception task for many real-world problems, e.g., in visual surveillance, and autonomous driving [20]. Thanks to
the great progress in object detection [18, 42] techniques,
“tracking-by-detection” paradigm has dominated the tracking community recently. Given an input video, a set of
detection hypotheses is first generated for each frame and
the goal of tracking is to associate these detection responses
across time, locally or globally, to form all the trajectories.
Among various previous works, minimum-cost networkflow [4, 41, 60] based methods have gained increasingly at-

2

Monash University

hamid.rezatofighi@monash.edu

tention due to its fast inference property. In this work, we
specifically focus on the network-flow based tracking.
The min-cost network flow formulation for multi-object
tracking problem is, indeed, an instance of constrained integer linear program (ILP) with uni-modular constraint matrices [60]. Therefore, the solution to such an ILP problem
can be optimally obtained by solving its relaxed version, i.e.
a constrained linear program (LP), which has an identical
optimal integer solution to its ILP counterpart [2]. Given
its computationally tractable inference, the success of a
network-flow based multi-object tracking approach largely
depends on designing a proper cost function. Many previous works have focused on learning a robust objective
function, e.g. the matching cost, between detections in two
frames utilizing a neural network trained using a, e.g. binary
cross-entropy [53], triplet [11] or contrastive [34] loss. The
major drawback of these approaches is that they only consider a limited temporal context during training, e.g., two or
three frames. As such, the learned objective function can
be sub-optimal as it ignores long-term temporal contexts
and associations. Several recent works adopt graph neural
networks [8, 14, 39] in order to learn a better feature representation for a spatio-temporal graph formulating multiobject tracking problem. However, their training objectives
are still constrained locally, e.g., a binary cross-entropy as
a local edge loss is employed during the training stage and
thus, knowledge about the global tracking result is not yet
properly incorporated.
Recently, there have been few attempts to learn a proper
objective function for an LP problem representing a global
data association in MOT [19, 50]. Seminal work of [50]
adds a log-barrier term into the objective function and
adopts a change of basis technique to deal with equality
constraints in the linear program, as a result, heuristics are
involved in choosing the optimal temperature parameters
during the interior method’s optimization process, and the
tracking results are inferior compared to many top-ranked
methods in tracking benchmarks [20, 37]. The work of [19]
performs 3D tracking on video and LiDAR data, followed
by a re-projection step to perform 2D tracking, which is
computationally demanding. In contrast to their works, we

8855

