Gated2Gated: Self-Supervised Depth Estimation from Gated Images
Amanpreet Walia* 1,3
Frank Julca-Aguilar1
1

Algolux

2

Stefanie Walz* 2 Mario Bijelic4 Fahim Mannan1
Michael Langer3 Werner Ritter2 Felix Heide1,4

Mercedes-Benz AG

3

McGill University

Abstract
Gated cameras hold promise as an alternative to scanning LiDAR sensors with high-resolution 3D depth that is
robust to back-scatter in fog, snow, and rain. Instead of
sequentially scanning a scene and directly recording depth
via the photon time-of-flight, as in pulsed LiDAR sensors,
gated imagers encode depth in the relative intensity of a
handful of gated slices, captured at megapixel resolution.
Although existing methods have shown that it is possible
to decode high-resolution depth from such measurements,
these methods require synchronized and calibrated LiDAR
to supervise the gated depth decoder – prohibiting fast
adoption across geographies, training on large unpaired
datasets, and exploring alternative applications outside of
automotive use cases. In this work, propose an entirely
self-supervised depth estimation method that uses gated intensity profiles and temporal consistency as a training signal. The proposed model is trained end-to-end from gated
video sequences, does not require LiDAR or RGB data, and
learns to estimate absolute depth values. We take gated
slices as input and disentangle the estimation of the scene
albedo, depth, and ambient light, which are then used to
learn to reconstruct the input slices through a cyclic loss.
We rely on temporal consistency between a given frame
and neighboring gated slices to estimate depth in regions
with shadows and reflections. We experimentally validate
that the proposed approach outperforms existing supervised and self-supervised depth estimation methods based
on monocular RGB and stereo images, as well as supervised methods based on gated images. Code is available at
https://github.com/princeton-computationalimaging/Gated2Gated.

1. Introduction
Depth sensing has become a cornerstone imaging modality for 3D scene understanding. Depth is used directly as input to a vision module, or indirectly in training datasets, to
supervise models relying on other modalities across a wide
range of applications such as perception and planning in autonomous driving, robotics, remote sensing, augmented and
virtual reality [40, 56].
The most successful methods for depth estimation are ei*

These authors contributed equally to this work.

4

Princeton University

ther based on pulsed scanning LiDAR [43], or passive RGB
sensors, i.e., monocular [14,17,48] and stereo RGB [26,49].
LiDAR depth sensors [51] measure the time-of-flight of
pulses of light emitted into the scene and returned to the sensor along a coaxial path that is sequentially scanned across
a scene. As a result, these sensors deliver precise depth with
high spatial resolution at short distances. However, they are
expensive, suffer from quadratic decreasing spatial resolution at longer distances, e.g., resulting in a few measurement points for pedestrians at 100 m distance [51], and they
fail in the presence of strong back-scatter. Monocular and
stereo RGB methods offer a substantially cheaper alternative, but they struggle to achieve depth precision comparable to time-of-flight imaging, struggle in low-light scenarios, and at long distances that map to small disparities.
Recently, gated imaging has been proposed as an alternative sensor modality for depth estimation and 3D detection [22, 32] which promises to overcome the spatial resolution limitation of scanning LiDAR while providing comparable depth precision. Gated cameras combine low-cost
CMOS sensors with analog gated readout and active flash
illumination, allowing to capture a sequence of gated image slices that each encode time-resolved illumination via
their relative intensity and, as such, provide depth cues not
present in RGB cameras. Thanks to this active gated flash
acquisition mode, gated imaging methods have shown to be
more robust in low-light scenarios and in the presence of
strong back-scatter that can be suppressed during acquisition [22]. For a comprehensive review of Gated Sensors
see Sec. 3. Gated images provide dense depth information at megapixel resolution of the gated camera, allowing for long-range perception where LiDAR-based methods fail [32]. However, all of these existing methods require calibrated and synchronized LiDAR data for training supervision. Although commercial gated cameras have
become available [20], the requirement of such a multimodal capture system prohibits the rapid adoption of gated
depth imaging not only in automotive applications but also
in other robotic use cases. Moreover, large unpaired sequences of gated imagery cannot be exploited in training
existing gated depth estimation methods. In this work, we
propose the first self-supervised method for depth estimation from gated cameras. The proposed method takes gated

2811

