GMFlow: Learning Optical Flow via Global Matching
Haofei Xu1 * Jing Zhang2

Jianfei Cai1

Hamid Rezatofighi1

Dacheng Tao3,2

1

2

Department of Data Science and AI, Monash University, Australia
The University of Sydney, Australia 3 JD Explore Academy, China

{xuhfgm,dacheng.tao}@gmail.com

jing.zhang1@sydney.edu.au

Abstract

{jianfei.cai,hamid.rezatofighi}@monash.edu

feature1
feature2

Learning-based optical flow estimation has been dominated with the pipeline of cost volume with convolutions for
flow regression, which is inherently limited to local correlations and thus is hard to address the long-standing challenge of large displacements. To alleviate this, the stateof-the-art framework RAFT gradually improves its prediction quality by using a large number of iterative refinements,
achieving remarkable performance but introducing linearly
increasing inference time. To enable both high accuracy
and efficiency, we completely revamp the dominant flow regression pipeline by reformulating optical flow as a global
matching problem, which identifies the correspondences by
directly comparing feature similarities. Specifically, we
propose a GMFlow framework, which consists of three
main components: a customized Transformer for feature
enhancement, a correlation and softmax layer for global
feature matching, and a self-attention layer for flow propagation. We further introduce a refinement step that reuses
GMFlow at higher feature resolution for residual flow prediction. Our new framework outperforms 31-refinements
RAFT on the challenging Sintel benchmark, while using
only one refinement and running faster, suggesting a new
paradigm for accurate and efficient optical flow estimation.
Code is available at https://github.com/haofeixu/gmflow.

1. Introduction
Since the pioneering learning-based work, FlowNet [10],
optical flow has been regressed with convolutions for a
long time [15–17, 31, 36, 39, 46, 51]. To encode the matching information into the network, the cost volume (i.e.,
correlation) [13] was shown to be an effective component
and thus has been extensively used in popular frameworks
[16, 36, 39]. However, such regression-based approaches
have one major intrinsic limitation. That is, the cost volume
requires a predefined size, as the search space is viewed as
the channel dimension for subsequent regression with con* Work done during Haofei’s internship at JD Explore Academy

local correlation

convolution

flow

(a) previous flow estimation approach

feature1
feature2

Transformer

global correlation
softmax

flow

(b) GMFlow

Figure 1. Conceptual comparison of flow estimation approaches. Most previous methods regress optical flow from a
local cost volume (i.e., correlation) with convolutions, while we
perform global matching with a Transformer and differentiable
matching layer (i.e., correlation and softmax).

volutions. This requirement restricts the search space to a
local range, making it hard to handle large displacements.
To alleviate the large displacements issue, RAFT [39]
proposes an iterative framework with a large number of iterative refinements where convolutions are applied to different local cost volumes at different iteration stages so as
to gradually reach near-global search space, achieving outstanding performance on standard benchmarks. The current state-of-the-art methods [17,39,46,51] are all based on
such an iterative architecture. Despite the excellent performance, such a large number of sequential refinements introduce linearly increasing inference time, which makes it
hard for speed optimization and hinders its deployment in
real-world applications. This raises a question: Is it possible to achieve both high accuracy and efficiency without
requiring such a large number of iterative refinements?
We notice that another visual correspondence problem,
i.e., sparse matching between an image pair [34, 38, 43],
which usually features a large viewpoint change, moves into
a different track. The top-performing sparse methods (e.g.,
SuperGlue [34] and LoFTR [38]) adopt Transformers [41]
to reason about the mutual relationship between feature descriptors, and the correspondences are extracted with an explicit matching layer (e.g., softmax layer [43]).
Inspired by sparse matching, we propose to completely
remove the additional convolutional layers operating on a
predefined local cost volume, and reformulate optical flow

8121

