ITSA: An Information-Theoretic Approach to Automatic Shortcut Avoidance
and Domain Generalization in Stereo Matching Networks
WeiQin Chuah* Ruwan Tennakoon* Reza Hoseinnezhad* Alireza Bab-Hadiashar* David Suter†
RMIT University, Australia*
Edith Cowan University (ECU), Australia†
{wei.qin.chuah,ruwan.tennakoon,rezah,abh}@rmit.edu.au, d.suter@ecu.edu.au

1. Introduction
Stereo matching is a fundamental task in computer vision and is widely used for depth sensing in various applications such as augmented reality (AR), robotics and
autonomous driving. In recent years, end-to-end trained
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have achieved impressive results for this task as quantified by the performance on several publicly available stereo-matching benchmarks [6, 16, 18, 45, 52].
Generally, end-to-end stereo-matching networks require
a large amount of labelled data for training. To overcome

(III)
(IV)

State-of-the-art stereo matching networks trained only
on synthetic data often fail to generalize to more challenging real data domains. In this paper, we attempt to unfold
an important factor that hinders the networks from generalizing across domains: through the lens of shortcut learning.
We demonstrate that the learning of feature representations
in stereo matching networks is heavily influenced by synthetic data artefacts (shortcut attributes). To mitigate this
issue, we propose an Information-Theoretic Shortcut Avoidance (ITSA) approach to automatically restrict shortcutrelated information from being encoded into the feature representations. As a result, our proposed method learns robust and shortcut-invariant features by minimizing the sensitivity of latent features to input variations. To avoid the
prohibitive computational cost of direct input sensitivity optimization, we propose an effective yet feasible algorithm to
achieve robustness. We show that using this method, stateof-the-art stereo matching networks that are trained purely
on synthetic data can effectively generalize to challenging
and previously unseen real data scenarios. Importantly, the
proposed method enhances the robustness of the synthetic
trained networks to the point that they outperform their finetuned counterparts (on real data) for challenging out-ofdomain stereo datasets.

(II)

(I)

Abstract

(a) KITTI-15

(b) DrivingStereo

(c) Oxford

(d) Middlebury

Figure 1. Comparison of disparity maps estimated by PSMNet [6]
when it is trained under different settings and across multiple domains. Each column shows the results for a realistic domain
namely: KITTI 2015 [26], DrivingStereo [47], Oxford Robotcar [24] and Middlebury [35]. Rows from top to bottom show a
sample image (I) , the prediction for the Scene Flow pre-trained
model (II), KITTI-15 fine-tuned model (III), and the proposed
ITSA optimized method (IV). Comparing these figures shows that
PSMNet trained solely on synthetic data performs poorly on real
data and fine tuning only improves the result for KITTI dataset
(still fails to generalize for other scenarios). The proposed method
performs well across the board (best viewed in color).

this challenge, many state-of-the-art networks are initially
trained on labelled synthetic data, commonly generated using game engines. However, models trained using synthetic
data do not generalize well to unseen realistic domains. For
example, the PSMNet [6] pre-trained on the Scene Flow
dataset [25] performs poorly when tested on unseen realistic domains as illustrated in Fig. 1. Therefore, in practice,
the networks trained with synthetic data are fine-tuned using labelled data from the relevant target domain. However,
collecting even a relatively small amount of dense ground
truth data in the real-world can be challenging for tasks
like stereo-matching [22, 41]. Furthermore, to be practically useful in many applications, a stereo-matching model
should be able to generalize effortlessly to different do-

13022

