Cross-Domain Adaptive Teacher for Object Detection
Xiaoliang Dai2
Chih-Yao Ma2
Yen-Cheng Liu3
Kan Chen4
Bichen Wu2
Zijian He2
Kris Kitani1
Peter Vajda2
1
2
3
4
Carnegie Mellon University
Meta (Facebook)
Georgia Tech
Waymo

Yu-Jhe Li1 *

{yujheli,kkitani}@cs.cmu.edu, {xiaoliangdai,cyma,zijian,wbc,vajdap}@fb.com,
ycliu@gatech.edu, kanchen@waymo.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Developing algorithms that can transfer the knowledge
learned from one labeled dataset (i.e., source domain) to
another unlabeled dataset (i.e., target domain) becomes in* Work done during the internship at Meta (Facebook).

0.7

False Positive Ratio (%)

We address the task of domain adaptation in object detection, where there is an obvious domain gap between a
domain with annotations (source) and a domain of interest
without annotations (target). As a popular semi-supervised
learning method, the teacher-student framework (a student
model is supervised by the pseudo labels from a teacher
model) has also yielded a large accuracy gain in crossdomain object detection. However, it suffers from the domain shift and generates many low-quality pseudo labels
(e.g., false positives), which leads to sub-optimal performance. To mitigate this problem, we propose a teacherstudent framework named Adaptive Teacher (AT) which
leverages domain adversarial learning and weak-strong
data augmentation to address the domain gap. Specifically,
we employ feature-level adversarial training in the student
model, allowing features derived from the source and target
domains to share similar distributions. This process ensures
the student model produces domain-invariant features. Furthermore, we apply weak-strong augmentation and mutual
learning between the teacher model (taking data from the
target domain) and the student model (taking data from
both domains). This enables the teacher model to learn
the knowledge from the student model without being biased
to the source domain. We show that AT demonstrates superiority over existing approaches and even Oracle (fullysupervised) models by a large margin. For example, we
achieve 50.9% (49.3%) mAP on Foggy Cityscape (Clipart1K), which is 9.2% (5.2%) and 8.2% (11.0%) higher
than previous state-of-the-art and Oracle, respectively.

Pseudo labeling on target domain training set

0.8

0.6

0.5

Mean Teacher (MT)
MT + Weak-Strong Augmentation
MT + Adversarial Loss
Adaptive Teacher (Ours)

0.4

0.3

10k

20k

30k

40k

Mutual Learning Iteration

50k

60k

Figure 1. The effectiveness of domain loss and weak-strong
augmentation on pseudo labeling in Mean Teacher (MT) [40].
The figure shows the false positive ratio on the training set of Clipart1k (target) with PASCAL VOC as source. We run 5 identical
experiments for each setting and plot the error bound accordingly.
Due to inherent domain shift in the Teacher model, it generates
noisy pseudo labels without domain loss. The weak-strong augmentation is able to stabilize pseudo labeling.

creasingly important for object detection. Researchers have
proposed various methods, such as domain classifier and adversarial learning [10], to address the task of cross-domain
adaptation in object detection [2, 3, 14, 32, 39, 42, 44]. Even
though these methods have led to accuracy improvement,
solely using adversarial learning on the complex recognition task such as object detection is still limited. Hence,
there is generally still a large performance gap from the Oracle model (fully supervision) on the target domain.
To explore the potential of self-training on the unlabeled target domain for improved detection performance,
researchers have exploited and extend the teacher-student
self-training method from semi-supervised learning to domain adaptation [40]. These approaches are able to learn

7581

