Neural Mesh Simplification
Rolandos Alexandros Potamias1
Stylianos Ploumpis1,2
Stefanos Zafeiriou1,2
1
2
Imperial College London
Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd
{r.potamias, s.ploumpis, s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk

Figure 1. We present a fast and learnable method for mesh simplification that generates simplified meshes in real-time.

Abstract
Despite the advent in rendering, editing and preprocessing methods of 3D meshes, their real-time execution
remains still infeasible for large-scale meshes. To ease
and accelerate such processes, mesh simplification methods have been introduced with the aim to reduce the mesh
resolution while preserving its appearance. In this work we
attempt to tackle the novel task of learnable and differentiable mesh simplification. Compared to traditional simplification approaches that collapse edges in a greedy iterative manner, we propose a fast and scalable method that
simplifies a given mesh in one-pass. The proposed method
unfolds in three steps. Initially, a subset of the input vertices is sampled using a sophisticated extension of random
sampling. Then, we train a sparse attention network to propose candidate triangles based on the edge connectivity of
the sampled vertices. Finally, a classification network estimates the probability that a candidate triangle will be included in the final mesh. The fast, lightweight and differentiable properties of the proposed method makes it possible
to be plugged in every learnable pipeline without introducing a significant overhead. We evaluate both the sampled
vertices and the generated triangles under several appearance error measures and compare its performance against
several state-of-the-art baselines. Furthermore, we showcase that the running performance can be up to 10× faster
than traditional methods.

1. Introduction
Triangle meshes remain the most popular 3D structure
to represent a surface. The advent of 3D scanning devices
have made feasible to collect highly detailed 3D meshes
that typically hold thousand of faces. However, extreme
details lead to enormous memory requirements that limit
their usage. A wide range of applications including rendering and editing along with their mobile implementations,
require lightweight meshes to enable real-time processing.
Additionally, many monocular 3D reconstruction methods
that utilize analysis-by-synthesis are required to be computational efficient and differentiable in terms of their topologies. These types of iterative optimization methods can
drastically benefit from an differentiable on-the-fly simplification technique that reduce their computational footprint.
Mesh simplification is a long studied problem, with an
immense amount of methods developed to sustainably reduce the size of the original mesh without extremely distorting its appearance. Traditional simplification techniques
decimate the input mesh in a greedy-fashion by prioritizing vertices and edges according to a cost function [10, 34].
However, in large-scale objects scenario, simplifying over
90% of the original mesh size requires iterating through
thousands of vertices resulting in an inevitable computational burden. In addition to their computational footprint,
traditional simplification techniques are non-differentiable
and thus can not be used directly in end-to-end training
processes that optimize the mesh surface. To alleviate the
aforementioned limitations we propose a learnable strategy

18583

