Light Field Neural Rendering

1

Mohammed Suhail1,2 *

Carlos Esteves4

Leonid Sigal1,2,3

Ameesh Makadia4

suhail33@cs.ubc.ca

machc@google.com

lsigal@cs.ubc.ca

makadia@google.com

University of British Columbia

2

Vector Institute for AI

3

Canada CIFAR AI Chair

4

Google

Abstract
Classical light field rendering for novel view synthesis
can accurately reproduce view-dependent effects such as reflection, refraction, and translucency, but requires a dense
view sampling of the scene. Methods based on geometric reconstruction need only sparse views, but cannot accurately
model non-Lambertian effects. We introduce a model that
combines the strengths and mitigates the limitations of these
two directions. By operating on a four-dimensional representation of the light field, our model learns to represent
view-dependent effects accurately. By enforcing geometric
constraints during training and inference, the scene geometry is implicitly learned from a sparse set of views. Concretely, we introduce a two-stage transformer-based model
that first aggregates features along epipolar lines, then
aggregates features along reference views to produce the
color of a target ray. Our model outperforms the state-ofthe-art on multiple forward-facing and 360◦ datasets, with
larger margins on scenes with severe view-dependent variations. Code and results can be found at light-field-neuralrendering.github.io.

1. Introduction
Synthesizing a novel view given a sparse set of images is
a long-standing challenge in computer vision and graphics
[10, 41, 42]. Recent advances in 3D neural rendering for
view synthesis, in particular NeRF [31] and its successors
[15, 16, 27, 33, 36, 58], have brought us tantalizingly close
to the capability of creating photo-realistic images in complex environments. One reason for NeRF’s success is its implicit 5D scene representation which maps a 3D scene point
and 2D viewing direction to opacity and color. In principle, such a representation could be perfectly suited to modeling view-dependent effects such as the non-Lambertian
reflectance of specular and translucent surfaces. However,
without regularization, this formulation permits degenerate
solutions due to the inherent ambiguity between 3D sur* Work done while interning at Google.

Ground Truth

Ours (35.3 dB)

NeX (30.4 dB)

NeRF (29.6 dB)

Figure 1. Novel view synthesis. On top is the target image to be
rendered, from the Lab scene in the Shiny dataset [55]. Bottom
row shows crops of novel views generated by our proposed model,
NeX [55], and NeRF [31]. Unlike NeX and NeRF that fail to synthesize refractions on the test tube, our model almost perfectly reconstructs these complex view-dependent effects. We indicate the
PSNR of the rendered images within parenthesis (higher is better).
Images can be zoomed for detail.

face and radiance, where an incorrect shape (opacity) can
be coupled with a high-frequency radiance function to minimize the optimization objective [61]. In practice, NeRF
avoids such degenerate solutions through its neural architecture design, where the viewing direction is introduced
only in the last layers of the MLP, thereby limiting the expressivity of the radiance function, which effectively translates to a smooth BRDF prior [61]. Thus, NeRF manages to
avoid degenerate solutions at the expense of fidelity in nonLambertian effects (Fig. 1 highlights this particular limitation of the NeRF model). Photo-realistic synthesis of nonLambertian effects is one of the few remaining hurdles for
neural rendering techniques.
In this paper, we formulate view synthesis as rendering a

8269

