Adversarial Parametric Pose Prior
Andrey Davydov *

Anastasia Remizova

Victor Constantin

andrey.davydov@epfl.ch

anastasia.remizova@epfl.ch

victor.constantin@epfl.ch

Sina Honari

Mathieu Salzmann

Pascal Fua

sina.honari@epfl.ch

mathieu.salzmann@epfl.ch

pascal.fua@epfl.ch

CVLab, EPFL

Abstract
The Skinned Multi-Person Linear (SMPL) model represents human bodies by mapping pose and shape parameters
to body meshes. However, not all pose and shape parameter values yield physically-plausible or even realistic body
meshes. In other words, SMPL is under-constrained and
may yield invalid results.
We propose learning a prior that restricts the SMPL parameters to values that produce realistic poses via adversarial training. We show that our learned prior covers the
diversity of the real-data distribution, facilitates optimization for 3D reconstruction from 2D keypoints, and yields
better pose estimates when used for regression from images.
For all these tasks, it outperforms the state-of-the-art VAEbased approach to constraining the SMPL parameters. The
code will be made available at https://github.com/
cvlab-epfl/adv_param_pose_prior.

1. Introduction
The SMPL model [17] is now widely used to parameterize body poses and shapes [15, 21]. However, it offers
no guarantee to produce realistic human bodies when random values are passed as its inputs. This complicates its usage within an optimization, regression, or generative frameworks, where it is desirable that any sample drawn be plausible.
To mitigate this issue, several approaches have been
used. In [2], this is addressed by introducing a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) learned on the SMPL pose.
Unfortunately, due to its unbounded nature, it still allows
poses far away from any training example and potentially
unrealistic. In SMPL-X [22], a Variational Autoencoder
* This work was supported in part by the Swiss National Science Foundation

(VAE) is used instead to learn a low-dimensional representation of the SMPL parameters. This choice was motivated
by the ability of VAEs to model the distribution of valid
data samples in the latent space as a multivariate Gaussian,
which was shown to better approximate the data distribution than classical models, such as GMMs, while also facilitating sampling at test time. In both approaches, the
learned prior is then used together with other losses in an
optimization-based framework that aims at finding plausible human meshes. Unfortunately, VAEs have drawbacks.
First, their learned prior tends to be mean-centered and to
discard part of the original data distribution that are far away
from it. Furthermore, its Gaussian prior is unbounded, like
that of GMMs. Hence, one can also sample latent values
far away from any in the training set and produce unrealistic bodies. Adversarial training has been used to bound the
parameter prediction of SMPL in regression-based frameworks [5, 11]. However, this requires balancing the adversarial loss with other losses. More importantly, no explicit
prior has been learned in such cases, as this training needs
to be repeated for each new task.
In short, these approaches make it necessary to balance different losses and do not bound the inputs of the
SMPL model. In contrast, we aim at learning a prior, that
once learned can be used in an optimization or learningbased frameworks, without the requirement of enforcing
constraints on it. In other words, the learned prior should
be integrated as part of the SMPL model and the model can
be optimized only on the target loss, where the learned prior
is not added as an extra constraint. To this end, we learn an
explicit prior, that constrains the input of the SMPL model
to be realistic poses via adversarial training. This has to
be done only once and independently of the target application so that no further adversarial training is needed. Hence,
it does not require balancing multiple losses in the downstream tasks.
Furthermore, one can use a bounded distribution, such as

10997

