Generating Diverse and Natural 3D Human Motions from Text
Chuan Guo

Shihao Zou

Xinxin Zuo
Sen Wang
Li Cheng
University of Alberta

Wei Ji

Xingyu Li

{cguo2, szou2,wji3,xingyu,lcheng5}@ualberta.ca

Start

End
Start

Generated motion 1

End

Generated motion 2

Real motion

Figure 1. Taken as input the text description, “the figure rises from a lying position and walks in a counterclockwise circle, and then lays
back down the ground”, our approach generates multiple distinct 3D human motions (e.g. the left and middle panels) that are faithful to
the prescribed textual content. The real motion is also presented at the right panel for reference.

Abstract
Automated generation of 3D human motions from text
is a challenging problem. The generated motions are expected to be sufficiently diverse to explore the text-grounded
motion space, and more importantly, accurately depicting the content in prescribed text descriptions. Here we
tackle this problem with a two-stage approach: text2length
sampling and text2motion generation. Text2length involves
sampling from the learned distribution function of motion
lengths conditioned on the input text. This is followed by
our text2motion module using temporal variational autoencoder to synthesize a diverse set of human motions of the
sampled lengths. Instead of directly engaging with pose sequences, we propose motion snippet code as our internal
motion representation, which captures local semantic motion contexts and is empirically shown to facilitate the generation of plausible motions faithful to the input text. Moreover, a large-scale dataset of scripted 3D Human motions,
HumanML3D, is constructed, consisting of 14,616 motion
clips and 44,970 text descriptions.

1. Introduction
Given a short textual description of a character’s movement as for example, an excerpt from a novel or a script,

we are capable of visualizing the motions in our minds or
even in drawings. The question is, how to automate this process by a machine, or in paraphrase, to generate realistic 3D
human motions from text? This is the problem we tackle
with in this paper. As illustrated in Fig. 1, given the input feed of “the figure rises from a lying position and walks
in a counterclockwise circle, and then lays back down the
ground”, our goal is to generate a diverse set of plausible
3D human motion dynamics following precisely the action
types, directions, speeds, timing and styles as prescribed by
the text.This automation process could bring a broad range
of application impacts in AR/VR content creation, gaming,
robotics, and human-machine interaction, to name a few. 1
Meanwhile, existing efforts in generating 3D human motions from descriptions [1, 4, 21, 32, 44] are sporadic and
the results are far from being satisfactory. Several common
shortfalls are observed: the input text is usually one short
sentence; the task is invariably formulated as deterministic sequence-to-sequence generation, with the synthesized
motions tending to be stationary and lifeless; moreover, the
generated motions are restricted to have the same length; finally, the sole dataset relied on by existing methods, KIT
Motion-Language (KIT-ML) [31], consists of only 3,010
motion sequences focusing on locomotion actions. In particular, there are three inherit challenges yet to be addressed.
1 Project webpage: https://ericguo5513.github.io/text-to-motion

5152

