ELSR: Efficient Line Segment Reconstruction with Planes and Points Guidance
Dong Wei,Yi Wan†, Yongjun Zhang†, Xinyi Liu, Bin Zhang, Xiqi Wang
School of Remote Sensing and Information Engineering, Wuhan University
{weidong,yi.wan,zhangyj,liuxy,bin.zhang,wangxiqi}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Three-dimensional (3D) line segments are helpful for
scene reconstruction. Most of the existing 3D-line-segmentreconstruction algorithms deal with two views or dozens
of small-size images; while in practice there are usually
hundreds or thousands of large-size images. In this paper,
we propose an efficient line segment reconstruction method
called ELSR 1 . ELSR exploits scene planes that are commonly seen in city scenes and sparse 3D points that can be
acquired easily from the structure-from-motion (SfM) approach. For two views, ELSR efficiently finds the local scene
plane to guide the line matching and exploits sparse 3D
points to accelerate and constrain the matching. To reconstruct a 3D line segment with multiple views, ELSR utilizes
an efficient abstraction approach that selects representative
3D lines based on their spatial consistence. Our experiments demonstrated that ELSR had a higher accuracy and
efficiency than the existing methods. Moreover, our results
showed that ELSR could reconstruct 3D lines efficiently for
large and complex scenes that contain thousands of largesize images.

Image sequences

SfM: cameras, sparse 3D points

Connections

(a) Preprocessing for image sequences.

Fast two-view matching

Spatial evaluation

3D lines

(b) Line matching and abstraction.

Figure 1. The pipeline of ELSR. ELSR acquires the camera matrix, the sparse 3D point, and the connection between the images
from the SfM pipeline. ELSR first matches line segments for image pairs and finally abstracts the representative 3D lines by evaluating the matches in the image sequence.

1. Introduction
Castle #003

(a) LPI, 925 seconds

(b) LJL, 583 seconds

Castle #005

(c) GLM, 2290 seconds (d) ELSR, 0.5 seconds

1.1. Motivation and Objective
3D line segments are dominant in most urban scenes. It
provides structure information that is very useful for 3D
scene abstraction [12], dense matching [26], plane detection [15], and surface reconstruction [27]. But 3D line segment reconstruction is still a challenging task in computer
vision.
The main drawback of the existing line reconstruction
methods is that they lack an elegant solution for fast and
robust line matching in two views. Line matching is more
complex than point matching because line segments are indistinct in both texture and geometry in two views, and
there are few deep-learning-based methods for line match† Corresponding author
1 Available at https://skyearth.org/publication/project/ELSR

Figure 2. The 3D lines are reconstructed from two-view matching.
ELSR is compared with LPI [7], LJL [17], and GLM [30].

ing. Generally, the line needs to be grouped [7, 21] and the
texture needs to be rectified [17, 23] for robust matching.
However, these operations are computationally expensive
for they lack geometry guidance.
In this paper, we focus on improving the 3D line segment reconstruction by geometry-guided matching for the

15807

