Bayesian Nonparametric Submodular Video Partition for Robust
Anomaly Detection
Hitesh Sapkota Qi Yu
Rochester Institute of Technology
{hxs1943, qi.yu}@rit.edu

Abstract
Multiple-instance learning (MIL) provides an effective
way to tackle the video anomaly detection problem by modeling it as a weakly supervised problem as the labels are
usually only available at the video level while missing for
frames due to expensive labeling cost. We propose to conduct novel Bayesian non-parametric submodular video partition (BN-SVP) to significantly improve MIL model training
that can offer a highly reliable solution for robust anomaly
detection in practical settings that include outlier segments
or multiple types of abnormal events. BN-SVP essentially
performs dynamic non-parametric hierarchical clustering
with an enhanced self-transition that groups segments in a
video into temporally consistent and semantically coherent
hidden states that can be naturally interpreted as scenes.
Each segment is assumed to be generated through a nonparametric mixture process that allows variations of segments within the same scenes to accommodate the dynamic
and noisy nature of many real-world surveillance videos.
The scene and mixture component assignment of BN-SVP
also induces a pairwise similarity among segments, resulting in non-parametric construction of a submodular set
function. Integrating this function with an MIL loss effectively exposes the model to a diverse set of potentially positive instances to improve its training. A greedy algorithm is
developed to optimize the submodular function and support
efficient model training. Our theoretical analysis ensures a
strong performance guarantee of the proposed algorithm.
The effectiveness of the proposed approach is demonstrated
over multiple real-world anomaly video datasets with robust detection performance.

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection from videos poses fundamental challenges as abnormal activities are usually rare, complicated,
and unbounded in nature [15]. Furthermore, segment or
frame labels are typically unavailable due to high labeling
cost and therefore, the detection models have to rely on the
weak video level labels [19]. There are two main streams

of work to handle the challenging anomaly detection task.
The first stream treats anomaly detection as an unsupervised learning problem [21]. It assumes that an event is
considered to be abnormal if it deviates significantly from
a predefined set of normal events included in the training
data [2, 24, 26]. However, a model trained on limited normal data is likely to capture only specific characteristics
present in the training dataset, and therefore, testing normal events deviating significantly from the training normal
events will lead to a high false alarm rate [27]. The second stream of research has attempted to address the limitation by formulating the problem as multiple instance learning (MIL) that models each video as a bag and its segments (or frames) as instances within the bag [19]. The
goal is to learn a model that can effectively make framelevel anomaly predictions relying on the video-level labels
during the training process. One effective MIL learning objective is to maximize the gap between two instances having
the respective highest anomaly scores from a pair of positive and negative bags. The maximum score based MIL (referred as MMIL) model outperformed the unsupervised approaches and achieved promising performance in real-world
long surveillance videos [19].
However, there are two key limitations with the MMIL
model. First, the presence of noisy outliers (different from
other normal events) in both abnormal and normal videos
may significantly impact the overall model performance.
This is because the objective function solely focuses on the
individual segments from both positive and negative bags,
making the training process sensitive to noises. Figure 1 (ab) shows the example normal frames that are significantly
different from other normal ones in real-world surveillance
videos. The first frame is from the burglary video that looks
similar to an abnormal frame from a video with an arson
event. The second frame is from the shooting video that
looks similar to a fighting frame. Hence, they may serve as
outliers in the corresponding videos.
Second, if multiple types of abnormal events (referred
to as multi-modal anomaly) present in a single abnormal
video, MMIL may only detect one type of anomaly while

3212

