Coarse-to-fine Deep Video Coding with Hyperprior-guided Mode Prediction
Zhihao Hu1 , Guo Lu2 , Jinyang Guo3 , Shan Liu4 , Wei Jiang4 , Dong Xu3†
1
Beihang University, China 2 Beijing Institute of Technology, China
3
The University of Sydney, Australia 4 Tencent, America

Abstract
The previous deep video compression approaches only
use the single scale motion compensation strategy and
rarely adopt the mode prediction technique from the traditional standards like H.264/H.265 for both motion and
residual compression. In this work, we first propose a
coarse-to-fine (C2F) deep video compression framework
for better motion compensation, in which we perform motion estimation, compression and compensation twice in a
coarse to fine manner. Our C2F framework can achieve
better motion compensation results without significantly increasing bit costs. Observing hyperprior information (i.e.,
the mean and variance values) from the hyperprior networks contains discriminant statistical information of different patches, we also propose two efficient hyperpriorguided mode prediction methods. Specifically, using hyperprior information as the input, we propose two mode prediction networks to respectively predict the optimal block
resolutions for better motion coding and decide whether to
skip residual information from each block for better residual coding without introducing additional bit cost while
bringing negligible extra computation cost. Comprehensive
experimental results demonstrate our proposed C2F video
compression framework equipped with the new hyperpriorguided mode prediction methods achieves the state-of-theart performance on HEVC, UVG and MCL-JCV datasets.

1. Introduction
Video compression systems are becoming more and
more important for various practical applications due to the
rapidly increasing demand for transmitting and storing huge
amount of videos. While the conventional methods like
H.264 [43], H.265 [33] and the recent standard H.266 [32]
have achieved promising results based on different handcrafted techniques, they cannot be end-to-end optimized by
using large-scale video datasets.
Recently, a large number of deep video compression
works [3, 12, 15, 23] have been proposed (see Section 2 for
† Dong Xu is the corresponding author.

more details), and most of them follow the hybrid coding
framework [32, 33, 43], in which both motion compensation and residual compression modules are used to reduce
the spatio-temporal redundancy. Therefore, two aspects are
critical when designing new deep video codecs: 1) how to
generate more accurate motion information for better motion compensation and 2) how to design more effective motion compression and residual compression approaches.
The state-of-the-art learning based video compression
methods [3, 15, 23] only use the single scale motion estimation and compensation strategy. Considering that the
motion patterns in videos may be complex, these singlescale deep video codecs may not work well for compressing videos from complex scenarios with significant motion patterns. Motivated by the successful applications of
the coarse-to-fine strategy for various tasks (e.g., optical
flow estimation [29] and video super-resolution [41]), in
this work, we first propose a new coarse-to-fine deep video
compression framework by adopting a two-stage motion
compensation strategy to better generate the predicted feature. At the coarse level, given the low-resolution features from the reference frame and the current frame, we
perform motion estimation to produce the low-resolution
offset features, which are then compressed after using the
motion compression module. After upsampling the reconstructed offset features, we further perform coarse-level motion compensation to wrap the high-resolution reference
feature as the intermediate predicted feature. Based on this
intermediate predicted feature and the high-resolution feature from the current frame, we perform these major operations (i.e., motion estimation, compression, and compensation) again at the fine level to additionally warp this intermediate predicted feature for better motion compensation. Our
two-stage coarse-to-fine motion compensation strategy can
generate better predicted feature for the subsequent residual
compression module without significantly increasing the bit
cost, which leads to better video compression performance.
To further improve video compression performance, we
also propose two efficient mode prediction methods for both
motion compression and residual compression, which are
motivated by the success of the rate-distortion (RD) opti-

5921

