Generating 3D Bio-Printable Patches Using Wound Segmentation and
Reconstruction to Treat Diabetic Foot Ulcers
Han Joo Chae

Seunghwan Lee Hyewon Son Seungyeob Han
ROKIT Healthcare, Inc.

Taebin Lim

{hanjoo.chae, seunghwan.lee, hyewon.son, seungyeob.han, taebin.lim}@rokit.co.kr

(a) Wound capturing

(b) 3D patch generation

(c) 3D bio-printing

(d) Applying the patch

Figure 1. The procedure of the DFU treatment includes (a) wound image capturing, (b) hybrid 3D patch generation combining 2D semantic
segmentation and 3D reconstruction, (c) printing the patch using a 3D bio-printer, and (d) applying the printed patch to the wound.

Abstract
We introduce AiD Regen, a novel system that generates 3D wound models combining 2D semantic segmentation with 3D reconstruction so that they can be printed via
3D bio-printers during the surgery to treat diabetic foot ulcers (DFUs). AiD Regen seamlessly binds the full pipeline,
which includes RGB-D image capturing, semantic segmentation, boundary-guided point-cloud processing, 3D model
reconstruction, and 3D printable G-code generation, into a
single system that can be used out of the box. We developed
a multi-stage data preprocessing method to handle small
and unbalanced DFU image datasets. AiD Regen’s humanin-the-loop machine learning interface enables clinicians
to not only create 3D regenerative patches with just a few
touch interactions but also customize and confirm wound
boundaries. As evidenced by our experiments, our model
outperforms prior wound segmentation models and our reconstruction algorithm is capable of generating 3D wound
models with compelling accuracy. We further conducted a
case study on a real DFU patient and demonstrated the effectiveness of AiD Regen in treating DFU wounds.

1. Introduction
Diabetic foot ulcer (DFU) is the most costly and devastating complication of diabetes mellitus, which affects
15 % of diabetic patients during their lifetimes [61]. Poor

blood circulation and high glucose levels decrease diabetic
patients’ ability to heal, and every 20 seconds, a leg is
lost through amputation due to infection and necrosis [3].
With the urgent need for a novel treatment method, the
integration of 3D printing and bio-materials is paving the
way toward devising innovative solutions in regenerative
medicine [48]. Kesavan et al. [35] have applied 3D bioprinted patches, that consist of minimally manipulated extracellular matrix (MA-ECM) harvested from autologous
fat tissues, to DFU wounds and shown a complete healing
with re-epithelialization only within about four weeks.
However, such use of 3D bio-printing technology is not
accessible for many medical practitioners as it requires a
complex process of 3D scanning and modeling. Conventional medical scanning methods, such as CT and MRI
scans, often demand large, special devices and environments as well as experts who can operate them. In addition,
the results of these scans usually include unnecessary parts
and peripherals so that hospitals need to hire CAD engineers for post-processing the results or rely on outsourcing;
either way, cost increases are inevitable. Also, since treatments of skin wounds like DFU are usually followed by
debridement, a surgical removal of damaged tissue, the 3D
patch creation must be done as quickly as possible to prevent debrided wounds from contamination. External postprocessing and outsourcing might not be the best solutions
in such time sensitive situations. Though portable industrial 3D scanners [53] lowered spatial and technical barriers, they still require users to understand correct scanning

2539

