BasicVSR++: Improving Video Super-Resolution
with Enhanced Propagation and Alignment
Kelvin C.K. Chan

Shangchen Zhou
Xiangyu Xu
Chen Change Loy
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

{chan0899, s200094, xiangyu.xu, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg

BasicVSR

BasicVSR++

BasicVSR

BasicVSR++
(ours)

BasicVSR++
Bas ic VSR
(CVPR21)

spatial
warping

residual
offsets

RSDN
(ECCV20)

DUF
(CVPR18)

RBPN
(CVPR19)

PFNL
(ICCV19)

RLSP
(ICCVW19)

#Params

Optical flow
Features

(a) Propagation

EDVR
(CVPRW19)

IconVSR
(CVPR21)

DCN

(b) Alignment

FRVSR
(CVPR18)

5M 10M 15M

20M

(c) Performance Gain

Figure 1. Improvements over BasicVSR [3]. (a) Second-order grid propagation in BasicVSR++ allows a more effective propagation of
features. (b) Flow-guided deformable alignment in BasicVSR++ provides a means for more robust feature alignment across misaligned
frames. (c) BasicVSR++ outperforms existing state of the arts including its predecessor, BasicVSR, while maintaining efficiency.

Abstract
A recurrent structure is a popular framework choice
for the task of video super-resolution. The state-of-theart method BasicVSR adopts bidirectional propagation with
feature alignment to effectively exploit information from the
entire input video. In this study, we redesign BasicVSR by
proposing second-order grid propagation and flow-guided
deformable alignment. We show that by empowering the recurrent framework with enhanced propagation and alignment, one can exploit spatiotemporal information across
misaligned video frames more effectively. The new components lead to an improved performance under a similar computational constraint. In particular, our model BasicVSR++ surpasses BasicVSR by a significant 0.82 dB in
PSNR with similar number of parameters. BasicVSR++ is
generalizable to other video restoration tasks, and obtains
three champions and one first runner-up in NTIRE 2021
video restoration challenge.

1. Introduction
Video super-resolution (VSR) is challenging in that one
needs to gather complementary information across misaligned video frames for restoration. One prevalent approach is the sliding-window framework [9, 28, 31, 35],
where each frame in the video is restored using the frames

within a short temporal window. In contrast to the slidingwindow framework, a recurrent framework attempts to exploit the long-term dependencies by propagating the latent
features. In general, these methods [8, 10–12, 14, 24] allow
a more compact model compared to those in the slidingwindow framework. Nevertheless, the problems of transmitting long-term information and aligning features across
frames in a recurrent model remain challenging.
We study the problems above by choosing the recent
state of the art, BasicVSR [3], as our base model. Improving
BasicVSR is non-trivial because it has already been used to
explore different schemes and is one of the most effective
designs for feature propagation and alignment. In particular,
BasicVSR adopts bidirectional propagation to aggressively
exploit information from the entire input video for reconstruction. For alignment, it designs an effective module that
uses optical flow for feature warping (see Fig. 1).
We wish to explore if there are more effective ways to
aggregate temporal information in a video, so that one can
restore finer details and deal with occluded and complex
regions better than BasicVSR. Such a study is meaningful
and fundamental as it will benefit the design of future VSR
models. To this end, we redesign BasicVSR by devising
second-order grid propagation and flow-guided deformable
alignment that allow information to be propagated and aggregated more effectively.

5972

