Rope3D: The Roadside Perception Dataset for Autonomous Driving
and Monocular 3D Object Detection Task
Xiaoqing Ye1 * Mao Shu1∗ Hanyu Li 1 Yifeng Shi1
Yingying Li1 Guangjie Wang2 Xiao Tan1† Errui Ding 1
1

Baidu Inc.

2

China University of Mining and Technology

Abstract
Concurrent perception datasets for autonomous driving
are mainly limited to frontal view with sensors mounted
on the vehicle. None of them is designed for the overlooked roadside perception tasks. On the other hand, the
data captured from roadside cameras have strengths over
frontal-view data, which is believed to facilitate a safer
and more intelligent autonomous driving system. To accelerate the progress of roadside perception, we present
the first high-diversity challenging Roadside Perception 3D
dataset- Rope3D from a novel view. The dataset consists
of 50k images and over 1.5M 3D objects in various scenes,
which are captured under different settings including various cameras with ambiguous mounting positions, camera specifications, viewpoints, and different environmental
conditions. We conduct strict 2D-3D joint annotation and
comprehensive data analysis, as well as set up a new 3D
roadside perception benchmark with metrics and evaluation devkit. Furthermore, we tailor the existing frontal-view
monocular 3D object detection approaches and propose to
leverage the geometry constraint to solve the inherent ambiguities caused by various sensors, viewpoints. Our dataset
is available on https://thudair.baai.ac.cn/rope.

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving plays a crucial role in helping reduce traffic accidents and improve transportation efficiency.
Current perceptual systems mainly equip the moving vehicle with LiDAR or camera sensors. Owing to the movement, the vehicle perceptual system can not observe surroundings for a long period. In addition, since the mounted
sensor is relatively low (usually on the top of a vehicle), the
perceptual range is comparatively limited and is vulnerable
to occlusion. On the contrary, the data captured from road* indicates equal contribution
† Xiao Tan (tanxchong@gmail.com is the corresponding author.)

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. The comparison of (a) frontal view and (b) roadside
camera view with a pitch angle. The car view focuses more on
the frontal area whereas the roadside camera observes the scene
in a long-term and large-range manner. Vehicles can be easily
occluded by closer objects in frontal view but the roadside view
alleviates the risk. For example, for car-view (a), the white van is
occluded by the black jeep whereas in roadside view (b) they are
both visible, corresponding to the white and pink 3D boxes in (c).
The triangle mark denotes the same LiDAR-mounted vehicle.

side cameras has its inherent strengths in terms of robustness to occlusion and long-time event prediction, since they
are collected from cameras mounted on poles a few meters
above the ground. The comparisons between two different
views of data are depicted in Fig. 1.
The importance of roadside perception is listed as follows: (1) Cooperative to Autonomous driving (AD). AD
still faces safety challenges and uncontrolled threats due to
blind spots. Instead, the roadside view can cover the blind
spots for two extra advantages over car views: a long-range
global perspective to extend vehicles’ perception field spatially and temporally and global trajectory prediction for

21341

