GCFSR: a Generative and Controllable Face Super Resolution Method
Without Facial and GAN Priors
Jingwen He1 Wu Shi2,3 Kai Chen1 Lean Fu1 Chao Dong2,4, ∗
ByteDance Inc, 2 ShenZhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
SIAT-SenseTime Joint Lab, Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
3
Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Joint Laboratory of Human-Machine Intelligence-Synergy Systems,
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China,
4
Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai, China.
1

hejingwenhejingwen@outlook.com, wu.shi@siat.ac.cn,
{chenkai.ck9838, fulean}@bytedance.com, chao.dong@siat.ac.cn

input ×32

s = 24

s = 32

s = 48

GT

Figure 1. The results of our proposed GCFSR on CelebA-HQ [16] for 32× SR. Left: The original 32 × 32 LR input image is upsampled
(×32) to a resolution 10242 by bicubic interpolation. The middle three images are the modulated results of GCFSR under different
conditional upscaling factors (s = 24, s = 32, s = 48). The conditional upscaling factor s controls the generative strength. The best SR
result (s = 32) is denoted by a yellow rectangle. Right: The ground truth (GT) at 10242 resolution. (Zoom in for best view)

Abstract
Face image super resolution (face hallucination) usually relies on facial priors to restore realistic details and
preserve identity information. Recent advances can achieve
impressive results with the help of GAN prior. They either design complicated modules to modify the fixed GAN
prior or adopt complex training strategies to finetune the
generator. In this work, we propose a generative and controllable face SR framework, called GCFSR, which can reconstruct images with faithful identity information without
any additional priors. Generally, GCFSR has an encodergenerator architecture. Two modules called style modulation and feature modulation are designed for the multifactor SR task. The style modulation aims to generate realistic face details and the feature modulation dynamically
fuses the multi-level encoded features and the generated
ones conditioned on the upscaling factor. The simple and
elegant architecture can be trained from scratch in an end* Corresponding author

to-end manner. For small upscaling factors (≤8), GCFSR
can produce surprisingly good results with only adversarial loss. After adding L1 and perceptual losses, GCFSR can
outperform state-of-the-art methods for large upscaling factors (16, 32, 64). During the test phase, we can modulate
the generative strength via feature modulation by changing the conditional upscaling factor continuously to achieve
various generative effects. Code is available at https:
//github.com/hejingwenhejingwen/GCFSR.

1. Introduction
Face image super resolution (face SR or face hallucination) algorithms have been developing rapidly in recent
years, with its wide application in video restoration and
AI photographing. Face SR has a close relationship with
general image SR [8, 9, 31–33, 38, 41] and face generation
tasks [10, 15, 17, 18, 20]. Similar as general image SR, face
SR is a restoration problem, whose goal is to reconstruct
correct structures and preserve identity information. Differ-

1889

