Robust Invertible Image Steganography
Youmin Xu† , Chong Mou† , Yujie Hu† , Jingfen Xie† , Jian Zhang†,‡
†
Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen, China
‡
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
youmin.xu@stu.pku.edu.cn; eechongm@gmail.com; hhuyujie@stu.pku.edu.cn;
xiejf@stu.pku.edu.cn; zhangjian.sz@pku.edu.cn

Input Pair

1. Introduction
Steganography is a widely studied topic [12], which aims
to hide messages like audio, image, and hyperlink into one
container in an undetected way. In Fig. 1, image steganography takes the secret and host image as input to produce the
container image. In its reverse process, it is only possible
for the receivers with a specific revealing network to reconstruct secret information from the container image, which
This work was supported in part by Shenzhen Fundamental Research
Program (No.GXWD20201231165807007-20200807164903001). (Corresponding author: Jian Zhang.)

Encoder

Secret Image

Decoder
Revealed Secret Revealed Host

Container
distortion

Failure

Image steganography aims to hide secret images into a
container image, where the secret is hidden from human vision and can be restored when necessary. Previous image
steganography methods are limited in hiding capacity and
robustness, commonly vulnerable to distortion on container
images such as Gaussian noise, Poisson noise, and lossy
compression. This paper presents a novel flow-based framework for robust invertible image steganography, dubbed as
RIIS. A conditional normalizing flow is introduced to model
the distribution of the redundant high-frequency component
with the condition of the container image. Moreover, a welldesigned container enhancement module (CEM) also contributes to the robust reconstruction. To regulate the network parameters for different distortion levels, a distortionguided modulation (DGM) is implemented over flow-based
blocks to make it a one-size-fits-all model. In terms of both
clean and distorted image steganography, extensive experiments reveal that the proposed RIIS efficiently improves the
robustness while maintaining imperceptibility and capacity.
As far as we know, we are the first to propose a learningbased scheme to enhance the robustness of image steganography in the literature. The guarantee of steganography robustness significantly broadens the application of steganography in real-world applications.

ISN

Host Image

Revealed Secret Revealed Host

Distorted
Container

Success

Abstract

RIIS
Revealed Secret Revealed Host

Figure 1. The upper row depicts the universal pipeline of image steganography. Previous steganography like ISN [35] gains
poor revealed secret and revealed host image when the container
is under slight distortion. On the contrary, our RIIS takes various
distortion into consideration, which shows satisfactory robustness.

is visually identical to the host image. Steganalysis techniques usually distinguish the container and host image by
color, frequency, and other features. Thus the secret image
should be hidden in the invisible domain of the container
image. It is also valuable in applications to embed as much
confidential data as possible into the host image, which is
evaluated as payload capacity.
The image steganography is designed to keep the hiding capacity while considering security and imperceptibility against steganalysis. Existing steganography schemes
[11, 43, 59] fail to strike a balance between imperceptibility
and high payload capacity. Traditional methods transform
the secret messages in the spatial or adaptive domains [29],
achieving the capacities of 0.2∼4 bits per pixel (bpp). The
secret data is usually embedded into fewer significance bits
[11] or indistinguishable parts, limiting the amount of secret
information capacity. Recent learning-based steganography
methods [7, 8] make an effort to exploit the potential capacity of secret. Most of them take the pre-processing, concealing, and revealing as separate modules and design specific

7875

