Location-Free Human Pose Estimation
Xixia Xu1 ,* Yingguo Gao2 , Ke Yan2†, Xue Lin1 , Qi Zou1†
1
Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing Jiaotong University, China
2
Tencent Youtu Lab, Shanghai, China
{19112036,18112028,qzou}@bjtu.edu.cn;

Abstract

Human pose estimation (a.k.a., keypoint localization) is
a challenging yet fundamental computer vision task, which
aims to detect the keypoint locations (e.g., eyes, ankles). In
recent years, HPE has witnessed dramatic progress with the
development of CNNs. An integral factor of the achievement is the availability of large-scale training data with
* Works done while interning at Tencent Youtu Lab.
† Corresponding author.

rknee
rwrist.

Location-sup

Baseline result

Location-free

Our result

rshou.
lshou.

…

1. Introduction

rshou.
lshou.

…

Human pose estimation (HPE) usually requires largescale training data to reach high performance. However,
it is rather time-consuming to collect high-quality and finegrained annotations for human body. To alleviate this issue, we revisit HPE and propose a location-free framework
without supervision of keypoint locations. We reformulate
the regression-based HPE from the perspective of classification. Inspired by the CAM-based weakly-supervised object localization, we observe that the coarse keypoint locations can be acquired through the part-aware CAMs but
unsatisfactory due to the gap between the fine-grained HPE
and the object-level localization. To this end, we propose a
customized transformer framework to mine the fine-grained
representation of human context, equipped with the structural relation to capture subtle differences among keypoints.
Concretely, we design a Multi-scale Spatial-guided Context
Encoder to fully capture the global human context while focusing on the part-aware regions and a Relation-encoded
Pose Prototype Generation module to encode the structural
relations. All these works together for strengthening the
weak supervision from image-level category labels on locations. Our model achieves competitive performance on
three datasets when only supervised at a category-level and
importantly, it can achieve comparable results with fullysupervised methods with only 25% location labels on MSCOCO and MPII.

{yingguogao,kerwinyan}@tencent.com

rknee
rwrist.

Figure 1. Column 1: Location-supervised v.s. Location-free
HPE; Column 2-4: the result of location-free baseline v.s. the
result of our method. Noted that the correct joints are lankle, lshou
and rankle respectively.

precise location annotations. However, it’s rather labelintensive and time-consuming to collect high-quality and
fine-grained annotations. Thus, we study the keypoint localization when only the image-level category labels are given.
The Class Activation Mapping (CAM) [53] is a simple
but effective method to discover object regions from intermediate classifier activation with only image-level labels,
which has been the cornerstone of weakly-supervised object localization (WSOL) [53] and weakly-supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) [47]. The CAM tends to focus on the most discriminative parts of object, and many approaches [20,46,48] are proposed to improve CAM to cover
the full extend of an object. But these methods cannot localize the subtle joints due to the gap between the object-level
localization and fine-grained keypoint localization.
Our method is also built upon CAM. There are two main
obstacles for applying CAM in HPE. i) For tiny and local keypoints, it’s hard for the model to capture the precise
spatial features for accurate prediction without the explicit
location labels. Furthermore, the local appearance features learned only relying on the image-level labels are not
comprehensive enough for understanding the human body.
Therefore, more contextual information and explicit spatial

13137

