Video Frame Interpolation with Transformer
Liying Lu1 Ruizheng Wu2 Huaijia Lin2 Jiangbo Lu2 Jiaya Jia1
1
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
SmartMore
{lylu,rzwu,linhj,leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, jiangbo@smartmore.com

Abstract
Video frame interpolation (VFI), which aims to synthesize intermediate frames of a video, has made remarkable
progress with development of deep convolutional networks
over past years. Existing methods built upon convolutional networks generally face challenges of handling large
motion due to the locality of convolution operations. To
overcome this limitation, we introduce a novel framework,
which takes advantage of Transformer to model long-range
pixel correlation among video frames. Further, our network is equipped with a novel cross-scale window-based
attention mechanism, where cross-scale windows interact
with each other. This design effectively enlarges the receptive field and aggregates multi-scale information. Extensive
quantitative and qualitative experiments demonstrate that
our method achieves new state-of-the-art results on various
benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Video frame interpolation (VFI) is a fundamental video
processing task in which intermediate frames are synthesized between given consecutive ones to increase the frame
rate. It is effective in alleviating motion blur and judder,
and has become a compelling strategy for numerous applications, such as novel view synthesis [15, 20], video compression [48], video restoration [16, 21, 49], and slow motion generation [2, 19, 27, 32, 35, 38]. Many popular algorithms adopt optical flow warping [2, 3, 19, 25, 27, 32, 33, 36,
37, 42, 50] to tackle this challenging task. Though achieving remarkable performance, these methods built upon convolutional networks generally face challenges of capturing
long-range spatial interactions due to the intrinsic locality of
convolution operations, thus limited in handling large motion, which is one of the main challenges of VFI.
Recently, natural language processing (NLP) [4, 12,
46] and computer vision [6, 14, 26] tasks achieve notable
progress using Transformers, which is a highly adaptive architecture with strong modeling capability. In this work,
we are inspired to explore the application of Transformers

AdaCoF

RIFE

Inputs (Overlay)

GT

ABME

Ours

Figure 1. Visual comparison on a challenging sample from Middlebury dataset [1]. Our method produces the result more appealing than the three leading VFI methods, i.e., AdaCoF [22],
RIFE [17] and ABME [37].

in the context of video frame interpolation and introduce a
novel network, VFIformer. With the attention mechanism
as the core operation, VFIformer is able to model pixel correspondence between different frames. Besides, its strong
capability of capturing long-range dependency is helpful for
handling large motion (see Fig. 1).
Since the vanilla Transformer needs high memory and
computational cost, the proposed VFIformer is designed
in a UNet [40] architecture where features are processed
in different scales to reduce the computational complexity and enlarge the receptive field. Besides, to overcome
the quadratic complexity, inspired by recent work [11, 23,

3532

