Give Me Your Attention:
Dot-Product Attention Considered Harmful for Adversarial Patch Robustness
Giulio Lovisotto1,2
1

Nicole Finnie2

University of Oxford

2

Mauricio Munoz2
Jan Hendrik Metzen2

Chaithanya Kumar Mummadi2,3

Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence

3

University of Freiburg

giulio.lovisotto@cs.ox.ac.uk,
{Nicole.Finnie,AndresMauricio.MunozDelgado,ChaithanyaKumar.Mummadi,JanHendrik.Metzen}@de.bosch.com

Figure 1. Comparison of clean and adversarially patched input for DETR [8]. The patch shifts a targeted key token towards the cluster
of query tokens (middle column). For dot-product attention, this effectively directs the attention of all queries to the malicious token and
prevents the model from detecting the remaining objects. The right column compares queries’ attention weights to the target key, marked
by a red box, between clean and patched inputs and highlights large attention weights drawn by this adversarial key.

Abstract
Neural architectures based on attention such as vision
transformers are revolutionizing image recognition. Their
main benefit is that attention allows reasoning about all
parts of a scene jointly. In this paper, we show how the
global reasoning of (scaled) dot-product attention can be
the source of a major vulnerability when confronted with
adversarial patch attacks. We provide a theoretical understanding of this vulnerability and relate it to an adversary’s
ability to misdirect the attention of all queries to a single key
token under the control of the adversarial patch. We propose novel adversarial objectives for crafting adversarial
patches which target this vulnerability explicitly. We show
the effectiveness of the proposed patch attacks on popular
image classification (ViTs and DeiTs) and object detection
models (DETR). We find that adversarial patches occupying 0.5% of the input can lead to robust accuracies as low
as 0% for ViT on ImageNet, and reduce the mAP of DETR
on MS COCO to less than 3%.

1. Introduction
The attention mechanism plays a prominent role in recent success of transformers for different language and
image processing tasks. Recent breakthroughs in image
recognition using vision transformers [12, 23, 37] have inspired different architectures’ design for tackling tasks such
as object detection [4, 8], semantic segmentation [35, 41,
46, 48], image synthesis [13, 17, 40], video understanding [3, 6, 15, 15, 19, 24, 30, 36, 49], and low-level vision
tasks [9, 21, 42, 47]. These different transformers use the
dot-product attention mechanism as an integral component
of their architectural design to model global interactions
among different input or feature patches. Understanding
robustness of these dot-product attention-based networks
against adversarial attacks targeting security-critical vulnerabilities is important for their deployment into real-world
applications.
The increasing interest of research in transformers across
vision tasks has motivated several recent works [2, 5, 7, 14,

15234

