Event-aided Direct Sparse Odometry
Javier Hidalgo-Carrió1 , Guillermo Gallego2 , Davide Scaramuzza1
1
Dept. of Informatics, Univ. of Zurich and Dept. of Neuroinformatics, Univ. of Zurich and ETH Zurich.
2
Technische Universität Berlin, Einstein Center Digital Future and SCIoI Excellence Cluster, Germany.

Figure 1. Camera trajectory and estimated 3D map (left). The top-right inset shows the sliding window map (grayscale points) with the
current keyframe map (pseudo-colored blue-red points, according to event polarity). The bottom-right insets show the color image (frame)
with the real events (left) and the image obtained by the event generative model (right).

Abstract
We introduce EDS, a direct monocular visual odometry using events and frames. Our algorithm leverages the
event generation model to track the camera motion in the
blind time between frames. The method formulates a direct probabilistic approach of observed brightness increments. Per-pixel brightness increments are predicted using
a sparse number of selected 3D points and are compared
to the events via the brightness increment error to estimate camera motion. The method recovers a semi-dense 3D
map using photometric bundle adjustment. EDS is the first
method to perform 6-DOF VO using events and frames with
a direct approach. By design it overcomes the problem of
changing appearance in indirect methods. Our results outperform all previous event-based odometry solutions. We
also show that, for a target error performance, EDS can
work at lower frame rates than state-of-the-art frame-based
VO solutions. This opens the door to low-power motiontracking applications where frames are sparingly triggered
“on demand” and our method tracks the motion in between.
We release code and datasets to the public.

Multimedia Material

1. Introduction
Visual Odometry (VO) is a paramount tool in computer
vision, robotics and, any application that requires spatial
reasoning [1–3]. In recent years, considerable progress has
been made on this topic [1, 4–6]. However, VO systems are
limited by the capabilities of their physical devices (sensors,
processors, and power). Some of these limitations (e.g.,
motion blur, dynamic range) can been tackled with novel
and/or more robust sensors, such as event cameras.
Event cameras [7–9] are bio-inspired sensors that work
radically different from traditional cameras. Instead of capturing brightness images at a fixed rate, they measure asynchronous, per-pixel brightness changes, called “events”.1
This principle of operation endows event cameras with outstanding properties, such as low latency, high temporal resolution (in the order of µs) and low power (milliwatts instead
of watts). The large potential of event cameras to tackle VO
and related problems in challenging scenarios has been investigated in [10–21]. We refer to a recent comprehensive
survey paper for further details [22].
Event-based VO is a challenging problem that has been
addressed step-by-step in scenarios with increasing complexity. Two fundamental challenges arise when working
with event cameras: noise (caused by timestamp jitter, pixel
1 See an illustrative animation: https://youtu.be/LauQ6LWTkxM?t=30

Code and dataset can be found at: https://rpg.ifi.uzh.ch/eds

5781

