Paramixer: Parameterizing Mixing Links in Sparse Factors Works Better than
Dot-Product Self-Attention
Tong Yu * Ruslan Khalitov ∗ Lei Cheng Zhirong Yang †
Norwegian University of Science and Technology

Abstract

The scalability issue significantly restricted the application
of neural models based on self-attention.

Self-Attention is a widely used building block in neural modeling to mix long-range data elements. Most selfattention neural networks employ pairwise dot-products to
specify the attention coefficients. However, these methods require O(N 2 ) computing cost for sequence length N .
Even though some approximation methods have been introduced to relieve the quadratic cost, the performance of
the dot-product approach is still bottlenecked by the lowrank constraint in the attention matrix factorization. In this
paper, we propose a novel scalable and effective mixing
building block called Paramixer. Our method factorizes the
interaction matrix into several sparse matrices, where we
parameterize the non-zero entries by MLPs with the data
elements as input. The overall computing cost of the new
building block is as low as O(N log N ). Moreover, all factorizing matrices in Paramixer are full-rank, so it does not
suffer from the low-rank bottleneck. We have tested the new
method on both synthetic and various real-world long sequential data sets and compared it with several state-of-theart attention networks. The experimental results show that
Paramixer has better performance in most learning tasks.

Various methods have been introduced to alleviate the
quadratic cost of full attention. Some of them attempt to
shorten the sequence length [2, 29], even though much information is lost. Others try to break up the softmax by
a certain kernel factorization. Another family of methods sparsify the attention matrix with predefined attention
[3, 4, 7, 27, 33]. However, most Transformer variants stick
to the dot-product self-attention, of which the expressive
power is restricted by the low-rank bottleneck [5] because
the dimensionality of the dot-product space is much smaller
than the sequence length. Therefore, they cannot accurately model the transformation if the attention is intrinsically high-rank.

1. Introduction
Transformer models have been widely used on many
tasks such as text classification [28], text summarization,
promoter region prediction [33], and image classification
[10]. The main engine in Transformer is the self-attention
mechanism, which can work in parallel to mix long-range
tokens in a long sequence. This fundamental innovation
eliminated the sequential dependency in recurrent neural
networks and was used as a building block for many powerful models, such as Bert [9], GPT [6] and Ernie [25].
However, the original self-attention is not scalable because it requires computing and storing all pairwise dotproducts, which incurs O(N 2 ) cost for sequence length N .
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author. zhirong.yang@ntnu.no

This paper proposes a scalable and effective attention
building block called Paramixer without dot-product and
softmax. Our method directly parameterizes the mixing
links in several sparse factors to form an attention matrix, where all factorizing matrices are full-rank. Therefore
Paramixer does not suffer from the low-rank bottleneck. We
present two ways to specify the non-zero positions in each
sparse factor. Both lead to an economical approximation of
the full attention matrix, with the computing cost as low as
O(N log N ). As a result, our method can easily model very
long sequential data.
We have tested Paramixer on various sequence data sets
and compared it with many popular self-attention neural
networks based on dot-products. The experimental results
show that Paramixer gets the best performance on very long
sequence tasks, including synthetic data inference, Genome
classification, and character-level long document classification. Paramixer also achieves state-of-art accuracy on the
public Long Range Arena benchmark tasks.
We organize the rest of the paper as follows. Section 2
investigates dot-product self-attention and its related work.
Section 3 introduces the development clue and model architecture of Paramixer. The experimental settings and results
are presented in Section 4, and we conclude the paper in
Section 5.

691

