PointCLIP: Point Cloud Understanding by CLIP
Renrui Zhang∗1,3 , Ziyu Guo∗2 , Wei Zhang1 , Kunchang Li1 , Xupeng Miao2
Bin Cui2 , Yu Qiao1 , Peng Gao†1 , Hongsheng Li3,4
1
Shanghai AI Laboratory
2
School of CS and Key Lab of HCST, Peking University
3
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence (CPII)
{zhangrenrui, gaopeng}@pjlab.org.cn hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep learning has dominated computer vision tasks of
both 2D and 3D domains in recent years, such as image
∗ Indicates equal contributions, † Indicates corresponding author

𝐴 𝑏𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑛
𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑖𝑟

𝐴 𝑡𝑎𝑏𝑙𝑒
𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑝

3D Training Set

𝐴 𝑐𝑜𝑜𝑙
𝑎𝑖𝑟𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑒

3D Test Set

𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛

𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡

𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡

PointCLIP
cha
ir
pla
ne
lam
p

Recently, zero-shot and few-shot learning via Contrastive
Vision-Language Pre-training (CLIP) have shown inspirational performance on 2D visual recognition, which learns
to match images with their corresponding texts in openvocabulary settings. However, it remains under explored
that whether CLIP, pre-trained by large-scale image-text
pairs in 2D, can be generalized to 3D recognition. In this
paper, we identify such a setting is feasible by proposing
PointCLIP, which conducts alignment between CLIPencoded point clouds and 3D category texts. Specifically,
we encode a point cloud by projecting it onto multi-view
depth maps and aggregate the view-wise zero-shot prediction in an end-to-end manner, which achieves efficient
knowledge transfer from 2D to 3D. We further design
an inter-view adapter to better extract the global feature
and adaptively fuse the 3D few-shot knowledge into CLIP
pre-trained in 2D. By just fine-tuning the adapter under
few-shot settings, the performance of PointCLIP could be
largely improved. In addition, we observe the knowledge
complementary property between PointCLIP and classical
3D-supervised networks. Via simple ensemble during
inference, PointCLIP contributes to favorable performance
enhancement over state-of-the-art 3D networks. Therefore,
PointCLIP is a promising alternative for effective 3D point
cloud understanding under low data regime with marginal
resource cost. We conduct thorough experiments on ModelNet10, ModelNet40 and ScanObjectNN to demonstrate the
effectiveness of PointCLIP. Code is available at https:
//github.com/ZrrSkywalker/PointCLIP.

2D Image-Text Pairs

𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛

PointNet++

Figure 1. Comparison of Training-testing Schemes between
PointCLIP and PointNet++. Different from classical 3D networks, our proposed PointCLIP is pre-trained by 2D imagetext pairs and directly conducts zero-shot classification on 3D
datasets without 3D training, which achieves efficient crossmodality knowledge transfer.

classification [12,17,22,28,37,41], object detection [1,4,13,
29,47,67], semantic segmentation [3,25,35,36,64,68], point
cloud recognition and part segmentation [19, 42, 44, 45, 56].
With 3D sensing technology developing rapidly, the growing demand for processing 3D point cloud data has boosted
many advanced deep models with better local feature aggregator [30, 32, 50], geometry modeling [20, 40, 60] and
projection-based processing [21, 34, 49]. Different from
grid-based 2D image data, 3D point clouds suffer from
space sparsity and irregular distribution, which hinder the
direct transfer of methods from 2D domain. More importantly, a large number of newly captured point clouds contain objects of “unseen” categories to the deployed models.
In this scenario, even the best-performing classifier might
fail to recognize them and it is unaffordable to re-train the
models every time when “unseen” objects arise.
Similar issues have been dramatically mitigated in
2D vision by Contrastive Vision-Language Pre-training

8552

