Hallucinated Neural Radiance Fields in the Wild
Qi Zhang2†
Xiaoyu Li2
Yue Chen1
Xingyu Chen1 *
Ying Feng2
Xuan Wang2
Jue Wang2
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University 2 Tencent AI Lab

Hallucinate

Ha-NeRF

(a) input

(b) training

(c) inference

Figure 1. We recover (b) hallucinated neural radiance fields (Ha-NeRF) from (a) a group of tourism images with variable appearance and
complex occlusions. Our method can consistently render (c) free-occlusion views which hallucinate different appearances.

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) has recently gained popularity for its impressive novel view synthesis ability. This
paper studies the problem of hallucinated NeRF: i.e., recovering a realistic NeRF at a different time of day from
a group of tourism images. Existing solutions adopt NeRF
with a controllable appearance embedding to render novel
views under various conditions, but they cannot render
view-consistent images with an unseen appearance. To
solve this problem, we present an end-to-end framework
for constructing a hallucinated NeRF, dubbed as Ha-NeRF.
Specifically, we propose an appearance hallucination module to handle time-varying appearances and transfer them
to novel views. Considering the complex occlusions of
tourism images, we introduce an anti-occlusion module to
decompose the static subjects for visibility accurately. Experimental results on synthetic data and real tourism photo
collections demonstrate that our method can hallucinate the
desired appearances and render occlusion-free images from
different views. The project and supplementary materials
are available at https://rover-xingyu.github.io/Ha-NeRF/.

* Work done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab.
† Corresponding Author.

1. Introduction
In recent years, synthesizing photo-realistic novel views
of a scene has become a research hotspot along with the
rapid development of neural rendering technologies. Imagine you want to visit the Brandenburg Gate in Berlin and enjoy the landscapes at different times and weathers, but you
cannot because of the coronavirus pandemic. For this hallucinated experience to be as engaging as possible, photorealistic images from different views that can change with
the weather, time, and other factors are necessary.
To achieve this, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [33] and
its following methods [25, 40, 58] have shown a remarkable
capacity to recover the 3D geometry and appearance, giving the user an immersive feeling of physically being there.
However, one significant drawback of NeRF is that they require a group of images without variable illumination and
moving objects, i.e., the radiance of the scene is constant
and visible for each view. Unfortunately, most images of
tourist landmarks are internet photos captured at different
times and occluded by various objects. Most NeRF-based
methods would integrate variable appearances and transient
occluders into the 3D volume when they occur, which disturbs the real scene in the volume. How to synthesize
the occlusion-free views from images with variable appearances and occluders remains to be solved.

12943

