FAM: Visual Explanations for the Feature Representations
from Deep Convolutional Networks
Yuxi Wu, Changhuai Chen, Jun Che, Shiliang Pu*
Hikvision Research Institute, China
{wuyuxi, chenchanghuai, chejun, pushiliang.hri}@hikvision.com

Abstract
In recent years, increasing attention has been drawn to
the internal mechanisms of representation models. Traditional methods are inapplicable to fully explain the feature
representations, especially if the images do not fit into any
category. In this case, employing an existing class or the
similarity with other image is unable to provide a complete
and reliable visual explanation. To handle this task, we
propose a novel visual explanation paradigm called Feature Activation Mapping (FAM) in this paper. Under this
paradigm, Grad-FAM and Score-FAM are designed for visualizing feature representations. Unlike the previous approaches, FAM locates the regions of images that contribute
most to the feature vector itself. Extensive experiments
and evaluations, both subjective and objective, showed
that Score-FAM provided most promising interpretable visual explanations for feature representations in Person ReIdentification. Furthermore, FAM also can be employed to
analyze other vision tasks, such as self-supervised representation learning.

1. Introduction
Over the last few years, the model explanation increasingly draws attention due to the wide applications of
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs). To this end, various visual explanation methods have been proposed.
For interpreting classification problem, Class Activation
Map (CAM) [1, 33] is proposed to locate which regions
of input image were looked at by the model for assigning
the label. Recent CAM-based works could be divided into
two branches, one is gradient-based CAMs [14] which use
gradient of class confidence to incorporate the importance
of inputs, the other is gradient-free CAMs [12, 22] which
capture the importance by the change of class confidence.
Meanwhile, a number of methods, e.g., DeepLift [16] and
integrated gradients [20], approximate the contribution of
inputs based on the element-wise product with gradients.

It is noteworthy that a target neuron or score must be
specified to evaluate gradient for the above approaches. In
classification, class confidence usually is the target. However, in some tasks, the class of a test sample might not exist
in train set. As a zero-shot learning problem, the identities
of test set in Person Re-Identification (Re-ID) are totally
different from train set. As showed in Figure 1 (b), ScoreCAM merely concerns on the similar part to the given train
identity, such as umbrella, pants and shoes, rather than the
person body in the test image. In this case, employing an
existing class cannot provide a reliable explanation.
Much less works have focused on understanding the feature representation [34]. RAM [23] and CG-RAM [15] are
proposed to reveal the associated visual cues between a pair
of images, and other gradient-based methods also can be
applied to the gradient of similarity value. However, the
similarity-based methods still are unable to explain the feature representation completely. As showed in Figure 1 (c),
the visualization results of RAM based on different images
were quite different, and mostly depend on the selection of
another image. The shoes got high activations in the result
based on the rank-2 gallery image, but got low activations
in others. Based on these conflicting results, it is hard to
interpret the contribution degree of shoes on feature representation in this image. Other similarity-based approaches
are also unable to explain this question. Besides that, a suitable image for comparison sometimes might be unavailable
in practical work. These issues have restricted interpreting
Re-ID model to assure the reliability.
To ameliorate the aforementioned flaws, we propose a novel visual explanation paradigm called Feature
Activation Mapping (FAM). FAM highlights the regions of
images that contribute most to the global feature representation. Specifically, we first proposed Gradient-weighted
FAM (Grad-FAM), which eliminates the dependency of
another image in RAM. Inspired by Score-CAM, a different
gradient-free FAM method Score-weighted FAM (ScoreFAM) is then proposed. Objective evaluation of ScoreFAM outperformed the other methods by large scale on
public datasets. The experimental results demonstrate that

10307

