LSVC: A Learning-based Stereo Video Compression Framework
Zhenghao Chen1 , Guo Lu2∗ , Zhihao Hu3 , Shan Liu4 , Wei Jiang4 , Dong Xu1
1
University of Sydney, 2 Beijing Institute of Technology, 3 Beihang University, 4 Tencent America
{zhenghao.chen, dong.xu}@sydney.edu.au, guo.lu@bit.edu.cn, huzhihao@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
In this work, we propose the first end-to-end optimized
framework for compressing automotive stereo videos (i.e.,
stereo videos from autonomous driving applications) from
both left and right views. Specifically, when compressing
the current frame from each view, our framework reduces
temporal redundancy by performing motion compensation
using the reconstructed intra-view adjacent frame and at
the same time exploits binocular redundancy by conducting disparity compensation using the latest reconstructed
cross-view frame. Moreover, to effectively compress the introduced motion and disparity offsets for better compensation, we further propose two novel schemes called motion
residual compression and disparity residual compression to
respectively generate the predicted motion offset and disparity offset from the previously compressed motion offset
and disparity offset, such that we can more effectively compress residual offset information for better bit-rate saving.
Overall, the entire framework is implemented by the fullydifferentiable modules and can be optimized in an end-toend manner. Our comprehensive experiments on three automotive stereo video benchmarks Cityscapes, KITTI 2012
and KITTI 2015 demonstrate that our proposed framework
outperforms the learning-based single-view video codec
and the traditional hand-crafted multi-view video codec.

1. Introduction
Stereo cameras are often used as crucial sensors for autonomous driving applications as they can acquire more precise depth information than traditional mono cameras, while
being less expensive than other sensors (e.g., LIDAR) [7].
Due to the increasing demand for storing and transmitting
the massive automotive stereo videos, how to effectively
compress such data has become an emerging task.
Automotive stereo video compression can be regarded as
a special case of multi-view video compression (MVC), for
which several traditional MVC standards [35, 38, 41] have
been proposed in the past decades. Nevertheless, such stan∗ Guo Lu is the corresponding author.

dards all rely on hand-crafted modules, which cannot be
jointly end-to-end optimized. Moreover, they only aim at
improving the compression performance for one view (e.g.,
the left view) by exploiting both inter-view and intra-view
redundancy, while compressing the base view (e.g., the right
view) by directly employing the single-view video codecs.
Therefore, the compression performance could not be significantly improved without exploiting the cross-view redundancy when compressing the right-view videos.
While deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved
tremendous success in image and video compression [5,29],
how to develop an effective learning-based stereo video
codec remains an under-explored research problem. In
this work, we propose the first learning-based stereo video
compression (LSVC) framework for autonomous driving
applications. Different from the traditional stereo video
codecs, which simply compress the right-view videos by using the single-view video codecs, our framework effectively
reduces both temporal and binocular redundancy for the
stereo videos from both views, in which we use the information from one view to assist the compression of another
view in an iterative fashion. Specifically, when compressing
the current left/right frame, the reconstructed within-view
frame (i.e., the left/right frame) from the previous timestep and the latest reconstructed cross-view frame (i.e., the
right/left frame) are used as two reference frames. To better
exploit both temporal redundancy for adjacent within-view
frames and binocular redundancy for cross-view frames, in
our approach, we estimate the motion offset between the
current frame and the reconstructed previous frame from the
same view, while estimating the disparity offset between the
current frame and the latest reconstructed cross-view frame.
After motion and disparity compression, we respectively
perform motion compensation and disparity compensation
to generate the intra-view and inter-view compensated features, which are eventually fused as the final compensated
feature for the subsequent residual compression process.
Furthermore, we also propose two new approaches
called motion residual compression (MRC) and disparity
residual compression (DRC) to effectively compress the introduced motion and disparity offsets, which is based on

6073

