MLP-3D: A MLP-like 3D Architecture with Grouped Time Mixing
Zhaofan Qiu† , Ting Yao† , Chong-Wah Ngo‡ and Tao Mei†
†
‡
JD Explore Academy, Beijing, China
Singapore Management University, Singapore
{zhaofanqiu, tingyao.ustc}@gmail.com, cwngo@smu.edu.sg, tmei@jd.com

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have been regarded as the go-to models for visual recognition. More recently, convolution-free networks, based on multi-head selfattention (MSA) or multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs), become
more and more popular. Nevertheless, it is not trivial when
utilizing these newly-minted networks for video recognition
due to the large variations and complexities in video data.
In this paper, we present MLP-3D networks, a novel MLPlike 3D architecture for video recognition. Specifically, the
architecture consists of MLP-3D blocks, where each block
contains one MLP applied across tokens (i.e., token-mixing
MLP) and one MLP applied independently to each token
(i.e., channel MLP). By deriving the novel grouped time
mixing (GTM) operations, we equip the basic token-mixing
MLP with the ability of temporal modeling. GTM divides
the input tokens into several temporal groups and linearly
maps the tokens in each group with the shared projection
matrix. Furthermore, we devise several variants of GTM
with different grouping strategies, and compose each variant in different blocks of MLP-3D network by greedy architecture search. Without the dependence on convolutions
or attention mechanisms, our MLP-3D networks achieves
68.5%/81.4% top-1 accuracy on Something-Something V2
and Kinetics-400 datasets, respectively. Despite with fewer
computations, the results are comparable to state-of-the-art
widely-used 3D CNNs and video transformers.

1. Introduction
During the past decade, the advances in Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) have successfully pushed the limits and improved the state-of-the-art technologies for image
and video understanding [5, 11, 12, 14, 19, 25, 28, 30, 45, 46,
48–51, 57, 64, 69]. Besides achieving the top performances
across tasks, the highly optimized implementation of convolution on various hardware makes CNNs continue to dominate computer vision research. Nevertheless, motivated by
the success of attention model in Natural Language Processing (NLP) [60], vision transformers [9, 21, 33, 38, 55, 63]

+
Linear
Projection

Channel MLP

LayerNorm

+

Weighted Sum

+
Token-mixing
MLP

Height
Mixing

Width
Mixing

Grouped
Time
Mixing

LayerNorm

Figure 1. A schematic diagram of MLP-3D block. The block
originates from the MLP-mixer layer in [54], and decomposes the
original token-mixing MLP into three sub-operations along height,
width and time dimensions, respectively. For time dimension, the
novel grouped time mixing operation is exploited.

become an alternative choice for image recognition by using multi-head self-attention (MSA) and multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs). More recently, the models solely with
MLPs (i.e., MLP-like networks) without convolutions or
self-attention layers are also shown able to perform well
on ImageNet classification, and are more efficient for both
training and inference [6, 17, 54, 70].
Despite having these impressive progresses on image
recognition, devising MLP-like architecture on video data
is seldom studied and remains challenging. The video data
is more complex due to large variations in motion and rich
content in visual details. Capturing useful information from
such information-intensive media requires exhaustive computing resources. This property inherently poses difficulties
for developing MLP-like 3D architecture from two aspects:
1) how to capture the complex temporal dynamics in videos
via MLP-like operations? 2) how to reduce the expensive
computations for space-time modeling?
To address the issues, in this work, we start from the
design of basic MLP-style operations to model temporal
sequence, and next study how to construct an efficient
MLP-like architecture on the utilization of these opera-

3062

