Modeling Indirect Illumination for Inverse Rendering
Yuanqing Zhang1,2
1

Jiaming Sun1

Zhejiang University

Xingyi He1
2

Huan Fu2

Rongfei Jia2

Xiaowei Zhou1∗

Tao Technology Department, Alibaba Group

Abstract
Recent advances in implicit neural representations and
differentiable rendering make it possible to simultaneously
recover the geometry and materials of an object from multiview RGB images captured under unknown static illumination. Despite the promising results achieved, indirect illumination is rarely modeled in previous methods, as it requires expensive recursive path tracing which makes the
inverse rendering computationally intractable. In this paper, we propose a novel approach to efficiently recovering
spatially-varying indirect illumination. The key insight is
that indirect illumination can be conveniently derived from
the neural radiance field learned from input images instead
of being estimated jointly with direct illumination and materials. By properly modeling the indirect illumination and
visibility of direct illumination, interreflection- and shadowfree albedo can be recovered. The experiments on both synthetic and real data demonstrate the superior performance
of our approach compared to previous work and its capability to synthesize realistic renderings under novel viewpoints and illumination. Our code and data are available
at https://zju3dv.github.io/invrender/.

Figure 1. To precisely recover SVBRDF (parameterized as albedo
and roughness) from multi-view RGB images, we propose an efficient approach to reconstruct spatially varying indirect illumination and combine it with environmental light evaluated by visibility as the full light model (a). The example in (b) demonstrates that
without modeling indirect illumination, its rendering effects are
baked into the estimated albedo to compensate for the incomplete
light model and also result in artifacts in the estimated roughness.

1. Introduction
Recovering the geometry, materials, and lighting of a
3D scene from images, also known as inverse rendering,
has been a long-standing problem in the fields of computer
vision and graphics. It is gaining traction in this era of
blowout VR and AR applications, where there is a high demand for easily acquired 3D contents from the real world.
Previous capture systems, such as light-stages with controlled light directions and cameras [8, 11, 31], using a colocated flashlight and camera in a dark room [2, 3], and rotating objects with a turntable [7, 26], show limitations in
user-friendliness.
More recent works [5,29,32] explore flexible capture settings under natural illumination. These methods typically
The authors from Zhejiang University are affiliated with the State Key
Lab of CAD&CG. This work was done when Yuanqing Zhang was an
intern at Alibaba Group. ∗ Corresponding author: Xiaowei Zhou.

represent geometry and spatially varying BRDF (SVBRDF)
as coordinate-based neural networks and recover them by
optimizing a re-rendering loss that compares rendered images with input images. However, capturing under natural
illumination often shows complex effects such as soft shadows and interreflections. It is intractable to simulate these
effects when optimizing SVBRDF and light parameters as
it necessitates expensive recursive path tracing in physically
based rendering. Prior methods usually ignore both selfocclusion and interreflection [29] in order to reduce computation, or only model visibility [32] or limit the indirect
lighting to a single bounce with known light sources [22].
Without properly modeling the indirect illumination, there
exists a gap between the captured image and the rendered
image. As a result, the effect of indirect illumination in the
captured images is prone to being baked into the estimated
diffuse albedo to compensate for this gap, as illustrated in

18643

