Learning to Answer Questions in Dynamic Audio-Visual Scenarios
Guangyao Li1,† , Yake Wei1,† , Yapeng Tian3,† , Chenliang Xu3 , Ji-Rong Wen1 , Di Hu1,2,*
1

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Rochester, Rochester
1
{guangyaoli, yakewei, jrwen, dihu}@ruc.edu.cn, 3 {yapengtian, chenliang.xu}@rochester.edu
2

Abstract
In this paper, we focus on the Audio-Visual Question
Answering (AVQA) task, which aims to answer questions
regarding different visual objects, sounds, and their associations in videos. The problem requires comprehensive multimodal understanding and spatio-temporal reasoning over audio-visual scenes. To benchmark this task
and facilitate our study, we introduce a large-scale MUSICAVQA dataset, which contains more than 45K questionanswer pairs covering 33 different question templates spanning over different modalities and question types. We develop several baselines and introduce a spatio-temporal
grounded audio-visual network for the AVQA problem. Our
results demonstrate that AVQA benefits from multisensory
perception and our model outperforms recent A-, V-, and
AVQA approaches. We believe that our built dataset has
the potential to serve as testbed for evaluating and promoting progress in audio-visual scene understanding and
spatio-temporal reasoning. Code and dataset: http://gewulab.github.io/MUSIC-AVQA/

1. Introduction
We are surrounded by audio and visual messages in daily
life, and both modalities jointly improve our ability in scene
perception and understanding [19]. For instance, imagine
that we are in a concert, watching the performance and listening to the music at the same time contribute to better
enjoyment of the show. Inspired by this, how to make machines integrate multimodal information, especially the natural modality such as the audio and visual ones, to achieve
considerable scene perception and understanding ability as
humans is an interesting and valuable topic.
In recent years, we have seen significant progress in
sounding object perception [6, 22, 37, 52], audio scene analysis [7, 10, 13, 20, 21, 51, 59], audio-visual scene parsing [42, 47], and content description [24, 40, 50] towards
audio-visual scene understanding. Although these methods
† Equal contribution. * Corresponding author.

Q: Which clarinet makes the sound first ?
AVQA model
VQA model

AQA model

makes the sound?

which clarinet?

cannot be parsed

cannot be parsed

Which…

fusion

A: right

Figure 1. Audio-visual question answering requires auditory and
visual modalities for multimodal scene understanding and spatiotemporal reasoning. For example, when we encounter a complex
musical performance scene involving multiple sounding and nonsounding instruments above, it is difficult to analyze the sound
first term in the question by VQA model that only considers visual
modality. While if we only consider the AQA model with mono
sound, the left or right position is also hard to be recognized. However, we can see that using both auditory and visual modalities can
answer this question effortlessly.

associate objects or sound events across audio and visual
views, most of them remain limited ability for cross-modal
reasoning, under complex audio-visual scenarios. In contrast, humans are capable of performing multi-step spatial
and temporal reasoning over multimodal contexts to solve
complex tasks, such as answering an audio-visual question,
but it is quite challenging for machines. Existing methods
such as Visual Question Answering (VQA) [3] and Audio
Question Answering (AQA) [9] only focus on single modality, which cannot reason well in a more natural scenario
with both audio and visual modalities. For instance, as
shown in Fig. 1, when answering the audio-visual question
“Which clarinet makes the sound first" for this instrumental
ensemble, it requires to locate sounding objects “clarinet"
in the audio-visual scenario and focus on the “first" sounding “clarinet" in the timeline. To answer the question cor-

19108

