NLX-GPT: A Model for Natural Language Explanations in Vision and
Vision-Language Tasks

1

Fawaz Sammani1 , Tanmoy Mukherjee1,2 , Nikos Deligiannis1,2
ETRO Department, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Pleinlaan 2, B-1050 Brussels, Belgium
2
imec, Kapeldreef 75, B-3001 Leuven, Belgium
fawaz.sammani@vub.be, tmukherj@etrovub.be, ndeligia@etrovub.be

Abstract
Natural language explanation (NLE) models aim at explaining the decision-making process of a black box system via generating natural language sentences which are
human-friendly, high-level and fine-grained. Current NLE
models1 explain the decision-making process of a vision
or vision-language model (a.k.a., task model), e.g., a VQA
model, via a language model (a.k.a., explanation model),
e.g., GPT. Other than the additional memory resources and
inference time required by the task model, the task and explanation models are completely independent, which disassociates the explanation from the reasoning process made
to predict the answer. We introduce NLX-GPT, a general, compact and faithful language model that can simultaneously predict an answer and explain it. We first
conduct pre-training on large scale data of image-caption
pairs for general understanding of images, and then formulate the answer as a text prediction task along with
the explanation. Without region proposals nor a task
model, our resulting overall framework attains better evaluation scores, contains much less parameters and is 15×
faster than the current SoA model. We then address the
problem of evaluating the explanations which can be in
many times generic, data-biased and can come in several
forms. We therefore design 2 new evaluation measures:
(1) explain-predict and (2) retrieval-based attack, a selfevaluation framework that requires no labels. Code is at:
https://github.com/fawazsammani/nlxgpt.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models have enabled extraordinary breakthroughs in a variety of vision tasks (such as image classification [15,17,26]) and vision-language tasks (such as visual
question answering [1, 3, 57], visual entailment [56], image
1 Throughout this paper, we refer to NLE models as Natural Language
Explanation models aimed for vision and vision-language tasks.

Figure 1. A comparison between previous models (left) and ours
(right). Our model solely requires a visual encoder and a language
model. We model the answer as a text prediction task along with
the explanation. Best viewed in color.

captioning [11, 34, 43, 53], and more), achieving promising
performance. However, they are black box systems. For
these models to be deployed in everyday life, explaining
their decision-making process becomes critical for several
reasons such as trust, accountability, and model bias understanding and correctness. Different from visual or textual
explanations which highlight regions or tokens in an image
or sentence that lead to a specific prediction [5, 45, 48, 49],
natural language explanation models [8, 33] explain the
decision-making process of a model through natural language sentences. These sentences are easy to understand
by humans and are much more detailed than highlighted
regions or tokens. Recently, NLE for vision and visionlanguage (VL) tasks has been introduced [20, 32, 36, 54].
In this work, we focus on explaining models aimed for
vision and vision-language tasks. Current NLE models
[20, 32, 36, 54] first utilize a VL-model to get an answer for
the task at hand (e.g., a visual question answering (VQA)
model). The outputs of the VL-model (answer and mul-

8322

