Rethinking Reconstruction Autoencoder-Based Out-of-Distribution Detection
Yibo Zhou
Beihang University
ybzhou@impcas.ac.cn

Abstract
In some scenarios, classifier requires detecting out-ofdistribution samples far from its training data. With desirable characteristics, reconstruction autoencoder-based
methods deal with this problem by using input reconstruction error as a metric of novelty vs. normality. We formulate the essence of such approach as a quadruplet domain translation with an intrinsic bias to only query for a
proxy of conditional data uncertainty. Accordingly, an improvement direction is formalized as maximumly compressing the autoencoder’s latent space while ensuring its reconstructive power for acting as a described domain translator. From it, strategies are introduced including semantic
reconstruction, data certainty decomposition and normalized L2 distance to substantially improve original methods, which together establish state-of-the-art performance
on various benchmarks, e.g., the FPR@95%TPR of CIFAR100 vs. TinyImagenet-crop on Wide-ResNet is 0.2%. Importantly, our method works without any additional data, hardto-implement structure, time-consuming pipeline, and even
harming the classification accuracy of known classes.

1. Introduction
Supervised discriminative deep classifiers are de facto
designed under a static closed-world assumption where the
data, which model face in the deployment environment, is
supposed to be sampled from the same distribution as training set [12]. However, for applications in the wild, such
as the safety-critical autonomous vehicles, test data is often hard to be known a priori. Worse, given that neural
networks especially those built on relu or softmax can easily produce not only erroneous, but arbitrarily confident so,
class predictions even for totally unrecognizable or irrelevant samples [9–11,21], it is consequential to empower system to flag or abstain predictions from unkowns.
Out-of-distribution (OoD) detection is a binary classification of detecting inputs sampled from distribution different from training data [11]. Many existing methods rely on
training or tuning with data labelled as OoD from other cat-

egories [28, 31], adversaries [15, 19] or the leave-out subset of training samples [30]. However, it is intractable to
cover the full space of OoD particularly for data with large
dimensions (e.g., an image) [20], resulting in that a supervised method capturing limited facets of OoD distribution
hardly generalizes without a data selection bias [24]. Meanwhile, the classifier’s accuracy on in-distribution (ID) images would be fluctuated by introducing OoD data with additional training objectives [28,30]. Such factors expose the
unsupervised nature of OoD detection.
In a class of unsupervised approaches, input reconstruction residual is considered a novelty metric to avoid the
above problems [22]. The essential assumption is that an
autoencoder learned to rebuild ID samples could not reconstruct OoD comparatively during testing [5]. However,
it has been extensively reported that autoencoders can effectively rebuild kinds of OoD samples even better [7, 22],
causing an inferior performance of such methods when applied to challenging multi-class OoD detection tasks. In this
paper, we investigate in a precise manner the problematic
reconstruction of outliers from the perspective of quadruplet domain translation by formalizing two concrete preconditions under which the reconstruction error of an input is
a valid data uncertainty measure. First, its latent feature
lies within the domain of encoded ID samples. Second, the
decoder has adequate reconstructive power to bridge the domains of ID images and their latent representations.
Precondition 1 requires system to capture the outliers of
latent representations. Without relying on kernel density
estimators [1, 7, 23] performing weakly in high dimensions
[17], similar to the scheme considering for compact latent
representations [2, 3], we minimize a regularization loss to
restrict ID latent features distributed within a certain space.
In conjunction with the training of input reconstruction, it is
explicated that, when this space is compressed sufficiently,
any latent feature outlier will lie outside it.
There is a coupled problem that an over-restricted latent
space might not provide sufficient reconstructive power for
large-scale ID images, which violates precondition 2. To
mitigate it, we change the reconstruction target from the image to its extracted activation vector (AV) feature to reduce
the unnecessary requirement of the expressiveness of latent

7379

