Generating Useful Accident-Prone Driving Scenarios via a Learned Traffic Prior
Davis Rempe1,2
1

Jonah Philion2,3,4

Stanford University

2

Leonidas J. Guibas1

NVIDIA

3

Sanja Fidler2,3,4

University of Toronto

4

Or Litany2

Vector Institute

nv-tlabs.github.io/STRIVE

Abstract
Evaluating and improving planning for autonomous vehicles requires scalable generation of long-tail traffic scenarios. To be useful, these scenarios must be realistic and
challenging, but not impossible to drive through safely. In
this work, we introduce STRIVE, a method to automatically
generate challenging scenarios that cause a given planner to produce undesirable behavior, like collisions. To
maintain scenario plausibility, the key idea is to leverage a
learned model of traffic motion in the form of a graph-based
conditional VAE. Scenario generation is formulated as an
optimization in the latent space of this traffic model, perturbing an initial real-world scene to produce trajectories
that collide with a given planner. A subsequent optimization
is used to find a “solution” to the scenario, ensuring it is
useful to improve the given planner. Further analysis clusters generated scenarios based on collision type. We attack
two planners and show that STRIVE successfully generates
realistic, challenging scenarios in both cases. We additionally “close the loop” and use these scenarios to optimize
hyperparameters of a rule-based planner.

Figure 1. STRIVE generates challenging scenarios for a given planner.
An adversarial optimization perturbs a real-world scene in the latent space
of a learned traffic model, causing an adversary (red) to collide with the
planner (green). A subsequent solution optimization finds a planner trajectory to avoid collisions, verifying a scenario is useful for identifying
planner improvements.

1. Introduction

becomes prohibitively expensive when a large set of scenarios is necessary for training or comprehensive evaluation.

The safety of contemporary autonomous vehicles (AVs)
is defined by their ability to safely handle complicated nearcollision scenarios. However, these kinds of scenarios are
rare in real-world driving, posing a data-scarcity problem
that is detrimental to both the development and testing of
data-driven models for perception, prediction, and planning.
Moreover, the better models become, the more rare these
events will be, making the models even harder to train.
A natural solution is to synthesize difficult scenarios in
simulation, rather than relying on real-world data, making it
easier and safer to evaluate and train AV systems. This approach is especially appealing for planning, where the appearance domain gap is not a concern. For example, one
can manually design scenarios where the AV may fail by
inserting adversarial actors or modifying trajectories, either
from scratch or by perturbing a small set of real scenarios.
Unfortunately, the manual nature of this approach quickly

Recent work looks to automatically generate challenging scenarios [1, 11, 12, 26, 36, 50, 53]. Generally, these approaches control a single or small group of “adversaries” in
a scene, define an objective (e.g. cause a collision with the
AV), and then optimize the adversaries’ behavior or trajectories to meet the objective. While most methods demonstrate generation of only 1 or 2 scenarios [1, 8, 26, 36], recent work [53] has improved scalability by starting from
real-world traffic scenes and perturbing a limited set of prechosen adversaries. However, these approaches lack expressive priors over plausible traffic motion, which limits the
realism and diversity of scenarios. In particular, adversarial
entities in a scenario are a small set of agents heuristically
chosen ahead of time; surrounding traffic will not be reactive and therefore perturbations must be careful to avoid
implausible situations (e.g. collisions with auxiliary agents).
Furthermore, less attention has been given to determining if

17305

