Sparse Instance Activation for Real-Time Instance Segmentation
Tianheng Cheng 1, 2 Xinggang Wang 1† Shaoyu Chen 1, 2 Wenqiang Zhang 1
Qian Zhang 2 Chang Huang 2 Zhaoxiang Zhang 3 Wenyu Liu 1
1
School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science & Technology 2 Horizon Robotics
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
{thch,xgwang,shaoyuchen,wq zhang,liuwy}@hust.edu.cn

{qian01.zhang,chang.huang}@horizon.ai

zhaoxiang.zhang@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
SparseInst-640

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation aims to generate instance-level
segmentation for each object in an image. Based on the advances in deep convolutional neural networks and object detection, recent works [4,9,14,18,40] have made tremendous
progress in instance segmentation and achieved impressive
results on large-scale benchmarks, e.g., COCO [24]. However, developing real-time and efficient instance segmentation algorithms is still challenging and urgent, especially for
autonomous driving and robotics.
Prevalent methods tend to adopt detectors [30, 37] to localize instances first and then segment through region-based
† Xinggang Wang is the corresponding author.

Mask R-CNN
SOLOv2-512

SparseInst-448

COCO Mask AP

In this paper, we propose a conceptually novel, efficient, and fully convolutional framework for real-time instance segmentation. Previously, most instance segmentation methods heavily rely on object detection and perform mask prediction based on bounding boxes or dense
centers. In contrast, we propose a sparse set of instance
activation maps, as a new object representation, to highlight informative regions for each foreground object. Then
instance-level features are obtained by aggregating features according to the highlighted regions for recognition
and segmentation. Moreover, based on bipartite matching, the instance activation maps can predict objects in a
one-to-one style, thus avoiding non-maximum suppression
(NMS) in post-processing. Owing to the simple yet effective designs with instance activation maps, SparseInst has
extremely fast inference speed and achieves 40 FPS and
37.9 AP on the COCO benchmark, which significantly outperforms the counterparts in terms of speed and accuracy.
Code and models are available at https://github.
com/hustvl/SparseInst.

SparseInst-512
OrienMask-544

35

YOLACT++

SOLOv2-448

SOLO-512

CenterMask-600

MEInst-512
YOLACT-700

30
PolarMask-800
YOLACT-550
PolarMask-600
Real-Time: 30 FPS
50 FPS

25
0

20

25 FPS

40
Inference time (ms)

17 FPS

60

Figure 1. Speed-and-accuracy Trade-off. The proposed SparseInst outperforms most state-of-the-art methods in both speed and
accuracy for real-time instance segmentation. Inference speeds are
measured on one NVIDIA 2080Ti.

convolutional networks [14], dynamic convolutions [36],
etc. Those methods are conceptually intuitive and achieve
great performance. However, when it comes to real-time instance segmentation, those methods suffer from some limitations. Firstly, most methods employ dense anchors (centers) to localize and then segment objects, e.g., more than
5456 instances (given 512 × 512 input) in CondInst [36],
which incur lots of redundant predictions and much computation burden. Besides, the receptive field of each pixel is
limited and the contextual information is insufficient if we
densely localize objects by centers or anchors [6, 12]. Secondly, most methods require multi-level prediction to handle the scale variation of natural objects, which inevitably
increases the latency. Region-based methods [14] apply
RoI-Align to acquire region features, making it difficult to
deploy algorithms to edge/embedded devices. Finally, the
post-processing also requires attention since the sorting and
NMS as well as processing masks are time-consuming, es-

4433

