Audio-Adaptive Activity Recognition Across Video Domains
Yunhua Zhang1
1

Hazel Doughty1

University of Amsterdam

2

Ling Shao2 * Cees G. M. Snoek1

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence

Abstract
This paper strives for activity recognition under domain
shift, for example caused by change of scenery or camera
viewpoint. The leading approaches reduce the shift in activity appearance by adversarial training and self-supervised
learning. Different from these vision-focused works we leverage activity sounds for domain adaptation as they have less
variance across domains and can reliably indicate which activities are not happening. We propose an audio-adaptive encoder and associated learning methods that discriminatively
adjust the visual feature representation as well as addressing shifts in the semantic distribution. To further eliminate
domain-specific features and include domain-invariant activity sounds for recognition, an audio-infused recognizer
is proposed, which effectively models the cross-modal interaction across domains. We also introduce the new task of
actor shift, with a corresponding audio-visual dataset, to
challenge our method with situations where the activity appearance changes dramatically. Experiments on this dataset,
EPIC-Kitchens and CharadesEgo show the effectiveness of
our approach. Project page: https://xiaobai1217.
github.io/DomainAdaptation.

1. Introduction
The goal of this paper is to recognize activities such as
eating, sleeping or cutting under domain shift caused by
change of scenery, camera viewpoint or actor, as shown
in Figure 1. Existing solutions align distribution-shifted
domains inside a single visual video network by adversarial
training [5,20,27,29] and self-supervised learning [9,22,34].
Although successful, projecting the visual features from
different source and target domains into a shared space can
make the ability of the model to distinguish between classes
in the target domain suffer. We observe that activity sounds
can act as natural domain-invariant cues, as they carry rich
activity information while exhibiting less variance across
domains. We thus propose a video model which adapts to
video distribution shifts with the aid of sound.
Many have considered sound in addition to visual analysis for activity recognition within a single domain [18, 24,25,
* Currently at Terminus Group, China.

Target domain

Source domain
Scenery shift
Cutting

Viewpoint shift
Sleeping

Actor shift
Eating

Figure 1. We recognize activities under domain shifts, caused by
change of scenery, camera viewpoint or actor, with the aid of sound.

28, 31, 38, 39, 45, 46, 49]. For instance, both Gao et al. [18]
and Korbar et al. [24] reduce the computational cost by previewing the audio track, while Lee et al. [25] show that combining visual features with audio can better localize actions.
However, the cross-modal correspondences become harder
to discover when shifting domains, causing existing crossmodal fusion schemes to degrade in performance. Yang et
al. [48] and Planamente et al. [30] propose to directly fuse
visual and audio features or predictions for cross-domain
activity classification. However, the effectiveness of these
methods is reduced when not all activities make a characteristic sound. Different from previous works, we introduce
audio-adaptive learning methods and a cross-modal interaction that utilizes the reliable domain-invariant cues within
sound to help the video model adapt to the distribution shift.
We make three contributions in this paper. First, we
propose an audio-adaptive encoder which exploits the rich
information from sound to adjust the visual feature representation causing the model to learn more discriminative
features in the target domain. This is done by preventing
the model from over-fitting to domain-specific visual content, while simultaneously dealing with imbalanced seman-

13791

