Is Mapping Necessary for Realistic PointGoal Navigation?
Ruslan Partsey1 * Erik Wijmans2,3 Naoki Yokoyama2 Oles Dobosevych1 Dhruv Batra2,3 Oleksandr Maksymets3
1

Ukrainian Catholic University 2 Georgia Institute of Technology 3 Meta AI
rpartsey.github.io/pointgoalnav

Abstract
Can an autonomous agent navigate in a new environment
without building an explicit map?
For the task of PointGoal navigation (‘Go to ∆x, ∆y’)
under idealized settings (no RGB-D and actuation noise,
perfect GPS+Compass), the answer is a clear ‘yes’ – mapless neural models composed of task-agnostic components
(CNNs and RNNs) trained with large-scale reinforcement
learning achieve 100% Success on a standard dataset (Gibson [24]). However, for PointNav in a realistic setting
(RGB-D and actuation noise, no GPS+Compass), this is an
open question; one we tackle in this paper. The strongest
published result for this task is 71.7% Success [39].1
First, we identify the main (perhaps, only) cause of the
drop in performance: absence of GPS+Compass. An agent
with perfect GPS+Compass faced with RGB-D sensing and
actuation noise achieves 99.8% Success (Gibson-v2 val).
This suggests that (to paraphrase a meme) robust visual
odometry is all we need for realistic PointNav; if we can
achieve that, we can ignore the sensing and actuation noise.
With that as our operating hypothesis, we scale dataset
size, model size, and develop human-annotation-free dataaugmentation techniques to train neural models for visual
odometry. We advance state of the art on the Habitat Realistic PointNav Challenge – SPL by 40% (relative), 53 to
74, and Success by 31% (relative), 71 to 94. While our approach does not saturate or ‘solve’ this dataset, this strong
improvement combined with promising zero-shot sim2real
transfer (to a LoCoBot robot) provides evidence consistent
with the hypothesis that explicit mapping may not be necessary for navigation, even in a realistic setting.

1. Introduction
The ability to navigate in a novel environment solely
from egocentric perception is an essential requirement for
* Correspondence to partsey@ucu.edu.ua
1 According to Habitat Challenge 2020 PointNav benchmark held annu-

ally. A concurrent as-yet-unpublished result has reported 91% Success on
2021’s benchmark, but we are unable to comment on the details because
an associated report is not available.

Figure 1. PointNav. The agent is tasked with navigating from
its starting location (blue square) to a goal location (red square)
specified as coordinates relative to its initial place. It must do so
from solely an RGB-D camera. The blue line shows the agent’s
trajectory, and the green line indicates the oracle path.

building intelligent and helpful robots. To make progress
on this long-term vision, the task of PointGoal navigation
(PointNav) [1], i.e. asking a robot to ‘go to (∆x, ∆y)’ relative to its starting location), has become a core task.
We are interested in the question – can an agent navigate
in a new environment without building an explicit map?2
This question is of deep scientific interest. Decades of
research in intelligent animal navigation show that various
animals build ‘cognitive maps’ [21, 31] of their environment. For decades, robotics research has treated explicit
mapping and localization [2, 20, 27, 30] as integral components in a navigation robot. There are many good reasons
to develop mapping technology, but we simply don’t know
whether mapping is necessary for navigation. One way to
resolve this is to refute the contrapositive – if we demonstrate a map-less approach that can navigate, that will imply
that explicit mapping is not necessary for successful navigation.
Under idealized settings – perfect localization via a
noise-free GPS+Compass sensor, egocentric sensing via
2 We distinguish an explicit mapping mechanism from implicit spatial
understanding that may emerge from building task-specific end-to-endlearned representations. The former is designed, the latter is emergent.

17232

