Spatio-Temporal Gating-Adjacency GCN for Human Motion Prediction
Chongyang Zhong1,2 , Lei Hu1,2 , Zihao Zhang1,2 , Yongjing Ye1,2 , Shihong Xia1,2 *
1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences; 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{zhongchongyang, hulei19z, zhangzihao, yeyongjing, xsh}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

The aim of human motion prediction is to predict the
motion trend of the skeleton-based human body in the future period from a given historical motion sequence, which
is a significant computer vision task with many potential
applications, such as autonomous driving, human-robotics
interaction, target tracking, and motion planning.
The skeleton-based human motion sequence is a structured time series, which means that the movement of a single joint is affected by the coupling of spatial connections
with other joints and the temporal trajectory tendency. We
call these complex spatio-temporal relationships as cross* Corresponding author.

Enhance
&
Fusion
&
Balance

…

1. Introduction

Joint Dependencies

…

Predicting future motion based on historical motion
sequence is a fundamental problem in computer vision,
and it has wide applications in autonomous driving and
robotics. Some recent works have shown that Graph Convolutional Networks(GCN) are instrumental in modeling the
relationship between different joints. However, considering the variants and diverse action types in human motion data, the cross-dependency of the spatio-temporal relationships will be difficult to depict due to the decoupled
modeling strategy, which may also exacerbate the problem
of insufficient generalization. Therefore, we propose the
Spatio-Temporal Gating-Adjacency GCN(GAGCN) to learn
the complex spatio-temporal dependencies over diverse action types. Specifically, we adopt gating networks to enhance the generalization of GCN via the trainable adaptive adjacency matrix obtained by blending the candidate
spatio-temporal adjacency matrices. Moreover, GAGCN
addresses the cross-dependency of space and time by balancing the weights of spatio-temporal modeling and fusing
the decoupled spatio-temporal features. Extensive experiments on Human 3.6M, AMASS, and 3DPW demonstrate
that GAGCN achieves state-of-the-art performance in both
short-term and long-term predictions.

Historical
Sequence

Temporal Correlations

Predicted
Sequence

Figure 1. The illustration of our method. Given the historical input human motion sequence, we try to predict the future motion
sequence by enhancing, balancing, and fusing two key factors, i.e.
the joint dependencies and the temporal correlations.

dependency. The challenges lie in motion prediction are
mainly two-fold. First, earlier literature based on Recurrent Neural Network(RNN), such as LSTM and GRU suggests that predicting the long-term sequence will meet the
inherent error accumulation problem [5,7–10,14,27,32,34].
Though subsequent convolution-based approaches [3, 11,
17] for sequence-to-sequence prediction reduce the error of
long-term prediction to some extent, the error accumulation is still a problem to be solved. Second, it is difficult to
model the spatio-temporal relationships since the skeletonbased human motion is very complex and diverse. Rather
than using the basic motion representation(joint angle, position, and velocity) directly or extracting the spatial features
of the motion with a simple fully connected layer, recent
studies try to use GCN to depict the spatio-temporal relationships [6, 18–20, 22, 24–26, 28].
Though GCN-based works are instrumental for solving
the long-term prediction problem to some extent, there are
two issues to be explored: 1. The inter-joint and inter-frame
relationships will change with the motion variance and action types, therefore a stable adjacency matrix will lead to

6447

