CrossPoint: Self-Supervised Cross-Modal Contrastive Learning for 3D Point
Cloud Understanding
Mohamed Afham†

Isuru Dissanayake† Dinithi Dissanayake† Amaya Dharmasiri†
Kanchana Thilakarathna‡ Ranga Rodrigo†
†
Dept. of Electronic and Telecommunication Engineering, Univeristy of Moratuwa, Sri Lanka
‡
The University of Sydney
afhamaflal9@gmail.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
3D vision, which is critical in applications such as autonomous driving, mixed reality and robotics has drawn extensive attention due its ability to understand the human
world. In light of that, there have been plethora of work
in 3D vision research problems such as object classification [38,39,55], detection [32] and segmentation [39,49,55]

Feature Invariant Space

2D Images

l
oda e
ss-m enc
Cro spond
e
r
r
Co

Intra-modal
Correspondence

In
sta I
nc ntr
e a-m
D
isc od
rim al
ina
ti o
n

Manual annotation of large-scale point cloud dataset for
varying tasks such as 3D object classification, segmentation and detection is often laborious owing to the irregular
structure of point clouds. Self-supervised learning, which
operates without any human labeling, is a promising approach to address this issue. We observe in the real world
that humans are capable of mapping the visual concepts
learnt from 2D images to understand the 3D world. Encouraged by this insight, we propose CrossPoint, a simple
cross-modal contrastive learning approach to learn transferable 3D point cloud representations. It enables a 3D2D correspondence of objects by maximizing agreement between point clouds and the corresponding rendered 2D image in the invariant space, while encouraging invariance to
transformations in the point cloud modality. Our joint training objective combines the feature correspondences within
and across modalities, thus ensembles a rich learning signal from both 3D point cloud and 2D image modalities in
a self-supervised fashion. Experimental results show that
our approach outperforms the previous unsupervised learning methods on a diverse range of downstream tasks including 3D object classification and segmentation. Further, the ablation studies validate the potency of our approach for a better point cloud understanding. Code and
pretrained models are available at https://github.
com/MohamedAfham/CrossPoint.

3D Point Clouds

In
sta C
nc ros
e sD m
isc od
rim al
ina
ti o
n

Co Cro
rre ss-m
sp o
on da
de l
nc
e

Figure 1. An illustration of the proposed approach. Given a 3D
point cloud of an object and its rendered 2D image from a random
camera view-point, CrossPoint enforces 3D-2D correspondence
while preserving the model being invariant to affine and spatial
transformations via self-supervised contrastive learning. This facilitates generalizable point cloud representations which can then
be utilized for 3D object classification and segmentation. Note
that the 2D images shown in the right are directly rendered from
the available 3D point clouds [63].

in the recent years with point clouds as the most popularly 3D data representation method. However, the success of deep learning crucially relies on large-scale annotated data. Even though the advancements in 3D sensing
technology (e.g., LIDAR) facilitates extensive collection of
3D point cloud samples, owing to the irregular structure of
point clouds, manually annotating such large-scale 3D point
cloud datasets is laborious. Self-supervised learning is one
of the predominant approaches to address this issue and is
proven to be effective in 2D domain [5, 7, 13, 34].
Several works have explored self-supervised representation learning on point clouds and are mainly based on generative models [1,57], reconstruction [46,53] and other pre19902

