Infrared Invisible Clothing:
Hiding from Infrared Detectors at Multiple Angles in Real World
Xiaopei Zhu1,2 Zhanhao Hu2 Siyuan Huang2 Jianmin Li2 Xiaolin Hu2,3,4 *
1
School of Integrated Circuits, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Institute for Artificial Intelligence,
State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Technology and Systems, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
4
Chinese Institute for Brain Research (CIBR), Beijing, China
{zxp18, huzhanha17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{siyuanhuang, lijianmin, xlhu}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Thermal infrared imaging is widely used in body temperature measurement, security monitoring, and so on, but
its safety research attracted attention only in recent years.
We proposed the infrared adversarial clothing, which could
fool infrared pedestrian detectors at different angles. We
simulated the process from cloth to clothing in the digital
world and then designed the adversarial “QR code” pattern. The core of our method is to design a basic pattern that
can be expanded periodically, and make the pattern after
random cropping and deformation still have an adversarial
effect, then we can process the flat cloth with an adversarial
pattern into any 3D clothes. The results showed that the optimized “QR code” pattern lowered the Average Precision
(AP) of YOLOv3 by 87.7%, while the random “QR code”
pattern and blank pattern lowered the AP of YOLOv3 by
57.9% and 30.1%, respectively, in the digital world. We
then manufactured an adversarial shirt with a new material: aerogel. Physical-world experiments showed that the
adversarial “QR code” pattern clothing lowered the AP of
YOLOv3 by 64.6%, while the random “QR code” pattern
clothing and fully heat-insulated clothing lowered the AP
of YOLOv3 by 28.3% and 22.8%, respectively. We used the
model ensemble technique to improve the attack transferability to unseen models.

1. Introduction
Thermal infrared (“infrared” for short throughout the paper) imaging is widely used in many areas such as human temperature measurement, safety monitoring, and au* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Demonstration of physical infrared attack. A person
wearing the adversarial clothes hid from infrared detectors at multiple angles. Whereas, the other person wearing ordinary clothes
was detected (indicated by bounding boxes).

topilot. Infrared imaging has its unique advantages [42].
First of all, infrared imaging can image in the dark, which
means that the infrared equipment can work 24 hours a day.
Secondly, unlike radar imaging, infrared imaging does not
need to transmit signals actively, which saves more energy.
Third, infrared imaging can measure temperature information, which is unavailable in visible light or radar filed. During the COVID-19 pandemic, infrared imaging is widely
used for fast body temperature monitoring.
Infrared object detection combines deep learning with
infrared imaging technique. The security of deep learning has attracted more and more attention in recent years.
Szegedy et al. [33] found that neural networks can output error results with high confidence by adding specially
crafted perturbations to the input data. The perturbed data is

13317

