Sparse Object-level Supervision for Instance Segmentation
with Pixel Embeddings
Adrian Wolny

Qin Yu

Constantin Pape

Anna Kreshuk

European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), Heidelberg, Germany

Abstract
Most state-of-the-art instance segmentation methods
have to be trained on densely annotated images. While
difficult in general, this requirement is especially daunting for biomedical images, where domain expertise is often required for annotation and no large public data collections are available for pre-training. We propose to address
the dense annotation bottleneck by introducing a proposalfree segmentation approach based on non-spatial embeddings, which exploits the structure of the learned embedding space to extract individual instances in a differentiable
way. The segmentation loss can then be applied directly to
instances and the overall pipeline can be trained in a fullyor weakly supervised manner. We consider the challenging case of positive-unlabeled supervision, where a novel
self-supervised consistency loss is introduced for the unlabeled parts of the training data. We evaluate the proposed method on 2D and 3D segmentation problems in different microscopy modalities as well as on the Cityscapes
and CVPPP instance segmentation benchmarks, achieving
state-of-the-art results on the latter.

training datasets that could serve for general-purpose backbone training. Most microscopy segmentation networks are
therefore trained from scratch, using annotations produced
by domain experts in their limited time.
Over the recent years, several weakly supervised segmentation approaches have been introduced to lighten the
necessary annotation burden. For natural images, imagelevel labels can serve as a surprisingly strong supervision
thanks to the popular image classification datasets which
include images of individual objects and can be used for
pre-training [11]. There are no such collections in microscopy (see also Fig. 5 for a typical instance segmentation problem example where image-level labels would be
of no help). Semi-supervised instance segmentation methods [4, 3, 9] can create pseudo-labels in the unlabeled parts
of the dataset. However, these methods require (weak) annotation of all the objects in at least a subset of images – a
major obstacle for microscopy datasets which often contain
hundreds of tightly clustered objects, in 3D.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation is one of the key problems addressed by computer vision. It is important for many application domains, from astronomy to scene understanding
in robotics, forming the basis for the analysis of individual
object appearance. Biological imaging provides a particularly large set of use cases for the instance segmentation
task, with imaging modalities ranging from natural photographs for phenotyping to electron microscopy for detailed analysis of cellular ultrastructure. The segmentation
task is often posed in crowded 3D environments or their 2D
projections with multiple overlapping objects. Additional
challenges – compared to segmentation in natural images –
come from the lack of large, publicly accessible, annotated
Correspondence to: anna.kreshuk@embl.de
Code: github.com/kreshuklab/spoco

Figure 1. Differentiable instance selection for non-spatial embedding networks. First, we sample an anchor point randomly or
guided by the groundtruth instances. Second, we compute a distance map in the embedding space from the anchor point to all
image pixels. In the final step, a kernel function (Eq 3) transforms
the distance map to the “soft” instance mask.

The aim of our contribution is to address the dense annotation bottleneck by proposing a different kind of weak
supervision for the instance segmentation problem: we require mask annotations for a subset of instances in the image, leaving the rest of the pixels unlabeled. This “positive unlabeled” setting has been explored in image classification and semantic segmentation problems [34, 30], but
- to the best of our knowledge - not for instance segmentation. Intrinsically, the instance segmentation problem is

4402

