It is Okay to Not Be Okay: Overcoming Emotional Bias in Affective Image
Captioning by Contrastive Data Collection
Youssef Mohamed, Faizan Farooq Khan, Kilichbek Haydarov, Mohamed Elhoseiny
The
painting looks like a series
of
King Abdullah University of Science and
Technology
Fear (KAUST)
scaffolding ladders that are really high

up - it looks like a labyrinth of ladders
{youssef.mohamed,faizan.khan,kilichbek.haydarov,mohamed.elhoseiny}@kaust.edu.sa
and an easy way to fall and get injured.

Contentment

Contentment

Contentment

Awe
Old
Similar

Looks like a very well constructed
piece

Old
Similar

Painting

Fear
New

Painting

The painting looks like a series of
scaffolding ladders that are really high
up - it looks like a labyrinth of ladders
and an easy way to fall and get injured.

Contentment

New

I like the soothing and calming colors
and the tranquility of the people in
the image.

Anger
It looks like a big wave has broken the
dock that fishers and boaters use to
load in their boats.

Contentment
Excitement
Old
Similar
Painting

Contentment

That looks very realistic, I love the
detail on the two ladies, they seriously
look real.

Old
Similar
Painting

Fear

New

The deep blue and purple colours give
this depth and makes the fruit stand
out.

It looks like the woman is protecting
the child from something oncoming in
the distance. The big red drapery
appears ominous.

New

Disgust
The green mould on the rotten fruits
on the table is disgusting

Figure 1: Examples from the contrastively collected dataset. On the left side of each example is the query painting with its
most common emotion on top of it. The right side shows a similar painting, based on the VGG feature map, which evokes the
oppositecontentment
emotion. We show the old utterance of the selected image and the new utterance to highlight the increased attention
to details. Despite of paired paintings having very similar styles,
the triggered emotions and utterances are very different.
contentment
Nearest
Neighbour

Artemis

A beautiful vase of flowers on the
table in the bedroom.

Artemis 2.0

The flowers are drooping down as if
they're dead and their colors have
faded.

Disgust:

Abstract

Datasets that capture the connection between vision,
language, and affection are limited, causing a lack of understanding of the emotional aspect of human intelligence.
As a step in this direction, the ArtEmis dataset was recently
introduced as a large-scale dataset of emotional reactions
to images along with language explanations of these chosen emotions. We observed a significant emotional bias towards instance-rich emotions, making trained neural speakers less accurate in describing under-represented emotions.
We show that collecting new data, in the same way, is not
effective in mitigating this emotional bias. To remedy this
problem, we propose a contrastive data collection approach
to balance ArtEmis with a new complementary dataset such
that a pair of similar images have contrasting emotions
(one positive and one negative). We collected 260,533 instances using the proposed method, we combine them with
ArtEmis, creating a second iteration of the dataset. The
new combined dataset, dubbed ArtEmis v2.0, has a balanced distribution of emotions with explanations revealing

disgust

more fine details in the associated painting. Our experiments show that neural speakers trained on the new dataset
improve CIDEr and METEOR evaluation metrics by 20%
and 7%, respectively, compared to the biased dataset. Finally, we also show that the performance per emotion of
neural speakers is improved across all the emotion categories, significantly on under-represented emotions. The
collected dataset and code are available at https://
artemisdataset-v2.org.

1. Introduction
Emotional experiences stimulated by sensory information lie at the heart of human nature. They provide a window into rich yet less understood aspects of human intelligence. Emotions play a central role in determining humans’
internal state, and subsequently, their behavior. Thus, studying emotional experiences and their expression is essential
in understanding human behavior. Emotions are heavily influenced by external stimuli, especially vision and language.
So, it is essential to have affective datasets that capture dif-

21263

