Can Neural Nets Learn the Same Model Twice? Investigating Reproducibility
and Double Descent from the Decision Boundary Perspective
Gowthami Somepalli 1 , Liam Fowl 1 , Arpit Bansal 1 , Ping Yeh-Chiang 1 , Yehuda Dar 2 ,
Richard Baraniuk 2 , Micah Goldblum 3 , Tom Goldstein 1
1

2

University of Maryland, College Park

{gowthami, pchiang, tomg}@cs.umd.edu
lfowl@math.umd.edu, bansal01@umd.edu

Rice University

{ydar, richb}@rice.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
The superiority of neural networks over classical linear
classifiers stems from their ability to slice image space into
complex class regions. While neural network training is certainly not well understood, existing theories of neural network training mostly focus on understanding the geometry
of loss landscapes [5, 8, 25]. Meanwhile, considerably less
is known about the geometry of class boundaries. The geometry of these regions depends strongly on the inductive
bias of neural network models, which we do not currently
have tools to rigorously analyze. To make things worse, the

New York University
goldblum@nyu.edu

Wide
ResNet

trial #1

Vision
Transformer

trial #2

We discuss methods for visualizing neural network decision boundaries and decision regions. We use these visualizations to investigate issues related to reproducibility and
generalization in neural network training. We observe that
changes in model architecture (and its associate inductive
bias) cause visible changes in decision boundaries, while
multiple runs with the same architecture yield results with
strong similarities, especially in the case of wide architectures. We also use decision boundary methods to visualize
double descent phenomena. We see that decision boundary
reproducibility depends strongly on model width. Near the
threshold of interpolation, neural network decision boundaries become fragmented into many small decision regions,
and these regions are non-reproducible. Meanwhile, very
narrows and very wide networks have high levels of reproducibility in their decision boundaries with relatively
few decision regions. We discuss how our observations relate to the theory of double descent phenomena in convex
models. Code is available at https://github.com/
somepago/dbViz.

Fully Connected
Network

3

Ground truth:

Airplane

Frog

Bird

Images:

Figure 1. The class boundaries of three architectures, plotted on
the plane spanning three randomly selected images. Each model
is trained twice with random seeds. Decision boundaries are structurally similar across runs of the same model, and there are consistent structural difference between the class regions of different
architectures.

inductive bias of neural networks is impacted by the choice
of architecture, which further complicates theoretical analysis.
In this study, we use empirical tools to study the geometry of class regions, and how neural architecture impacts
inductive bias. We do this using visualizations and quantitative metrics calculated using realistic models. We start by
presenting simple methods for decision boundary visualization. Using visualization as a tool, we do a deep dive on
three main issues:
• Do neural networks produce decision boundaries that
are consistent across random initializations? Put simply, can a neural network learn the same model twice?
We see empirically that the decision boundaries of a
network have strong similarities across runs, and we

13699

