PokeBNN: A Binary Pursuit of Lightweight Accuracy
Yichi Zhang∗
Cornell University

Zhiru Zhang
Cornell University

Łukasz Lew∗
Google Research

yz2499@cornell.edu

zhiruz@cornell.edu

lew@google.com

80

Abstract

1. Introduction
A need for Pareto optimization. Deep learning research is largely driven by benchmarks and metrics. In the
∗ Work performed while at Google, equal contribution.
1 Poke/’p6kI/ is pronounced similarly to pocket. PokeConv, PokeBNN,
and Pokemon are abbreviations of Pocket Convolution, Pocket Binary
Neural Network, and Pocket Monster, respectively.
2 Source code and reproduction instructions are available in AQT repository: github.com/google/aqt.

Top-1(%)

Optimization of Top-1 ImageNet promotes enormous networks that may be impractical in inference settings. Binary
neural networks (BNNs) have the potential to significantly
lower the compute intensity but existing models suffer from
low quality. To overcome this deficiency, we propose PokeConv, a binary convolution block which improves quality
of BNNs by techniques such as adding multiple residual
paths, and tuning the activation function. We apply it to
ResNet-50 and optimize ResNet’s initial convolutional layer
which is hard to binarize. We name the resulting network
family PokeBNN1 . These techniques are chosen to yield favorable improvements in both top-1 accuracy and the network’s cost. In order to enable joint optimization of the
cost together with accuracy, we define arithmetic computation effort (ACE), a hardware- and energy-inspired cost
metric for quantized and binarized networks. We also identify a need to optimize an under-explored hyper-parameter
controlling the binarization gradient approximation.
We establish a new, strong state-of-the-art (SOTA) on
top-1 accuracy together with commonly-used CPU64 cost,
ACE cost and network size metrics. ReActNet-Adam [33],
the previous SOTA in BNNs, achieved a 70.5% top-1 accuracy with 7.9 ACE. A small variant of PokeBNN achieves
70.5% top-1 with 2.6 ACE, more than 3x reduction in cost; a
larger PokeBNN achieves 75.6% top-1 with 7.8 ACE, more
than 5% improvement in accuracy without increasing the
cost. PokeBNN implementation in JAX/Flax [6, 18] and reproduction instructions are open sourced.2

75
70
65
60
55

2.0x
1.25x 1.5x 1.75x
1.0x 1.4x
ReActNet-Adam
0.75x
ReActNet

0.5x (PokeBNN)

MeliusNet59
MeliusNet42

MeliusNet29 RealtoBin
IR34
BiReal34
IR18 SQBWN18
XNOR++
PCNN
BiReal18

104
ACE (Million)

Figure 1. Comparison of BNNs using top-1 and ACE (Sec. 3).

past a single metric per benchmark, e.g., top-1 accuracy
on ImageNet, was sufficient. Today one needs to account
for various model architectures, sizes, and computational
costs. This promotes optimizing the Pareto frontier of a
quality metric such as top-1 and another cost metric such
as FLOPS, latency, or energy consumption.
The choice of the optimization metric. Since the industry is currently the main user of large-scale inference,
the cost metric should be correlated to dollar cost per inference. As the ML hardware gets more mature, what becomes
evident is that the energy use is the key metric proportional
to the inference cost, especially in the data centers. In Sec. 3
we define a new proxy metric called arithmetic computation effort (ACE), which aims to estimate inference cost abstracting of concrete ML hardware.
The impact of quantization and binarization. In numerical formats such as int8 or float16, the less significant
bits do not affect a network’s output as much as the more
significant bits. Yet, processing them consumes the same
amount of energy. This might not be optimal. The possible
inference cost reduction (or equivalently performance improvement) with each halving of the quantization bits (e.g.,
16b to 8b to 4b to 2b to 1b) is at least 2x (e.g., NVIDIA
Ampere is 8x faster in int1 than in int8 [38]) and up to 4x as
estimated by the ACE metric. For comparison, this is significantly larger than the improvements yielded by upgrading
the GPU or TPU by one or two generations.

12475

