Controllable Animation of Fluid Elements in Still Images
Aniruddha Mahapatra
Adobe Research India

Kuldeep Kulkarni
Adobe Research India

anmahapa@adobe.com

kulkulka@adobe.com

(a)

(c)

(b)

Figure 1. Our approach takes in input image along with the user-provided motion hints (red arrows in (a) and the user-provided mask
(white in (b)) indicating the regions of fluid elements to be animated and outputs the sequence of frames of the animated videos.

Abstract
We propose a method to interactively control the animation of fluid elements in still images to generate cinemagraphs. Specifically, we focus on the animation of fluid elements like water, smoke, fire, which have the properties of
repeating textures and continuous fluid motion. Taking inspiration from prior works, we represent the motion of such
fluid elements in the image in the form of a constant 2D optical flow map. To this end, we allow the user to provide
any number of arrow directions and their associated speeds
along with a mask of the regions the user wants to animate.
The user-provided input arrow directions, their corresponding speed values, and the mask are then converted into a
dense flow map representing a constant optical flow map
(FD ). We observe that FD , obtained using simple exponential operations can closely approximate the plausible motion of elements in the image. We further refine computed
dense optical flow map FD using a generative-adversarial
network (GAN) to obtain a more realistic flow map. We
devise a novel UNet based architecture to autoregressively
generate future frames using the refined optical flow map by
forward-warping the input image features at different resolutions. We conduct extensive experiments on a publicly
available dataset and show that our method is superior to
the baselines in terms of qualitative and quantitative met-

rics. In addition, we show the qualitative animations of
the objects in directions that did not exist in the training
set and provide a way to synthesize videos that otherwise
would not exist in the real world. Project url: https:
//controllable-cinemagraphs.github.io/

1. Introduction
It is widely perceived that animations capture human
imagination more than still images. The effect of this can
be seen in the proliferation of video content that is being
uploaded on social media. Studies show that video-based
ads and explainers are far more likely to gain trust and engagement than those based on other modalities, leading to a
significant boost in sales. However, the required animations
or videos are less easily available for the users to leverage
than still images that exist in abundance in one’s collection.
Hence, it is desirable to empower the practitioners with controllable tools to convert the still images to videos of the
required kind. This motivates us to consider the problem
of animating images with user control to generate output
videos that are generally called ‘cinemapgraphs’ in literature. Similar to [11] we focus on the images that contain
fluid elements like water, smoke, fire that have repeating
textures and continuous fluid motion.
There has been a rich body of work [1,3,5,7,9–11,16,20,25]

3667

