Neural Fields as Learnable Kernels for 3D Reconstruction
Francis Williams* 1,2 , Zan Gojcic* 1,3 , Sameh Khamis1 , Denis Zorin2 ,
Joan Bruna2 , Sanja Fidler,1,4,5 Or Litany1
1

NVIDIA

2

New York University

In-category reconstruction

3

ETH Zürich

4

Out-of-category reconstruction

University of Toronto

5

Vector Institute

Generalization to scanned scenes

Figure 1: Trained on synthetic shapes, NKF can reconstruct objects in and out of the training distribution, and scanned scenes.

Abstract
We present Neural Kernel Fields: a novel method for
reconstructing implicit 3D shapes based on a learned kernel
ridge regression. Our technique achieves state-of-the-art
results when reconstructing 3D objects and large scenes from
sparse oriented points, and can reconstruct shape categories
outside the training set with almost no drop in accuracy.
The core insight of our approach is that kernel methods
are extremely effective for reconstructing shapes when the
chosen kernel has an appropriate inductive bias. We thus
factor the problem of shape reconstruction into two parts: (1)
a backbone neural network which learns kernel parameters
from data, and (2) a kernel ridge regression that fits the
input points on-the-fly by solving a simple positive definite
linear system using the learned kernel. As a result of this
factorization, our reconstruction gains the benefits of datadriven methods under sparse point density while maintaining
interpolatory behavior, which converges to the ground truth
shape as input sampling density increases. Our experiments
demonstrate a strong generalization capability to objects
outside the train-set category and scanned scenes. Source
code and pretrained models are available at https://
nv-tlabs.github.io/nkf.

of a shape to a 3D implicit surface for that shape. Surface
reconstruction from point clouds is a well studied topic in
computer vision and graphics, with applications in robotics,
entertainment, and manufacturing. Techniques for surface
reconstruction broadly fall into two types: implicit methods which aim to recover a volumetric function whose zero
level-set encodes the surface, and explicit methods which
directly recover a triangle mesh from the input points. While
implicit approaches can adapt to arbitrary topologies, the
requirement to store a dense volumetric field led many past
works to favor explicit approaches [42, 19]. More recently,
implicit approaches have regained popularity due to a number of works demonstrating that neural networks are compact and effective at encoding signed-distance [43, 55] and
occupancy fields [39, 46]. These works pair neural field1 representations with modern advances in point cloud processing
architectures to produce powerful reconstruction techniques.
Current state-of-the-art shape reconstructions methods can
be categorized along three axes (Fig. 3):
(1) Feed-forward vs. test-time optimization: Feed-forward
methods leverage shape priors to directly predict a surface
from input points. While these methods are fast, they are
not strictly constrained by their input and thus may perform
a task more akin to retrieval than reconstruction (see [57]

1. Introduction
The goal of 3D reconstruction is to recover geometry from
partial measurements of a shape. In this work, we aim to
map a sparse set of oriented points sampled from the surface

1 A neural field refers to the parameterization of a continuous function

of spatial coordinates using a neural network. In this work we focus on
scalar functions mapping coordinates to real numbers.
* Denotes equal contribution.

18500

