Simulated Adversarial Testing of Face Recognition Models
Nataniel Ruiz
Boston University

Adam Kortylewski
Johns Hopkins University

Weichao Qiu
Huawei

Cihang Xie
UC Santa Cruz

nruiz9@bu.edu

akortyl1@jhu.edu

qiuwch@gmail.com

cixie@ucsc.edu

Sarah Adel Bargal
Boston University

Alan Yuille*
Johns Hopkins University

Stan Sclaroff*
Boston University

sbargal@bu.edu

ayuille1@jhu.edu

sclaroff@bu.edu

Abstract
Most machine learning models are validated and tested
on fixed datasets. This can give an incomplete picture of the
capabilities and weaknesses of the model. Such weaknesses
can be revealed at test time in the real world. The risks involved in such failures can be loss of profits, loss of time or
even loss of life in certain critical applications. In order to
alleviate this issue, simulators can be controlled in a finegrained manner using interpretable parameters to explore
the semantic image manifold. In this work, we propose a
framework for learning how to test machine learning algorithms using simulators in an adversarial manner in order
to find weaknesses in the model before deploying it in critical scenarios. We apply this method in a face recognition
setup. We show that certain weaknesses of models trained
on real data can be discovered using simulated samples.
Using our proposed method, we can find adversarial synthetic faces that fool contemporary face recognition models. This demonstrates the fact that these models have weaknesses that are not measured by commonly used validation
datasets. We hypothesize that this type of adversarial examples are not isolated, but usually lie in connected spaces in
the latent space of the simulator. We present a method to
find these adversarial regions as opposed to the typical adversarial points found in the adversarial example literature.

1. Introduction
Evaluating a machine learning model can have many pitfalls. Ideally, we would like to know (1) when the model
will fail (2) in which way it will fail and (3) how badly it
will fail. In other words, we would like to be able to accurately estimate the model’s risk on the true test data distribu* Equal senior contribution.

tion as well as know what specific factors induce the model
to failure. We would like to know how these failures will
manifest themselves. For example, whether a face verification model will generate a false-positive or false-negative
error. And finally, when this failure happens, we would
like to know how confident was the incorrect decision by
the model. Testing models is no longer a purely academic
endeavour [60], with many high profile bad societal consequences being revealed in recent years due to insufficient
testing particularly with respect to racial and gender bias in
face analysis systems [5, 15, 19].
These three desiderata are very hard to achieve in practice. There are major philosophical and theoretical obstacles to achieve perfect knowledge of model failures a priori.
Nevertheless, partial knowledge of model weaknesses and
predictions of model failures are possible. Yet, there are
still major hurdles that stand in our way.
One such hurdle is the fact that testing data is limited,
due to the fact that it is expensive to gather and label. It is
not uncommon for a model to perform well on an assigned
test set and fail to generalize to specific obscure examples
when it is deployed. A second important hurdle is the fact
that testing data is unruly. There are latent factors that generate the testing data, which are hard to control or even to
fully understand. For example, a known factor that is hard
to control is the lighting of a scene. Most datasets have
been captured without controlling for this variable, and thus
present an insufficient amount of variability in this respect.
Testing a model in one environment could yield perfect performance, yet fail on an environment with more lighting
variability. Even if a test dataset with carefully controlled
lighting were assembled, the dataset would be very expensive and time-consuming to collect and there is no guarantee
that the full variability would be explored.
A way to tackle these problems is to use simulators to
generate test data. Such an approach can cheaply generate a
large quantity of data spanning a large spectrum. Also, sim-

4145

