Input-level Inductive Biases for 3D Reconstruction
Wang Yifan1∗ Carl Doersch2
ETH Zurich

2

DeepMind

Input image pair

1

Relja Arandjelović2
3

João Carreira2

Andrew Zisserman2,3

VGG, Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
Output depth
for image 1

Input matrix
flatten()

Multiple view
geometry
inductive biases

Generalist Perception
Model

Queries
for image 1

Figure 1. Input-level inductive biases. We explore 3D reconstruction using a generalist perception model, the recent Perceiver IO [23]
which ingests a matrix of unordered and flattened inputs (e.g. pixels). The model is interrogated using a query matrix and generates an
output for every query – in this paper the outputs are depth values for all pixels of the input image pair. We incorporate inductive biases
useful for multiple view geometry into this generalist model without having to touch its architecture, by instead encoding them directly as
additional inputs.

Abstract
Much of the recent progress in 3D vision has been driven
by the development of specialized architectures that incorporate geometrical inductive biases. In this paper we tackle
3D reconstruction using a domain agnostic architecture and
study how to inject the same type of inductive biases directly
as extra inputs to the model. This approach makes it possible to apply existing general models, such as Perceivers,
on this rich domain, without the need for architectural
changes, while simultaneously maintaining data efficiency
of bespoke models. In particular we study how to encode
cameras, projective ray incidence and epipolar geometry
as model inputs, and demonstrate competitive multi-view
depth estimation performance on multiple benchmarks.

1. Introduction
The focus of modern computer vision research is, to a
large extent, to identify good architectures for each task of
interest. There are many tasks of interest, ranging from classical ones such as optical flow [19], to highly specialized
(yet arguably important) ones such as recognizing equine
action units [31]. Creating dedicated models for every possible task naturally results in a sprawling catalog of archi∗ Work done during internship at DeepMind.

tectures.
Eventually it seems desirable to build a more general visual system that can deal with most perceptual problems. To
get there, one option is to combine state-of-the-art systems
for all of those problems, but this would be complex, inelegant and not scalable. Another option is to employ models without much customization or inductive biases for any
particular task, but these models will by definition be less
data-efficient and hence less accurate than specialized ones
given a fixed data budget.
In this paper we explore the single-general-model route.
We ask the following question: can the lack of architecturelevel inductive biases be replaced by extra inputs which encode our knowledge about the problem structure? In other
words, can we feed those priors as inputs rather than hardwire them into the model architecture (Fig. 1), like a loadable software solution instead of a more rigid hardware solution. As the general model we employ the recently published Perceiver IO [23] and as domain we focus on multiview geometry and 3D reconstruction, an area of computer
vision where architectural specialization is particularly exuberant [20, 22, 30, 36, 44, 66, 69].
Our main contribution is in mapping out and evaluating
some of the options for expressing priors for 3D reconstruction as input features, in particular in the setting of depth
estimation from stereo image pairs. We consider concepts
in multiview geometry such as camera viewpoint, light ray

6176

