Learning Optical Flow with Kernel Patch Attention
Ao Luo1

Fan Yang2
Xin Li2
Shuaicheng Liu3,1 *
1
2
Megvii Technology
Group 42
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China

Abstract
P

Optical flow is a fundamental method used for quantitative motion estimation on the image plane. In the deep
learning era, most works treat it as a task of ‘matching of
features’, learning to pull matched pixels as close as possible in feature space and vice versa. However, spatial affinity
(smoothness constraint), another important component for
motion understanding, has been largely overlooked. In this
paper, we introduce a novel approach, called kernel patch
attention (KPA), to better resolve the ambiguity in dense
matching by explicitly taking the local context relations into
consideration. Our KPA operates on each local patch, and
learns to mine the context affinities for better inferring the
flow fields. It can be plugged into contemporary optical flow
architecture and empower the model to conduct comprehensive motion analysis with both feature similarities and spatial relations. On Sintel dataset, the proposed KPA-Flow
achieves the best performance with EPE of 1.35 on clean
pass and 2.36 on final pass, and it sets a new record of
4.60% in F1-all on KITTI-15 benchmark. Code is publicly available at https://github.com/megviiresearch/KPAFlow.

1. Introduction
Optical flow is a fundamental technique used to characterize and quantify motion between two video frames, that
facilitates a large number of real-life applications including
visual tracking [39], video inpainting [45] and autonomous
driving [8]. Recent deep learning based methods have made
significant breakthroughs by i) learning discriminative features with advanced training paradigms (e.g., reinforcement learning [1] and alternative learning [17, 34, 50]), ii)
seeking/incorporating extra clues from the given scene [32]
and iii) utilizing multi-frame information [19]. However,
most contemporary works address the cross-image matching problem by learning and measuring feature similarities, overlooking another core component for motion under* Corresponding author

(a) Frame 1

(b) Frame 2

(c) GT

(d) RAFT

(e) GMA

(f) Ours

(g) GMA Attention

(h) Our Attention

Figure 1. A challenging image pair with heavy motion blur
from the final pass of Sintel test set. Unlike previous works
(RAFT [36] and GMA [20]) suffering from ambiguous matching,
our KPA-Flow is able to simultaneously mine the context and spatial affinities for better inferring the flow fields. The attention map
of GMA contains many globally misleading clues while ours effectively avoids the noise. “P” indicates the attention point.

standing — the spatial relations which reveal the underlying
affinities during motion.
Traditional optical flow algorithms formulate the dense
matching as an energy minimization problem, explicitly
considering both feature similarities and spatial smoothness [5, 6, 13]. Although the hand-crafted features used by
those traditional methods suffer from scale and shape variations, the smoothness constraint, to a great extent, helps to
fix errors by taking the spatial relations into consideration.
In the deep learning era, most contemporary optical flow
methods largely focus on addressing the feature-matching
similarities (e.g., using 4D correlation volumes [36]), expecting that the extracted features by deep models are dis-

8906

