Polarity Sampling: Quality and Diversity Control
of Pre-Trained Generative Networks via Singular Values
Ahmed Imtiaz Humayun †∗ , Randall Balestriero ‡∗ , Richard Baraniuk†
Rice University† , Meta AI Research‡

We present Polarity Sampling, a theoretically justified plugand-play method for controlling the generation quality
and diversity of any pre-trained deep generative network
(DGN). Leveraging the fact that DGNs are, or can be approximated by, continuous piecewise affine splines, we derive the analytical DGN output space distribution as a function of the product of the DGN’s Jacobian singular values raised to a power ρ. We dub ρ the polarity parameter and prove that ρ focuses the DGN sampling on the
modes (ρ < 0) or anti-modes (ρ > 0) of the DGN outputspace probability distribution. We demonstrate that nonzero
polarity values achieve a better precision-recall (qualitydiversity) Pareto frontier than standard methods, such as
truncation, for a number of state-of-the-art DGNs. We also
present quantitative and qualitative results on the improvement of overall generation quality (e.g., in terms of the
Fréchet Inception Distance) for a number of state-of-theart DGNs, including StyleGAN3, BigGAN-deep, NVAE, for
different conditional and unconditional image generation
tasks. In particular, Polarity Sampling redefines the stateof-the-art for StyleGAN2 on the FFHQ Dataset to FID 2.57,
StyleGAN2 on the LSUN Car Dataset to FID 2.27 and StyleGAN3 on the AFHQv2 Dataset to FID 3.95. Colab Demo.

precision (quality)

Abstract

recall (diversity)

ρ≪0

1. Introduction
Deep Generative Networks (DGNs) have emerged as
the go-to framework for generative modeling of highdimensional datasets, such as natural images. Within the
realm of DGNs, different frameworks can be used to produce an approximation of the data distribution, e.g., Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [18], Variational AutoEncoders (VAEs) [31] or flow-based models [40]. But
despite the different training settings and losses that each
of these frameworks aim to minimize, the evaluation metric of choice that is used to characterize the overall quality
of generation is the Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) [22].
∗ equal contribution

ρ<0

ρ>0

ρ≫0

Figure 1. First row: Evolution of generation quality and diversity
for varying truncation [29] ψ and polarity ρ. Polarity Sampling
achieves a better Pareto trade-off than truncation, e.g., polarity can
be used to achieve a specified recall at higher precision or a specified precision at higher recall, compared to truncation. For additional Pareto examples, see Fig. 3. Second, Third, and Fourth
row: Samples obtained from BigGAN-deep on Golden Retriever,
Tiger and House Finch classes of Imagenet with samples of greater
quality (ρ < 0) and greater diversity (ρ > 0). For examples with
LSUN [54], see Fig. 4.

The FID is obtained by taking the Fréchet Distance in the
InceptionV3 [48] embedding space between two distributions; the distributions are usually taken to be the training
dataset and samples from a DGN trained on the dataset.

10641

