Playable Environments: Video Manipulation in Space and Time
Willi Menapace*

Stéphane Lathuilière†

Aliaksandr Siarohin

Christian Theobalt†

University of Trento

LTCI, Télécom Paris
Institut Polytechnique de Paris

University of Trento

MPI for Informatics, SIC

Sergey Tulyakov†

Vladislav Golyanik†

Elisa Ricci†

Snap Inc.

MPI for Informatics, SIC

University of Trento
Fondazione Bruno Kessler

Abstract
We present Playable Environments—a new representation for interactive video generation and manipulation in
space and time. With a single image at inference time,
our novel framework allows the user to move objects in 3D
while generating a video by providing a sequence of desired
actions. The actions are learnt in an unsupervised manner.
The camera can be controlled to get the desired viewpoint.
Our method builds an environment state for each frame,
which can be manipulated by our proposed action module and decoded back to the image space with volumetric
rendering. To support diverse appearances of objects, we
extend neural radiance fields with style-based modulation.
Our method trains on a collection of various monocular
videos requiring only the estimated camera parameters and
2D object locations. To set a challenging benchmark, we introduce two large scale video datasets with significant camera movements. As evidenced by our experiments, playable
environments enable several creative applications not attainable by prior video synthesis works, including playable
3D video generation, stylization and manipulation1 .

1. Introduction
What would you change in the last tennis match you
saw? The actions of the player? The style of the field, or,
perhaps, the camera trajectory to observe a highlight more
dramatically? To do so interactively, the geometry and the
style of the field and the players need to be reconstructed.
Players’ actions need to be understood and the outcomes
of future actions anticipated. To enable these features one
needs to reconstruct the observed environment in 3D and
* This work was partially done while interning at MPI for Informatics
† Equal senior contribution
1 willi-menapace.github.io/playable-environments-website

Control Camera

Figure 1. Given a single initial frame, our method creates playable
environments that allow the user to interactively generate different
videos by specifying discrete actions to control players, manipulating the camera trajectory and indicating the style for each object
in the scene.

provide simple and intuitive interaction, offering an experience similar to playing a video game. We call these representations Playable Environments (PE).
Such a representation enables multiple creative applications, such as 3D- and action-aware video editing, camera
trajectory manipulation, changing the action sequence, the
agents and their styles, or continuing the video in time, beyond the observed footage. Fig. 1 shows a playable environment for tennis matches. In it, the user specifies actions
to move the players, controls the viewpoint and changes the
style of the players and the field. The environment can be
played, akin to a video game, but with real objects.
In this work, we propose a method to construct PEs of
complex scenes that supports a large set of interactive manipulations. Trained on a dataset of monocular videos, our
method presents six core characteristics listed in Tab. 1 that
enable the creation of such PEs. Our framework allows the
user to interactively generate videos by providing discrete
actions ⟨1⟩ and controlling the camera pose ⟨2⟩. Further-

3584

