Replacing Labeled Real-image Datasets with Auto-generated Contours
Hirokatsu Kataoka1 , Ryo Hayamizu1 , Ryosuke Yamada1 , Kodai Nakashima1 , Sora Takashima1,2 ,
Xinyu Zhang1,2 , Edgar Josafat Martinez-Noriega1,2 , Nakamasa Inoue1,2 , Rio Yokota1,2
1

National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST)
2
Tokyo Institute of Technology

https://hirokatsukataoka16.github.io/Replacing-Labeled-Real-Image-Datasets/

Abstract
In the present work, we show that the performance
of formula-driven supervised learning (FDSL) can match
or even exceed that of ImageNet-21k without the use of
real images, human-, and self-supervision during the pretraining of Vision Transformers (ViTs). For example, ViTBase pre-trained on ImageNet-21k shows 81.8% top-1 accuracy when ﬁne-tuned on ImageNet-1k and FDSL shows
82.7% top-1 accuracy when pre-trained under the same
conditions (number of images, hyperparameters, and number of epochs). Images generated by formulas avoid the
privacy/copyright issues, labeling cost and errors, and biases that real images suffer from, and thus have tremendous
potential for pre-training general models.
To understand the performance of the synthetic images,
we tested two hypotheses, namely (i) object contours are
what matter in FDSL datasets and (ii) increased number of
parameters to create labels affects performance improvement in FDSL pre-training. To test the former hypothesis, we constructed a dataset that consisted of simple object
contour combinations. We found that this dataset can match
the performance of fractals. For the latter hypothesis, we
found that increasing the difﬁculty of the pre-training task
generally leads to better ﬁne-tuning accuracy.

1. Introduction
Image recognition has greatly beneﬁted from labeled
real-image datasets. Conventional image datasets comprise
real images of various objects on a general background
annotated by humans. A visual representation can be acquired by learning from real images with such annotations.
Supervised learning (SL) is the most trusted approach for
this task. However, in recent years self-supervised learning
(SSL) has gained ground [6–9, 16].
SSL methods have recently been used to pre-train Vision
Transformers (ViTs) [13]; however, datasets with hundreds

Pre-training Image

Attention Image

【ImageNet-21k】

Fine-tuning
@ ImageNet-1k Top-1 Acc.

81.8
【ExFractalDB-21k; Extended FractalDataBase】

82.7
【RCDB-21k; RadialContourDataBase】

82.4
Figure 1. We have found that vision transformers (ViT) can be
successfully pre-trained without real images, human- and selfsupervision, and can exceed the accuracy of ImageNet-21k pretraining when ﬁne-tuned on ImageNet-1k. We constructed a
new dataset Radial Contour DataBase (RCDB) based on the assumption that contours are what matter for the pre-training of
ViT. RCDB also exceeded the performance of ImageNet-21k pretraining, while consisting only of contours.

of millions of images are required [11, 32]. The learning
methods DINO [5] and MoCoV3 [10] show that it is possible to train on relatively small datasets such as ImageNet-1k
(ILSVRC) [31]. SSL methods remove the time-consuming
labeling of a dataset, but do not address privacy, copyright,
and societal biases when real images are used [2, 37].
Formula-driven supervised learning (FDSL) trains on
synthetic images generated by mathematical formulas and
thus avoids such issues [1, 3, 19–21, 27]. The images can
be categorized and labeled automatically based on the parameters of the equations used to generate them. Because
the images are generated by mathematical formulas, they
avoid the ethical problems associated with labeled realimage datasets. If FDSL can be used to pre-train models
to the same accuracy as that achieved with real images, it
could replace SL/SSL to avoid ethical issues.
To improve FDSL methods, Kataoka et al. [21] used
fractal geometry based on the assumption that fractals are
a natural phenomenon. They found that the actual performance depends on the number of hyperparameters in order

21232

