Crafting Better Contrastive Views for Siamese Representation Learning
Xiangyu Peng1 * Kai Wang1 * Zheng Zhu2 Mang Wang3 Yang You1†
1
National University of Singapore 2 Tsinghua University 3 Alibaba Group
{xiangyupeng, kai.wang, youy}@comp.nus.edu.sg
zhengzhu@ieee.org

wangmang.wm@alibaba-inc.com

Code: https://github.com/xyupeng/ContrastiveCrop

Abstract
Recent self-supervised contrastive learning methods
greatly benefit from the Siamese structure that aims at minimizing distances between positive pairs. For high performance Siamese representation learning, one of the keys
is to design good contrastive pairs. Most previous works
simply apply random sampling to make different crops of
the same image, which overlooks the semantic information
that may degrade the quality of views. In this work, we
propose ContrastiveCrop, which could effectively generate
better crops for Siamese representation learning. Firstly,
a semantic-aware object localization strategy is proposed
within the training process in a fully unsupervised manner.
This guides us to generate contrastive views which could
avoid most false positives (i.e., object vs. background).
Moreover, we empirically find that views with similar appearances are trivial for the Siamese model training. Thus,
a center-suppressed sampling is further designed to enlarge
the variance of crops. Remarkably, our method takes a
careful consideration of positive pairs for contrastive learning with negligible extra training overhead. As a plugand-play and framework-agnostic module, ContrastiveCrop
consistently improves SimCLR, MoCo, BYOL, SimSiam
by 0.4% ∼ 2.0% classification accuracy on CIFAR-10,
CIFAR-100, Tiny ImageNet and STL-10. Superior results
are also achieved on downstream detection and segmentation tasks when pre-trained on ImageNet-1K.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) has attracted much attention in the computer vision community due to its potential of exploiting large amount of unlabeled data. As
a mainstream approach in SSL, contrastive learning has
achieved higher performance on several downstream tasks
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. The motivation of our proposed ContrastiveCrop. (a)
and (c) are generated by typical RandomCrop, while (b) and (d)
are crops from our method. We address the false positive problem (object vs. background) shown in (a) by localizing the object
and restricting the crop center within the bounding box (the black
dashed box) in (b). Moreover, we enlarge the variance of crops in
(d) by keeping them away from the center, which avoids the close
appearance as shown in (c).

(e.g., object detection, segmentation and pose estimation
[16, 18, 21, 27, 32]) than its supervised counterpart. Such
promising results can be largely attributed to the Siamese
structure, which is commonly applied in state-of-the-art unsupervised methods, including SimCLR [5], MoCo [20],
BYOL [17] and SimSiam [8]. Typically, the Siamese structure takes two augmented views from an image as input,
and minimizes their distance in the embedding space. With
proper views selected, Siamese networks demonstrate a
strong capability to learn generic visual features [37].
One of the key issues of contrastive learning is to design
positives selection. Some works generate different positive
views by strong data augmentation, such as color distor-

16031

