A Self-Supervised Descriptor for Image Copy Detection
Ed Pizzi

Sreya Dutta Roy

Sugosh Nagavara Ravindra

Priya Goyal

Matthijs Douze

Meta AI

Abstract
Image copy detection is an important task for content
moderation. We introduce SSCD, a model that builds on
a recent self-supervised contrastive training objective. We
adapt this method to the copy detection task by changing the
architecture and training objective, including a pooling operator from the instance matching literature, and adapting
contrastive learning to augmentations that combine images.
Our approach relies on an entropy regularization term,
promoting consistent separation between descriptor vectors, and we demonstrate that this significantly improves
copy detection accuracy. Our method produces a compact
descriptor vector, suitable for real-world web scale applications. Statistical information from a background image
distribution can be incorporated into the descriptor.
On the recent DISC2021 benchmark, SSCD is shown to
outperform both baseline copy detection models and selfsupervised architectures designed for image classification
by huge margins, in all settings. For example, SSCD outperforms SimCLR descriptors by 48% absolute.
Code is available at https : / / github . com /
facebookresearch/sscd-copy-detection.

1. Introduction
All online photo sharing platforms use content moderation to block or limit the propagation of images that are
considered harmuful: terrorist propaganda, misinformation,
harassment, pornography, etc. Some content moderation
can be performed automatically, for unambiguous data like
pornographic pictures, but this is much harder for complex
data like memes [31] or misinformation [2]. In these cases,
content is moderated manually. For of viral images, where
copies of same image may be uploaded thousands of times,
manual moderation of each copy is tedious and unnecessary. Instead, each image for which a manual moderation
decision is taken can be recorded in a database, so that it
can be re-identified later and handled automatically.
This paper is concerned with this basic task of reidentifcation. This is non trivial because copied images are

Figure 1. The SSCD architecture for image copy detection. It
is based on SimCLR, with the following additions: the entropy
regulatization, cutmix/mixup-aware InfoNCE, and inference-time
score normalization.

often altered, for technical reasons (e.g. a user shares a mobile phone screenshot that captures additional content), or
users may make adversarial edits to evade moderation.
Image re-identification is an image matching problem,
with two additional challenges. The first is the enormous
scale at which copy detection systems are deployed. At
this scale, the only feasible approach is to represent images as short descriptor vectors, that can be searched efficiently with approximate nearest neighbor search methods [23, 30]. Copy detection systems typically proceed in
2 stages: a retrieval stage that produces a shortlist of candidate matches and a verification stage, often based on local
descriptor matching that operates on the candidates. In this
work, we are concerned with the first stage. Figure 1 shows
the overall architecture of our Self Supervised Copy Detection (SSCD) approach.
The second challenge is that there is a hard match/nonmatch decision to take, and positive image pairs are rare.
We wish to limit verification candidates using a threshold,
which is a harder constraint than the typical image retrieval
setting, where only the order of results matter.
SSCD uses differential entropy regularization [42] to

14532

