ContIG: Self-supervised Multimodal Contrastive Learning for
Medical Imaging with Genetics
Aiham Taleb1 *
1

Matthias Kirchler1,2 *

Christoph Lippert1,3

Hasso Plattner Institute for Digital Engineering, University of Potsdam, Germany
2

3

Remo Monti1

TU Kaiserslautern, Germany

Hasso Plattner Institute for Digital Health at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, NYC, USA
{firstname.lastname}@hpi.de

Abstract
High annotation costs are a substantial bottleneck in applying modern deep learning architectures to clinically relevant medical use cases, substantiating the need for novel
algorithms to learn from unlabeled data. In this work, we
propose ContIG, a self-supervised method that can learn
from large datasets of unlabeled medical images and genetic data. Our approach aligns images and several genetic modalities in the feature space using a contrastive
loss. We design our method to integrate multiple modalities of each individual person in the same model end-toend, even when the available modalities vary across individuals. Our procedure outperforms state-of-the-art selfsupervised methods on all evaluated downstream benchmark tasks. We also adapt gradient-based explainability
algorithms to better understand the learned cross-modal associations between the images and genetic modalities. Finally, we perform genome-wide association studies on the
features learned by our models, uncovering interesting relationships between images and genetic data.1

T C

T

T

A

C

A

C T

TACC...GTCACT….GAGT….CACTAG….TCTAT

PGS1

PGS2

PGS3

G A

TACC...GTCACT….GAGT….CACTAG….TCTAT

PGS4

G T

C

G

A

T T

GTCACT…..GCTT….ACATTG….CGATC….TACT

PGS5

PGS6

ATCTCT….GACT....CAGTAG….GATAC…TACG

A T

G T

A

G

T

T G

ATCTCT….GACT….CAGTAG….GATAC…TACG

Figure 1. Overview of our contrastive learning method from imaging and genomic data. It learns representations by bringing the
modalities of each individual closer in the embedding space, and
apart from different individuals’. In this example, the modalities
are retinal fundus images (in brown), SNP data (in green), and
polygenic risk scores (PGS) (in purple). Our method handles missing modalities (e.g. missing PGS for the person in the upper right).

1. Introduction
Medical imaging plays a vital role in patient healthcare.
It aids in disease prevention, early detection, diagnosis, and
treatment. However, efforts to employ machine learning algorithms to support in clinical settings are often hampered
by the high costs of required expert annotations [41]. At the
same time, large-scale biobank studies have recently started
to aggregate unprecedented scales of multimodal data on
human health. For example, the UK Biobank (UKB) [96]
contains data on 500, 000 individuals, including a wide
range of imaging modalities such as retinal fundus images
and cardiac, abdominal, and brain MRI. Similar studies are
* Equal contribution
1 Source code at: https://github.com/HealthML/ContIG

currently underway in other countries, such as the Nationale
Kohorte (NaKo) [15], BioMe [13], FinnGen [34], Estonia
Biobank [14], and others. While some of these studies also
include phenotypic descriptions, e.g. a person’s medical history, such data tend to be both highly incomplete and biased
due to clinical practices and assessment methods [76], making learning from them challenging and error-prone. On the
other hand, genetic data is increasingly abundant. While
chip-based genotyping technology has enabled the study of
common genetic variation at scale [108], the exponentially
decreasing costs of genomic sequencing is driving progress
for rare genetic variation [80]. Due to these advances, the
UKB and other biobanks often contain a rich array of ge-

20908

