On the Importance of Asymmetry for Siamese Representation Learning
Xiao Wang∗,†

Haoqi Fan1,† Yuandong Tian1
1
Facebook AI Research (FAIR)

Daisuke Kihara2 Xinlei Chen1
2
Purdue University

Code: https://github.com/facebookresearch/asym-siam

loss

Abstract
Many recent self-supervised frameworks for visual representation learning are based on certain forms of Siamese
networks. Such networks are conceptually symmetric with
two parallel encoders, but often practically asymmetric as
numerous mechanisms are devised to break the symmetry.
In this work, we conduct a formal study on the importance
of asymmetry by explicitly distinguishing the two encoders
within the network – one produces source encodings and the
other targets. Our key insight is keeping a relatively lower
variance in target than source generally benefits learning.
This is empirically justified by our results from five case
studies covering different variance-oriented designs, and
is aligned with our preliminary theoretical analysis on the
baseline. Moreover, we find the improvements from asymmetric designs generalize well to longer training schedules,
multiple other frameworks and newer backbones. Finally,
the combined effect of several asymmetric designs achieves
a state-of-the-art accuracy on ImageNet linear probing and
competitive results on downstream transfer. We hope our
exploration will inspire more research in exploiting asymmetry for Siamese representation learning.

1. Introduction
Despite different motivations and formulations, many recent un-/self-supervised methods for visual representation
learning [1, 6–8, 18, 19, 44] are based on certain forms of
Siamese networks [4]. Siamese networks are inherently
symmetric, as the two encoders within such networks share
many aspects in design. For example, their model architectures (e.g., ResNet [20]) are usually the same; their network
weights are often copied over; their input distributions –
typically compositions of multiple data augmentations [8] –
are by default identical; and their outputs are encouraged to
be similar for the same image. Such a symmetric structure
not only enables straightforward adaptation from off-theshelf, supervised learning architectures to self-supervised
learning, but also introduces a minimal inductive bias to
∗: work done during internship at FAIR. †: equal contribution.

higher
variance

lower
variance

source

target
x

Figure 1. Asymmetry for Siamese representation learning. For
the two encoders in a Siamese network, we treat one as a source
encoder, and the other as a target encoder. We find it generally
beneficial to have relatively lower variance in target than source.

learn representations invariant w.r.t. various transformations
in computer vision [10].
However, symmetry is not the only theme in these frameworks. In fact, numerous mechanisms were proposed to
break the conceptual symmetry. For example, BYOL [18]
and SimSiam [10] place a special predictor head on one
of the encoders, so architecture-wise they are no longer
symmetric; MoCo [19] introduces momentum encoder, in
which the weights are computed with moving-averages instead of directly copied; SwAV [6] and DINO [7] additionally adopt a multi-crop [27] strategy to enhance the augmentation on one side, shifting the data distribution asymmetric
between encoders; even the InfoNCE loss [28] treats outputs from two encoders differently – one is positive-only
and the other also involves negatives. Among them, some
specific asymmetric designs are crucial and well-studied
(e.g., stop-gradient to prevent collapse [10]), but the general role of asymmetry for Siamese representation learning
is yet to be better understood.
In this paper, we conduct a more formal study on the
importance of asymmetry for Siamese learning. Deviating from the original meaning of ‘Siamese’, we explicitly mark the two encoders within the network functionally different: a source encoder and a target encoder.1 The
1 Depending on the context, source has also been referred as query/online/student; and target as key/teacher in the literature [18, 19, 32].

16570

