NeRFReN: Neural Radiance Fields with Reflections
Yuan-Chen Guo1 * Di Kang2
1

Linchao Bao2

Yu He3† Song-Hai Zhang1

BNRist, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing
2
Tencent AI Lab 3 BIMSA

NeRFReN

Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) has achieved unprecedented view synthesis quality using coordinate-based neural scene representations. However, NeRF’s view dependency can only handle simple reflections like highlights but
cannot deal with complex reflections such as those from
glass and mirrors. In these scenarios, NeRF models the
virtual image as real geometries which leads to inaccurate
depth estimation, and produces blurry renderings when the
multi-view consistency is violated as the reflected objects
may only be seen under some of the viewpoints. To overcome these issues, we introduce NeRFReN, which is built
upon NeRF to model scenes with reflections. Specifically,
we propose to split a scene into transmitted and reflected
components, and model the two components with separate
neural radiance fields. Considering that this decomposition
is highly under-constrained, we exploit geometric priors
and apply carefully-designed training strategies to achieve
reasonable decomposition results. Experiments on various
self-captured scenes show that our method achieves highquality novel view synthesis and physically sound depth estimation results while enabling scene editing applications.

NeRF

Abstract

+

*

(a)

+

*

(b)

Figure 1. NeRF models the stable reflection image as real geometries rather than view-dependent effect of the points on the reflective surface. We illustrate two problems NeRF may encounter
when modeling scenes with complex reflections: (1) inaccurate
depth estimation in reflective regions, as in (a) and (b); (2) inaccurate rendering when the multi-view consistency is violated, as
in the magnified area in (b). NeRFReN tackles these problems
by modeling the transmitted and reflected component of the scene
with separate NeRFs, and synthesizing views in the image domain
(bottom). See Sec. 3.1 for more detailed analysis.

1. Introduction
Photorealistic novel view synthesis (NVS) from unstructured image collections is crucial to creating immersive
virtual experiences. Despite having achieved significant
progress in controlled settings, challenges still exist in handling light transport at the surface of different materials. For
example, reflections caused by glass or mirrors commonly
exist in real-world scenes, posing great difficulties for novel
view synthesis due to the severe view-dependent effects.
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [12], as an emerging
technique in this field, has achieved impressive view synthesis quality by adopting volumetric representations with
coordinate-based neural networks. By conditioning radi* Research done when Yuan-Chen Guo was an intern at Tencent AI Lab.
† Corresponding author: hooyeeevan2511@gmail.com.

ance on both coordinates and viewing directions, NeRF is
able to faithfully handle view-dependent effects like highlights. However, in the presence of severe reflections that
contain a stable virtual image other than highlights, NeRF
tends to model the scene geometry behind the reflective surface as translucent (like fogs) and regard the reflected geometries as appearing at some virtual depth. The reason
is that NeRF does not explain the view-dependency of a
reflecting surface point by changing the color of this very
point when viewed from different directions, but explain it
by utilizing all the spatial points behind it along the camera ray to get the correct color through volume rendering
as in Eq. (2), resulting in foggy geometries and physically
wrong depth. Although this works well for view synthesis
in certain scenarios, there are two inherent limitations: (1)

18409

