Bounded Adversarial Attack on Deep Content Features
Qiuling Xu, Guanhong Tao, Xiangyu Zhang
Purdue University
{xu1230, taog, xyzhang}@purdue.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel adversarial attack targeting content
features in some deep layer, that is, individual neurons in the
layer. A naive method that enforces a fixed value/percentage
bound for neuron activation values can hardly work and
generates very noisy samples. The reason is that the level
of perceptual variation entailed by a fixed value bound is
non-uniform across neurons and even for the same neuron.
We hence propose a novel distribution quantile bound for
activation values and a polynomial barrier loss function.
Given a benign input, a fixed quantile bound is translated to
many value bounds, one for each neuron, based on the distributions of the neuron’s activations and the current activation
value on the given input. These individualized bounds enable
fine-grained regulation, allowing content feature mutations
with bounded perceptional variations. Our evaluation on ImageNet and five different model architectures demonstrates
that our attack is effective. Compared to seven other latest
adversarial attacks in both the pixel space and the feature
space, our attack can achieve the state-of-the-art trade-off
between attack success rate and imperceptibility. 1

1. Introduction
Adversarial attack is a prominent security threat for Deep
Learning (DL) applications. With a benign input, perturbation is applied to the input to derive an adversarial example,
which causes the DL model to misclassify. An underlying assumption is that adversarial samples should be perceptually
close to real inputs [10]. Without this assumption, adversarial samples could merely be too different from real inputs
and become unseen samples, in which case misclassification
is well expected. Traditionally, imperceptibility is ensured by
having bounded perturbation in the pixel space. The bound
is usually small, e.g., [−4, 4] in the RGB range of [0, 255],
such that perturbations are imperceptible by humans.
Researchers have recently shown adversarial examples
with large pixel distances (from the original inputs) can
1 Code and Samples are available on Github [37].

be generated. Such distances are usually way beyond the
bounds that many existing defense and validation techniques
aim to protect, providing a new attack vector. These techniques focus on mutating meta-features of original inputs,
such as colors and styles, due to the difficulty of harnessing perturbations on content features, such as shapes and
local patterns, denoted by individual neurons. While using adversarial samples generated by these techniques can
harden the model in meta-feature space, making the model
robust to color and style changes, they offer limited protection when the attacker is able to mutate individual contentfeatures/neurons in an imperceptible way. In addition, the
perturbations generated by these methods are pervasive and
hence more visible in human eyes, making them less desirable when being used in real attacks.
In this paper, we propose a new attack vector in the feature space that can perform imperceptible content feature
perturbation. Such perturbations cannot be expressed by
pixel bounds or meta-feature bounds (e.g., bounds on mean
and standard deviation of activation values) and hence pose
a new challenge to existing defense techniques. The essence
of our technique is to bound the perturbations of individual neurons. Given a uniform bound at the perception level
(e.g., allowing 10% perceptual perturbation for each contentfeature/neuron), it is projected to various value bounds for
individual neurons which have different activation value
ranges and distributions. Gradient back-propagation is used
to mutate input pixels, just like in traditional adversarial
attack, while the mutations are constrained by the internal
bounds. A naive method is to first profile the activation value
ranges of individual neurons and then limit the variation of
each neuron to a fixed portion of its value range. However,
this method does not work because the perception of a fixed
activation value perturbation varies substantially (even for
a single feature) depending on the activation value itself.
For example, a change of 1.0 when the activation value is
0.0 admits a substantially different level of perceptual variations compared to the same change when the value is 15.0.
To achieve a uniform perceptual bound, we propose to use
a distribution quantile bound. More specifically, given a
model, we identify internal values that approximate normal

15203

