Robust Equivariant Imaging: a fully unsupervised framework for learning to
image from noisy and partial measurements
Dongdong Chen*
School of Engineering
University of Edinburgh

Julián Tachella∗
School of Engineering
University of Edinburgh

Abstracty

A y

= 0.01

26.22

Deep networks provide state-of-the-art performance in
multiple imaging inverse problems ranging from medical
imaging to computational photography. However, most existing networks are trained with clean signals which are
often hard or impossible to obtain.
y Equivariant imaging
A y
(EI) is a recent self-supervised learning framework that ex- 23.23
ploits the group invariance present in signal distributions
to learn a reconstruction function from partial measurement data alone. While EI results are impressive, its performance degrades with increasing noise. In this paper,
we propose a Robust Equivariant Imaging (REI) framework
y partial measurements
A y
which can learn to image from noisy
alone. The proposed method uses Stein’s Unbiased Risk 19.04
Estimator (SURE) to obtain a fully unsupervised training
loss that is robust to noise. We show that REI leads to
considerable performance gains on linear and nonlinear
inverse problems, thereby paving the way for robust unsupervised imaging with deep networks. Code is available at
https://github.com/edongdongchen/REI.

1. Introduction
Inverse problems play a fundamental role in computer vision and signal processing. Applications such as
computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), super-resolution and image inpainting have been extensively explored. The goal in an inverse problem is to reconstruct a signal x ∈ Rn from measurements y ∈ Rm , that
is inverting the forward process
y = A(x) + ϵ,

(1)

which is generally a challenging task due to the noise ϵ
and the ill-conditioned or rank deficient forward operator A
(e.g., m < n). Traditional approaches exploit prior knowledge about x (sparsity [10], total variation [36] or more re* The first two authors have contributed equally to this paper.

= 0.1

= 0.2

EI

EI

EI

Mike E. Davies
School of Engineering
University of Edinburgh

30.84

24.56

19.95

REI

REI

REI

30.98

28.09

27.16

Sup

Sup

Sup

32.12

29.49

28.60

Figure 1. REI vs EI: EI is not robust to noise and the performance
degrades with increasing noise. From top to bottom: reconstructions of EI, supervised (Sup) baseline, and the proposed REI on
4× accelerated MRI with Gaussian noise level σ = 0.01, 0.1, 0.2.
PSNR values are shown in the top right corner of the images.

cently the deep image prior [39]) to regularize the reconstructions. A different approach is taken by more recent
end-to-end learning solutions [17] which aim to learn the
inverse mapping directly from (x, y) pairs. However, in
many inverse problems, it is expensive or impossible to obtain clean signals x, and only noisy measurement data y are
available for training.
Without any assumptions on the signal distribution, it is
fundamentally impossible to learn the reconstruction mapping from partial measurements alone, as there are infinitely
many inverses for each observed measurement y [4, 10].
Some unsupervised methods alleviate this limitation by us-

5647

x (GT)

x (GT)

x (GT)

