Robust Cross-Modal Representation Learning with Progressive Self-Distillation
Alex Andonian*
MIT CSAIL

Shixing Chen, Raffay Hamid
Amazon Prime Video

andonian@mit.edu

{shixic, raffay}@amazon.com

The convergence of self-supervised pretraining techniques
in natural language processing and computer vision have
brought about a renaissance of cross-modal representation
learning methods [1, 19, 30, 39, 52, 63, 68, 75] where largescale weakly correlated multimodal data (e.g., image-text
pairs) is used to learn cross-modal representations using
contrastive learning techniques. In particular, the recently
proposed CLIP [63] model has garnered significant attention due to its impressive zero-shot recognition ability and
excellent transfer performance on downstream tasks.
However, despite their recent success, multimodal pretraining methods like CLIP [63] are data and compute in* This work was done when the author was an intern at Amazon.

Ours

T1

V2

T2

V3

T3

V1

T1

V2

T2

V3

T3

pretrained models

test image
ground truth: goldfish

guinea pig
beer glass
cockroach
pomeranian
axolotl

an out-of-distribution
image from ImageNet-R
dataset showing a
goldfish rendered in a
stained glass pane

test image

0.18
0.11
0.04
0.04
0.04

goldfish
clown fish
0.17
axolotl 0.01

0.67

puffer fish 0.01
snail 0.01

Ours

1. Introduction

V1

CLIP

The learning objective of vision-language approach of
CLIP [63] does not effectively account for the noisy manyto-many correspondences found in web-harvested image
captioning datasets, which contributes to its compute and
data inefficiency. To address this challenge, we introduce
a novel training framework based on cross-modal contrastive learning that uses progressive self-distillation and
soft image-text alignments to more efficiently learn robust
representations from noisy data. Our model distills its own
knowledge to dynamically generate soft-alignment targets
for a subset of images and captions in every minibatch,
which are then used to update its parameters. Extensive
evaluation across 14 benchmark datasets shows that our
method consistently outperforms its CLIP counterpart in
multiple settings, including: (a) zero-shot classification, (b)
linear probe transfer, and (c) image-text retrieval, without incurring extra computational cost. Analysis using an
ImageNet-based robustness test-bed [70] reveals that our
method offers better effective robustness to natural distribution shifts compared to both ImageNet-trained models and
CLIP itself. Lastly, pretraining with datasets spanning two
orders of magnitude in size shows that our improvements
over CLIP tend to scale with number of training examples.

CLIP

Abstract

model outputs

Figure 1. Illustrative Comparison with CLIP – CLIP [63]
learns a joint vision-language embedding space by bringing corresponding image-text representation together (green links), while
repelling unpaired instances away from each other (red links).
This formulation does not account for potential semantic similarity between negative samples. We address this issue by learning to
predict a distribution of soft-alignment targets (dotted blue edges)
in a given minibatch, thereby allowing our model to learn more
robust representations. This robustness is evident when comparing predicted distributions on an out-of-distribution image from
ImageNet-R dataset [25], where unlike CLIP, our method can correctly classify a goldfish rendered in a stained glass pane.

efficient. Much of CLIP’s success can be attributed to its
voracious appetite for training data, utilizing 400M imagetext pairs and an estimated 3, 584 GPU days for pretraining.
As the scale of data increases, pretraining requirements of
these methods become increasingly expensive, thereby limiting their widespread adoption in a sustainable manner.
This data and compute inefficiency of CLIP [63] can be
partially attributed to the underlying assumptions it makes
about the web-harvested data it uses for training. Several mainstream vision-language datasets utilize the alttext HTML attribute of images scraped from archived web
pages [9, 67, 71] where captions can often have words unrelated to their corresponding image-content [67]. However, CLIP [63] models the caption for each image to be
accurately and exclusively related to only that image (see
Figure 1). Moreover, when using larger batch sizes (32K
used for CLIP), the likelihood of observing negatives with

16430

