Generalizing Gaze Estimation with Rotation Consistency
Yiwei Bao1 Yunfei Liu1 Haofei Wang2 Feng Lu1, 2 *
1
State Key Laboratory of VR Technology and Systems, School of CSE, Beihang University
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{baoyiwei, lyunfei, lufeng}@buaa.edu.cn

wanghf@pcl.ac.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Gaze is one of the most important cues for human intention prediction. It has been used in a variety of applications
such as virtual/augmented reality [21,30], human-computer
interaction [18, 35, 37], and medical analysis [3, 20]. To obtain accurate gaze estimations, various systems have been
developed. Appearance-based gaze estimation is one of the
most promising approaches, since it has the lowest hardware requirements.
With the advancement of deep learning techniques, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) have achieved significant performance improvement in many computer vision
* Corresponding Author. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant 61972012.

Output

Sub-label
Images

Rotation Consistency
Gaze Error

Recent advances of deep learning-based approaches
have achieved remarkable performance on appearancebased gaze estimation. However, due to the shortage of
target domain data and absence of target labels, generalizing gaze estimation algorithm to unseen environments is
still challenging. In this paper, we discover the rotationconsistency property in gaze estimation and introduce the
‘sub-label’ for unsupervised domain adaptation. Consequently, we propose the Rotation-enhanced Unsupervised
Domain Adaptation (RUDA) for gaze estimation. First, we
rotate the original images with different angles for training. Then we conduct domain adaptation under the constraint of rotation consistency. The target domain images
are assigned with sub-labels, derived from relative rotation
angles rather than untouchable real labels. With such sublabels, we propose a novel distribution loss that facilitates
the domain adaptation. We evaluate the RUDA framework
on four cross-domain gaze estimation tasks. Experimental
results demonstrate that it improves the performance over
the baselines with gains ranging from 12.2% to 30.5%. Our
framework has the potential to be used in other computer
vision tasks with physical constraints.

Adaptation

Gaze direction labels

Pretrain model

Source domain

Before UDA
After UDA

User

RUDA framework (proposed)

Target domain

Figure 1. The overall structure of the proposed rotation-enhanced
unsupervised domain adaptation (RUDA) framework for gaze estimation. RUDA adapts the pre-trained model to target domain
without requiring any gaze labels in target domain.

tasks. Gaze estimation task is no exception, various CNNbased gaze estimation methods have been proposed over the
last decades [8]. These systems usually have different inputs: eye images [9,24,29,39,42], face images [19,22,43] or
both face/eye images [1, 7, 23]. However, existing methods
suffer from severe performance degradation when adapting
to new domains, which is mainly caused by the difference
between the domains, e.g., subject appearance, image quality, shooting angle and illumination.
One of the major challenge of gaze domain adaptation is
that we usually do not have access to target domain labels in
real world scenarios, and we cannot directly train the gaze
estimator in target domain. To address this problem, unsupervised domain adaptation approaches aim to ﬁnd a gazerelevant constraint generalizing the model to target domain
without label. Kellnhofer et al. propose to supervise gaze
estimation model with an domain discriminator by adversarial learning [19]. Similarly, Wang et al. employ an appearance discriminator and a head pose classiﬁer for adaptation [39]. More recently, Liu et al. propose to guide the
model with outliers [25]. Although some unsupervised domain adaptation approaches for gaze estimation have been
proposed, it is still a challenging task.

4207

