MUM : Mix Image Tiles and UnMix Feature Tiles
for Semi-Supervised Object Detection
JongMok Kim1,2 JooYoung Jang1,2 Seunghyeon Seo2 Jisoo Jeong2 Jongkeun Na1 Nojun Kwak2
1
SNUAILAB, South Korea 2 Seoul National University, South Korea
{win98man, jyjang1090, zzzlssh, soo3553}@snu.ac.kr, jake.na@snuailab.ai, nojunk@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Many recent semi-supervised learning (SSL) studies
build teacher-student architecture and train the student network by the generated supervisory signal from the teacher.
Data augmentation strategy plays a significant role in the
SSL framework since it is hard to create a weak-strong augmented input pair without losing label information. Especially when extending SSL to semi-supervised object detection (SSOD), many strong augmentation methodologies
related to image geometry and interpolation-regularization
are hard to utilize since they possibly hurt the location
information of the bounding box in the object detection
task. To address this, we introduce a simple yet effective
data augmentation method, Mix/UnMix (MUM) , which unmixes feature tiles for the mixed image tiles for the SSOD
framework. Our proposed method makes mixed input image tiles and reconstructs them in the feature space. Thus,
MUM can enjoy the interpolation-regularization effect from
non-interpolated pseudo-labels and successfully generate a
meaningful weak-strong pair. Furthermore, MUM can be
easily equipped on top of various SSOD methods. Extensive experiments on MS-COCO and PASCAL VOC datasets
demonstrate the superiority of MUM by consistently improving the mAP performance over the baseline in all the
tested SSOD benchmark protocols. The code is released at
https://github.com/JongMokKim/mix-unmix.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have made a lot of progress on
diverse computer vision tasks thanks to the availability of
large-scale datasets. To achieve better and generalizable
performance, a large amount of labeled data is indispensable, which however requires a vast amount of workforce
and time for annotation [3, 12, 31]. Unlike image classificaThis work was supported by the NRF grant (2021R1A2C3006659)
and IITP grant (NO.2021-0-01343, Artificial Intelligence Graduate School
Program) funded by the Korea government (MSIT).

Figure 1. Typical teacher-student (pseudo-labeling) framework
for SSL. To fully exploit the unlabeled data, building an intelligent
teacher and employing an adequate data augmentation strategy for
weak-strong pairs are very important in this framework.

tion, which needs only a class label per image, object detection requires a pair of a class label and location information for multiple objects per single image. Therefore, it is
more challenging to acquire enough amount of labeled data
in object detection. To address the above problem, many recent works have focused on leveraging abundant unlabeled
data when training the network with a small amount of labeled data, called semi-supervised learning (SSL) and semisupervised object detection (SSOD).
In recent days, many SSL works rely on the teacherstudent framework where a teacher network, typically a
temporal ensemble model of the student, generates supervisory signals and trains the student network with them as
shown in Fig. 1 [23, 35]. Data augmentation plays a significant role in this framework and most of the recent works
apply strongly augmented inputs for the student model
while weak augmentations are given to the teacher [33, 38].
Interpolation-regularization (IR), whose core idea is that the
output of the interpolated input should be similar to the interpolated output of the original inputs, was originally developed as a data augmentation technique for supervised
learning [46] and has been successfully applied to teacher-

14512

