ActiveZero: Mixed Domain Learning for Active Stereovision with Zero
Annotation
Isabella Liu1
1

Edward Yang1
Jianyu Tao1
3
Qing Ran
Zhu Liu3

University of California, San Diego

2

Rui Chen2
Hao Su1

Tsinghua University

3

Xiaoshuai Zhang1

Alibaba DAMO Academy

Abstract

1. Introduction
Depth sensors can provide 3D geometry information
about a target scene, which is critical in various robotic
applications, including mapping, navigation, and object
manipulation [6,17,26]. Among the different types of depth
sensors available, active stereovision depth sensors (eg.
Intel RealSense™D series) are the most widely adopted in
both industry and academic settings due to their high spatial

Training

Active Stereovision

Mixed Domain Learning

Temporal IR Pattern

Testing

Traditional depth sensors generate accurate real world
depth estimates that surpass even the most advanced learning approaches trained only on simulation domains. Since
ground truth depth is readily available in the simulation
domain but quite difficult to obtain in the real domain, we
propose a method that leverages the best of both worlds. In
this paper we present a new framework, ActiveZero, which
is a mixed domain learning solution for active stereovision
systems that requires no real world depth annotation. First,
we demonstrate the transferability of our method to out-ofdistribution real data by using a mixed domain learning
strategy. In the simulation domain, we use a combination
of supervised disparity loss and self-supervised losses on a
shape primitives dataset. By contrast, in the real domain,
we only use self-supervised losses on a dataset that is outof-distribution from either training simulation data or test
real data. Second, our method introduces a novel selfsupervised loss called temporal IR reprojection to increase
the robustness and accuracy of our reprojections in hardto-perceive regions. Finally, we show how the method can
be trained end-to-end and that each module is important
for attaining the end result. Extensive qualitative and
quantitative evaluations on real data demonstrate state of
the art results that can even beat a commercial depth sensor.
The codes of ActiveZero are available at: https://
github.com/haosulab/active_zero.

Original RGB Image

RealSense D415

Our Method

Abs Depth Err=9.669mm

Abs Depth Err=6.540mm

Figure 1. ActiveZero produces more accurate and complete
disparity estimates on real IR stereo images for objects with
complex optical characteristics (specular, transparent) than commercial depth sensors with zero real depth annotation using mixed
domain learning by leveraging self-supervised reprojection loss
on temporal IR patterns in the real domain and direct disparity
supervision in the simulation domain.

resolution, high accuracy, and low cost [19]. These sensors
are composed of an infrared (IR) pattern emitter and two IR
cameras with the IR pattern projected onto the target scene
to facilitate stereo matching. However, since these sensors
use classical stereo algorithms, they suffer from common
stereo matching issues such as over smoothing, edge fattening and holes for specular and transparent objects so they
are non-ideal for robotic applications which require high
precision and completeness [5].
Learning based methods can solve the aforementioned
issues by generating more accurate and complete depth
maps through the utilization of prior samples to understand
how to correctly handle edges and uncertain pixels [2–4,
35]. However, a large scale stereo dataset with ground truth
depth is required to train these learning based methods,
which is costly and time-consuming to collect in the real
world. Therefore, one way to alleviate this problem is to use

13033

