MulT: An End-to-End Multitask Learning Transformer
Deblina Bhattacharjee, Tong Zhang, Sabine Süsstrunk and Mathieu Salzmann
School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL, Switzerland
{deblina.bhattacharjee, tong.zhang, sabine.susstrunk, mathieu.salzmann}@epfl.ch

Abstract
We propose an end-to-end Multitask Learning
Transformer framework, named MulT, to simultaneously learn multiple high-level vision tasks, including depth
estimation, semantic segmentation, reshading, surface normal estimation, 2D keypoint detection, and edge detection.
Based on the Swin transformer model, our framework
encodes the input image into a shared representation and
makes predictions for each vision task using task-specific
transformer-based decoder heads. At the heart of our
approach is a shared attention mechanism modeling the
dependencies across the tasks. We evaluate our model
on several multitask benchmarks, showing that our MulT
framework outperforms both the state-of-the art multitask
convolutional neural network models and all the respective
single task transformer models. Our experiments further
highlight the benefits of sharing attention across all the
tasks, and demonstrate that our MulT model is robust and
generalizes well to new domains. Our project website is at
https://ivrl.github.io/MulT/.

1. Introduction
First proposed in [45], transformers have made great
strides in a wide range of domains. For instance, previous works [13, 25, 35–37, 52] have demonstrated that transformers trained on large datasets learn strong representations for many downstream language tasks; and models
based on transformers have achieved promising results on
image classification, object detection, and panoptic segmentation [5, 6, 14, 18, 34, 38, 44, 49, 58]. In contrast to these
works that focus on a single task, in this paper, we investigate the use of transformers for multitask learning.
Although a few works have studied the use of transformers to handle multiple input modalities, such as images and
text, they typically focus on a single task, e.g., visual question answering [19, 20, 23, 28], with the exception of [19],
which tackles several language tasks but a single vision one.
By contrast, our goal is to connect multiple vision tasks covering the 2D, 3D, and semantic domains. To this end we

Figure 1. Motivation for MulT. Our MulT model, which is a
transformer-based encoder-decoder model with shared attention to
learn task inter-dependencies, produces better results than both the
dedicated 1-task transformer models (1-task Swin [26]) and the
state-of-the-art multitask CNN baseline [41].

address the following questions: Can a transformer model
trained jointly across tasks improve the performance in each
task relative to single-task transformers? Can one explicitly
encode dependencies across tasks in a transformer-based
framework? Can a multitask transformer generalize to unseen domains?
To the best of our knowledge, only [9, 30, 40] have
touched upon the problem of addressing multiple tasks with
transformers. However, none of these works aims to encode strong dependencies across the tasks beyond the use
of a shared backbone. Furthermore, IPT [9] handles solely
low-level vision tasks, such as denoising, super-resolution
and deraining, whereas [30] focuses uniquely on the tasks
of object detection and semantic segmentation and [40]
on scene recognition and importance score prediction in
videos. Here, we cover a much wider range of high-level
vision tasks and explicitly model their dependencies.
To this end, we introduce MulT, which consists of a
transformer-based encoder to transform the input image into
a latent representation shared by the tasks, and transformer
decoders with task-specific heads producing the final pre12031

