End-to-End Compressed Video Representation Learning for
Generic Event Boundary Detection
Congcong Li1 *, Xinyao Wang2 , Longyin Wen2 , Dexiang Hong1∗ , Tiejian Luo1 , Libo Zhang3†
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
ByteDance Inc., Mountain View, USA
3
Institute of Software Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
licongcong18@mails.ucas.edu.cn, {xinyao.wang,longyin.wen}@bytedance.com
hongdexiang19@mails.ucas.edu.cn, tjluo@ucas.ac.cn, libo@iscas.ac.cn

80

Abstract

1. Introduction
Video traffic will account for 82% percent of all internet
traffic by 2022, up from 75% in 2017 [11]. Understanding
video content using AI technology is an active area of research in recent years. However, it is still a challenging task
due to the complex temporal evolution in the enormous size
* This work was done during internships at ByteDance Inc.
† Corresponding author (libo@iscas.ac.cn)

(e) CLA(TSN+SlowFast)
(f) CASTANET(CSN)

(d) Ours(CSN+R18)

76
74

F1 score (%)

Generic event boundary detection aims to localize the
generic, taxonomy-free event boundaries that segment
videos into chunks. Existing methods typically require video
frames to be decoded before feeding into the network, which
demands considerable computational power and storage
space. To that end, we propose a new end-to-end compressed video representation learning for event boundary
detection that leverages the rich information in the compressed domain, i.e., RGB, motion vectors, residuals, and
the internal group of pictures (GOP) structure, without fully
decoding the video. Specifically, we first use the ConvNets to extract features of the I-frames in the GOPs. After that, a light-weight spatial-channel compressed encoder
is designed to compute the feature representations of the Pframes based on the motion vectors, residuals and representations of their dependent I-frames. A temporal contrastive
module is proposed to determine the event boundaries of
video sequences. To remedy the ambiguities of annotations
and speed up the training process, we use the Gaussian kernel to preprocess the ground-truth event boundaries. Extensive experiments conducted on the Kinetics-GEBD dataset
demonstrate that the proposed method achieves comparable results to the state-of-the-art methods with 4.5× faster
running speed.

78

(c) Ours(R50+R18)

72
70
68
66

Real Time
(b) PC+OF(R50+R18)

64

(a) PC(R50)

62
10 20

40

60

80

100

Average per frame inference time (ms)

120

Figure 1. The inference time vs. F1 score of different methods
on the Kinetics-GEBD dataset [28]. (a) The previous method [28]
PC is relatively fast with inferior results. (b) After integrating the
optical flow (OF) module, the accuracy is improved with much
slower running speed. (c, d) Our method achieves competitive
F1 score with extremely fast running speed by directly leveraging
motion vectors and residuals in the compressed domain. (e, f)
CLA [18] and CASTANET [14] take fully decoded RGB frames
as input, which are much slower than the methods conducted in
compressed domain. The green region indicates the methods run
in real-time.

of raw video streams with high temporal redundancy.
Video understanding is one of the most fundamental
problems in computer vision, which includes video tagging,
action recognition, and video boundary detection, etc. In
contrast to static images, videos provide rich information involving temporal consistency in consecutive frames which
can be additionally utilized. Currently, the two-stream network [8,9,30] and 3D convolutional network [17,33,34,37]
are two popular network architectures in the video under-

13967

