One-bit Active Query with Contrastive Pairs
Yuhang Zhang1 , Xiaopeng Zhang3 , Lingxi Xie3 , Jie Li1 , Robert C. Qiu1 ,* Hengtong Hu2 , Qi Tian3
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Hefei University of Technology 3 Huawei Inc.
{hang universe, lijiecs, rcqiu}@sjtu.edu.cn, tian.qi1@huawei.com
{huhengtong.hfut, zxphistory, 198808xc}@gmail.com

Abstract
How to achieve better results with fewer labeling costs
remains a challenging task. In this paper, we present a new
active learning framework, which for the first time incorporates contrastive learning into recently proposed one-bit
supervision. Here one-bit supervision denotes a simple Yes
or No query about the correctness of the model’s prediction,
and is more efficient than previous active learning methods
requiring assigning accurate labels to the queried samples.
We claim that such one-bit information is intrinsically in
accordance with the goal of contrastive loss that pulls positive pairs together and pushes negative samples away. Towards this goal, we design an uncertainty metric to actively
select samples for query. These samples are then fed into
different branches according to the queried results. The
Yes query is treated as positive pairs of the queried category for contrastive pulling, while the No query is treated
as hard negative pairs for contrastive repelling. Additionally, we design a negative loss that penalizes the negative
samples away from the incorrect predicted class, which can
be treated as optimizing hard negatives for the corresponding category. Our method, termed as ObCP, produces a
more powerful active learning framework, and experiments
on several benchmarks demonstrate its superiority.

1. Introduction
Active learning is particularly useful in many modern
machine learning systems, where data may be sufficient,
but labels are scarce or expensive to obtain [12, 14, 24, 25].
The key hypothesis of active learning is that one can build a
good predictive model with less labeled samples if a model
already knows which samples should be labeled to help improve predictive performance. Generally, an active learning
algorithm iteratively selects samples to label, based on the
prediction results of current model. Once the samples are
labeled, they are added to the training set, and such process
* Corresponding author

Model

Model

Unlabeled pool

Labeled pool

Labeled pool

Unlabeled pool

Yes
Accurate labeling

Select samples

Annotator

Conventional active learning

Is the
prediction
right ?

Select samples

Annotator

One-bit active learning

Figure 1. Illustration of differences between conventional active
learning and one-bit supervision. The latter leverages a simple
yes or no query about the correctness of the model’s prediction
instead of assigning an accurate label. In this paper, we adopt onebit supervision in our active learning framework and combine it
with contrastive learning for jointly optimization.

continues till the labeled budget is used up. However, conventional active learning strategies are usually constrained
by annotating samples with accurate labels, i.e., which exact
class one sample belongs to. While it is difficult for the labeler to memorize and distinguish all categories especially
when the number of categories scales up, like ImageNet [7]
which consists of 1K categories.
Recently, a novel active annotation method called onebit supervision [18] is proposed, which labels samples with
one bit information by answering a simple yes-or-no question, i.e., whether an image belongs to a specified class c,
this method can facilitate the learned procedure more efficiently under the same amount of supervision. For example, if we can get the model’s prediction on unlabeled data,
we only need to inquiry the labeler “Does the model predict this sample right?” It is a more efficient query strategy
compared with traditional labeling procedure in terms of bit
information, since for a C-classes classification problem,
accurately labeling a sample needs log2 C bits of information, while the one-bit query only needs one bit. This means
that with the same amount of annotations, we are able to
query more samples to get more information accordingly.
The differences between conventional active learning and
the one-bit method are shown in Figure 1. However, previous one-bit method [18] only makes use of the correct pre-

9697

