CycleMix: A Holistic Strategy for Medical Image Segmentation from
Scribble Supervision
Ke Zhang and Xiahai Zhuang*
Fudan University
Abstract
Curating a large set of fully annotated training data can
be costly, especially for the tasks of medical image segmentation. Scribble, a weaker form of annotation, is more
obtainable in practice, but training segmentation models
from limited supervision of scribbles is still challenging.
To address the difﬁculties, we propose a new framework
for scribble learning-based medical image segmentation,
which is composed of mix augmentation and cycle consistency and thus is referred to as CycleMix. For augmentation of supervision, CycleMix adopts the mixup strategy with a dedicated design of random occlusion, to perform increments and decrements of scribbles. For regularization of supervision, CycleMix intensiﬁes the training objective with consistency losses to penalize inconsistent segmentation, which results in signiﬁcant improvement of segmentation performance. Results on two open
datasets, i.e., ACDC and MSCMRseg, showed that the proposed method achieved exhilarating performance, demonstrating comparable or even better accuracy than the fullysupervised methods. The code and expert-made scribble annotations for MSCMRseg are publicly available at https:
//github.com/BWGZK/CycleMix.

(a)
Img 1

Cycle consistency

Seg 1

Mix aug

Mixed seg

Seg mixed

濇濙濛濡濙濢濨濣濦

濇濙濛濡濙濢濨濣濦
Seg 2

Mixed

Img 2

: Global consistency

: Local consistency

(b)

Figure 1. Illustration of CycleMix based on mix augmentation and
cycle consistency on scribble training images: (a) shows the operations and results of mixing images and corresponding labels; (b)
illustrates the segmentation results for consistency regularization.

tated. As an alternative, we propose to investigate a speciﬁc
form of WSL approaches, which only utilize scribble annotations for model training.
1. Introduction
WSL is proposed to exploit weak annotations, such as
image-level
labels, sparse annotations, and noisy annotaLarge fully-annotated datasets are crucial to the genertions
[24].
Among
them, scribble, as images in Figure. 1
alization ability of deep neural networks. However, the
(a)
illustrate,
is
one
of the most convenient forms of weak
manual labeling of medical images requires great efforts
label
and
has
great
potential
in medical image segmentafrom experienced clinical experts, which is both expention
[4].
However,
due
to
the
lack of supervision, it is still
sive and time-consuming. To alleviate it, existing works
ardours to learn the shape priors of objects, which makes
have exploited weakly labeled and unlabeled training data
the segmentation of the boundaries particularly difﬁcult.
to assist model training, such as semi-supervised learning
The existing scribble learning mainly includes two
(SSL) [20, 23, 27] and weakly-supervised learning (WSL)
groups. The ﬁrst line of researches leverage a priori as[14, 22, 31]. However, SSL generally requires part of the
sumption to expand scribble annotation [24], such as labelimages in the dataset to be accurately and precisely annoing pixels with similar gray values and similar positions in
* Xiahai Zhuang is corresponding author. This work was funded by
the same category [13, 19]. However, the process of scribthe National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 61971142,
ble expansion may generate noisy labels, which deteriorates
62111530195 and 62011540404) and the development fund for Shanghai
11656the segmentation performance of trained models. The sectalents (no. 2020015).
1

