Show, Deconfound and Tell: Image Captioning with Causal Inference
Bing Liu1∗† , Dong Wang1∗ , Xu Yang2 , Yong Zhou1† , Rui Yao1 , Zhiwen Shao1 , Jiaqi Zhao1
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, China University of Mining and Technology,
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Southeast University
{liubing,dongwang}@cumt.edu.cn, 101013120@seu.edu.cn,
{yzhou,ruiyao,zhiwen shao,jiaqizhao}@cumt.edu.cn

Abstract

Cake

GT1: A white plate covered in cake and a fork.
Fork

The transformer-based encoder-decoder framework has
shown remarkable performance in image captioning. However, most transformer-based captioning methods ever overlook two kinds of elusive confounders: the visual confounder and the linguistic confounder, which generally lead
to harmful bias, induce the spurious correlations during
training, and degrade the model generalization. In this
paper, we first use Structural Causal Models (SCMs) to
show how two confounders damage the image captioning. Then we apply the backdoor adjustment to propose
a novel causal inference based image captioning (CIIC)
framework, which consists of an interventional object detector (IOD) and an interventional transformer decoder
(ITD) to jointly confront both confounders. In the encoding stage, the IOD is able to disentangle the region-based
visual features by deconfounding the visual confounder. In
the decoding stage, the ITD introduces causal intervention into the transformer decoder and deconfounds the visual and linguistic confounders simultaneously. Two modules collaborate with each other to alleviate the spurious
correlations caused by the unobserved confounders. When
tested on MSCOCO, our proposal significantly outperforms
the state-of-the-art encoder-decoder models on Karpathy
split and online test split. Code is published in https:
//github.com/CUMTGG/CIIC.

1. Introduction
Image captioning aims to automatically understand the
semantic information of an image and generate its accurate
description. Inspired by neural machine translation [36], the
encoder-decoder architecture has been widely adopted by
most conventional image captioning models [2, 10, 39, 41],
in which a deep convolutional neural network (CNN) serves
∗ Authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author

GT2: A slice of cake sitting on a plate next to a fork.
GT3: A piece of white cake on a plate has a fork.
Cake

Fork

GT1: The remains of a piece of cake and a fork.
GT2: A tasty looking piece of cake with a fork next to it.
GT3: Two forks on a plate of cake.

(a)
Cake

GT: A bowl with a piece of cake in it next to a spoon.
Transformer: A piece of cake on a plate with a fork.

Spoon

CIIC: A piece of cake on a plate with a spoon.

(b)

Figure 1. The example about the spurious correlation in image captioning. (a) Examples of the visual confounder (the visual feature of cake) and linguistic confounder (the word embedding of “cake”) in the MSCOCO training dataset when generating
the word “fork”, where “GT1”, “GT2” and “GT3” denote three
ground truth captions of each image chosen from the dataset. (b)
Some captions generated by the original Transformer [37] and
CIIC. The generated correct and incorrect words are colored by
blue and red, respectively. “GT” means the ground truth caption.

as the encoder to extract visual features from the input image, and a recurrent neural network (RNN) is used as the
decoder to generate the corresponding caption. Based on
this architecture, a large number of improvements have been
made by recent works, which mainly focus on two-fold:
(i) Optimizing the visual representations of the input image [2,15,18,42], and (ii) enhancing the architectural modeling capabilities for inter-modal and intra-modal interactions [8, 28].
In the aspect of visual representation, most captioning
models apply a well-trained detector, e.g., Faster R-CNN
[33], to extract visual features. Nevertheless, these models neglected the problem of entangled visual features in
the visual feature extraction stage. As shown in Figure 1a,
the features of a region of the fork extracted by Faster R-

18041

