Sparse Local Patch Transformer for Robust Face Alignment and Landmarks
Inherent Relation Learning
Jiahao Xia1 , Weiwei Qu2 , Wenjian Huang2 , Jianguo Zhang*,2 , Xi Wang3 , Min Xu*,1
1
Faculty of Engineering and IT, University of Technology Sydney
2
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Eng., Southern University of Science and Technology, 3 CalmCar
Jiahao.Xia@student.uts.edu.au, 11930667@mail.sustech.edu.cn, {huangwj, zhangjg}@sustech.edu.cn, Xi.Wang@calmcar.com, Min.Xu@uts.edu.au

Abstract

Input Image

Stage1

灤N landmarks

Heatmap regression methods have dominated face alignment area in recent years while they ignore the inherent relation between different landmarks. In this paper, we propose a Sparse Local Patch Transformer (SLPT) for learning the inherent relation. The SLPT generates the representation of each single landmark from a local patch and
aggregates them by an adaptive inherent relation based on
the attention mechanism. The subpixel coordinate of each
landmark is predicted independently based on the aggregated feature. Moreover, a coarse-to-fine framework is further introduced to incorporate with the SLPT, which enables
the initial landmarks to gradually converge to the target
facial landmarks using fine-grained features from dynamically resized local patches. Extensive experiments carried
out on three popular benchmarks, including WFLW, 300W
and COFW, demonstrate that the proposed method works
at the state-of-the-art level with much less computational
complexity by learning the inherent relation between facial
landmarks. The code is available at the project website1 .

1. Introduction
Face alignment is aimed at locating a group of predefined facial landmarks from images. Robust face alignment based on deep learning technology has attracted increasing attention in recent years and it is the fundamental algorithm in many face-related applications such as face
reenactment [40], face swapping [21] and driver fatigue detection [1]. Despite recent progress, it still remains a challenging problem, especially for images with heavy occlusion, profile view and illumination variation.
The inherent relation between facial landmarks play an
important role in face alignment since human face has a
regular structure. Although heatmap regression methods
* Corresponding Author
1 https://github.com/Jiahao-UTS/SLPT-master

Stage2

CNN

Stage3

Results

NME:54.55%

NME:7.12%

Sparse Local Patch
Transformer

NME:4.60%

NME:4.76%

Landmark Queries

Figure 1. The proposed coarse-to-fine framework leverages the
sparse local patches for robust face alignment. The sparse local patches are cropped according to the landmarks in the previous stage and fed into the same SLPT to predict the facial landmarks. Moreover, the patch size narrows down with the increasing
of stages to enable the local features to evolve into a pyramidal
form.

achieve impressive performance [7, 18, 33–35] in recent
years, they still ignore the inherent relation because convolutional neural network (CNN) kernels focus locally, thus
failed to capture the relations of landmarks farther away in
a global manner. In particular, they consider the pixel coordinate with highest intensity of the output heatmap as the
optimal landmark, which inevitably introduces a quantization error, especially for common downsampled heatmap.
Coordinate regression methods [9,10,12,24,36,37,42] have
an innate potential to learn the relation since it regresses the
coordinates from global feature directly via fully-connected
layers (FC). Nevertheless, a coherent relation should be
learned together with local appearance while coordinate regression methods lose the local feature by projecting the

4052

