Forward Compatible Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning
Da-Wei Zhou1 , Fu-Yun Wang1 , Han-Jia Ye1†, Liang Ma2 , Shiliang Pu2 , De-Chuan Zhan1
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University 2 Hikvision Research Institute
{zhoudw, yehj, zhandc}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, wangfuyun@smail.nju.edu.cn, {maliang6, pushiliang.hri}@hikvision.com

Base Session (Session 0)

Abstract
Novel classes frequently arise in our dynamically changing world, e.g., new users in the authentication system, and
a machine learning model should recognize new classes
without forgetting old ones. This scenario becomes more
challenging when new class instances are insufficient, which
is called few-shot class-incremental learning (FSCIL). Current methods handle incremental learning retrospectively
by making the updated model similar to the old one. By
contrast, we suggest learning prospectively to prepare for
future updates, and propose ForwArd Compatible Training
(FACT) for FSCIL. Forward compatibility requires future
new classes to be easily incorporated into the current model
based on the current stage data, and we seek to realize it
by reserving embedding space for future new classes. In
detail, we assign virtual prototypes to squeeze the embedding of known classes and reserve for new ones. Besides,
we forecast possible new classes and prepare for the updating process. The virtual prototypes allow the model to
accept possible updates in the future, which act as proxies
scattered among embedding space to build a stronger classifier during inference. FACT efficiently incorporates new
classes with forward compatibility and meanwhile resists forgetting of old ones. Extensive experiments validate FACT’s
state-of-the-art performance. Code is available at: https:
//github.com/zhoudw-zdw/CVPR22-Fact

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the significant breakthroughs
of deep neuron networks in many vision tasks [14, 19, 36, 40,
54]. However, data often come in stream format [18] with
emerging new classes [12, 63, 65] in real-world applications,
e.g., new types of products in e-commerce. It requires a
model to incorporate new class knowledge incrementally,
which is called Class-Incremental Learning (CIL). When
updating the model with new classes, a fatal problem occurs,
namely catastrophic forgetting [16] — the discriminability of
† Correspondence to: Han-Jia Ye (yehj@lamda.nju.edu.cn)

Class 1

Session 1

Session 2

Class 4

Class 6

Class 5

Class 7

Class 2
Class 3

Reserved

Reserved

Reserved

Traditional Training

Forward Compatible Training

Figure 1. Top: the setting of FSCIL. We need to maintain a classifier
covering all classes, where sessions with non-overlapping classes
arrive sequentially. Ample training instances are available in the
base session, while only few-shot instances in incremental sessions.
The model should incorporate new classes without forgetting old
ones. Bottom: forward compatible training scheme. Different from
traditional training paradigm, we reserve the embedding space for
new classes in the base session for future possible extensions.

old classes drastically declines. How to design effective CIL
algorithms to overcome catastrophic forgetting has attracted
much interest in the computer vision field [22, 25, 48, 50, 60].
Current CIL methods address the scenario where new
classes are available with sufficient instances. However, the
data collection and labeling cost can be relatively high in
many applications. Take a rare bird classification model
for an example. We can only use few-shot images to train
the incremental model since they are hard to collect. This
task is called Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning (FSCIL),
which is shown at the top of Figure 1. A model needs to
sequentially incorporate new classes with limited instances
without harming the discriminability of old classes. Apart
from the forgetting problem, it also triggers overfitting on
few-shot instances. As a result, some algorithms [58, 67]
are proposed to solve FSCIL from the few-shot learning perspective, aiming to alleviate overfitting in model updating.
In FSCIL, a sequence of models should work together
with harmony, i.e., the updated model should maintain the
discriminability of old classes. Such a learning process is
similar to software development. The newer version software should accept the data that worked under the previous version, which is referred to as ‘backward compatibil-

9046

