SMPL-A: Modeling Person-Specific Deformable Anatomy
Hengtao Guo1,2 , Benjamin Planche1 , Meng Zheng1 , Srikrishna Karanam1 , Terrence Chen1 , Ziyan Wu1
1
United Imaging Intelligence, Cambridge MA, USA
2
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy NY, USA
{first.last}@uii-ai.com, guoh9@rpi.edu

Abstract
A variety of diagnostic and therapeutic protocols rely on
locating in vivo target anatomical structures, which can be
obtained from medical scans. However, organs move and
deform as the patient changes his/her pose. In order to obtain accurate target location information, clinicians have
to either conduct frequent intraoperative scans, resulting in
higher exposition of patients to radiations, or adopt proxy
procedures (e.g., creating and using custom molds to keep
patients in the exact same pose during both preoperative
organ scanning and subsequent treatment. Such custom
proxy methods are typically sub-optimal, constraining the
clinicians and costing precious time and money to the patients. To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first to
present a learning-based approach to estimate the patient’s
internal organ deformation for arbitrary human poses in
order to assist with radiotherapy and similar medical protocols. The underlying method first leverages medical scans
to learn a patient-specific representation that potentially
encodes the organ’s shape and elastic properties. During
inference, given the patient’s current body pose information and the organ’s representation extracted from previous
medical scans, our method can estimate their current organ
deformation to offer guidance to clinicians. We conduct
experiments on a well-sized dataset which is augmented
through real clinical data using finite element modeling.
Our results suggest that pose-dependent organ deformation
can be learned through a point cloud autoencoder conditioned on the parametric pose input. We hope that this work
can be a starting point for future research towards closing
the loop between human mesh recovery and anatomical reconstruction, with applications beyond the medical domain.

1. Introduction
Many medical procedures rely on precise location and
shape information of target tissues. Since radioactive scans
are invasive, there is a maximum number that a patient can
safely undergo per specific time period [10, 12]. Due to this

SMPL-A

SMPL

RGB with Pose A

Organs
Consistent
with MR Scan

Person-Specific
Parameter: α
MR Scan with Pose A

RGB with Pose B

SMPL
Parameter
Regression

Organs
Deform
Accordingly

SMPL-A Organ
Mesh Decoder

SMPL

SMPL-A

Figure 1. Application overview. The information from
alpha previous
medical scans can facilitate estimating current organ’s shape and
deformation.

constraint, doctors have to carefully plan imaging protocols,
weighing risks for the patient versus spatial and temporal
inconsistency that may arise from too coarse scan-based
investigation. Any solution to help determine the evolution of an illness or the impact of a treatment without excessive imaging would greatly help clinicians and reduce
patients’ risks. Currently, complex protocols are used to
precisely target organ regions while minimizing potential
radioactive damage. For example, in radiotherapy (a cancer treatment that uses high doses of radiation to kill cancerous cells and shrink tumors [8]), it is common practice
to create and use patient-specific molds (usually made of
plastic or plaster) to keep patients in the exact same pose
during both preoperative organ scanning and during subsequent treatment sessions. Such customized molds help ensure the desired organ region is targeted accurately without
having to re-scan the patient and re-localize the tumors before each session. This custom proxy method—like other

20814

