Open-Vocabulary One-Stage Detection with Hierarchical Visual-Language
Knowledge Distillation
Zongyang Ma1,2 , Guan Luo1,2 , Jin Gao1,2,† , Liang Li3,† , Yuxin Chen1,2 , Shaoru Wang1,2
Congxuan Zhang4 , and Weiming Hu1,2,5
1
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Brain Science Center, Beijing Institute of Basic Medical Sciences 4 Nanchang Hangkong University
5
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
mazongyang2020@ia.ac.cn, {gluo,jin.gao}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, liang.li.brain@aliyun.com

Abstract

Visual-to-Visual
IE

Open-vocabulary object detection aims to detect novel
object categories beyond the training set. The advanced
open-vocabulary two-stage detectors employ instance-level
visual-to-visual knowledge distillation to align the visual
space of the detector with the semantic space of the Pretrained Visual-Language Model (PVLM). However, in the
more efficient one-stage detector, the absence of classagnostic object proposals hinders the knowledge distillation on unseen objects, leading to severe performance
degradation. In this paper, we propose a hierarchical
visual-language knowledge distillation method, i.e., HierKD, for open-vocabulary one-stage detection. Specifically, a global-level knowledge distillation is explored to
transfer the knowledge of unseen categories from the PVLM
to the detector. Moreover, we combine the proposed globallevel knowledge distillation and the common instance-level
knowledge distillation to learn the knowledge of seen and
unseen categories simultaneously. Extensive experiments
on MS-COCO show that our method significantly surpasses
the previous best one-stage detector with 11.9% and 6.7%
AP50 gains under the zero-shot detection and generalized
zero-shot detection settings, and reduces the AP50 performance gap from 14% to 7.3% compared to the best twostage detector. Code will be released at this url 1 .

1. Introduction
The emerging trends in advanced detectors [2,18,19,26–
29, 33, 37] have improved the speed and accuracy of traditional object detection tasks significantly, whereas the cate1 https://github.com/mengqiDyangge/HierKD
† Corresponding authors.

IE

Crop and resize

ROIAlign

Two-stage
One-stage
(a) Instance-level Knowledge Distillation
Language-to-Visual
Caption

Aggregate

TE

(b) Global-level Knowledge Distillation
GT boxes of base categories

GT boxes of novel categories
Proposals of two-stage methods

Positive sample points of one-stage methods
IE

Image Encoder of the PVLM

TE

Text Encoder of the PVLM

Figure 1. Comparisons between instance-level and global-level
knowledge distillation: (a) illustrates the pipelines of two-stage
methods and one-stage methods with instance-level knowledge
distillation. (b) illustrates our proposed global-level knowledge
distillation, which directly distills the caption representation from
PVLM to the global image representation from detector.

gories they can recognize are limited. Once the traditional
detectors are expected to detect more object categories in
the real-world scenarios, the usual solution falls on labeling more categories of objects in training sets. However,
the cost may be unaffordable and the long-tail distribution
will be exacerbated by increasing the unseen categories linearly according to Zipf’s law [31]. To overcome these limitations, zero-shot [1] and open-vocabulary [36] object detection tasks are proposed to recognize objects from unseen categories (novel categories) while the detector is only
trained with annotations from seen categories (base categories). The main difference between these two tasks is
that the open-vocabulary detector might have seen a novel
object during training though its instance-level annotation

14074

