Deep Color Consistent Network for Low-Light Image Enhancement
Zhao Zhang1,2 , Huan Zheng1,2 , Richang Hong1,2 , Mingliang Xu3 , Shuicheng Yan4 , Meng Wang1,2
1
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, China
2
Key Laboratory of Knowledge Engineering with Big Data (Ministry of Education) & Intelligent
Interconnected Systems Laboratory of Anhui Province, Hefei University of Technology, China
3
School of Information Engineering, Zhengzhou University, China
4
Sea AI Lab (SAIL), Singapore

Abstract
Low-light image enhancement (LLIE) explores how to
refine the illumination and obtain natural normal-light images. Current LLIE methods mainly focus on improving the
illumination, but do not consider the color consistency by
reasonably incorporating color information into the LLIE
process. As a result, color difference usually exists between
the enhanced image and ground-truth. To address this issue, we propose a new deep color consistent network termed
DCC-Net to retain the color consistency for LLIE. A new
“divide and conquer” collaborative strategy is presented,
which can jointly preserve color information and enhance
the illumination. Specifically, the decoupling strategy of our
DCC-Net decouples each color image into two main components, i.e., gray image plus color histogram. Gray image
is used to generate reasonable structures and textures, and
the color histogram is beneficial for preserving the color
consistency. That is, they both are utilized to complete the
LLIE task collaboratively. To match the color and content
features, and reduce the color consistency gap between enhanced image and ground-truth, we also design a new pyramid color embedding (PCE) module, which can better embed color information into the LLIE process. Extensive experiments on six real datasets show that the enhanced images of our DCC-Net are more natural and colorful, and
perform favorably against the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Low-light image enhancement (LLIE) is a task of refining the illumination to obtain natural norm-light images,
which aims at improving the perception and visual quality
of low-light images captured in poor illumination environment. Low-light images are rather common in reality, e.g.,
images captured in outdoor or indoor scenes with poor lighting conditions, which suffers from the unclear contents and

RetinexNet (15.49/0.29) Zero-DCE++ (18.71/0.37)

KinD++ (21.84/0.75)

DCC-Net (27.54/0.79) EnlightenGAN (13.66/0.50)

Ground-Truth

Figure 1. Comparison of our DCC-Net and other deep LLIE methods in terms of PSNR/SSIM metrics. We clearly see that there is a
large color gap between the enhanced images of RetinexNet, ZeroDCE++, Kind++ and EnlightenGAN, and the ground-truth image.
In contrast, our DCC-Net can retain the color consistency effectively, and the enhanced image is more natural and colorful.

textures, low contrast and noises. These degradations will
not only have negative effect on human perception, but also
will be not conducive to the subsequent multimedia computing and computer vision tasks designed for high-quality images, for instance face recognition [3], object detection [25]
and semantic segmentation [4].
Traditional LLIE methods aim to build a model to refine
the illumination and obtain the enhanced image, which can
be roughly categorized into histogram equalization (HE)based and retinex-based methods. Traditional methods are
relatively simple and easy, but they usually cannot restore
the consistent colors and detailed textures.
With the impressive performance of deep neural networks (DNN) in diverse high-level and low-level vision
tasks [5, 10, 31, 36], deep LLIE methods also achieve great
improvement [2,11,30]. Deep LLIE methods usually design

1899

