Multi-Object Tracking Meets Moving UAV

1

Shuai Liu†1 , Xin Li†2 , Huchuan Lu1,2 , You He∗3
Dalian University of Technology, 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, 3 Naval Aeronautical University
1
Dalian, 2 Shenzhen, 3 Yantai, China

lshuai@mail.dlut.edu.cn, xinlihitsc@gmail.cn, lhchuan@dlut.edu.cn, youhe nau@163.com

Abstract
Imbalanced
categories

Multi-object tracking in unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)
videos is an important vision task and can be applied in a
wide range of applications. However, conventional multiobject trackers do not work well on UAV videos due to
the challenging factors of irregular motion caused by moving camera and view change in 3D directions. In this paper, we propose a UAVMOT network specially for multiobject tracking in UAV views. The UAVMOT introduces
an ID feature update module to enhance the object’s feature association. To better handle the complex motions under UAV views, we develop an adaptive motion ﬁlter module. In addition, a gradient balanced focal loss is used to
tackle the imbalance categories and small objects detection
problem. Experimental results on the VisDrone2019 and
UAVDT datasets demonstrate that the proposed UAVMOT
achieves considerable improvement against the state-ofthe-art tracking methods on UAV videos.

View
change

Irregular
motion

Detection

Data Association

Figure 1. Challenges of MOT on UAV videos. Detection stage:
the categories of objects in UAV videos are imbalanced and most
of the targets under a UAV view are small. Data association stage:
appearance and motion of objects change irregularly and rapidly
due to the moving of the UAV camera.

view), multi-object tracking under the moving UAV views is
still challenging. As illustrated in Fig. 1, there are two critical problems need to be solved urgently in the detection and
data association stages. In the detection stage, there are usually multiple categories of objects in a moving UAV view
and the object numbers of each category are extremely imbalanced, which makes the training of the detection model
difﬁcult. In addition, most of the objects in UAV videos are
small due to the high altitude of UAV, which further aggravates the difﬁculty of the detection task. In the data association stage, the challenge lies in the inconsistent appearance and motion information of the target objects which is
caused by irregular and fast camera motion and usually results in ID switches. The object motion in UAV videos is a
superposition of object movements and the motion of UAV
which is irregular and hard to be modelled by the traditional
Kalman ﬁlter.
In this paper, we propose a novel multi-object tracker,
named UAVMOT network, for multi-object tracking on
moving UAV videos. To enhance ID embedding features
of objects, we construct an ID feature update (IDFU) mod-

1. Introduction
Multi-object tracking (MOT) is a fundamental task in
computer vision and is widely used in numerous applications [30, 33], such as autonomous driving, intelligent
transportation system, and advanced video analysis. MOT
methods [5, 45] typically follow the tracking by detection
paradigm which includes two steps: detection and data association. The detection step generates potential box predictions of the target objects in every frame while the data
association step matches the predicted boxes of the same
target across frames based on appearance and motion cues
[18]. Recently, multi-object tracking in UAV views has
aroused the keen interest of researchers [1, 31, 39, 51] due
to the convenience and dexterity of unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) [9].
Despite the progress made in conventional multi-object
tracking (usually tested on the videos captured in a static
† Equal contribution, ∗ corresponding author

8876

