Face2Exp: Combating Data Biases for Facial Expression Recognition
Dan Zeng1 , Zhiyuan Lin1 , Xiao Yan1 , Yuting Liu2 , Fei Wang3 , Bo Tang*1
1

Research Institue of Trustworthy Autonomous Systems, Southern University of Science and Technology,
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology
2
JD.com, Beijing, China; 3 School of Microelectronics, Southern University of Science and Technology

{zengd@,12132456@mail.,yanx@,wangf@,tangb3@}sustech.edu.cn;lalenaliu17@gmail.com

Abstract
Facial expression recognition (FER) is challenging due
to the class imbalance caused by data collection. Existing studies tackle the data bias problem using only labeled facial expression dataset. Orthogonal to existing
FER methods, we propose to utilize large unlabeled face
recognition (FR) datasets to enhance FER. However, this
raises another data bias problem—the distribution mismatch between FR and FER data. To combat the mismatch, we propose the Meta-Face2Exp framework, which
consists of a base network and an adaptation network. The
base network learns prior expression knowledge on classbalanced FER data while the adaptation network is trained
to fit the pseudo labels of FR data generated by the base
model. To combat the mismatch between FR and FER
data, Meta-Face2Exp uses a circuit feedback mechanism,
which improves the base network with the feedback from
the adaptation network. Experiments show that our MetaFace2Exp achieves comparable accuracy to state-of-the-art
FER methods with 10% of the labeled FER data utilized by
the baselines. We also demonstrate that the circuit feedback
mechanism successfully eliminates data bias 1 .

1. Introduction
Facial expression recognition (FER) has many applications in human-computer interaction and affective computing [1, 2, 7]. However, as shown in Figure 1 (a), existing FER training datasets are biased towards some majority classes, which leads to poor test accuracy for the minority classes. The bias is because some facial expressions (e.g., contempt, disgust) are rare in daily life and it
is expensive collect many samples for them. Deep neural networks (DNNs) trained with biased data tend to favor
majority classes and perform poorly on minority classes.
1 Code is available at link:https://github.com/danzeng1990/Face2Exp.
* Corresponding author.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) The class distribution of FER training data is biased,
resulting in different test accuracy among the classes. (b) The class
distributions of FER and FR data mismatches. We use ResNet50
trained with the entire AffectNet to test FER and FR data.

Early FER methods, such as [9] and [19], train deep neural
network with biased FER data to classify expressions and
observe sharp accuracy drop for minority expression categories. To tackle the class bias, later methods [32], [10]
use human facial movements (i.e., facial action unit, facial
landmarks) as side information for expression recognition.
However, these methods require datasets with labels besides
expression, which are even more expensive to collect. Some
FER methods [26, 29] improve performance by removing
ambiguous samples from the training set.
To summarize, existing FER methods work on biased
FER datasets with focuses such as model design, side information and difficult samples. However, it is well-known
that high quality training data is crucial to the performance
of DNN models. Methods [6, 21, 24] enhance FER with
small-scale controlled unlabeled data to improve performance. As large-scale class-balanced FER dataset is expensive to acquire, we propose to use large face recognition (FR) datasets without expression labels to improve
FER. For example, Webface260M [42], MS-Celeb-1M [13]
and VGGFace2 [3] are all million-level FR datasets, which
contain face images with good comprehensive variety (i.e.,
varied pose, identities, varying illumination, and different
expressions). In contrast, the largest public FER dataset
contains only 440K images. However, this inevitably raises
another data bias problem because FER data and FR data
have mismatched distributions as illustrated in Figure 1(b).
To combat the forgoing data biases, we propose the

20291

