Modality-Agnostic Learning for Radar-Lidar Fusion in Vehicle Detection
Yu-Jhe Li

Jinhyung Park
Matthew O’Toole
Carnegie Mellon University

Kris Kitani

{yujheli, jinhyun1, motoole2, kmkitani}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Fusion of multiple sensor modalities such as camera, Lidar, and Radar, which are commonly found on autonomous
vehicles, not only allows for accurate detection but also robustifies perception against adverse weather conditions and
individual sensor failures. Due to inherent sensor characteristics, Radar performs well under extreme weather conditions (snow, rain, fog) that significantly degrade camera
and Lidar. Recently, a few works have developed vehicle detection methods fusing Lidar and Radar signals, i.e., MVDNet. However, these models are typically developed under
the assumption that the models always have access to two
error-free sensor streams. If one of the sensors is unavailable or missing, the model may fail catastrophically. To
mitigate this problem, we propose the Self-Training Multimodal Vehicle Detection Network (ST-MVDNet) which
leverages a Teacher-Student mutual learning framework
and a simulated sensor noise model used in strong data augmentation for Lidar and Radar. We show that by (1) enforcing output consistency between a Teacher network and a
Student network and by (2) introducing missing modalities
(strong augmentations) during training, our learned model
breaks away from the error-free sensor assumption. This
consistency enforcement enables the Student model to handle missing data properly and improve the Teacher model
by updating it with the Student model’s exponential moving average. Our experiments demonstrate that our proposed learning framework for multi-modal detection is able
to better handle missing sensor data during inference. Furthermore, our method achieves new state-of-the-art performance (5% gain) on the Oxford Radar Robotcar dataset
under various evaluation settings.

1. Introduction
In autonomous driving, many vehicles are equipped with
multiple sensors, such as camera, Lidar, and Radar, as
demonstrated in many datasets [2, 4, 9, 31]. Leveraging different types of sensors can be used to tackle any occasional
failures for each sensor and can potentially improve the per-

Radar stream
Predictions

Lidar stream

Multi-modality vehicle
detection model

(a) Clear sensor
Radar stream (missing)

Missing detections
Predictions

Lidar stream

Multi-modality vehicle
detection model

(b) Corrupted sensor

Figure 1. Illustration of the problem caused by noisy or missing
sensor stream. Models trained on two modalities may suffer from
errors when inferenced on missing sensors (only one modality is
available).

formance of object detections than using each individual
sensor. Existing works [6,13,23,37] mainly focus on fusing
Lidar and camera, taking advantage of the camera’s higher
resolution and rich texture information. However, these visual sensors are sensitive to adverse weather conditions and
suffer from degraded performance in harsh weather such as
fog [3], snow, and rain.
In addition to Lidar and camera, Radar has also been
widely adopted in autonomous system of vehicles [2, 4]
and is more robust in certain weather conditions (e.g., fog,
snow, rain). To be particular, Radar uses wavelength in the
scale of millimeter as ADC chirp signals which is much
larger than the size of rain, fog, or even snow [10], making them essentially invisible to Radar. Since the collected

918

