Towards Data-Free Model Stealing in a Hard Label Setting
Sunandini Sanyal
Sravanti Addepalli
R. Venkatesh Babu
Video Analytics Lab, Department of Computational and Data Sciences
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore

Abstract
Machine learning models deployed as a service (MLaaS)
are susceptible to model stealing attacks, where an adversary attempts to steal the model within a restricted access
framework. While existing attacks demonstrate near-perfect
clone-model performance using softmax predictions of the
classification network, most of the APIs allow access to only
the top-1 labels. In this work, we show that it is indeed
possible to steal Machine Learning models by accessing
only top-1 predictions (Hard Label setting) as well, without
access to model gradients (Black-Box setting) or even the
training dataset (Data-Free setting) within a low query budget. We propose a novel GAN-based framework1 that trains
the student and generator in tandem to steal the model effectively while overcoming the challenge of the hard label
setting by utilizing gradients of the clone network as a proxy
to the victim’s gradients. We propose to overcome the large
query costs associated with a typical Data-Free setting by
utilizing publicly available (potentially unrelated) datasets
as a weak image prior. We additionally show that even in
the absence of such data, it is possible to achieve state-ofthe-art results within a low query budget using synthetically
crafted samples. We are the first to demonstrate the scalability of Model Stealing in a restricted access setting on a
100 class dataset as well.

1. Introduction
Deep learning based systems have progressed leaps and
bounds over the past few years, enabling their deployment
in critical applications such as self-driving cars, surveillance systems and biomedical applications. Furthermore,
organizations often provide pretrained machine learning
models as a service (MLaaS) where the end user is allowed
to query the model and get access to its predictions via APIs
for use in various applications.
However, exposing the predictions of the models through
queries makes the model susceptible to model stealing at1 Project Page: https://sites.google.com/view/dfms-hl

Figure 1. Model Stealing Attack and its vulnerabilities: An
adversary queries the victim Model V with proxy data to obtain its
labels. The labelled training data is used to train a clone Model C
which can be further used by the adversary to stage membership
inference [31], model inversion [10] or adversarial attacks [43].

tacks, which attempt to clone the victim model even in a
black-box setting that restricts access to its gradients. Protecting the privacy of an ML model is of paramount importance as organizations invest significant resources on
cutting edge research and also on gathering and labelling
large amounts of training data [14] for achieving competent
performance on various tasks. In addition, recent works
[29, 32, 35, 42] have shown that an adversary could train
a substitute model via model stealing and use it for crafting adversarial examples [12] in a black-box setting, which
poses a serious threat when the model is deployed in security critical applications. A stolen model could also compromise the privacy of users by leaking confidential data
through a membership inference attack [31] or model inversion [40, 41]. Fig.-1 showcases some of the possible malicious outcomes of Model Stealing. In order to prevent
model stealing attacks, some defenses attempt to perturb
the softmax predictions of the model, while preserving its
top-1 prediction [22]. In this work we consider the problem
of model stealing in a more practical and challenging hard
label setting, where only the top-1 prediction of the model

15284

