Visual Acoustic Matching
Changan Chen1,4 Ruohan Gao2 Paul Calamia3 Kristen Grauman1,4
1
University of Texas at Austin 2 Stanford University 3 Reality Labs Research at Meta

1. Introduction
The audio we hear is always transformed by the space we
are in, as a function of the physical environment’s geometry,
the materials of surfaces and objects in it, and the locations
of sound sources around us. This means that we perceive the
same sound differently depending on where we hear it. For
example, imagine a person singing a song while standing
on the hardwood stage in a spacious auditorium versus in a
cozy living room with shaggy carpet. The underlying song
content would be identical, but we would experience it in
two very different ways.
For this reason, it is important to model room acoustics
to deliver a realistic and immersive experience for many
applications in augmented reality (AR) and virtual reality
(VR). Hearing sounds with acoustics inconsistent with the
scene is disruptive for human perception. In AR/VR, when
the real space and virtually reproduced space have different
acoustic properties, it causes a cognitive mismatch and the
“room divergence effect” damages the user experience [63].
Creating audio signals that are consistent with an environment has a long history in the audio community. If the
geometry (often in the form of a 3D mesh) and material

Meta AI

Target Space

Abstract
We introduce the visual acoustic matching task, in which
an audio clip is transformed to sound like it was recorded
in a target environment. Given an image of the target environment and a waveform for the source audio, the goal is to
re-synthesize the audio to match the target room acoustics
as suggested by its visible geometry and materials. To address this novel task, we propose a cross-modal transformer
model that uses audio-visual attention to inject visual properties into the audio and generate realistic audio output. In
addition, we devise a self-supervised training objective that
can learn acoustic matching from in-the-wild Web videos,
despite their lack of acoustically mismatched audio. We
demonstrate that our approach successfully translates human speech to a variety of real-world environments depicted
in images, outperforming both traditional acoustic matching and more heavily supervised baselines.

4

Source Audio

Output Audio

Figure 1. Goal of visual acoustic matching: transform the sound
recorded in one space to another space depicted in the target visual
scene. For example, given source audio recorded in a studio, resynthesize that audio to match the room acoustics of a concert hall.

properties of the space are known, simulation techniques
can be applied to generate a room impulse response (RIR),
a transfer function between the sound source and the microphone that describes how the sound gets transformed by the
space. RIRs can then be convolved with an arbitrary source
audio signal to generate the audio signals received by the
microphone [8, 9, 17, 50, 51]. In the absence of geometry
and material information, the acoustical properties can be
estimated blindly from audio captured in that room (e.g., reverberant speech), then used to auralize a signal [29,42,56].
However, both approaches have practical limitations: the
former requires access to the full mesh and material properties of the target space, while the latter gets only limited
acoustic information about the target space from the reverberation in the audio sample. Neither uses imagery of the
target scene to perform acoustic matching.
We propose a novel task: visual acoustic matching.
Given an image of the target environment and a source audio clip, the goal is to re-synthesize the audio as if it were
recorded in the target environment (see Figure 1). The idea
is to transform sounds from one space to another space
by altering their scene-driven acoustic signatures. Visual

18858

