Learning to Learn across Diverse Data Biases in Deep Face Recognition
Chang Liu1,2 *
1
1

Xiang Yu2

Northeastern University

Yi-Hsuan Tsai2
Masoud Faraki2
Ramin Moslemi2
Manmohan Chandraker2,3
Yun Fu1
2
3
NEC Labs America
University of California, San Diego

{liu.chang6, yunfu}@ece.neu.edu, 2 {xiangyu, ytsai, mfaraki ,rmoslemi, manu}@nec-labs.com

Head class Tailed class

Abstract

Long-Tail

ID 1

Convolutional Neural Networks have achieved remarkable success in face recognition, in part due to the abundant availability of data. However, the data used for training CNNs is often imbalanced. Prior works largely focus
on the long-tailed nature of face datasets in data volume
per identity, or focus on single bias variation. In this paper, we show that many bias variations such as ethnicity,
head pose, occlusion and blur can jointly affect the accuracy signiﬁcantly. We propose a sample level weighting
approach termed Multi-variation Cosine Margin (MvCoM),
to simultaneously consider the multiple variation factors,
which orthogonally enhances the face recognition losses to
incorporate the importance of training samples. Further, we
leverage a learning to learn approach, guided by a held-out
meta learning set and use an additive modeling to predict the
MvCoM. Extensive experiments on challenging face recognition benchmarks demonstrate the advantages of our method
in jointly handling imbalances due to multiple variations.

Per-class Data Volume

ID 3

Head Pose


ID 2





Ethnicity

Figure 1. While traditional methods only consider per-class data
volume or single bias factor for long-tailed effects, multiple bias
factors such as head pose and ethnicity jointly manifest as longtailed effects in MS-Celeb-1M [14]. Further, samples from the
same identity can show different variations – for example, images
from ID1 show both frontal and proﬁle poses – indicating that
accounting for identity or class-level variation is not sufﬁcient.
Hence, our MvCoM aims at explicitly modeling the sample-level
multiple long-tailed variations jointly for face recognition.

(majority in samples) to mitigate the bias. However, we
observe that there usually exist more than one bias variation
factors. As shown in Fig. 1, several bias factors jointly inﬂuence the overall data distribution. We hypothesize that
dealing with such multiple factors of imbalance results in
a feature space that allows better test-time generalization.
Moreover, recent methods focus on class-level imbalance,
where samples within the same class share the same importance [2, 21, 37]. This is limited in practice, as different
images from the same person would likely differ in their
importance (e.g., frontal and proﬁle views). Some other
methods [20, 54] compensate the loss with the sample hardness, which is general but cannot attribute the hardness to
any of the concrete variation factor. Thus, we hypothesize
considering sample-level variation instead of class-level,
and explicitly model each of the variation factor into the loss
design.

1. Introduction
Deep face recognition has achieved remarkable progress
[4, 6, 27, 39, 42, 50, 56], with strong results on public benchmarks [19, 57]. However, real-world data distributions are
usually long-tailed, whereby a method trained with uniform
sampling over the imbalanced training data leads to degraded
accuracy. Since it is impractical to collect data that sufﬁciently covers a wide variety of the imbalance factors, there
is a pressing need to develop training methods that can mitigate dataset bias along multiple factors of variations.
In current literature, long-tailed or imbalanced data distribution is usually analyzed in terms of per-class data volume,
or a single bias factor such as ethnicity [10, 11, 44, 52] or
head pose [29, 35, 60, 64]. Previous approaches distinguish
long-tailed classes (minority in samples) from head classes

To handle data imbalance, classical methods [2, 16, 41]
introduce re-weighted loss functions by assigning higher

* This work was conducted as part of a summer internship at NEC Labs
America.

4072

