MetaPose: Fast 3D Pose from Multiple Views without 3D Supervision
Ben Usman1,2
1

Boston University

Andrea Tagliasacchi2,3
2

Google Research

3

Kate Saenko1,4

Simon Fraser University

Abstract
In the era of deep learning, human pose estimation from
multiple cameras with unknown calibration has received
little attention to date. We show how to train a neural
model to perform this task with high precision and minimal latency overhead. The proposed model takes into account joint location uncertainty due to occlusion from multiple views, and requires only 2D keypoint data for training. Our method outperforms both classical bundle adjustment and weakly-supervised monocular 3D baselines on the
well-established Human3.6M dataset, as well as the more
challenging in-the-wild Ski-Pose PTZ dataset.

1. Introduction
We tackle the problem of estimating 3D coordinates of
human joints from RGB images captured using synchronized (potentially moving) cameras with unknown positions, orientations, and intrinsic parameters. We additionally assume having access to a training set with only 2D
positions of joints labeled on captured images.
Historically, real-time capture of the human 3D pose has
been undertaken only by large enterprises that could afford expensive specialized motion capture equipment [18].
In principle, if camera calibrations are available [3], human body joints can be triangulated directly from cameraspace observations [26, 33]. One scenario in which camera calibration cannot easily be estimated is sports capture,
in which close-ups of players are captured in front of lowtexture backgrounds, with wide-baseline, moving cameras.
Plain backgrounds preclude calibration via classical multicamera SfM [21], as not sufﬁciently many feature correspondences can be detected across views; see Figure 1.
In this work, we propose a neural network to simultaneously predict 3D human and relative camera poses from
multiple views; see Figure 1. Our approach uses human
body joints as a source of information for camera calibration. As joints often become occluded, uncertainty must be
carefully accounted for, to avoid bad calibration and con-

4

Avneesh Sud2
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

trained on multi-view 2D data (no 3D!)

apply existing singe-view
models to each view

combined
3D pose

apply learned fast
neural optimizer

Figure 1. We show how to train a neural network that can aggregate outputs of multiple single-view methods, takes prediction
uncertainty into consideration, has minimal latency overhead, and
requires only 2D supervision for training. Our method mimics the
structure of bundle-adjustment solvers, but using the joints of the
human body to drive camera calibration, and by implementing a
bundle-like solver with a simple feed-forward neural network.

sequent erroneous 3D pose predictions. As we assume a
synchronized multi-camera setup at test-time, our algorithm
should also be able to effectively aggregate information
from different viewpoints. Finally, our approach supervised
by 2D annotations alone, as ground-truth annotation of 3D
data is unwieldy. As summarized in Figure 2, and detailed
in what follows, none of the existing approaches fully satisﬁes these fundamental requirements.
Fully-supervised 3D pose estimation approaches yield the
lowest estimation error, but make use of known 3D camera speciﬁcation during either training [65] or both training
and inference [26]. However, the prohibitively high cost of
3D joint annotation and full camera calibration in-the-wild
makes it difﬁcult to acquire large enough labeled datasets
representative of speciﬁc environments [30, 53], therefore
rendering supervised methods not applicable in this setup.
Monocular 3D methods [25, 37, 62] and 2D-to-3D lifting
networks [10, 61], relax data constraints to enable 3D pose
inference using just multi-view 2D data without calibration
at train time. Unfortunately, at inference time, these methods can only be applied to a single view at a time, therefore
unable to leverage cross-view information and uncertainty.
Classical SfM (structure from motion) approaches to 3D
pose estimation [33] iteratively reﬁne both the camera and

6759

