The Devil is in the Margin:
Margin-based Label Smoothing for Network Calibration
Bingyuan Liu1 *, Ismail Ben Ayed1 , Adrian Galdran2 , Jose Dolz1
1

ÉTS Montreal, Canada

2

Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain

Abstract
In spite of the dominant performances of deep neural
networks, recent works have shown that they are poorly
calibrated, resulting in over-confident predictions. Miscalibration can be exacerbated by overfitting due to the minimization of the cross-entropy during training, as it promotes
the predicted softmax probabilities to match the one-hot label assignments. This yields a pre-softmax activation of the
correct class that is significantly larger than the remaining
activations. Recent evidence from the literature suggests
that loss functions that embed implicit or explicit maximization of the entropy of predictions yield state-of-the-art calibration performances. We provide a unifying constrainedoptimization perspective of current state-of-the-art calibration losses. Specifically, these losses could be viewed as
approximations of a linear penalty (or a Lagrangian term)
imposing equality constraints on logit distances. This points
to an important limitation of such underlying equality constraints, whose ensuing gradients constantly push towards a
non-informative solution, which might prevent from reaching the best compromise between the discriminative performance and calibration of the model during gradient-based
optimization. Following our observations, we propose a
simple and flexible generalization based on inequality constraints, which imposes a controllable margin on logit distances. Comprehensive experiments on a variety of image
classification, semantic segmentation and NLP benchmarks
demonstrate that our method sets novel state-of-the-art results on these tasks in terms of network calibration, without
affecting the discriminative performance. The code is available at https://github.com/by-liu/MbLS .

applications, such as image classification [12] or semantic segmentation [3]. Nevertheless, recent studies [8, 21]
have shown that these high-capacity models are poorly calibrated, often resulting in over-confident predictions. As a
result, the predicted probability values associated with each
class overestimate the actual likelihood of correctness.
Quantifying the predictive uncertainty for modern DNNs
has received an increased attention recently, with a variety
of alternatives to better calibrate network outputs. A simple
strategy consists in including a post-processing step during
the test phase to transform the output of a trained network
[5, 8, 28, 32], with the parameters of this additional operation determined on a validation set. Despite their simplicity and low computational cost, these methods were shown
to be effective when training and testing data are drawn
from the same distribution. However, one of their observed
limitations is that the choice of the transformation parameters, such as temperature scaling, is highly dependent on
the dataset and network. A more principled alternative is to
explicitly maximize the Shannon entropy of the predictions
during training by integrating a term into the learning objective, which penalizes confident output distributions [25].
Furthermore, recent efforts to quantify the quality of predictive uncertainties have focused on investigating the effect of
the entropy on the training labels [21,22,31]. Findings from
these works evidence that, popular losses, which modify the
hard-label assignments, such as label smoothing [27] and
focal loss [17], implicitly integrate an entropy maximization
objective and have a favourable effect on model calibration.
As shown comprehensively in the recent study in [21], these
losses, with implicit or explicit maximization of the entropy,
represent the state-of-the-art in model calibration.
Contributions are summarized as follows:

1. Introduction

• We provide a unifying constrained-optimization perspective of current state-of-the-art calibration losses.
Specifically, these losses could be viewed as approximations of a linear penalty (or a Lagrangian term) imposing equality constraints on logit distances. This
points to an important limitation of such underly-

With the advent of deep neural networks (DNNs), we
have witnessed a dramatic performance improvement in a
variety of computer vision and NLP tasks across different
* Corresponding author: bingyuan.liu@etsmtl.ca

80

