Styleformer: Transformer based Generative Adversarial Networks with Style
Vector
Jeeseung Park∗
mAy-I Inc.

Younggeun Kim*
MINDsLab Inc.

jspark@may-i.io

younggeun@mindslab.ai

Abstract
We propose Styleformer, a generator that synthesizes image using style vectors based on the Transformer structure.
In this paper, we effectively apply the modified Transformer
structure (e.g., Increased multi-head attention and Prelayer normalization) and introduce novel Attention Style
Injection module which is style modulation and demodulation method for self-attention operation. The new generator components have strengths in CNN’s shortcomings,
handling long-range dependency and understanding global
structure of objects. We present two methods to generate
high-resolution images using Styleformer. First, we apply
Linformer in the field of visual synthesis (Styleformer-L),
enabling Styleformer to generate higher resolution images
and result in improvements in terms of computation cost and
performance. This is the first case using Linformer to image generation. Second, we combine Styleformer and StyleGAN2 (Styleformer-C) to generate high-resolution compositional scene efficiently, which Styleformer captures longrange dependencies between components. With these adaptations, Styleformer achieves comparable performances to
state-of-the-art in both single and multi-object datasets.
Furthermore, groundbreaking results from style mixing and
attention map visualization demonstrate the advantages
and efficiency of our model.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [21] is one of
the widely used generative model. Since the appear of DCGAN [43], convolution operations have been considered
essential for high-resolution image generation and stable
training. Convolution operations are created under the assumption of the locality and stationarity of the image (i.e.,
inductive bias), which is advantageous for image processing [37]. Through convolution neural networks (CNNs)
with this strong inductive bias, GAN have efficiently gen* Equal contribution. The order was determined randomly.

erated realistic, high-fidelity images.
However, drawbacks of CNNs clearly exist. Local receptive field of CNNs makes model difficult to capture longrange dependency and understanding global structure of object. Stacking multiple layers can solve this problem, but
this leads to another problem of losing spatial information
and fine details [55]. Moreover, sharing kernel weights
across locations leads to unstable training when the pattern
or styles differ by location in the image [56]. This is also
related to the poor quality of generated structured images
or compositional scenes (e.g., outdoor scenes), unlike the
generation of a single object (e.g., faces)
In this paper, we propose Styleformer, a generator that
uses style vectors based on the Transformer structure. Unlike CNNs, Styleformer utilizes self-attention operation
to capture long-range dependency and understand global
structure of objects efficiently. Furthermore, we overcome
computation problem of Transformer and show superior
performance not only in low-resolution but also in high resolution images. Specifically, we introduce the following
three models:
1) Styleformer - The basic block of Styleformer is based
on Transformer encoder, so we introduce components that
need to be changed for stable learning. Inspired by MobileStyleGAN [3], we enhance the multi-head attention in
original Transformer by increasing the number of heads, allowing model to generate image efficiently. We also modify
layer normalization, residual connection, and feed-forward
network (Section 3.2). Moreover, we introduce novel attention style injection module, suitable style modulation, and
demodulation method for self-attention operation (Section
3.3). This design allows Styleformer to generate image stably, and enables model to handle long-range dependency
and understand global structures.
2) Styleformer-L - We sidestep scalability limitation
arising from the quadratic mode of attention operation
by applying Linformer [50] (Styleformer-L). As such,
Styleformer-L can generate high-resolution images with
linear computational costs. This paper is the first case to apply Linformer in the field of visual synthesis (Section 3.4).

8983

