Learning Canonical F-Correlation Projection for Compact Multiview
Representation
Yun-Hao Yuan1 , Jin Li1 , Yun Li1 , Jipeng Qiang1 , Yi Zhu1 , Xiaobo Shen2 , Jianping Gou3
1
School of Information Engineering, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, China
2
School of Computer Science, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
3
School of Computer Science and Communication Engineering, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, China
{yhyuan, liyun, jpqiang, zhuyi}@yzu.edu.cn
cvjinli@outlook.com, njust.shenxiaobo@gmail.com, goujianping@ujs.edu.cn

Abstract
Canonical correlation analysis (CCA) matters in multiview representation learning. But, CCA and its most variants are essentially based on explicit or implicit covariance
matrices. It means that they have no ability to model the
nonlinear relationship among features due to intrinsic linearity of covariance. In this paper, we address the preceding problem and propose a novel canonical F-correlation
framework by exploring and exploiting the nonlinear relationship between different features. The framework projects
each feature rather than observation into a certain new
space by an arbitrary nonlinear mapping, thus resulting
in more flexibility in real applications. With this framework as a tool, we propose a correlative covariation projection (CCP) method by using an explicit nonlinear mapping. Moreover, we further propose a multiset version of
CCP dubbed MCCP for learning compact representation of
more than two views. The proposed MCCP is solved by an
iterative method, and we prove the convergence of this iteration. A series of experimental results on six benchmark
datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed CCP
and MCCP methods.

1. Introduction
Canonical correlation analysis (CCA) [17], proposed by
Hotelling, is a classic yet powerful technique in multidimensional data analysis for finding the relationship between
two sets of random variables. CCA aims to seek pairs of linear projection vectors such that the projected variables are
maximally correlated in the low-dimensional space. CCA
has been applied to many applications such as multiview
clustering [5], feature fusion [30], multilabel classification
[29], and multiview representation learning (MRL) [23].
To date, there have been numerous useful variants of

CCA, which can be broadly divided into three categories:
supervised, semi-supervised, and unsupervised methods.
Supervised variants of CCA take the label information of all
the observations of different views into consideration during
model training. For example, discriminative CCA [21, 32]
was proposed by incorporating intraclass and interclass information of two view samples into CCA. Multilabel CCA
[27,29] was presented by regarding one view as the data and
the other view as class labels. To deal with multiview (more
than two views) cases, some multiview supervised extensions of CCA have been proposed recently based on intraclass and interclass information of multiview observations;
see, e.g., discriminative and labeled multiple CCA [11, 12].
Semi-supervised variants of CCA not only take advantage of unlabeled multiview data, but also labeled multiview
data for learning latent representation. For example, Chen
et al. [9] proposed a semi-supervised and semi-paired CCA
method, which uses the global structure information of unlabeled data and local discriminative information of labeled
data and meanwhile, exploits the limited paired data. Wan
and Zhu [34] presented a cost-sensitive semi-supervised
CCA approach, which carries out label propagation with
CCA in a unified cost-sensitive learning framework.
In real-world applications, there are usually no shortage
of unlabeled data but labels are expensive. Therefore, it is
of great significance to develop unsupervised CCA’s variants which can make full use of all of the multiview observations. In this paper, we consider the problem of CCA’s
generalization in unsupervised learning scenarios, which is
a much harder problem owing to the absence of class labels that would guide the search for relevant information
and compact multiview representation learning.
Much effort has been focused on unsupervised variants
of CCA for compact multiview representation or feature
learning. For example, in small sample size (SSS) problems
where the dimensionality of feature vectors is larger than
the number of observations, regularized CCA [16, 29] was

19260

