Multimodal Dynamics: Dynamical Fusion for Trustworthy
Multimodal Classification
Zongbo Han1 * ‡, Fan Yang2 *, Junzhou Huang2 , Changqing Zhang1†, Jianhua Yao2†
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University1 ,
Tencent AI Lab2
{zongbo,zhangchangqing}@tju.edu.cn, {fionafyang,jianhuayao}@tencent.com, jzhuang75@gmail.com

Abstract
Integration of heterogeneous and high-dimensional data
(e.g., multiomics) is becoming increasingly important. Existing multimodal classification algorithms mainly focus
on improving performance by exploiting the complementarity from different modalities. However, conventional
approaches are basically weak in providing trustworthy
multimodal fusion, especially for safety-critical applications (e.g., medical diagnosis). For this issue, we propose a novel trustworthy multimodal classification algorithm termed Multimodal Dynamics, which dynamically
evaluates both the feature-level and modality-level informativeness for different samples and thus trustworthily integrates multiple modalities. Specifically, a sparse gating is introduced to capture the information variation of
each within-modality feature and the true class probability
is employed to assess the classification confidence of each
modality. Then a transparent fusion algorithm based on the
dynamical informativeness estimation strategy is induced.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to jointly
model both feature and modality variation for different samples to provide trustworthy fusion in multi-modal classification. Extensive experiments are conducted on multimodal
medical classification datasets. In these experiments, superior performance and trustworthiness of our algorithm are
clearly validated compared to the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Multimodal learning has achieved impressive success in
a wide spectrum of applications (e.g., medical-diagnosis
[16, 52]), which improves the performance by exploring
the complementary information from different modalities.
Representative multimodal methods typically integrate dif∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors. ‡ Supported by 2021
Tencent Rhino-Bird Research Elite Training Program.

ferent modalities into a unified representation with powerful neural networks [29, 34, 45, 61, 63, 64, 71, 72, 74]. Despite encouraging progress, traditional multimodal models
are still unreliable due to the limitation of existing fusion
strategies. As a result, existing multimodal learning also
challenges itself in deployment for safety-critical applications (e.g., computer-aided diagnosis). This inspires us to
utilize multimodal information in a more elegant way to
produce trustworthy multimodal fusion.
For multimodal learning, traditional methods mainly focus on obtaining a common or joint representation by exploring the correlated and complementary information between different modalities with powerful neural networks
[8, 65]. Some existing multimodal methods obtain a joint
representation by simply concatenating the features obtained from different modalities [26,32]. Then a neural network is employed to explore the joint representation. Besides, joint representations can be obtained through carefully designed objective functions [3, 4, 27, 63] and neural
network architectures [6, 38, 62]. Although effective, these
methods are weak in dynamically perceiving the informativeness of each feature and modality for different samples,
which could enhance the trustworthiness (including stability and explainablity) in multimodal classification. In multimodal medical data, as shown in Fig. 1, uninformative features and modalities widely exist due to the unsatisfactory
data collection (e.g., inherent noise in multiomics data [7],
uneven quality of histopathological images for different patients [68] and tabular data with complex missing patterns
and feature noise [70]). This motivates us to evaluate the informativeness of each feature and each modality of different
samples, and conduct a dynamical multimodal fusion.
In this work, we propose a novel algorithm termed Multimodal Dynamics for trustworthy multimodal classification,
which models the feature and modality informativeness to
promote the fusion stability and explainablity. Specifically,
we introduce a sparse gating strategy to dynamically obtain the informative features for different samples, and the
modality confidence is introduced to dynamically evalu-

20707

