Disentangling Visual Embeddings for Attributes and Objects
Nirat Saini

Khoi Pham

Abhinav Shrivastava

Visual
Disentanglement

We study the problem of compositional zero-shot learning for object-attribute recognition. Prior works use visual
features extracted with a backbone network, pre-trained for
object classification and thus do not capture the subtly distinct features associated with attributes. To overcome this
challenge, these studies employ supervision from the linguistic space, and use pre-trained word embeddings to better separate and compose attribute-object pairs for recognition. Analogous to linguistic embedding space, which already has unique and agnostic embeddings for object and
attribute, we shift the focus back to the visual space and propose a novel architecture that can disentangle attribute and
object features in the visual space. We use visual decomposed features to hallucinate embeddings that are representative for the seen and novel compositions to better regularize the learning of our model. Extensive experiments show
that our method outperforms existing work with significant
margin on three datasets: MIT-States, UT-Zappos, and a
new benchmark created based on VAW. The code, models, and dataset splits are publicly available at https:
//github.com/nirat1606/OADis.

Visual
Composition

Abstract

Input Images

University of Maryland, College Park
Iattr : peeled orange

orange

I : peeled apple

peeled

unseen pair: sliced orange

Iobj : sliced apple

apple

sliced

seen pair: peeled apple

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Method illustration: Given an input image I of
peeled apple, we use two other images: (1) one with same object, different attribute Iobj - sliced apple, (2) one with same
attribute, different object Iattr - peeled orange. We propose a
novel architecture that takes I and Iattr , and extracts their visual
similarity features for peeled and visual dissimilarity features
for orange. Similarly, using I and Iobj , the visual similarity
features for apple, and the dissimilarity features for sliced
can be extracted. We compose these primitive visual features
to hallucinate a seen pair peeled apple, and a novel unseen
pair sliced orange to be used for regularizing our embedding
space. Note that this is a visualization of embedding space composition, we do not generate images.

Objects in the real world can appear with different properties, i.e., different color, shape, material, etc. For instance,
an apple can be red or green, cut or peeled, raw or ripe, and
even dirty or clean. Understanding object properties can
greatly benefit various applications, e.g., robust object detection [5, 14, 15, 26], human object interaction [7, 49, 51],
and activity recognition [1, 3, 4, 16, 18, 34]. Since the total
number of possible attribute-object pairs in the real world
is prohibitively large, it is impractical to collect image examples and train multiple classifiers. Prior works proposed
compositional learning, i.e., learning to compose knowledge of known attributes and object concepts to recognize
a new attribute-object composition. Datasets such as MITStates [24] and UT-Zappos [56] are commonly used to study
this task, with joint attribute-object recognition for a diverse, yet limited set of objects and attributes.

Compositional learning refers to combining simple
primitive concepts to understand a complex concept. This
idea dates back to Recognition and Composition theory by
Biederman [6], and early work in the visual domain by
Hoffman [22], which proposed recognition by parts for pose
estimation. Prior works explore compositionality to a certain degree, e.g., via feature sharing and shared embeddings
space. Among them, most works use linguistically inspired
losses to separate attributes and objects in the shared embedding space, then use that primitive knowledge to compose new complex pairs. Using linguistic embeddings is
helpful since: (1) there is a clear distinction between attribute and object in the embedding space, and (2) these
embeddings already contain semantic knowledge of similar objects and attributes, which is helpful for composition.
However, unlike word embedding, it is difficult to discrimi-

13658

