Dancing under the stars: video denoising in starlight
Kristina Monakhova
UC Berkeley

Stephan R. Richter
Intel Labs

Laura Waller
UC Berkeley

Vladlen Koltun
Intel Labs

Figure 1. Video denoising in submillilux. (a) One frame from the raw noisy video clip (10 fps) taken between 0.6–0.7 millilux on a clear,
moonless night with no external illumination. (b) Result after contrast stretching the video clip. (c) Denoised result using our denoiser.

Abstract
Imaging in low light is extremely challenging due to
low photon counts. Using sensitive CMOS cameras, it is
currently possible to take videos at night under moonlight
(0.05-0.3 lux illumination). In this paper, we demonstrate
photorealistic video under starlight (no moon present,
<0.001 lux) for the first time. To enable this, we develop a
GAN-tuned physics-based noise model to more accurately
represent camera noise at the lowest light levels. Using
this noise model, we train a video denoiser using a
combination of simulated noisy video clips and real noisy
still images. We capture a 5-10 fps video dataset with
significant motion at approximately 0.6-0.7 millilux with no
active illumination. Comparing against alternative methods,
we achieve improved video quality at the lowest light levels,
demonstrating photorealistic video denoising in starlight for
the first time.

1. Introduction
Some animals, such as hawkmoths and carpenter bees,
can effectively navigate on the darkest moonless nights
by the light of the stars (< 0.001 lux) [29, 47, 55], while
our best CMOS cameras generally require at least 3/4
moon illumination (> 0.1 lux) to image moving objects
at night [11]. Seeing in the darkest settings (moonless,
clear nights) is extremely challenging due to the minuscule
amounts of light present in the environment. In such dark
settings, photographers can use long exposure times (e.g. 20
seconds or higher) to collect enough light from the scene.

This approach works well for still images, but severely limits
the temporal resolution and precludes imaging of moving
objects. Alternatively, cameras can increase the gain, making
each pixel effectively more sensitive to light. This allows
shorter exposures, but greatly increases the noise present in
each frame. In this setting, motion might be perceptible, but
noise overwhelms the images.
Denoising algorithms can be used to improve the image
quality in noisy images. Over the years, a number of
denoising algorithms have been developed, from classic
methods (e.g. BM3D [17], V-BM4D [39]) to deep learningbased approaches [58]. Each of these methods attempt to
extract the signal from the noise based on some assumptions
about the statistical distributions of the image and noise.
While successful for certain denoising tasks, most of these
methods are built upon a simplistic noise model (Gaussian or
Poisson-Gaussian noise), which does not apply in extremely
low-light settings. When high sensor gain is used in low-light
images, the noise is often non-Gaussian, non-linear, sensorspecific, and difficult to model or characterize. Without
having a good understanding of the structure of the noise in
the images, denoising algorithms may fail – mistaking the
structured noise for signal.
Recently, several deep learning-based approaches have
provided remarkable denoising performance in low light
down to 0.1–0.3 lux [13, 14]. Rather than assuming a
certain noise model, these methods train a denoiser using
clean/noisy image pairs captured by a camera. Such an
approach automatically accounts for the low-light noise
through deep learning, however this comes at the price

16241

