ManiTrans: Entity-Level Text-Guided Image Manipulation via Token-wise
Semantic Alignment and Generation
Jianan Wang1 Guansong Lu2 Hang Xu2 Zhenguo Li2 Chunjing Xu2 Yanwei Fu1
1
School of Data Science, Fudan University 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{jawang19, yanweifu}@fudan.edu.cn

Text

{luguansong, xu.hang, li.zhenguo, xuchunjing}@huawei.com

Original Image

ManiGAN

Lightweight-GAN

Our ManiTrans

bird1: This bird has a black head
and a yellow belly.
bird2: A bird is orange and black
in colour, with a blue crown
and black eye rings.

bird1: This bird has a black head,
black wings and a white belly.
bird2: A red bird has a yellow head
and a yellow belly
with a red crown.

Figure 1. Results of manipulating multiple entities according to different texts with ManiGAN [26], Lightweight-GAN [28] and our
ManiTrans. Our ManiTrans can manipulate different entities accordingly, while two baseline methods fail.

Abstract
Existing text-guided image manipulation methods aim to
modify the appearance of the image or to edit a few objects
in a virtual or simple scenario, which is far from practical
application. In this work, we study a novel task on textguided image manipulation on the entity level in the real
world. The task imposes three basic requirements, (1) to
edit the entity consistent with the text descriptions, (2) to
preserve the text-irrelevant regions, and (3) to merge the
manipulated entity into the image naturally. To this end,
we propose a new transformer-based framework based on
the two-stage image synthesis method, namely ManiTrans,
which can not only edit the appearance of entities but also
generate new entities corresponding to the text guidance.
Our framework incorporates a semantic alignment module
to locate the image regions to be manipulated, and a semantic loss to help align the relationship between the vision and
language. We conduct extensive experiments on the real
datasets, CUB, Oxford, and COCO datasets to verify that
our method can distinguish the relevant and irrelevant re-

gions and achieve more precise and flexible manipulation
compared with baseline methods.

1. Introduction
There are various active branches of image manipulation, such as style transfer [16], image translation [21, 62],
and Text-Guided Image Manipulation (TGIM), by taking
advantage of recent deep generative architectures such as
GANs [17], VAE [25] and auto-regressive models [50]. Particularly, the previous TGIM methods either operate some
objects by text instructions [12, 15, 60], such as “adding”
and “removing” in a simple toy scene, or manipulating the
appearance of objects [4] or the style of the image [23, 52].
In this work, we are interested in a novel challenging task of
entity-Level Text-Guided Image Manipulation (eL-TGIM),
which is to manipulate the entities on a natural image given
the text descriptions, as shown in Fig. . Critically, our eLTGIM is much more difficult than the vanilla TGIM task,
as it demands much manipulation ability in the fine-grained
entity level. Thus, it is nontrivial to directly extend previ-

10707

