Unifying Panoptic Segmentation for Autonomous Driving
Oliver Zendel

Matthias Schörghuber
Bernhard Rainer
Csaba Beleznai
AIT Austrian Institute of Technology

Markus Murschitz

oliver.zendel,matthias.schoerghuber,bernhard.rainer,markus.murschitz,csaba.beleznai@ait.ac.at

Abstract
This paper aims to improve panoptic segmentation for
real-world applications in three ways. First, we present a
label policy that unifies four of the most popular panoptic segmentation datasets for autonomous driving. We also
clean up label confusion by adding the new vehicle labels
pickup and van. Full relabeling information for the popular
Mapillary Vistas, IDD, and Cityscapes dataset are provided
to add these new labels to existing setups.
Second, we introduce Wilddash2 (WD2), a new dataset
and public benchmark service for panoptic segmentation.
The dataset consists of more than 5000 unique driving
scenes from all over the world with a focus on visually challenging scenes, such as diverse weather conditions, lighting
situations, and camera characteristics. We showcase experimental visual hazard classifiers which help to pre-filter
challenging frames during dataset creation.
Finally, to characterize the robustness of algorithms in
out-of-distribution situations, we introduce hazard-aware
and negative testing for panoptic segmentation as well as
statistical significance calculations that increase confidence
for both concepts. Additionally, we present a novel technique for visualizing panoptic segmentation errors.
Our experiments show the negative impact of visual hazards on panoptic segmentation quality. Additional data
from the WD2 dataset improves performance for visually
challenging scenes and thus robustness in real-world scenarios.

1. Introduction
During the last years, the previously separate tasks of semantic scene segmentation (assigning a semantic label like
car, road, street sign to each pixel) and instance segmentation (assigning masks per individual instance) have been
combined into the panoptic segmentation task [15].
Diverse challenges imposed by real-world autonomous
driving applications confront ML systems with data distributions different from those used during training. Their

Figure 1. Diverse driving scenes from Wilddash2; ae0021: mirroring wet road in UAE, ar0006: broad avenue from Argentia, ci0011:
busy market in Côte d’Ivoire, do0007: unusual pickup from Dominican Republic, ee0031: night scene from Estonia with a highly
reflective car hood, gr0027: rainy drive in Greece

ability to extrapolate to out-of-distribution (OOD) test cases
is an active but largely unsolved problem. The combination of multiple datasets promises a partial solution by
combining different advantages and mitigating individual
shortcomings. In this paper, we present both a unification method for existing road scene datasets and the new
dataset Wilddash2 based on this principle. Recent work
of Hendrycks et al. [9] shows that while some robustnessrelated distribution shifts can be synthetically generated
from data, other factors (e.g. location/scene-specific image content) can only be well represented during the image formation process of dataset creation. Inspired by
this, Wilddash2 is captured at diverse locations (see Figures 1,2), environment conditions, and includes many potentially performance-reducing factors (called visual hazards [40]) such as: fog, occlusions, overexposure and many
more. Additionally, for benchmarking we add many out-of-

21351

