Autoregressive Image Generation using Residual Quantization
Doyup Lee*
POSTECH, Kakao Brain

Chiheon Kim*
Kakao Brain

Saehoon Kim
Kakao Brain

doyup.lee@postech.ac.kr

chiheon.kim@kakaobrain.com

shkim@kakaobrain.com

Minsu Cho
POSTECH

Wook-Shin Han †
POSTECH

mscho@postech.ac.kr

wshan@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
For autoregressive (AR) modeling of high-resolution images, vector quantization (VQ) represents an image as a sequence of discrete codes. A short sequence length is important for an AR model to reduce its computational costs
to consider long-range interactions of codes. However,
we postulate that previous VQ cannot shorten the code sequence and generate high-fidelity images together in terms
of the rate-distortion trade-off. In this study, we propose the
two-stage framework, which consists of Residual-Quantized
VAE (RQ-VAE) and RQ-Transformer, to effectively generate
high-resolution images. Given a fixed codebook size, RQVAE can precisely approximate a feature map of an image
and represent the image as a stacked map of discrete codes.
Then, RQ-Transformer learns to predict the quantized feature vector at the next position by predicting the next stack
of codes. Thanks to the precise approximation of RQ-VAE,
we can represent a 256×256 image as 8×8 resolution of
the feature map, and RQ-Transformer can efficiently reduce
the computational costs. Consequently, our framework outperforms the existing AR models on various benchmarks of
unconditional and conditional image generation. Our approach also has a significantly faster sampling speed than
previous AR models to generate high-quality images.

Figure 1. Examples of our conditional generation for 256×256
images. The images in the first row are generated from the classes
of ImageNet. The images in the second row are generated from
text conditions (“A cheeseburger in front of a mountain range covered with snow.” and “a cherry blossom tree on the blue ocean”).
The text conditions are unseen during the training.

1. Introduction
Vector quantization (VQ) becomes a fundamental technique for autoregerssive (AR) models to generate highresolution images [5, 11, 12, 33, 40]. Specifically, an image
is represented as a sequence of discrete codes, after the feature map of the image is quantized by VQ and rearranged by
an ordering such as raster-scan [30]. After the quantization,
AR model is trained to sequentially predict the codes in the
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

sequence. That is, AR models can generate high-resolution
images without predicting whole pixels in an image.
We postulate that reducing the sequence length of codes
is important for AR modeling of images. A short sequence
of codes can significantly reduce the computational costs
of an AR model, since an AR uses the codes in previous
positions to predict the next code. However, previous studies have a limitation to reducing the sequence length of images in terms of the rate-distortion trade-off [38]. Namely,
VQ-VAE [40] requires an exponentially increasing size of

11523

