DATA: Domain-Aware and Task-Aware Self-supervised Learning
Qing Chang 1,3,4,5

Junran Peng 2
Lingxi Xie 2
Jiajun Sun 1,3,4,5
Haoran Yin 1,3,4,5
Qi Tian 2
Zhaoxiang Zhang*1,3,4,5,6
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 2 Huawei Inc.
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition
5
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing
6
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI CAS

changqing2020@ia.ac.cn, jrpeng4ever@126.com
198808xc@gmail.com, {sunjiajun211,yinhaoran19}@mails.ucas.ac.cn
tian.qi1@huawei.com, zhaoxiang.zhang@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
The paradigm of training models on massive data without label through self-supervised learning (SSL) and finetuning on many downstream tasks has become a trend recently. However, due to the high training costs and the unconsciousness of downstream usages, most self-supervised
learning methods lack the capability to correspond to the
diversities of downstream scenarios, as there are various
data domains, different vision tasks and latency constraints
on models. Neural architecture search (NAS) is one universally acknowledged fashion to conquer the issues above,
but applying NAS on SSL seems impossible as there is no
label or metric provided for judging model selection. In
this paper, we present DATA, a simple yet effective NAS
approach specialized for SSL that provides Domain-Aware
and Task-Aware pre-training. Specifically, we (i) train a
supernet which could be deemed as a set of millions of
networks covering a wide range of model scales without
any label, (ii) propose a flexible searching mechanism compatible with SSL that enables finding networks of different computation costs, for various downstream vision tasks
and data domains without explicit metric provided. Instantiated With MoCo v2, our method achieves promising results across a wide range of computation costs on downstream tasks, including image classification, object detection and semantic segmentation. DATA is orthogonal to
most existing SSL methods and endows them the ability
of customization on downstream needs. Extensive experiments on other SSL methods demonstrate the generalizability of the proposed method. Code is released at https:
//github.com/GAIA-vision/GAIA-ssl.
* Corresponding author.

…

…
Figure 1. Illustration of how DATA works. We first build a supernet which is a set of many subnets, and train massive models simultaneously in the regime of self-supervised learning. Then, we
propose a unsupervised searching method that enables domainaware and task-aware model selection without any label. The
mechanism enables self-supervised models to fit various scenarios
including point,edge and cloud covering different vision tasks like
image classification, object detection, and segmentation. Network
architectures in figure are ploted by software PlotNeuralNet [25].

1. Introduction
As is universally agreed that deep learning algorithms
are data-hungry, how to leverage the exponentially growing
unlabelled data from open-source has become a huge challenge. Self-supervised learning (SSL), which utilizes the

9841

