Self-Supervised Super-Resolution for Multi-Exposure Push-Frame Satellites
Ngoc Long Nguyen1
Jérémy Anger1,2
Axel Davy1
Pablo Arias1
1
Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, ENS Paris-Saclay, Centre Borelli, France

Gabriele Facciolo1
2
Kayrros SAS

https://centreborelli.github.io/HDR-DSP-SR/

Abstract
Modern Earth observation satellites capture multiexposure bursts of push-frame images that can be superresolved via computational means. In this work, we propose a super-resolution method for such multi-exposure sequences, a problem that has received very little attention
in the literature. The proposed method can handle the
signal-dependent noise in the inputs, process sequences of
any length, and be robust to inaccuracies in the exposure
times. Furthermore, it can be trained end-to-end with selfsupervision, without requiring ground truth high resolution
frames, which makes it especially suited to handle real data.
Central to our method are three key contributions: i) a
base-detail decomposition for handling errors in the exposure times, ii) a noise-level-aware feature encoding for improved fusion of frames with varying signal-to-noise ratio
and iii) a permutation invariant fusion strategy by temporal pooling operators. We evaluate the proposed method on
synthetic and real data and show that it outperforms by a
significant margin existing single-exposure approaches that
we adapted to the multi-exposure case.

1. Introduction
High resolution (HR) satellite imagery is a key element
in a broad range of tasks, including human activity monitoring and disaster relief. Super-resolution by computational methods has recently been adopted [7, 41] by the remote sensing industry (Planet SkySat, Satellogic Aleph-1).
By leveraging high frame rate low-resolution (LR) acquisitions, low-cost constellations can be effective competitors
to more traditional high-cost satellites. In order to capture
the full dynamic range of the scene, some satellites use exposure bracketing, resulting in sequences with varying exposures. While several works have addressed multi-image
super-resolution (MISR) of single-exposure sequences, almost no previous work considers the multi-exposure case.
MISR techniques exploit the aliasing in several LR acquisitions to reconstruct a HR image. The maximum attainable resolution is capped by the spectral decay of the blur

kernel resulting from the sensor’s pixel integration and the
camera optics, which imposes a frequency cutoff beyond
which there is no usable high frequency information.
Aggregating many frames is also interesting as it allows
significant noise reduction. If the LR frames are acquired
with bracketed exposures, it is possible to integrate them in
a super-resolved high dynamic range (HDR) image. Long
exposures have higher signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) which
helps reduce the noise in dark regions, whereas short exposures provide information in bright regions which can cause
saturation with longer exposure times.
In this work, our goal is to perform joint super-resolution
and denoising from a time series of bracketed satellite images. We focus on push-frame satellite sensors such as the
SkySat constellation from Planet. We increase the resolution by a factor of two, which is the frequency cutoff of the
combined optical and sensor’s imaging system. The SkySat
satellites [41] contain a full-frame sensor capable of capturing bursts of overlapping frames: a given point on the
ground is seen in several consecutive images. However, our
technique is general and can be applied to other satellites,
or beyond satellite imagery to consumer cameras capable of
multi-exposure burst or video acquisition.
Several methods have addressed either MISR or HDR
imaging from multiple exposures, but their combination has
received little attention. Existing works consider an ideal
setup in which frames can be aligned with an affinity [7,53]
or a homography [55], and the number of acquisitions is
large enough to render the problem an overdetermined system of equations. Such motion models are good approximations for satellite bursts, but ignore parallax [8], which
can be noticeable for mountains and tall buildings.
In the case of satellite imaging, push-frame cameras capable of capturing multi-exposure bursts are relatively recent, which explains why all previous works on MISR
focus on the single-exposure case [7, 17, 40, 43], except
for SkySat’s proprietary method [41] producing the L1B
product, whose details are not public. Deep learning
methods currently outperform traditional model-based approaches [47]. In general, learning-based methods require
large realistic datasets with ground truth to be trained, as

1858

