Implicit Sample Extension for Unsupervised Person Re-Identification
Xinyu Zhang1*, Dongdong Li3,1∗ , Zhigang Wang1 , Jian Wang1 , Errui Ding1 ,
†
Javen Qinfeng Shi2 , Zhaoxiang Zhang3,4 , Jingdong Wang1
1
Baidu VIS, China 2 The University of Adelaide, Australia 3 Institute of Automation, CAS & UCAS, China
4
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI CAS, China
{zhangxinyu14,wangzhigang05,wangjian33,dingerrui,wangjingdong}@baidu.com
{lidongdong2019,zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn, javen.shi@adelaide.edu.au

Actual samples

Abstract
Most existing unsupervised person re-identification (ReID) methods use clustering to generate pseudo labels for
model training. Unfortunately, clustering sometimes mixes
different true identities together or splits the same identity
into two or more sub clusters. Training on these noisy
clusters substantially hampers the Re-ID accuracy. Due
to the limited samples in each identity, we suppose there
may lack some underlying information to well reveal the
accurate clusters. To discover these information, we propose an Implicit Sample Extension (ISE) method to generate what we call support samples around the cluster boundaries. Specifically, we generate support samples from actual samples and their neighbouring clusters in the embedding space through a progressive linear interpolation
(PLI) strategy. PLI controls the generation with two critical factors, i.e., 1) the direction from the actual sample
towards its K-nearest clusters and 2) the degree for mixing up the context information from the K-nearest clusters.
Meanwhile, given the support samples, ISE further uses
a label-preserving loss to pull them towards their corresponding actual samples, so as to compact each cluster.
Consequently, ISE reduces the “sub and mixed” clustering errors, thus improving the Re-ID performance. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed method is
effective and achieves state-of-the-art performance for unsupervised person Re-ID. Code is available at: https:
//github.com/PaddlePaddle/PaddleClas.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised person re-identification (Re-ID) aims to
learn person appearance features without annotations. It
gains increasing attention and popularity due to its wide
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Support samples

Sample extension

Training &&
Re-clustering

(a) Sub clusters after ISE
Training &&
Re-clustering

(b) Mixed clusters after ISE

Figure 1. Clustering behaviour changes with our implicit sample
extension (ISE). Different shapes represent different ground-truth
identities, while different colors stand for different pseudo labels
(best viewed in color). Usually, clustering may produce (a) sub
clusters that samples share the same true identity but are split
apart as two or more clusters; and (b) mixed clusters that samples with different identities are mixed to the same cluster. Our
support samples help to merge the sub clusters as one and split the
mixed clusters apart, thus improving the performance.

practical applications in the real world. One kind of works
[2, 8, 13, 25, 43, 44, 49] attempt to transfer knowledge from
existing labeled data to unlabeled target data, known as
unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA). Another kind of
works rely on unsupervised learning (USL) to learn representations purely from unlabeled images, which is more
data-friendly than UDA. Most USL Re-ID methods [4,9,14]
follow an iterative two-stage training procedure: 1) using
clustering [12, 22] to generate pseudo labels as the supervision for the next step; 2) training the Re-ID model using
the pseudo labels. Here we focus on investigating the USL
Re-ID, and follow the two-stage pipeline.
Clustering is critical in the aforementioned USL and has
attracted great attention from existing USL methods. For
instance, ACT [38] utilizes two models that try to refine
pseudo labels for each other. SpCL [14] employs a self-

7369

