Learning a Structured Latent Space for Unsupervised Point Cloud Completion
Yingjie Cai1 , Kwan-Yee Lin1 ,* Chao Zhang2 , Qiang Wang2 , Xiaogang Wang1 , Hongsheng Li1 *
1
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Samsung Research Institute China - Beijing (SRC-B)
caiyingjie@link.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Unsupervised point cloud completion aims at estimating
the corresponding complete point cloud of a partial point
cloud in an unpaired manner. It is a crucial but challenging
problem since there is no paired partial-complete supervision that can be exploited directly. In this work, we propose a novel framework, which learns a unified and structured latent space that encoding both partial and complete
point clouds. Specifically, we map a series of related partial point clouds into multiple complete shape and occlusion code pairs and fuse the codes to obtain their representations in the unified latent space. To enforce the learning of such a structured latent space, the proposed method
adopts a series of constraints including structured ranking
regularization, latent code swapping constraint, and distribution supervision on the related partial point clouds.
By establishing such a unified and structured latent space,
better partial-complete geometry consistency and shape
completion accuracy can be achieved. Extensive experiments show that our proposed method consistently outperforms state-of-the-art unsupervised methods on both synthetic ShapeNet and real-world KITTI, ScanNet, and Matterport3D datasets.

1. Introduction
Point cloud completion aims at estimating the corresponding complete point cloud of a partial point cloud,
which is an important task and can assist downstream applications such as shape classification [17,26–28,34], robotics
navigation [12, 31] and scene understanding [1, 2, 10, 19],
as raw point clouds are often noisy, sparse and partial.
Although fully supervised point cloud completion methods [21, 22, 25,43, 45, 48–51] have achieved impressive performance, they heavily rely on large-scale paired partialcomplete training data. It is, however, difficult to collect
paired data from real-world scans. Additionally, such com* H. Li and K. Lin are the co-corresponding authors.

Unified Latent
Space

Completion

Complete
shape code ‫ݖ‬

ሺ‫ܢ‬ԢԢǡ ‫ܗ‬ԢԢሻ

ሺ‫ܢ‬Ԣǡ ‫ܗ‬Ԣሻ
‫ ݖ‬ൌ ‫ ݖ‬ᇱ ൌ ‫ ݖ‬ᇱᇱ
‫ ݋‬൐ ‫ ݋‬ᇱ ൐ ‫ ݋‬ᇱᇱ

ሺ‫ܢ‬ǡ ‫ܗ‬ሻ

Occlusion
code ‫݋‬

Figure 1. Illustration of the unified and structured latent space
where any point cloud can be represented as a complete shape
code z and a corresponding occlusion code o. We complete the
partial point cloud via properly regularizing such codes in an unsupervised manner. Best viewed in color.

pletion networks trained on paired real data or paired synthetic data cannot sufficiently generalize to actual scans, as
their data distributions might not well match those of training samples.
A promising alternate solution is to learn a completion network in an unpaired manner following the setup
of [6, 41, 44, 52]. However, it is a more challenging setup
since there is no paired and accurate point-wise supervision
that can be adopted directly. To tackle the problem, different methods are proposed to adopt different types of supervision from the unpaired data. A representative work [52]
adopts GAN inversion for 3D shape completion. It trains
a complete point cloud generator with adversarial losses.
During inference, an optimal shape code can be recovered
via hundreds of gradient descent iterations by minimizing
a partial-complete consistency loss. The consistency1 between the predicted point cloud and the input can be maintained. However, the inverse optimization is generally unstable and easy to stuck at local minima if using unsuitable
1 Consistency describes whether the predicted point cloud represents
the same object as the partial input.

5543

