Details or Artifacts: A Locally Discriminative Learning Approach to
Realistic Image Super-Resolution
Jie Liang1 *, Hui Zeng2 * and Lei Zhang1†
The HongKong Polytechnic University, 2 OPPO Research
{liang27jie, cshzeng}@gmail.com; cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk
1

Abstract
Single image super-resolution (SISR) with generative adversarial networks (GAN) has recently attracted increasing attention due to its potentials to generate rich details.
However, the training of GAN is unstable, and it often introduces many perceptually unpleasant artifacts along with
the generated details. In this paper, we demonstrate that
it is possible to train a GAN-based SISR model which can
stably generate perceptually realistic details while inhibiting visual artifacts. Based on the observation that the
local statistics (e.g., residual variance) of artifact areas
are often different from the areas of perceptually friendly
details, we develop a framework to discriminate between
GAN-generated artifacts and realistic details, and consequently generate an artifact map to regularize and stabilize the model training process. Our proposed locally discriminative learning (LDL) method is simple yet effective,
which can be easily plugged in off-the-shelf SISR methods and boost their performance. Experiments demonstrate
that LDL outperforms the state-of-the-art GAN based SISR
methods, achieving not only higher reconstruction accuracy
but also superior perceptual quality on both synthetic and
real-world datasets. Codes and models are available at
https://github.com/csjliang/LDL.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) [6, 13, 14, 19, 20,
30–33, 38, 40, 42, 45, 47, 48], which aims to reconstruct a
high-resolution (HR) image from its low-resolution (LR)
observation, is one hot yet challenging research topic in
low-level computer vision. It has become prevalent to train
deep neural networks (DNNs) for SISR, while many DNNbased SISR models [2, 6, 27, 37, 48] are trained with pixelwise ℓ1 and ℓ2 losses, and/or local window based metrics
(such as SSIM [41]). It is well-known that though high
* Equal contribution.
† This work is supported by the Hong Kong RGC RIF grant (R5001-18).

Type A. Smooth areas / Large-scale structures
Type B. Texture-like aliasing details

LR Input

SR Result

Type C. Fine-scale aliasing structures

LR Input

SR Result

Figure 1. Three representative types of SISR regions generated by
ESRGAN [40]. For each example, the left is an LR patch and the
right is its GAN-SR result. Type A patches represent regions that
are easy to super-resolve, e.g., smooth and large-scale structural
areas, where the main structures are preserved in the LR input. In
contrast, patches of type B and type C are with fine-scale details,
which are hard to be faithfully restored due to the signal aliasing in the LR inputs. The results of texture-like type B patches
are perceptually realistic despite the pixel-wise differences to the
ground-truth, since the patterns are naturally irregular with weak
priors for observers. However, the results of type C patches exhibit
perceptually unpleasant visual artifacts since the overshoot pixels
and distorted structures are sensitive to human perception.

PSNR and SSIM indices might be induced by these losses,
they can hardly produce rich image details [4, 20].
With the rapid development of generative adversarial
networks (GAN) [9, 15], GAN-based SISR (GAN-SR for
short) has recently attracted significant attention for its potentials to recover sharp images with rich details [20,30, 32,
40, 44]. Though great progresses have been achieved, adversarial training is unstable and often introduces unpleasant visual artifacts [20, 44]. As users are mostly expecting

5657

