NeRF-Editing: Geometry Editing of Neural Radiance Fields
Yu-Jie Yuan 1,2,† Yang-Tian Sun 1,2,† Yu-Kun Lai 3
Yuewen Ma 4 Rongfei Jia 4 Lin Gao 1,2*
1
Beijing Key Laboratory of Mobile Computing and Pervasive Device,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Computer and Control Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Computer Science & Informatics, Cardiff University 4 Alibaba Group
{yuanyujie, sunyangtian, gaolin}@ict.ac.cn

LaiY4@cardiff.ac.uk

{yuewen.my, rongfei.jrf}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Implicit neural rendering, especially Neural Radiance
Field (NeRF), has shown great potential in novel view synthesis of a scene. However, current NeRF-based methods
cannot enable users to perform user-controlled shape deformation in the scene. While existing works have proposed some approaches to modify the radiance field according to the user’s constraints, the modification is limited
to color editing or object translation and rotation. In this
paper, we propose a method that allows users to perform
controllable shape deformation on the implicit representation of the scene, and synthesizes the novel view images of
the edited scene without re-training the network. Specifically, we establish a correspondence between the extracted
explicit mesh representation and the implicit neural representation of the target scene. Users can first utilize welldeveloped mesh-based deformation methods to deform the
mesh representation of the scene. Our method then utilizes
user edits from the mesh representation to bend the camera
rays by introducing a tetrahedra mesh as a proxy, obtaining
the rendering results of the edited scene. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our framework can achieve ideal
editing results not only on synthetic data, but also on real
scenes captured by users.

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis has been extensively studied in
computer vision and computer graphics. In particular, the
recently proposed neural radiance field (NeRF) [43] has inspired a large number of follow-up works aiming to achieve
better visual effects [36], faster rendering speed [18, 77],
†: Authors contributed equally
*Corresponding Author is Lin Gao (gaolin@ict.ac.cn)

generalization to different scenes [78], relighting [4,60], applying to dynamic scenes [48], and reducing the number of
inputs [29]. However, as an implicit modeling method, the
neural radiance field is difficult for users to edit or modify
the scene objects, which is relatively easy with the explicit
representation. The mesh representation, as a kind of explicit representation, is commonly used in shape modeling
and rendering. There is a lot of research work on mesh deformation or editing [80]. However, it is difficult to obtain
an accurate explicit representation of a real-world scene.
From a sparse set of images, one can use some Multi-View
Stereo (MVS) method [52] to reconstruct the point cloud or
mesh representation of the scene, but the quality is generally poor. Rendering the reconstructed representation under novel views will lead to unrealistic results. Therefore,
based on the promising novel view synthesis ability of implicit representations, such as NeRFs, further studying how
to edit the implicit representation has become a new exploration direction.
Some works have already studied how to edit NeRF. For
example, EditingNeRF [38] was the first to propose editing
on the implicit radiance field. They train on a set of synthetic models from the same category, such as chairs and
tables from ShapeNet [5], and introduce shape code and
color code to represent the geometry and appearance of different models, respectively. The user selects a desired color
and draw a few coarse scribbles on an image of a specified
view to indicate what should be changed. Then local edits
are propagated to 3D regions through updating the network
based on the loss between the original image and the edited
image. This work is limited to color modification or the removal of certain parts of the shape, and it is impossible to
make substantial modifications to the shape, such as shape
deformation. A recent work, ObjectNeRF [74], proposed to
learn a decompositional neural radiance field, which separates the objects and the background. As such, it can dupli-

18353

