Context-Aware Video Reconstruction for Rolling Shutter Cameras
Bin Fan
Yuchao Dai*
Zhiyuan Zhang
Qi Liu
Mingyi He
School of Electronics and Information, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China

Abstract

Input RS
RS 0

With the ubiquity of rolling shutter (RS) cameras, it is becoming increasingly attractive to recover the latent global
shutter (GS) video from two consecutive RS frames, which
also places a higher demand on realism. Existing solutions, using deep neural networks or optimization, achieve
promising performance. However, these methods generate
intermediate GS frames through image warping based on
the RS model, which inevitably result in black holes and noticeable motion artifacts. In this paper, we alleviate these
issues by proposing a context-aware GS video reconstruction architecture. It facilitates the advantages such as occlusion reasoning, motion compensation, and temporal abstraction. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst estimate the bilateral motion
ﬁeld so that the pixels of the two RS frames are warped to a
common GS frame accordingly. Then, a reﬁnement scheme
is proposed to guide the GS frame synthesis along with bilateral occlusion masks to produce high-ﬁdelity GS video
frames at arbitrary times. Furthermore, we derive an approximated bilateral motion ﬁeld model, which can serve as
an alternative to provide a simple but effective GS frame initialization for related tasks. Experiments on synthetic and
real data show that our approach achieves superior performance over state-of-the-art methods in terms of objective
metrics and subjective visual quality. Code is available at
https://github.com/GitCVfb/CVR.

1. Introduction
Many modern CMOS cameras equipped with rolling
shutter (RS) dominate the consumer photography market
due to their low cost and simplicity in design, and are also
prevalent in the automotive sector and motion picture industry [16, 48, 52, 62]. Within this acquisition mode, pixels on
the rolling shutter CMOS sensor plane are exposed from top
to bottom in a row-by-row fashion with a constant inter-row
delay. This leads to undesirable visual distortions called
the RS effect (e.g. wobble, skew) in the presence of fast
motion, which is a hindrance to scene understanding and a
nuisance in photography. With the increased demand for
* Y. Dai is the corresponding author (daiyuchao@gmail.com).

17572

RS 1

Ground truth GS
t=0

t=0.5

t=1

Figure 1. GS video reconstruction example. The left column
shows two input consecutive RS images, and three ground-truth
GS images at time 0, 0.5, and 1, respectively. Rows to the right
show ﬁve GS frames (at times 0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1) extracted
by [9] (top) and our method (below), followed by two corresponding zoom-in regions. The orange box represents occluded black
holes and the red box indicates motion artifacts speciﬁc to moving objects. Our method recovers higher ﬁdelity GS images due
to contextual aggregation and motion enhancement. Note that the
black image edges by our method are because they are not available in both RS frames (cf . blue circle). Best viewed on Screen.

high quality and high framerate video of consumer-grade
devices (e.g. tablets, smartphones), video frame interpolation (VFI) has attracted increasing attention in the computer
vision community. Unfortunately, despite the remarkable
success, the currently existing VFI methods [2,18,38,39,56]
implicitly assume that the camera employs a global shutter
(GS) mechanism, i.e. all pixels are exposed simultaneously.
They are therefore unable to produce satisfying in-between
frames with rolling shutter video acquired by e.g. these devices in dynamic scenes or fast camera movements, resulting in RS artifacts remaining [9].
To address this problem, many RS correction methods
[13,17,24,43,55,63] have been actively studied to eliminate
the RS effect. In analogy to VFI generating non-existent
intermediate GS frames from two consecutive GS frames,
recovering the latent intermediate GS frames from two consecutive RS frames, e.g. [10,24,61,62], serves as a tractable

