NPBG++: Accelerating Neural Point-Based Graphics
Ruslan Rakhimov1∗ Andrei-Timotei Ardelean1∗ Victor Lempitsky1,2

Evgeny Burnaev1,3

1

2

Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Russia
Yandex, Russia 3 Artificial Intelligence Research Institute, Russia

Abstract
We present a new system (NPBG++) for the novel view
synthesis (NVS) task that achieves high rendering realism
with low scene fitting time. Our method efficiently leverages the multiview observations and the point cloud of a
static scene to predict a neural descriptor for each point,
improving upon the pipeline of Neural Point-Based Graphics [1] in several important ways. By predicting the descriptors with a single pass through the source images, we lift
the requirement of per-scene optimization while also making the neural descriptors view-dependent and more suitable for scenes with strong non-Lambertian effects. In our
comparisons, the proposed system outperforms previous
NVS approaches in terms of fitting and rendering runtimes
while producing images of similar quality. Project page:
https://rakhimovv.github.io/npbgpp/.

1. Introduction
The ability to render photorealistic views of a scene, as
learned from a handful of observations, opens the door to
many applications in virtual / augmented reality, cinematography, gaming industry, and virtually any field which involves computer graphics. While there is a high interest
in creating such novel view synthesis (NVS) systems, the
problem proves to be challenging. Early methods based on
view interpolation [4,16,26] do not fare well enough in realworld scenarios, which entail complex geometry, limited
proximity of input images, lighting variations, etc. There
are mainly three development directions which the different
works addressing this task generally seek to improve: rendered image quality, scene fitting time, and rendering speed.
Despite the recent development in Computer Vision brought
by Deep Learning approaches, there is still a noticeable gap
between the current state of the art in NVS and an ideal
model for this task.
∗ Equal contribution

Correspondence to ruslan.rakhimov@skoltech.ru

Figure 1. Time comparison. Time vs. image quality (LPIPS)
comparison of several methods, computed on the ‘hotdog‘ scene
from the NeRF-synthetic dataset. The time axis represents the
time-to-rendering, i.e., fitting time + rendering time for one image.
For methods marked with ?, the first scores are reported without
per-scene optimizations. Fitting time consists of feature extraction for IBRNet, geometry estimation + 3D modeling stage for
NPBG++, and geometry estimation + meshing for SVS (the renderings on top offer qualitative comparisons between these configurations). The remaining scores are computed at different points
in the fine-tuning processes. Circle areas are proportional to logarithms of the rendering times (smaller is better) and highlight the
methods’ rendering speed.

To this end, our work proposes a new system that enables
real-time rendering and can rapidly adapt to new scenes.
Similarly to Neural Point-Based Graphics (NPBG) [1],
our approach uses point clouds to model the geometry of
scenes. This representation is advantageous as point clouds
are generally available by using inexpensive RGBD cameras or by processing RGB streams with classic Structurefrom-Motion and Multi-View Stereo pipelines such as
COLMAP [35, 37]. These reconstructions are usually not
accurate or complete enough to be used directly for rendering, whereas performing surface estimation could yield a
loss of geometric details and requires significant additional

15969

