CoSSL: Co-Learning of Representation and Classifier for
Imbalanced Semi-Supervised Learning
Yue Fan

Dengxin Dai

Anna Kukleva

Bernt Schiele

{yfan, ddai, akukleva, schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany
Saarland Informatics Campus
Abstract
Standard semi-supervised learning (SSL) using classbalanced datasets has shown great progress to leverage unlabeled data effectively. However, the more realistic setting of class-imbalanced data – called imbalanced SSL –
is largely underexplored and standard SSL tends to underperform. In this paper, we propose a novel co-learning
framework (CoSSL), which decouples representation and
classifier learning while coupling them closely. To handle
the data imbalance, we devise Tail-class Feature Enhancement (TFE) for classifier learning. Furthermore, the current evaluation protocol for imbalanced SSL focuses only
on balanced test sets, which has limited practicality in realworld scenarios. Therefore, we further conduct a comprehensive evaluation under various shifted test distributions. In experiments, we show that our approach outperforms other methods over a large range of shifted distributions, achieving state-of-the-art performance on benchmark
datasets ranging from CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, ImageNet, to
Food-101. Our code will be made publicly available.

1. Introduction
Imbalanced data distributions are ubiquitous, and pose
great challenges for standard deep learning methods. Many
approaches have been proposed for long-tailed recognition,
where the number of (labeled) examples exhibits a longtailed distribution with heavy class imbalance [17, 18, 33,
37, 39, 52]. While semi-supervised learning (SSL) in the
class-balanced setting has shown great promise, in this paper we are interested in the challenging and realistic setting
of imbalanced SSL where both the labeled and the unlabeled
data are class-imbalanced, as shown in Fig. 1.
Despite a few pioneer works [30, 54], existing solutions
from long-tailed recognition and SSL do not generalize
well to this setting. On the one hand, long-tailed recognition [6, 9, 19, 20, 24] is not designed to utilize unlabeled

Figure 1. Conventional recognition tasks focus on constrained
settings: long-tailed recognition does not involve unlabeled data;
semi-supervised learning (SSL) assumes class-balanced distributions for both labeled and unlabeled data. In this work, we aim at
imbalanced SSL, where the training data is partially annotated, and
both labeled and unlabeled data are not manually balanced. This
setting is more general and poses great challenges to existing algorithms. A robust learning algorithm should still be able to learn
a good classifier under this setting.

data despite being good at handling data imbalance. Semisupervised learning (SSL) [1, 3, 4, 34, 42, 46, 48–50], on
the other hand, can effectively leverage unlabeled data but
can not address data imbalance. In certain cases, standard
SSL methods trained with imbalanced unlabeled datasets
can lead to even worse results than a simple re-balancing
method without using any unlabeled data [30], which counters the promise of SSL.
In this paper, we address the imbalanced SSL problem by
leveraging strong SSL algorithms [3, 4, 50, 55] and recent
success of decoupling representation and classifier learning from long-tailed recognition [29]. To this end, we propose CoSSL, a novel co-learning framework for imbalanced
SSL, which closely couples representation and classifier
while the training of them is decoupled. As shown in Fig.
2, CoSSL consists of three modules: semi-supervised representation learning, classifier learning, and pseudo-label
generation. In our co-learning framework, the representa-

14574

