ZZ-Net: A Universal Rotation Equivariant Architecture for 2D Point Clouds
Georg Bökmana , Fredrik Kahla , Axel Flintha,b
bokman@chalmers.se, fredrik.kahl@chalmers.se, axel.flinth@umu.se
a
b

Department of Electrical Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology
Department of Mathematics and Mathematical Statistics, Umeå University

Abstract
In this paper, we are concerned with rotation equivariance on 2D point cloud data. We describe a particular set
of functions able to approximate any continuous rotation
equivariant and permutation invariant function. Based on
this result, we propose a novel neural network architecture
for processing 2D point clouds and we prove its universality
for approximating functions exhibiting these symmetries.
We also show how to extend the architecture to accept a
set of 2D-2D correspondences as indata, while maintaining
similar equivariance properties. Experiments are presented
on the estimation of essential matrices in stereo vision.

Figure 1. A simple example of rotation equivariance. The illustration shows the task of determining the direction to the North
Star given other stars in the night sky. The input is the set of locations of the visible stars in some 2D coordinate frame. Rotation
equivariance of the point cloud processor f means here that the determined direction should rotate if the night sky (or the observer)
rotates. (Picture of stars [2].)

1. Introduction
The need to interpret and process point clouds arises in
many different application areas such as autonomous driving, augmented reality and robotics [18]. Basic problem examples in computer vision are classification, segmentation
and object detection as well as correspondence problems in
multiple view geometry [34] . Considering as input object a
point cloud or a pair of point clouds, it is a natural requirement that permuting the order of the points doesn’t change
the object in question. Such a permutation should therefore not change the way the points are processed. This permutation symmetry needs to be considered when designing
a neural network for point cloud input, which is typically
done by having equivariant network layers. Another possible symmetry is rotation of the point clouds about the origin.
For an example of a single point cloud processing task that
is rotation equivariant, see Figure 1. We will also consider
rotational symmetries for pairs of point clouds.
Equivariance. Let us introduce some notation and provide a formal definition of equivariance. Given a group G
we consider sets which exhibit G-symmetries (in a sense to
be made precise shortly) and functions between such sets.
A G-set is a set X equipped with a G-action, i.e., a group
homomorphism φ from G to the group of bijections from

X to X. One should think of a G-action φ as a way to relate elements of G to symmetries of X. Typically, we will
suppress the group homomorphism in the notation and write
gx or g ∗ x for φ(g)(x). An example of a G-set is Cm acted
on by the permutation group Sm . Note that Sm could act
on Cm in different ways and we must specify the action to
describe a G-set. The canonical action is to permute the
m dimensions, but another obvious action is the trivial action given by πZ = Z for all π ∈ Sm and all Z ∈ Cm .
If we have two G-sets X and Y , we say that a function
f : X → Y is (G-)equivariant if it commutes with the Gactions: f (gx) = gf (x). A special case is when the action
on Y is trivial and then we call f invariant: f (gx) = f (x).
For more information on groups, symmetries and equivariance in general, we refer to e.g. [22].
In this paper, we focus on the group SO(2) × Sm . The
SO(2)-action on a point cloud is given by rotating all points
about the origin and the Sm -action is given by permuting
the points.1 More concretely, we are concerned with functions that are invariant to permutations, but equivariant to
1 Technical note: These two actions commute with each other and hence
define an SO(2) × Sm -action.

10976

