CVNet: Contour Vibration Network for Building Extraction
Ziqiang Xu1 , Chunyan Xu1 , Zhen Cui1 ,* Xiangwei Zheng2 , Jian Yang1
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
School of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong Normal University
{xuziqiang, cyx, zhen.cui, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn, xwzhengcn@163.com

Abstract
The classic active contour model raises a great promising solution to polygon-based object extraction with the
progress of deep learning recently. Inspired by the physical
vibration theory, we propose a contour vibration network
(CVNet) for automatic building boundary delineation. Different from the previous contour models, the CVNet originally roots in the force and motion principle of contour
string. Through the infinitesimal analysis and Newton’s
second law, we derive the spatial-temporal contour vibration model of object shapes, which is mathematically reduced to second-order differential equation. To concretize
the dynamic model, we transform the vibration model into
the space of image features, and reparameterize the equation coefficients as the learnable state from feature domain.
The contour changes are finally evolved in a progressive
mode through the computation of contour vibration equation. Both the polygon contour evolution and the model
optimization are modulated to form a close-looping end-toend network. Comprehensive experiments on three datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of our CVNet
over other baselines and state-of-the-art methods for the
polygon-based building extraction. The code is available
at https://github.com/xzq-njust/CVNet.

1. Introduction
Automatic building footprint extraction plays an important role in various higher level geographic and environmental applications, such as disaster assessment and rescuing [21], 3D-city modeling [13, 23], urban changing detection [27], earth observation and cartography [25] and so on.
Most advanced object extraction methods [11, 26] fall into
the category of pixel-wise segmentation, especially when
CNNs have become the cornerstone in the pixel-wise image
segmentation. Although the pixel-wise building extraction
methods [11,26] generally perform well, most of them often
* The corresponding author.

lead to either big inadvertent fusion of adjacent instances or
small scattered islands. Moreover, building borders are difficult to delineate with precise structures, and usually complex post-processing would be adopted to generate smooth
shapes. At the same time, the segmentation methods store
their results as raster data, which would result into highmemory requirement and lack the flexibility of distortion
and zooming.
Instead, active contour model has the ability to address
the aforementioned problems. Give an initialized polygon,
a snake [12] would gradually converge to object boundary
under the driven of both internal and external energies. To
address the initialization and poor convergence to boundary concavities, Gradient Vector Flow [29] introduces a
new external force for active contours, which can analyze
it from a view of force balance though depending on energy functional. To boost the accuracy of building contour
detection, recently, the modern CNN-based architectures
have also been deployed to extract feature representation
of building in [7, 19]. In particular, DSAC [19] integrate
the powerful learning network with active contour model,
which largely improves border delineation compared to the
pixel-wise segmentation. Although a set of priors such as
boundary continuity and smoothness may be adopted, selfintersections occur yet because minimizing energy cannot
take the sequence of points into account. To overcome selfintersection, DARNet [7] takes polar coordinates to represent active contours, and deforms the contour points to
the intersection of boundary and rays in the certain direction. In recent work [9], the authors proposed TDAC based
on Level-Set model which estimates contours by pixel-wise
prediction like image segmentation. ACDRNet [8] belongs
to a general data-driven method that only considers the final goal of contours matching by directly optimize the final
object contours and their masks. In contrast to the pixelwise segmentation, these contour-based methods usually
perform better in detecting various building contours, but
they are limited in the energy principle of the active contour model itself [7, 9, 19], and yet the theory/principle of
contour modeling is an open question.

1383

