DETReg: Unsupervised Pretraining with
Region Priors for Object Detection
Amir Bar1 , Xin Wang5 , Vadim Kantorov1 , Colorado J Reed2 , Roei Herzig1 ,
Gal Chechik3,4 , Anna Rohrbach2 , Trevor Darrell2 , Amir Globerson1
1
Tel-Aviv University 2 Berkeley AI Research 3 NVIDIA 4 Bar-Ilan University 5 Microsoft Research
amir.bar@cs.tau.ac.il

Abstract
Recent self-supervised pretraining methods for object
detection largely focus on pretraining the backbone of the
object detector, neglecting key parts of detection architecture.
Instead, we introduce DETReg, a new self-supervised method
that pretrains the entire object detection network, including
the object localization and embedding components. During
pretraining, DETReg predicts object localizations to match
the localizations from an unsupervised region proposal generator and simultaneously aligns the corresponding feature
embeddings with embeddings from a self-supervised image
encoder. We implement DETReg using the DETR family
of detectors and show that it improves over competitive
baselines when finetuned on COCO, PASCAL VOC, and
Airbus Ship benchmarks. In low-data regimes, including
semi-supervised and few-shot learning settings, DETReg establishes many state-of-the-art results, e.g., on COCO we
see a +6.0 AP improvement for 10-shot detection and over 2
AP improvements when training with only 1% of the labels.1

1. Introduction
Object detection is a key task in computer vision, yet it
largely relies on the availability of human-annotated training datasets. Building such datasets is not only costly but
sometimes infeasible for privacy-sensitive applications such
as medical imaging or personal photos [46, 68]. Fortunately,
recent advancements in self-supervised representation learning have substantially reduced the amount of labeled data
needed for a variety of applications, including object detection [6, 11, 26, 27].
Despite this recent progress, current approaches are limited in their ability to learn good representations for object detection because they do not pretrain the entire object detection network, specifically the localization and
region embedding components. Most recent works (e.g.,
1 Code: https://www.amirbar.net/detreg/.

SwAV
Backbone Only

UP-DETR
Random Region

DETReg (ours)
Object-Centric

Figure 1. Top class-agnostic object detections after pretraining.
Self-supervised pretraining methods, such as SwAV [6], pretrain
only the detector’s backbone, so the object localizations following
the pretraining stage solely depend on the random initialization
of the localization components (green). UP-DETR [16] pretrains
the entire detection network, but since its pretraining operates by
re-identifying random regions, it does not specialize in localizing
objects after the pretraining (orange dashes). Our model, DETReg,
pretrains the entire detection network using object-centric pretraining, and following the pretraining stage can localize objects (blue).

SwAV [6], ReSim [62], InsLoc [67]) follow the same pretraining playbook for the detection network as a supervised image-classification-based pretraining, where only the
CNN backbone can be initialized from the pretrained model.
While the recent UP-DETR [16] method pretrains a full detection architecture, it still does not localize objects within
the image, but rather random image regions.
In this work, we present a model for Detection with Transformers using Region priors (DETReg), which unlike existing pretraining methods, learns to both localize and encode

14605

