Ev-TTA: Test-Time Adaptation for Event-Based Object Recognition
Junho Kim1 , Inwoo Hwang1 , and Young Min Kim1,2, *
1
2

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University

Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence and INMC, Seoul National University

Abstract
We introduce Ev-TTA, a simple, effective test-time adaptation algorithm for event-based object recognition. While
event cameras are proposed to provide measurements of
scenes with fast motions or drastic illumination changes,
many existing event-based recognition algorithms suffer
from performance deterioration under extreme conditions
due to significant domain shifts. Ev-TTA mitigates the
severe domain gaps by fine-tuning the pre-trained classifiers during the test phase using loss functions inspired
by the spatio-temporal characteristics of events. Since the
event data is a temporal stream of measurements, our loss
function enforces similar predictions for adjacent events to
quickly adapt to the changed environment online. Also,
we utilize the spatial correlations between two polarities of
events to handle noise under extreme illumination, where
different polarities of events exhibit distinctive noise distributions. Ev-TTA demonstrates a large amount of performance gain on a wide range of event-based object recognition tasks without extensive additional training. Our formulation can be successfully applied regardless of input representations and further extended into regression tasks. We
expect Ev-TTA to provide the key technique to deploy eventbased vision algorithms in challenging real-world applications where significant domain shift is inevitable.

1. Introduction
Event cameras are neuromorphic sensors that produce a
sequence of brightness changes with high dynamic range
and microsecond-scale temporal resolution. The sensor targets conditions where the quality of measurements degrades
for standard frame-based cameras. Conventional cameras
under extreme measurement conditions produce the prominent artifacts of motion blur or pixel saturation, and the performance deteriorates for a subsequent perceptual module.
Being able to acquire visual information in challenging environments, event cameras have the potential to overcome
* Young Min Kim is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. Visualization of events from N-ImageNet [17] recorded
in various environmental conditions. Positive, negative events are
shown in blue and red, respectively. Events in low lighting (b)
exhibit noise bursts, where a large number of noisy events are triggered from one polarity. Events in extreme motion (c) have denser
events triggered along edges compared to normal conditions (a).
Both changes lead to a significant domain gap, deteriorating the
recognition performance.

the limitations of frame-based cameras.
Despite the myriad of benefits that event cameras can offer, there is a clear gap between data acquisition and recognition. While event cameras can acquire meaningful information even in challenging environments, events obtained
from these conditions are typically noisy and lack visual
features. Figure 1 shows that there exists a stark visual contrast between events recorded at normal lighting and regular
camera motion with those from very low lighting or extreme
camera motion. Event-based object recognition algorithms
are directly affected by these changes in input and the performance becomes very unstable. Figure 3b also shows the
perturbation in the feature embedding space due to the domain shift. Since it is difficult to manually collect labeled
data in a wide variety of external conditions, an adaptation
strategy is necessary to fully leverage the potential of event
cameras.
We propose Ev-TTA, a test-time adaptation algorithm
targeted for event-based object recognition. Given a pre-

17745

