Self-Supervised Arbitrary-Scale Point Clouds Upsampling via Implicit Neural
Representation
Wenbo Zhao1,2 , Xianming Liu1,2 *, Zhiwei Zhong1,2 , Junjun Jiang1,2 , Wei Gao3 , Ge Li3 , Xiangyang Ji4
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, 4 Tsinghua University

Abstract
Point clouds upsampling is a challenging issue to generate dense and uniform point clouds from the given sparse
input. Most existing methods either take the end-to-end supervised learning based manner, where large amounts of
pairs of sparse input and dense ground-truth are exploited
as supervision information; or treat up-scaling of different
scale factors as independent tasks, and have to build multiple networks to handle upsampling with varying factors. In
this paper, we propose a novel approach that achieves selfsupervised and magnification-flexible point clouds upsampling simultaneously. We formulate point clouds upsampling as the task of seeking nearest projection points on the
implicit surface for seed points. To this end, we define two
implicit neural functions to estimate projection direction
and distance respectively, which can be trained by two pretext learning tasks. Experimental results demonstrate that
our self-supervised learning based scheme achieves competitive or even better performance than supervised learning based state-of-the-art methods. The source code is publicly available at https://github.com/xnowbzhao/sapcu.

1. Introduction
Point clouds serve as a popular tool to represent 3D data
due to their flexibility and compactness in describing objects/scenes with complex geometry and topology. They
can be easily captured by modern scanning devices, and
have been widely used in many applications, such as autonomous driving, robotics, etc. However, due to the inherent limitations of 3D sensing technology, raw point clouds
acquired from 3D scanners are usually sparse, occluded
and non-uniform. In many downstream applications, such
as surface reconstruction and understanding, dense point
clouds are desired for representing shapes with richer geometric details. Accordingly, people turn to develop a computational approach, referred to as point clouds upsampling,
* Corresponding author: csxm@hit.edu.cn

which has attracted extensive attention in both industry and
academia [7, 8, 13, 20–22].
Unlike conventional grid based images, point clouds are
irregular and unordered, which make point clouds upsampling a more challenging task than its 2D image counterpart. The goal of point clouds upsampling is two-fold: 1)
generating a dense point set from the sparse input to provide richer details of the object; 2) generating a uniform and
complete point set to cover the underlying surface faithfully.
In recent years, deep neural networks based point
clouds upsampling approaches emerge and become popular, which adaptively learn structures from data and achieve
superior performance than traditional methods, such as
optimization-based ones [1,5,6]. For instance, Yu et al. [21]
propose to learn multi-level features per point and expand
the point set via a multi-branch convolution unit implicitly
in feature space, which is then split to a multitude of features for reconstruction of an upsampled point set. Wang et
al. [20] propose to progressively train a cascade of patchbased upsampling networks on different levels of detail. Li
et al. [7] apply generative adversarial network into point
clouds upsampling, which constructs an up-down-up expansion unit in the generator for upsampling point features with
error feedback and self-correction, and formulate a selfattention unit to enhance the feature integration. To better represent locality and aggregate the point neighborhood
information, Qian et al. [13] propose to use a Graph Convolutional Network to perform point clouds upsampling.
In summary, the outlined deep learning based methods
take a general approach: first design an upsampling module
to expand the number of points in the feature space, then
formulate losses to enforce the output points to be as close
as possible to the ground truth dense points. However, these
methods suffer from the following two limitations:
End-to-End Training. These methods are trained in an
end-to-end supervised learning manner, which requires a
large amount of pairs of input sparse and ground-truth dense
point sets as the supervision information. The training data
is constructed by sampling from synthetic models, whose
distributions are inevitably biased from that of the real-

1999

