Mr.BiQ: Post-Training Non-Uniform Quantization
based on Minimizing the Reconstruction Error
Yongkweon Jeon1, *
1

Chungman Lee1,*

Samsung Research

2

Korea University

Eulrang Cho2,*,†
3

The University of Texas at Austin

{dragwon.jeon, chungman.lee}@samsung.com

Abstract
Post-training quantization compresses a neural network
within few hours with only a small unlabeled calibration
set. However, so far it has been only discussed and empirically demonstrated in the context of uniform quantization on
convolutional neural networks. We thus propose a new posttraining non-uniform quantization method, called Mr.BiQ,
allowing low bit-width quantization even on Transformer
models. In particular, we leverage multi-level binarization
for weights while allowing activations to be represented as
various data formats (e.g., INT8, bfloat16, binary-coding,
and FP32). Unlike conventional methods which optimize
full-precision weights first, then decompose the weights into
quantization parameters, Mr.BiQ recognizes the quantization parameters (i.e., scaling factors and bit-code) as directly and jointly learnable parameters during the optimization. To verify the superiority of the proposed quantization
scheme, we test Mr.BiQ on various models including convolutional neural networks and Transformer models. According to experimental results, Mr.BiQ shows significant
improvement in terms of accuracy when the bit-width of
weights is equal to 2: up to 5.35 p.p. improvement in CNNs,
up to 4.23 p.p. improvement in Vision Transformers, and up
to 3.37 point improvement in Transformers for NLP.

1. Introduction
As deep neural networks scale up rapidly to improve
model accuracy, it becomes more challenging not only to
reduce memory footprint but also to achieve low end-toend latency in resource-constrained environments. To mitigate such challenges, many researchers have made a considerable amount of effort on advancing model compression
techniques such as pruning [12, 24, 28], low-rank approximation [23, 37], knowledge distillation [9, 14], and quantization [4, 7, 11, 22, 29, 35, 40].
* Equal contribution. Correspondence to: dragwon.jeon@samsung.com
† This work was done when they were working at Samsung Research.

Yeonju Ro3,*,†

ercho@korea.ac.kr

yro@utexas.edu

Quantization, among such compression techniques, is
particularly effective in terms of reducing the model size
and accelerating inference even on commodity hardware.
By representing each parameter with lower bit-width, quantization can reduce the model size, and hence alleviate
memory bottleneck issues. In addition, since quantization
maintains dense formats of tensors, parallelism can be fully
exploited without irregular data structures. These irregularities, induced by certain compression methods such as pruning, require much support for specialized hardware designs.
As such, quantization can be implemented efficiently without a lot of support for specialized hardware designs and
makes it practical to deploy quantized models on various
hardware form factors.
By and large, quantization can be classified into two categories: quantization-aware training (QAT) [7, 47, 49] and
post-training quantization (PTQ) [22, 29, 40, 44]. In general, QAT yields higher accuracy than PTQ because it directly aims to minimize the loss of the network. Nonetheless, QAT relies on the entire training dataset and requires
a thorough hyperparameter search, which leads to the same
amount of training time and overhead as the full-precision
models. On the other hand, PTQ allows the quantization of
pre-trained models with only a small calibration dataset or
without any dataset, which enables us to compress models
even when data access is restricted due to various reasons
including privacy concerns. PTQ also does not require a
comprehensive understanding of the model, and thus has
been attracting attention recently.
Early works on post-training quantization are concentrated on minimizing the quantization error which is defined
as the mean squared error between the original weights and
the quantized weights (i.e., min E[(w − wq )2 ]). However,
recent works [22, 29] tend to focus on minimizing the reconstruction error (i.e., min E[(Wx − Wq x)2 ]) that can
be derived from the second-order approximation of the loss
by the Taylor series. Although minimizing the reconstruction error for PTQ is proven to be effective, PTQ has been
discussed and empirically demonstrated only in the context
of uniform quantization on convolutional neural networks

12329

