Learning Second Order Local Anomaly for General Face Forgery Detection
Jianwei Fei1 * Yunshu Dai1 * Peipeng Yu2 Tianrun Shen3 Zhihua Xia2,1† Jian Weng2
1
Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology 2 Jinan University 3 Nanjing University
{fjw826244895,daiyunshu0102,ypp865,xia zhihua}@163.com
tiruns@yeah.net

cryptjweng@gmail.com

Abstract
In this work, we propose a novel method to improve the
generalization ability of CNN-based face forgery detectors.
Our method considers the feature anomalies of forged faces
caused by the prevalent blending operations in face forgery
algorithms. Specifically, we propose a weakly supervised
Second Order Local Anomaly (SOLA) learning module to
mine anomalies in local regions using deep feature maps.
SOLA first decomposes the neighborhood of local features
by different directions and distances and then calculates the
first and second order local anomaly maps which provide
more general forgery traces for the classifier. We also propose a Local Enhancement Module (LEM) to improve the
discrimination between local features of real and forged
regions, so as to ensure accuracy in calculating anomalies. Besides, an improved Adaptive Spatial Rich Model
(ASRM) is introduced to help mine subtle noise features via
learnable high pass filters. With neither pixel level annotations nor external synthetic data, our method using a simple ResNet18 backbone achieves competitive performances
compared with state-of-the-art works when evaluated on
unseen forgeries.

1. Introduction
Recent progress in face synthesis technologies allows
the low-entry production of sophisticated fake facial content which causes severe trust issues. Concerns are growing
over the nefarious use of such face forgery technologies.
To deal with this problem, many methods have been developed to detect face forgeries using different traces, such
as obvious visual artifacts [24, 29, 39], frequency domain
cues [10, 12, 20, 33], temporal anomalies [3, 28, 37, 38, 47],
or multimodality conflicts [1,5,30]. But these traces are not
so generalizable that the detectors may fail when encountering unseen forgeries. Thus recent works are looking for
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.

Anomaly
Prediction

Local Feature

First Order
Local Anomaly

Anomaly
Prediction

Second Order
Local Anomaly

Figure 1. Second Order Local Anomaly (SOLA) learning module
decomposes the neighborhood and predicts the first and second
order anomaly maps.

more universal forgery traces, so as to boost the generalizability.
All the face forgery algorithms, whether face swapping
or reenactment, need to blend the forged regions into the
original background. The two parts inevitably hold different features, especially in high frequency regions, resulting
in anomaly in forged images. On such observation, some
methods are proposed to capture the feature inconsistency
[4, 22, 52]. [52] propose a patch wise consistency learning
method to mine anomalies in forged face images and succeed in generalizing to unseen forgeries. However, these
works treat regions with various distances equally, which
violates the fact that natural images hold different dependencies of short and long distances. Moreover, they usually
require either pixel level annotations or external synthetic
data. Although pixel level annotations can be created in lab
environments, the need for them limits the usage of forged
faces transmitted in the real world.
In this work, we focus on capturing forgery traces from
the perspective of local anomaly. Specifically, given a face
image, we extract its deep features with a CNN backbone,
and divide the neighborhood of a local feature into 4 groups
by different orientations and distances, thereby modeling
more fine-grained local anomalies and generating 4 groups
of anomaly maps. These anomaly maps are then decomposed again to calculate the second order anomaly which

20270

