Exploring Structure-aware Transformer over Interaction Proposals
for Human-Object Interaction Detection∗
Yong Zhang† , Yingwei Pan‡ , Ting Yao‡ , Rui Huang† , Tao Mei‡ , and Chang-Wen Chen§
†

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen ‡ JD Explore Academy
§
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

yongzhang@link.cuhk.edu.cn, {panyw.ustc, tingyao.ustc}@gmail.com, ruihuang@cuhk.edu.cn,
tmei@jd.com, changwen.chen@polyu.edu.hk
<human, glove, wear>
CNN

Abstract

Vanilla Transformer

<human, bat, hold>

No interaction

Parametric
interaction queries

Recent high-performing Human-Object Interaction
(HOI) detection techniques have been highly influenced
by Transformer-based object detector (i.e., DETR). Nevertheless, most of them directly map parametric interaction
queries into a set of HOI predictions through vanilla
Transformer in a one-stage manner. This leaves rich interor intra-interaction structure under-exploited. In this work,
we design a novel Transformer-style HOI detector, i.e.,
Structure-aware Transformer over Interaction Proposals
(STIP), for HOI detection. Such design decomposes
the process of HOI set prediction into two subsequent
phases, i.e., an interaction proposal generation is first
performed, and then followed by transforming the nonparametric interaction proposals into HOI predictions
via a structure-aware Transformer. The structure-aware
Transformer upgrades vanilla Transformer by encoding
additionally the holistically semantic structure among
interaction proposals as well as the locally spatial structure of human/object within each interaction proposal, so
as to strengthen HOI predictions. Extensive experiments
conducted on V-COCO and HICO-DET benchmarks have
demonstrated the effectiveness of STIP, and superior
results are reported when comparing with the stateof-the-art HOI detectors. Source code is available at
https://github.com/zyong812/STIP.

1. Introduction
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection [5, 11] is
intended to localize the interactive human-object pairs
within an image and identify the interactions in between, yielding the HOI predictions in the form of
⟨human, object, interaction⟩ triplets. Practical HOI detection systems perform the human-centric scene under∗ This work was performed at JD Explore Academy.

(a) Previous Transformer-style HOI detectors

<human, glove, wear>
CNN

Structure-aware Transformer

<human, bat, hold>

No interaction

Detection
human-glove human-bat
Interaction
Proposal
Network
human-bat human-bat
Inter-interaction semantic structure

Intra-interaction spatial structure

(b) Structure-aware Transformer over Interaction Proposals (STIP)

Figure 1. Comparison between existing Transformer-style HOI
detectors and our STIP. (a) Existing Transformer-style HOI detectors directly transform the parametric interaction queries into
HOI predictions via vanilla Transformer in a one-stage fashion. (b)
STIP adopts a two-phase solution, i.e., first producing interaction
proposals via Interaction Proposal Network, and then mapping the
non-parametric interaction queries (i.e., interaction proposals) into
HOI predictions. Both of the inter- and intra-interaction structures
derived from interaction proposals are additionally exploited to
boost HOI set prediction through a structure-aware Transformer.

standing, and thus have a great potential impact for numerous applications, such as surveillance event detection
[1, 7] and robot imitation learning [2]. In general, conventional HOI detectors [8–10, 16, 24, 27, 32, 38–40] tackle the
HOI set prediction task in an indirect way, by formalizing it as surrogate regression and classification problems
for human/object/interaction. Such indirect approach needs
a subsequent post-processing by collapsing near-duplicate
predictions and heuristic matching [16, 24, 40], and thus
cannot be trained in an end-to-end fashion, resulting in a
sub-optimal solution. The intent to overcome the problem of sub-optimal solution leads to the development of recent state-of-the-art HOI detectors [6, 17, 36, 50] that follow the Transformer-based detector of DETR [3] to cast
HOI detection as a direct set prediction problem, and embrace the “end-to-end” philosophy (Figure 1 (a)). In par-

19548

