Revealing Occlusions with 4D Neural Fields
Basile Van Hoorick
Columbia University

Purva Tendulkar
Columbia University

Dı́dac Surı́s
Columbia University

basile@cs.columbia.edu

purva.tendulkar@columbia.edu

didac.suris@columbia.edu

Dennis Park
Toyota Research Institute

Simon Stent
Toyota Research Institute

Carl Vondrick
Columbia University

dennis.park@tri.global

simon.stent@tri.global

vondrick@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
For computer vision systems to operate in dynamic situations, they need to be able to represent and reason about
object permanence. We introduce a framework for learning to estimate 4D visual representations from monocular RGB-D video, which is able to persist objects, even
once they become obstructed by occlusions. Unlike traditional video representations, we encode point clouds into
a continuous representation, which permits the model to
attend across the spatiotemporal context to resolve occlusions. On two large video datasets that we release along
with this paper, our experiments show that the representation is able to successfully reveal occlusions for several
tasks, without any architectural changes. Visualizations
show that the attention mechanism automatically learns
to follow occluded objects. Since our approach can be
trained end-to-end and is easily adaptable, we believe it
will be useful for handling occlusions in many video understanding tasks. Data, code, and models are available at
occlusions.cs.columbia.edu.

1. Introduction
When an object becomes occluded in video, its location
and visual structure is often still predictable. In several studies, developmental psychologists have been able to demonstrate that shortly after birth, children learn how objects persist during occlusions [2, 5, 42, 52], and evidence suggests
that animals perform similar reasoning too [32, 41].1 For
example, although the yellow orb in Figure 1 disappears
behind other objects, its location, geometry, and appearance
remain evident to you. Occlusions are fundamental to computer vision, and predicting the contents behind them underlies many applications in video analysis.
The field has developed a number of deep learning meth1 See “What The Fluff Challenge” on YouTube.

Figure 1. Video Occlusions – Although the yellow orb becomes
fully occluded in the video, we can still perform many visual
recognition tasks, such as predicting its location, reconstructing
its appearance, and classifying its semantic category. This paper
introduces a video representation architecture that is able to learn
to perform all of these occlusion reasoning tasks.

ods to operate on point clouds [19,44,66,68,69], which due
to their attractive properties, have emerged as the representation of choice for numerous 3D tasks. Point clouds are
sparse, making them particularly scalable to large scenes.
However, to solve the problem in Figure 1, we need a
video representation that (1) uses evidence from the previous frames in order to (2) generate the new points that are
not observed in the subsequent frames. Since point clouds
are possible to collect at scale [7, 9], we believe they are an
excellent source of data for learning to predict behind occlusions in video. However, the representation must also have
the capacity to create points conditioned on their context.
This paper introduces an architecture for learning to predict 4D point clouds from an RGB-D video camera. The
key to our approach is a continuous neural field representation of a point cloud, which uses an attention mechanism to
condition the full space on the observations. Since the representation is continuous, the approach can learn to produce
points anywhere in spacetime, allowing for high-fidelity reconstructions of complex scenes. Where there are occlusions and missing observations, the representation is able to
use attention to find the object and/or missing scene structure when it was last visible, and subsequently put the right

3011

