Learnable Irrelevant Modality Dropout for Multimodal Action Recognition on
Modality-Specific Annotated Videos
Saghir Alfasly1,2
1
2

Jian Lu1,3,∗

Chen Xu1,2

Yuru Zou1

Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Advanced Machine Learning and Applications, Shenzhen University, China

Guangdong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Shenzhen, China

3

Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, China

{saghiralfasly, jianlu, yuruzou}@szu.edu.cn, chenxuszu@sina.com

Abstract
With the assumption that a video dataset is multimodality annotated in which auditory and visual modalities both
are labeled or class-relevant, current multimodal methods
apply modality fusion or cross-modality attention. However, effectively leveraging the audio modality in visionspecific annotated videos for action recognition is of particular challenge.
To tackle this challenge, we propose a novel audio-visual
framework that effectively leverages the audio modality in
any solely vision-specific annotated dataset. We adopt the
language models (e.g., BERT) to build a semantic audiovideo label dictionary (SAVLD) that maps each video label to its most K-relevant audio labels in which SAVLD
serves as a bridge between audio and video datasets. Then,
SAVLD along with a pretrained audio multi-label model are
used to estimate the audio-visual modality relevance during the training phase. Accordingly, a novel learnable irrelevant modality dropout (IMD) is proposed to completely
drop out the irrelevant audio modality and fuse only the relevant modalities. Moreover, we present a new two-stream
video Transformer for efficiently modeling the visual modalities. Results on several vision-specific annotated datasets
including Kinetics400 and UCF-101 validated our framework as it outperforms most relevant action recognition
methods.

1. Introduction
One of the deep neural network (DNN) learning schemes
to improve video understanding is to leverage as many input
modalities as available, such as audio, RGB frames, motion,
textual data, the visible text on videos, and human skeleton
joints. Therefore, multimodal learning has shown a remarkable improvement in video-based action recognition. These
methods process either each modality with an independent
∗ Corresponding author

Vision-Specific
Annotated Data
e.g., Kinetics400

Lablel Semantic Similarity
Matching (with BERT)
(Sentence-based label embeddings)

Audio-Specific
Annotated Data
e.g., AudioSet
Female Speech

Dancing

Music

Public
Speaking

Applause
Singing

Wrestling

Clapping
Shouting

Dancing

Public
Speaking
Clapping

Music
Singing

Wrestling
Applause

Female
Speech

Shouting

Overlapped Audio Label Clusters - (SAVLD Dictionary)

Figure 1. Conceptual Overview: Vision-Audio Label Mapping.
In an overlapped manner, our method performs a cross-dataset
textual labels mapping in which audio labels are mapped to their
most closely relevant video-based human activity labels by using
language models, e.g., BERT. The resulting clusters compose a
SAVLD dictionary that serves as a bridge between video and audio
datasets. Since our framework trains human activity multimodal
models on vision-specific datasets, we use SAVLD to leverage the
auditory modality in videos.

DNN or all with a single shared DNN. The modalities or
their feature representations are fused either in an early fusion, middle fusion, or late fusion manner [1–3]. Another
fusion scheme is proposed by adopting cross-modality attention or gated units [4–7].
Motivation. Most of the attention and fusion methods
[2] boost the audio-visual models’ performance on audiovision correspondence-based videos in which auditory and
visual modalities are corresponding or at least relevant as in
Kinetics-Sounds [8] and EPIC-Kitchen dataset [9]. However, these fusion methods do not provide similar performance boost on the vision-specific annotated datasets, such
as Kinetics400 [10] and UCF-101 [11]. This condition

20208

