Efficient Video Instance Segmentation via Tracklet Query and Proposal
Jialian Wu1
Sudhir Yarram1
Hui Liang2
Tian Lan2
Junsong Yuan1
Jayan Eledath2
Gérard Medioni2
1

2

State University of New York at Buffalo

Amazon

https://jialianwu.com/projects/EfficientVIS.html

Abstract

DA
Input Video

Data Association

Neural Net
plane#1

Clip #2

RoI-wise

(Hand-crafted)

plane#1

Clip #1

RoI-wise

Video Instance Segmentation (VIS) is a challenging video
task recently introduced in [28]. It aims to predict a tracklet
segmentation mask with a class label for every appeared object instance in a video as illustrated in Fig. 1. Existing methods typically solve the VIS problem at either frame-level or
clip-level. The frame-level methods [10, 14, 16, 24, 26, 29]
follow a tracking-by-segmentation paradigm, which first
performs image instance segmentation and then links the
current masks with history tracklets via data association as
shown in Fig. 1 (a). This paradigm typically requires com-

Clip #1

plane#2

DA

DA

Clip #2
Efficient Inference
Efficient Training

Frame-wise

1. Introduction

DA

Tracklet Mask
(Linked by DA)

plane#2

Frame-wise

Video Instance Segmentation (VIS) aims to simultaneously classify, segment, and track multiple object instances in
videos. Recent clip-level VIS takes a short video clip as input
each time showing stronger performance than frame-level
VIS (tracking-by-segmentation), as more temporal context
from multiple frames is utilized. Yet, most clip-level methods are neither end-to-end learnable nor real-time. These
limitations are addressed by the recent VIS transformer
(VisTR) [25] which performs VIS end-to-end within a clip.
However, VisTR suffers from long training time due to its
frame-wise dense attention. In addition, VisTR is not fully
end-to-end learnable in multiple video clips as it requires
a hand-crafted data association to link instance tracklets
between successive clips. This paper proposes EfficientVIS,
a fully end-to-end framework with efficient training and inference. At the core are tracklet query and tracklet proposal
that associate and segment regions-of-interest (RoIs) across
space and time by an iterative query-video interaction. We
further propose a correspondence learning that makes tracklets linking between clips end-to-end learnable. Compared
to VisTR, EfficientVIS requires 15× fewer training epochs
while achieving state-of-the-art accuracy on the YouTubeVIS benchmark. Meanwhile, our method enables whole video
instance segmentation in a single end-to-end pass without
data association at all.

Tracklet Mask
(End-to-end
Generated)

plane#1 plane#2

Efficient Inference

Strong Performance

(a) Frame-level

(b) Prior Clip-level (VIS Transformer)

Efficient Inference
Efficient Training
Efficient Framework(fully end-to-end)
Strong Performance

(c) EfficientVIS (ours)

Figure 1. Overview of real-time VIS pipelines. Compared to (a)
or (b), our method features 1) Efficient training thanks to the RoIwise design; 2) Efficient framework that achieves whole video
instance segmentation in a single end-to-end pass without any data
association and post-processing; 3) Strong performance thanks to
the clip-by-clip processing and fully end-to-end paradigm.

plex data association algorithms and limits temporal context,
making it susceptible to object occlusions. By contrast, the
clip-level methods [2, 3, 15, 25] jointly perform segmentation
and tracking clip-by-clip. Within each clip, object information is propagated back and forth. Such a paradigm usually
performs stronger than the frame-level methods thanks to
larger temporal receptive field. However, most clip-level
methods are not end-to-end and require elaborated inference
that causes slow speed. These issues are addressed by the
recent VIS transformer (VisTR) [25] which extends image
object detector DETR [7] to the VIS task. VisTR generates
VIS predictions within each video clip in one end-to-end
pass, which greatly simplifies the clip-level paradigm and
makes VIS within a clip end-to-end trainable.
However, the VIS transformer is confronted with two
issues: (i) The convergence speed of VisTR is slow since
the frame-wise dense attention weights in the transformer
need long training epochs to search for properly attended
regions among all video frame pixels. It is difficult for
researchers to experiment with this algorithm as it requires
long development cycles. (ii) When a video is too long to fit
into GPU memory in one forward-pass, it has to be divided
into multiple successive clips for sequential processing. In

959

