PhotoScene: Photorealistic Material and Lighting Transfer for Indoor Scenes
Yu-Ying Yeh1 Zhengqin Li1 Yannick Hold-Geoffroy2 Rui Zhu1 Zexiang Xu2
Miloš Hašan2 Kalyan Sunkavalli2 Manmohan Chandraker1
1

University of California, San Diego

Abstract
Most indoor 3D scene reconstruction methods focus on
recovering 3D geometry and scene layout. In this work,
we go beyond this to propose PhotoScene1 , a framework
that takes input image(s) of a scene along with approximately aligned CAD geometry (either reconstructed automatically or manually specified) and builds a photorealistic digital twin with high-quality materials and similar lighting. We model scene materials using procedural
material graphs; such graphs represent photorealistic and
resolution-independent materials. We optimize the parameters of these graphs and their texture scale and rotation,
as well as the scene lighting to best match the input image
via a differentiable rendering layer. We evaluate our technique on objects and layout reconstructions from ScanNet,
SUN RGB-D and stock photographs, and demonstrate that
our method reconstructs high-quality, fully relightable 3D
scenes that can be re-rendered under arbitrary viewpoints,
zooms and lighting.

1. Introduction
A core need in 3D content creation is to recreate indoor
scenes from photographs with a high degree of photorealism. Such photorealistic “digital twins” can be used in a
variety of applications including augmented reality, photographic editing and simulations for training in synthetic yet
realistic environments. In recent years, commodity RGBD
sensors have become common and remarkable progress has
been made in reconstructing 3D scene geometry from both
single [14, 47] and multiple photographs [51], as well as
in aligning 3D models to images to build CAD-like scene
reconstructions [5, 22, 23, 36]. But photorealistic applications require going beyond the above geometry acquisition
to capture material and lighting too — to not only recreate
appearances accurately but also visualize and edit them at
arbitrary resolutions, under novel views and illumination.
Prior works assign material to geometry under the simplifying assumptions of homogeneous material [23] or sin1 Code: https://github.com/ViLab-UCSD/photoscene

2

Adobe Research

Input Photo

Novel Viewpoint

PhotoScene
Result

Coarsely-aligned 3D
Geometry from Photo

Novel Lighting

Figure 1.
Given an input photo and a coarsely aligned
3D scene model, PhotoScene automatically infers high-quality
spatially-varying procedural materials and scene illumination to
closely match scene appearance. The reconstructed materials are
resolution-independent (see zoom insets) and ascribed to the full
3D geometry, to create a high-quality photorealistic digital twin
that can be rendered under novel views and lighting.

gle objects [38]. In contrast, we deal with the challenge
of ascribing spatially-varying material to an indoor scene
while reasoning about its complex and global interactions
with arbitrary unknown illumination. One approach to our
problem would be to rely on state-of-the-art inverse rendering methods [29, 32] to reconstruct per-pixel material properties and lighting. However, these methods are limited to
the viewpoint and resolution of the input photograph, and
do not assign materials to regions that are not visible (either outside the field of view or occluded by other objects).
Instead, we posit that learned scene priors from inverse rendering are a good initialization, whereafter a judicious combination of expressive material priors and physically-based
differentiable rendering can solve the extremely ill-posed
optimization of spatially-varying material and lighting.
In this paper, we use procedural node graphs as compact
yet expressive priors for scene material properties. Such
graphs are heavily used in the content and design industry
to represent high-quality, resolution-independent materials
with a compact set of optimizable parameters [1, 3]. This
offers a significant advantage: if the parameters of a procedural graph can be estimated from just the observed parts of
the scene in an image, we can use the full graph to ascribe

18562

