Multimodal Material Segmentation
Yupeng Liang
Ryosuke Wakaki
Shohei Nobuhara
Ko Nishino
Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University
https://vision.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp/

RGB

Near Infra-Red

Angle of Polarization

Degree of Polarization

Material Segmentation Annotation

Figure 1. We realize multimodal material segmentation, i.e., per-pixel recognition of materials from multiple imaging modalities, by
introducing a novel dataset and network. MultiModal Material Segmentation (MCubeS) dataset captures 42 different road scenes in 500
image sets each consisting of RGB, near-infrared, and polarization images. Each image is densely annotated with materials. We introduce
MCubeSNet which learns to focus on the most informative combinations of imaging modalities for each material class through a newly
derived region-guided filter selection (RGFS) layer.

Abstract
Recognition of materials from their visual appearance
is essential for computer vision tasks, especially those that
involve interaction with the real world. Material segmentation, i.e., dense per-pixel recognition of materials, remains challenging as, unlike objects, materials do not exhibit clearly discernible visual signatures in their regular
RGB appearances. Different materials, however, do lead
to different radiometric behaviors, which can often be captured with non-RGB imaging modalities. We realize multimodal material segmentation from RGB, polarization, and
near-infrared images. We introduce the MCubeS dataset
(from MultiModal Material Segmentation) which contains
500 sets of multimodal images capturing 42 street scenes.
Ground truth material segmentation as well as semantic segmentation are annotated for every image and pixel.
We also derive a novel deep neural network, MCubeSNet,
which learns to focus on the most informative combinations
of imaging modalities for each material class with a newly
derived region-guided filter selection (RGFS) layer. We use
semantic segmentation as a prior to “guide” this filter selection. To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first
comprehensive study on truly multimodal material segmentation. We believe our work opens new avenues of practical
use of material information in safety critical applications.

1. Introduction
Thanks to the large strides made in object recognition
research, computers can now tell what the object in an image is with sufficient accuracy. Telling what an object is,
however, often insufficient to act in the real world. Our own
visual system can not only tell a cup from a table, but also
a paper cup from a ceramic one so that we can plan our
grasp before touching it. If a computer could similarly tell
what an object is made of, critical decisions can be made
faster and more accurately. In particular, dense pixel-wise
recognition of materials in an image becomes an essential
task. We refer to this as material segmentation and distinguish it from classic “material recognition” which focuses
on recognizing materials image-wise or for isolated objects.
Successful material segmentation would be particularly
beneficial for road scene analysis. If an autonomous vehicle
or an advanced driver assistance system (ADAS) can tell an
asphalt road from a concrete one or a leaf on the road from
dirt, it can execute safer control. Outdoor material segmentation, however, remains elusive mainly due to the rich variety of materials encountered in the real world and the lack
of annotated data. Closest works only realize image-wise
recognition of materials or are primarily of indoor architectural, professional photographs [1, 27]. It is also worth clarifying the distinction of material segmentation from stuff
segmentation. “Stuff” is not a material but rather refers to

19800

