C-CAM: Causal CAM for Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation on
Medical Image
Zhang Chen
Xi’an Jiaotong University
Xi’an, China

Zhiqiang Tian*
Xi’an Jiaotong University
Xi’an, China

Jihua Zhu
Xi’an Jiaotong University
Xi’an, China

1900938761@qq.com

zhiqiangtian@xjtu.edu.cn

zhujh@xjtu.edu.cn

Ce Li
Lanzhou University of Technology
Xi’an, China

Shaoyi Du*
Xi’an Jiaotong University
Xi’an, China

xjtulice@gmail.com

dushaoyi@gmail.com

Abstract
Recently, many excellent weakly supervised semantic
segmentation (WSSS) works are proposed based on class
activation mapping (CAM). However, there are few works
that consider the characteristics of medical images. In this
paper, we find that there are mainly two challenges of medical images in WSSS: i) the boundary of object foreground
and background is not clear; ii) the co-occurrence phenomenon is very severe in training stage. We thus propose
a Causal CAM (C-CAM) method to overcome the above
challenges. Our method is motivated by two cause-effect
chains including category-causality chain and anatomycausality chain. The category-causality chain represents
the image content (cause) affects the category (effect). The
anatomy-causality chain represents the anatomical structure (cause) affects the organ segmentation (effect). Extensive experiments were conducted on three public medical
image data sets. Our C-CAM generates the best pseudo
masks with the DSC of 77.26%, 80.34% and 78.15% on
ProMRI, ACDC and CHAOS compared with other CAMlike methods. The pseudo masks of C-CAM are further used
to improve the segmentation performance for organ segmentation tasks. Our C-CAM achieves DSC of 83.83% on
ProMRI and DSC of 87.54% on ACDC, which outperforms state-of-the-art WSSS methods. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Tian-lab/C-CAM .

1. Introduction
Recently, semantic segmentation [22] is widely studied
due to the development of deep learning. Existing paradig* Corresponding Author

Medical image

Natural image

Liver
Spleen

Right kidney
Left kidney
Challenge1: ambiguous boundary

Challenge2: co-occurrence

Figure 1. Main challenges of medical images. Challenge1: The
object boundary for medical image is more ambiguous than natural image. Challenge2: Different organs often occur in the same
medical image in training stage.

m of semantic segmentation is training a model to classify the category of every pixel with abundant pixel-level
labeled data. However, the acquirement of pixel-level labels is time-consuming and expensive. Therefore, a new
paradigm called weakly supervised semantic segmentation
(WSSS) comes out. Different from fully supervised semantic segmentation (FSSS), WSSS utilizes weak annotations, e.g., image-level label, point, scribble and bounding box.
Among these weak annotations, image-level label is the easiest way to be obtained. Meanwhile, it is the most challenging one to be used for segmentation. In this paper, we focus
on image-level labels for medical image segmentation.
The main problem for WSSS with image-level labels is
the lack of location information. Class activation mapping
(CAM) methods [7, 14, 24, 30, 33, 44] creatively give convolutional neural network (CNN) locating ability with only image-level labels. However, the CAM could only locate discriminative part of object, which leads awful segmentation performance. Many CAM-based WSSS methods [2, 8, 13, 18, 34, 39] are successively proposed to narrow
the gap between WSSS and FSSS. The main idea of these

11676

