Explaining Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
via Latent Visual-Semantic Filter Attention
Yu Yang, Seungbae Kim, and Jungseock Joo
University of California, Los Angeles
yuyang@cs.ucla.edu, sbkim@cs.ucla.edu, jjoo@comm.ucla.edu

(a) A Trained Deep CNN (Target Model)

Abstract
Interpretability is an important property for visual models as it helps researchers and users understand the internal mechanism of a complex model. However, generating semantic explanations about the learned representation is challenging without direct supervision to produce
such explanations. We propose a general framework, Latent Visual Semantic Explainer (LaViSE), to teach any existing convolutional neural network to generate text descriptions about its own latent representations at the filter
level. Our method constructs a mapping between the visual and semantic spaces using generic image datasets, using images and category names. It then transfers the mapping to the target domain which does not have semantic labels. The proposed framework employs a modular structure
and enables to analyze any trained network whether or not
its original training data is available. We show that our
method can generate novel descriptions for learned filters
beyond the set of categories defined in the training dataset
and perform an extensive evaluation on multiple datasets.
We also demonstrate a novel application of our method for
unsupervised dataset bias analysis which allows us to automatically discover hidden biases in datasets or compare different subsets without using additional labels. The dataset
and code are made public to facilitate further research.1

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks have shown great performance in visual representation learning, but the learned representations are usually hard to explain or interpret. The
lack of explainability raises the concern that AI systems
and models, although very accurate in prediction, may have
hidden negative effects on human users and society, such
as AI bias. Several studies reported biases in computer vision models for face attribute classification [8, 12], recognition [33, 58], and image captioning [25]. It is very chal1 https://github.com/YuYang0901/LaViSE

(b) Feature Extractor

Classifier
(c)
Latent
Visual
Semantic
Explainer
(LaViSE)

Inputs
Convolutional
Filters

“What concept(s)
did this filter
learn to identify?”

Annotations of all of these
concepts are not required.

(d) LaViSE Output:

“laptop”, “computer”,
“screen”, …

Figure 1. The proposed framework aims to semantically explain
the concepts learned by individual filters in a CNN without supervision on the concepts used for the semantic explanations.

lenging, however, to identify these biases from a black-box
model with distributed knowledge.
To date, several methods have been proposed to interpret
what are learned and captured in CNNs. These methods
vary greatly by the form (visualization, captions, synthesized samples), the focus (individual filter vs network level),
and the scope (any existing models vs requiring training
with supervision) of the generated explanations, and each
method has its own strengths and weaknesses.
The main objective of this paper is to generate the textual interpretations of any existing black box model that can
overcome the limitations of existing approaches for several
reasons. First, it generates words and thus can be more
semantically meaningful and objective than visualization
based methods [42, 49, 66]. Second, it can apply to any
arbitrary network and does not require training or annotations, which is much more applicable than methods that require training a model with ground-truth explanation annotations [27]. We do train an adapter using general image
classification datasets which can apply to any given target
model. Third, it can generate explanations using novel concepts that are not given in the training set. These properties
are critical in understanding black-box models for which
we do not have access to the original training data or any

8333

