Marginal Contrastive Correspondence for Guided Image Generation
Fangneng Zhan1 Yingchen Yu2 Rongliang Wu2 Jiahui Zhang2 Shijian Lu* 2 Changgong Zhang3
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 Nanyang Technological University 3 Amazon

Abstract
Exemplar-based image translation establishes dense
correspondences between a conditional input and an exemplar (from two different domains) for leveraging detailed
exemplar styles to achieve realistic image translation. Existing work builds the cross-domain correspondences implicitly by minimizing feature-wise distances across the two
domains. Without explicit exploitation of domain-invariant
features, this approach may not reduce the domain gap
effectively which often leads to sub-optimal correspondences and image translation. We design a Marginal Contrastive Learning Network (MCL-Net) that explores contrastive learning to learn domain-invariant features for realistic exemplar-based image translation. Specifically, we
design an innovative marginal contrastive loss that guides
to establish dense correspondences explicitly. Nevertheless,
building correspondence with domain-invariant semantics
alone may impair the texture patterns and lead to degraded
texture generation. We thus design a Self-Correlation Map
(SCM) that incorporates scene structures as auxiliary information which improves the built correspondences substantially. Quantitative and qualitative experiments on multifarious image translation tasks show that the proposed method
outperforms the state-of-the-art consistently.

1. Introduction
Image-to-image translation refers to the image generation conditioned on the certain inputs from other domains
[25, 29, 32], and has delivered impressive advances with the
emergence of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [5]
in recent years. As a typical ill-posed problem, diverse solutions are naturally allowed in image translation tasks as
one conditional input could corresponds to multiple image
instances. Faithful control of the generation style not only
enables diverse generation given certain conditions but also
flexible user control of the desired generation. However,
yielding high-fidelity images with controllable styles still
remains a grand challenge.
* Corresponding author

Conditional Input

Exemplar Image

Condition
Encoder

Image
Encoder

Ground Truth

Shared

Image
Encoder

Correspondence
Anchor

Pos

Neg

Neg

Neg

Neg

Contrastive Learning

Figure 1. Learning domain-invariant features for building correspondence across domains: We exploit contrastive learning between the Conditional Input and the Ground Truth by pulling features at the same position closer while pushing those at different
positions apart. With the learned Condition Encoder and Image
Encoder, explicit feature correspondences can be built up between
the Conditional Input and the Exemplar Image.

To tackle the style control challenge, one predominant
approach employs variational autoencoders (VAEs) to regularize the image style into a Gaussian distribution as in
SPADE [25], yet this approach often suffer from compromised generation quality due to the posterior collapse phenomenon [18] of VAEs. Another direction is to leverage
the styles extracted from the exemplars for guiding the generation. For instance, Zhu et al. [47] propose to achieve
style control for each semantic region with a dedicated style
code. However, the latent codes are typically extracted via
a style encoder, which often reflects the global styles only
and struggles to capture the detailed structures. Very recently, dense correspondence has been actively explored in
exemplar-based image translation, and emerges as a promising approach to achieve faithful style control. Specifically,
Zhang et al. [40] propose to establish dense semantic correspondence between conditioned input and a given exemplar
so as to offer dense style guidance in translation. Zheng et
al. [43] and CoCosNet v2 [45] enables the establishment of

10663

