Stereo Depth from Events Cameras: Concentrate and Focus on the Future
Yeongwoo Nam1,2, *
1

Saige Research

Mohammad Mostafavi3, *
2

NAVER AI Lab.

3

Kuk-Jin Yoon4

Lunit

4

KAIST

Jonghyun Choi2,5,†
5

Yonsei University

yw.nam@saigeresearch.ai, mostafavi@lunit.io, kjyoon@kaist.ac.kr, jc@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Dense Depth

Concentrate Net

Neuromorphic cameras or event cameras mimic human
vision by reporting changes in the intensity in a scene, instead of reporting the whole scene at once in a form of an
image frame as performed by conventional cameras. Events
are streamed data that are often dense when either the scene
changes or the camera moves rapidly. The rapid movement
causes the events to be overridden or missed when creating
a tensor for the machine to learn on. To alleviate the event
missing or overriding issue, we propose to learn to concentrate on the dense events to produce a compact event representation with high details for depth estimation. Speciﬁcally, we learn a model with events from both past and future but infer only with past data with the predicted future.
We initially estimate depth in an event-only setting but also
propose to further incorporate images and events by a hierarchical event and intensity combination network for better
depth estimation. By experiments in challenging real-world
scenarios, we validate that our method outperforms prior
arts even with low computational cost. Code is available
at: https://github.com/yonseivnl/se-cff.

1. Introduction
A common practice to tackle design challenges is learning from nature. Mimicking natural strategies by copying
their form, shape, process, or even ecosystem for speciﬁc
applications is called biomimicry [2]. Stereo depth estimation mimics the human visual ability to understand depth
from a pair of cameras. The computer vision community
has shown signiﬁcant interest in stereo vision, while it has
remained a challenging task. The ill-posed nature of stereo
depth estimation, shortcomings from RGB sensors (e.g.,
low dynamic range, motion blur and etc.), and algorithmic limitations make stereo vision very challenging. Examples of imperfect sensing the scene include low dynamic
range, blurry, or noisy images. Special cases that the algorithms cannot handle include repeating patterns, reﬂective
* : equal contribution. † : corresponding author. This work is done while
YN and JC are an intern, AI tech advisor at NAVER AI Lab., respectively.

multi-density
stacks from
stereo events

attention-based
concentration
network

missing details with few events

concentrated
left and right
event pairs

knowledge
distillation from
future events

intensity image for reference

overriding details with many events concentrated events with high details

Figure 1. Overview of our stereo depth estimation from events.
We predict dense depth with sharp edges by ‘concentrating’ the
event representation tensors to preserve details. We further transfer
the knowledge of future events by training with past and future
events while keeping our system causal at inference.

(i.e., shiny) objects, and low-texture areas [23, 27].
Event cameras which are also referred to as neuromorphic cameras follow the same concept of biomimicry as
they mimic human vision. Similar to the human eye, an
event camera captures only pixel-wise intensity differences
and reports them as a stream instead of the whole scene at
once as a frame. Although event cameras bring new and
unique speciﬁcations, they require a paradigm shift in the
algorithms that use these devices. This paper falls within
both mentioned trends coined as neuromorphic stereo vision and mimics the human eye to estimate depth from a
stereo pair of event cameras. This line of research has gathered interest within the event camera community and has
advanced in many aspects [23] including novel algorithms
and attempts to generalize to real-world situations.
The stream of events is sparse in nature and does not follow any predeﬁned pattern in terms of the density of events
either in time or space, and relies purely on the scene and
camera movements. We use this unpredictable sparse-dense
stream and divide it into a sequence of stacked events that

6114

