CVF-SID: Cyclic multi-Variate Function for
Self-Supervised Image Denoising by Disentangling Noise from Image
Sanghyun Son1
Kyoung Mu Lee1,2
Mohsen Yavartanoo1 *
Reyhaneh Neshatavar1 *
1
2
Dept. of ECE & ASRI, IPAI, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
{reyhanehneshat,myavartanoo,thstkdgus35,kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Recently, significant progress has been made on image
denoising with strong supervision from large-scale datasets.
However, obtaining well-aligned noisy-clean training image pairs for each specific scenario is complicated and
costly in practice. Consequently, applying a conventional
supervised denoising network on in-the-wild noisy inputs is
not straightforward. Although several studies have challenged this problem without strong supervision, they rely on
less practical assumptions and cannot be applied to practical situations directly. To address the aforementioned challenges, we propose a novel and powerful self-supervised denoising method called CVF-SID based on a Cyclic multiVariate Function (CVF) module and a self-supervised image disentangling (SID) framework. The CVF module can
output multiple decomposed variables of the input and take
a combination of the outputs back as an input in a cyclic
manner. Our CVF-SID can disentangle a clean image
and noise maps from the input by leveraging various selfsupervised loss terms. Unlike several methods that only
consider the signal-independent noise models, we also deal
with signal-dependent noise components for real-world applications. Furthermore, we do not rely on any prior assumptions about the underlying noise distribution, making
CVF-SID more generalizable toward realistic noise. Extensive experiments on real-world datasets show that CVFSID achieves state-of-the-art self-supervised image denoising performance and is comparable to other existing approaches. The code is publicly available from this link.

1. Introduction
Image denoising is an active research topic and has attracted increasing attention due to its practicality in computer vision. The fundamental idea of image denoising is
to remove unwanted noise signals from a given input and
restore a noise-free clean image. Following the recent ad* equal contribution

Input Noisy

Ground Truth

N2V [18]: 24.00dB

N2S [4]: 25.34dB

R2R [25]: 30.37dB

CVF-SID (Ours): 32.99dB

Figure 1. Real-world image denoising results on the SIDD validation dataset. In contrast to R2R, our CVF-SID is directly applicable to sRGB images. N2V and N2S fail to restore the clean
image, and R2R loses the details evidenced in the yellow patch.

vances in convolutional neural networks (CNN), the latest denoising methods have achieved dramatic performance
compared to the traditional algorithms. Specifically, those
methods resort to supervised learning on the large-scale
synthetic dataset, where noise is simply modeled with additive white Gaussian (AWGN) [9, 11, 20, 33, 35].
Nevertheless, recent studies [3, 12] have observed that
the denoising models learned on synthetic images do not
generalize well on practical examples. The primary reason for this issue is that real-world noise distribution differs
from the synthetic AWGN. To deal with this limitation, few
attempts have been made to acquire realistic noisy-clean image pairs [1] in the wild. Still, this process is challenging
and sometimes unavailable as it requires multiple shots under the same static scene with several constraints.
Advanced methods overcome the lack of paired images
by adopting novel un-/self-supervised frameworks. The
generation-based approaches [13, 16] utilize unsupervised
adversarial training. They first generate noisy samples from
a set of clean images by imitating the noise distribution of

17583

