DESTR: Object Detection with Split Transformer
Liqiang He and Sinisa Todorovic
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR 97330, USA
{heli,sinis}@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
Self- and cross-attention in Transformers provide for
high model capacity, making them viable models for object detection. However, Transformers still lag in performance behind CNN-based detectors. This is, we believe, because: (a) Cross-attention is used for both classification and bounding-box regression tasks; (b) Transformer’s decoder poorly initializes content queries; and (c)
Self-attention poorly accounts for certain prior knowledge
which could help improve inductive bias. These limitations
are addressed with the corresponding three contributions.
First, we propose a new Detection Split Transformer (DESTR) that separates estimation of cross-attention into two
independent branches – one tailored for classification and
the other for box regression. Second, we use a mini-detector
to initialize the content queries in the decoder with classification and regression embeddings of the respective heads
in the mini-detector. Third, we augment self-attention in the
decoder to additionally account for pairs of adjacent object
queries. Our experiments on the MS-COCO dataset show
that DESTR outperforms DETR and its successors.

1. Introduction
This paper addresses a basic vision problem, that of
object detection in images. Recently proposed DEtection TRansformer (DETR) [2] and its successors, such
as, e.g., Conditional DETR (C-DETR) [19] and Anchor
DETR [25], have been demonstrated as competitive performers on the benchmark MS-COCO dataset [15], despite using a simpler backbone network with single-scale
features than more complex state-of-the-art (SOTA) CNNs
[20, 22, 24, 27]. This success has been ascribed to Transformers’ high model capacity, since they estimate selfattention and cross-attention, thereby explicitly capturing
relationships between parts and larger spatial contexts in the
image. However, recent findings [3, 5] suggest that Transformers lack certain inductive biases possessed by CNNs
to help them constrain the hypothesis space. Therefore,

Transformers require longer training (e.g., DETR needs 500
training epochs) and larger amount of training data to compensate. In this work, we identify and address three key
limitations of the mentioned family of detector Transformers, and thus improve their inductive bias.
The first limitation concerns cross-attention. DETR’s decoder computes cross-attention between the encoder’s output embedding and a set of learnable object queries, for estimating relationships between these queries and the entire
image context. This cross-attention is then used for both
classification and bounding-box regression of the queries.
The same holds for other Transformer detectors.
Motivated by the success of FCOS detector [24] that
splits the classification and box regression heads, as our
first contribution, we propose to split estimation of crossattention into two independent branches – one for classification, and the other for regression. Hence the name of
our new Detection Split Transformer (DESTR). Since the
branches will not share weights, each will likely focus on
a different set of optimal features, as desired, rather than
jointly use suboptimal features for both classification and
regression. This is illustrated in Fig. 1, where we show
cross-attention maps computed by DETR, C-DETR, and
our DESTR. As can be seen, DETR’s cross-attention appears to focus on most discriminative object parts which
may not necessarily be informative for box regression. On
the other hand, C-DETR’s cross-attention seems to primarily focus on shape cues. DESTR’s classification and regression cross-attention maps differ, as intended, where the
former highlights more class-characteristic regions to help
classification, and the latter has higher values on horizontal
and vertical edges in the image to guide the box prediction,
and looks more dilated to the same regions.
The second limitation concerns the poor initialization
and need for long training of content queries in the decoder.
Features of the learnable object queries in the decoder consist of the content embedding (a.k.a. content query) and positional embedding (a.k.a. spatial query). DETR learns the
positional embedding so it captures a spatial distribution of
objects in training images [2]. However, the content queries

9377

