ix

1− 

register



Similarity

...

...

Meta mean

Meta variance
Traing Data

Similarity selection

1− 

Remember the Difference: Cross-Domain Few-Shot Semantic Segmentation via
Meta-MemoryFine-tune
Transfer
align

Fine-tune

bM , vbM

load

support

support

Wenjian Wang,1,2,3 Lijuan Duan,1,2,3 Yuxi Wang,5 Qing En,4 Junsong Fan,5 Zhaoxiang Zhang5,6*
1
Testing Data Technology, Beijing University of Technology,
Faculty of Information
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Trusted Computing,
3
National Engineering Laboratory for Key Technologies of Information
Security
Level Protection, China
(b)Few-shot
domain
(a)Few-shot
(c)Ours
4
adaptation
School of Computer Science, Carleton University, Canada
Domain distribution
Class
Same Class
5
Centre for Artificial Intelligence
and Robotics, (HKISI
CAS)
6
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (NLPR, CASIA, UCAS)
wangwj@emails.bjut.edu.cn, ljduan@bjut.edu.cn, yuxiwang93@gmail.com
QingEn@cunet.carleton.ca, {fanjunsong2016, zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
align

Few-shot semantic segmentation intends to predict pixellevel categories using only a few labeled samples. Existing
few-shot methods focus primarily on the categories sampled
from the same distribution. Nevertheless, this assumption
cannot always be ensured. The actual domain shift problem
FSS-1000 significantly reduces
SUIM the performance of few-shot learning.
To remedy this problem, we propose an interesting and challenging cross-domain few-shot semantic segmentation task,
where the training and test tasks perform on different domains. Specifically, we first propose a meta-memory bank
to improve the generalization of the segmentation network
by bridging the domain gap between source and target domains. The meta-memory stores the intra-domain style information from source domain instances and transfers it to
target samples. Subsequently, we adopt a new contrastive
learning strategy to explore the knowledge of different categories during the training stage. The negative and positive pairs are obtained from the proposed memory-based
style augmentation. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed method achieves promising results
on cross-domain few-shot semantic segmentation tasks on
COCO-20i , PASCAL-5i , FSS-1000, and SUIM datasets.

1. Introduction
Recently, semantic segmentation [2, 19, 45] has made
remarkable progress benefiting from the large amounts of
human-annotated datasets and deep convolutional neural
*Corresponding Author

horse

cat

dog

horse

Source space

elephant

giraffe

Few-shot space
Few-shot learning

dog

transfer

transfer

zebra

cat

Few-shot domain adaptation

zebra

elephant

giraffe

Cross-domain few-shot
Domain adpation

Cross-domain few-shot (ours)

Figure 1. Comparison with few-shot segmentation and few-shot
domain adaptation segmentation. In few-shot learning, the training set and testing sets come from the same domain. In few-shot
domain adaptation, the training set and testing sets are from separate domains, but the label space is the same. In our cross-domain
few-shot segmentation task, the training set and testing sets come
from different domains, and the categories in the testing set are
unseen.

networks [11]. However, obtaining these large annotated
datasets is time-consuming and labor-intensive, and the
trained model always fails to segment novel unseen categories. To tackle this problem, few-shot semantic segmentation methods [6, 42, 47] have received a lot of attention in
recent years, aiming to produce pixel-level predictions for
the novel categories when given only few (one) training images.
Few-shot semantic segmentation methods [1,16] address
the challenge of adapting a segmentation network to a new

7065

