Vox2Cortex: Fast Explicit Reconstruction of Cortical Surfaces from
3D MRI Scans with Geometric Deep Neural Networks
Fabian Bongratz1†∗ , Anne-Marie Rickmann1,2∗ , Sebastian Pölsterl2 , Christian Wachinger1,2
1
Technical University of Munich, 2 Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich

Abstract
The reconstruction of cortical surfaces from brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans is essential for quantitative analyses of cortical thickness and sulcal morphology. Although traditional and deep learning-based algorithmic pipelines exist for this purpose, they have two major
drawbacks: lengthy runtimes of multiple hours (traditional)
or intricate post-processing, such as mesh extraction and
topology correction (deep learning-based). In this work,
we address both of these issues and propose Vox2Cortex,
a deep learning-based algorithm that directly yields topologically correct, three-dimensional meshes of the boundaries of the cortex. Vox2Cortex leverages convolutional and
graph convolutional neural networks to deform an initial
template to the densely folded geometry of the cortex represented by an input MRI scan. We show in extensive experiments on three brain MRI datasets that our meshes are as
accurate as the ones reconstructed by state-of-the-art methods in the field, without the need for time- and resourceintensive post-processing. To accurately reconstruct the
tightly folded cortex, we work with meshes containing about
168,000 vertices at test time, scaling deep explicit reconstruction methods to a new level.

1. Introduction
Over the last years, fully-convolutional neural networks
(F-CNNs) have been introduced for the automatic wholebrain segmentation of MRI scans. Architecture choices
range from multi-view 2D F-CNNs [17, 43] and patchbased 3D F-CNNs [18] to full-size 3D F-CNNs [41]. In
contrast to time-consuming traditional methods for brain
analysis, such networks perform the segmentation in seconds. The resulting voxel-based segmentation can be adequately used for volume measurements of the whole brain
or subcortical structures. However, the cerebral cortex, a
thin and highly-folded sheet of neural tissue of the brain,
∗: Equal contribution, †: Corr. author (fabi.bongratz@tum.de)

Figure 1. Coronal slices of a brain MRI scan with overlays of
mesh- and voxel-based segmentation, and 3D renderings of corresponding pial and white matter (WM) surfaces. The top row shows
meshes generated by our method, the bottom row shows meshes
generated by applying marching cubes on the voxel segmentation.
Marching cubes meshes clearly show stair-case artifacts.

is not well captured by voxel-based segmentations since
it is just a few voxels thick. Instead, cortical surfaces
have been reconstructed as triangular meshes [9] to capture
the intrinsic two-dimensional structure, which enables accurate measurements like thickness, volume, and gyrification. Such in-vivo measurements have not only been important for studying higher-level processes like consciousness, thought, emotion, reasoning, language, and memory [39, 44], but also for detecting cortical atrophy in numerous brain disorders like Alzheimer’s disease [27] and
schizophrenia [25].
The current standard for cortical surface reconstruction
is FreeSufer [5, 9], which produces smooth, accurate, and
topologically correct surface meshes but runs for several
hours per scan. On the other hand, voxel-based segmentation algorithms are quick and their outputs can be used
to obtain mesh-based surface representations using algorithms like marching cubes [28, 29]. However, the extracted
meshes suffer from typical stair-case artifacts and their resolution is limited by the resolution of the segmentation, respectively the resolution of the initial MRI scan, see Fig-

20773

