Optimizing Elimination Templates by Greedy Parameter Search*
Evgeniy Martyushev
South Ural State University
martiushevev@susu.ru

Jana Vrablikova
Department of Algebra
MFF, Charles University

Tomas Pajdla
CIIRC - CTU in Prague
pajdla@cvut.cz

j.vrablikov@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose a new method for constructing elimination templates for efficient polynomial system solving of minimal
problems in structure from motion, image matching, and
camera tracking. We first construct a particular affine parameterization of the elimination templates for systems with
a finite number of distinct solutions. Then, we use a heuristic greedy optimization strategy over the space of parameters to get a template with a small size. We test our method
on 34 minimal problems in computer vision. For all of them,
we found the templates either of the same or smaller size
compared to the state-of-the-art. For some difficult examples, our templates are, e.g., 2.1, 2.5, 3.8, 6.6 times smaller.
For the problem of refractive absolute pose estimation with
unknown focal length, we have found a template that is 20
times smaller. Our experiments on synthetic data also show
that the new solvers are fast and numerically accurate. We
also present a fast and numerically accurate solver for the
problem of relative pose estimation with unknown common
focal length and radial distortion.

1. Introduction
Many tasks in 3D reconstruction [49, 50] and camera
tracking [46, 55] lead to solving minimal problems [1, 4,
10, 25, 29, 36, 38, 45, 48, 51], which can be formulated as
systems of polynomial equations.
The state-of-the-art approach to efficient solving polynomial systems for minimal problems is to use symbolicnumeric solvers based on elimination templates [5, 29, 33].
These solvers have two main parts. In the first offline part,
an elimination template is constructed. The template consists of a map (formulas) from input data to a (Macaulay)
coefficient matrix. The template is the same for different input generic (noisy) data. In the second online phase, the co* The

research was supported by projects EU RDF IMPACT
No. CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/15 003/0000468 and EU H2020 No. 871245
SPRING. T. Pajdla is with the Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics
and Cybernetics, Czech Technical University in Prague.

efficient matrix is filled by the data of a particular problem,
reduced by the Gauss–Jordan (G–J) elimination and used
to construct an eigenvalue/eigenvector computation problem of an action matrix that delivers the solutions of the
system.
While the offline phase is not time critical, the online phase has to be computed very fast (mostly in submillisecond time) to be useful for robust optimization based
on RANSAC schemes [16]. Therefore, it is important to
build templates (i.e., Macaulay matrices) that are as small
as possible to make the G–J elimination fast. Besides the
size, we also need to pay attention to building templates
that lead to numerically stable computation.

1.1. Contribution
We develop a new approach to constructing elimination
templates for efficiently solving minimal problems. First,
using the general syzygy-based parameterization of elimination templates from [33], we construct a partial (but still
generic enough) parameterization of templates. Then, we
apply a greedy heuristic optimization over the space of parameters to find as small a template as possible.
We demonstrate our method on 34 minimal problems in
geometric computer vision. For all of them, we found the
templates either of the same or smaller size compared to the
state-of-the-art. For some difficult examples, our templates
are, e.g., 2.1, 2.5, 3.8, 6.6 times smaller. For the problem
of refractive absolute pose estimation with unknown focal
length, we have found a template that is 20 times smaller.
Our experiments on synthetic data also show that the new
solvers are fast and numerically accurate.
We propose a practical solver for the problem of relative
pose estimation with unknown common focal length and
radial distortion. All previously presented solvers for this
problem are either extremely slow or numerically unstable.

1.2. Related work
Elimination templates are matrices that encode the transformation from polynomials of the initial system to polynomials needed to construct the action matrix. Knowing an ac-

15754

