Likert Scoring with Grade Decoupling for Long-term Action Assessment
Angchi Xu1 , Ling-An Zeng2 , Wei-Shi Zheng1,3,4,∗
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Sun Yat-sen University, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
4
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
{xuangch, zenglan3}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract
Long-term action quality assessment is a task of evaluating how well an action is performed, namely, estimating a quality score from a long video. Intuitively, longterm actions generally involve parts exhibiting different levels of skill, and we call the levels of skill as performance
grades. For example, technical highlights and faults may
appear in the same long-term action. Hence, the final score
should be determined by the comprehensive effect of different grades exhibited in the video. To explore this latent
relationship, we design a novel Likert scoring paradigm inspired by the Likert scale in psychometrics, in which we
quantify the grades explicitly and generate the final quality score by combining the quantitative values and the corresponding responses estimated from the video, instead of
performing direct regression. Moreover, we extract gradespecific features, which will be used to estimate the responses of each grade, through a Transformer decoder architecture with diverse learnable queries. The whole model
is named as Grade-decoupling Likert Transformer (GDLT),
and we achieve state-of-the-art results on two long-term action assessment datasets.1

1. Introduction
Action quality assessment (AQA) is a task to evaluate
how well a specific action is performed and is usually modeled as a score regression task. Due to its rich application
scenarios in the real world, such as sport events [16, 27, 30–
32, 37, 43–45], surgical training [10–12, 21, 41] and daily
skills [8, 9, 18], AQA has attracted growing attention from
the computer vision community.
Compared with actions that only take a few seconds
* Corresponding author.
1 Project page https : / / isee - ai . cn / angchi / CVPR22 _
˜
GDLT.html

Grade Decoupling
Grade-aware
Features
Likert Scoring
Scale of Action Performance
0.1
Poor Grade (0 points)
0.2
Fair Grade (30 points)
0.3
Good Grade (60 points)
0.4
Excellent Grade (100 points)
64 points
Total Score

Figure 1. A brief illustration of our idea. The features of an action
video are first disentangled into different grade-aware features,
which contain the information related to specific grades. Then they
will be regarded as “evidence” to generate responses and “fill” the
“scale”. The final quality score is generated by aggregating the
scores of “scale questions” (i.e., different grades) according to the
responses from the video.

(e.g., diving), AQA of long-term actions (e.g., figure skating) is more challenging since they contain richer and more
complex information. Intuitively, a long video is very
likely to exhibit different levels of skill (e.g., excellent,
good, fair or poor) at different parts [9], and we call
the levels of skill as performance grades. For example, a perfect air twist, a substandard leg lifting, and a
fall fault may occur in the same long-term action (figure
skating). Therefore, we conceive that the quality score
should be determined by the comprehensive effect of different grades exhibited in a video. In other words, we suppose that there exists an inherent mapping from grades to
scores. This observation has hardly been discussed in pre-

3232

