Generalized Few-shot Semantic Segmentation
Zhuotao Tian1
1

Xin Lai1

CUHK

2

Li Jiang2

MPI Informatics

Shu Liu3
3

Michelle Shu4

SmartMore

4

Hengshuang Zhao5,6

Cornell University

5

HKU

6

Jiaya Jia1,3

MIT

Abstract
Base Class Learning

Training semantic segmentation models requires a large
amount of finely annotated data, making it hard to quickly
adapt to novel classes not satisfying this condition. FewShot Segmentation (FS-Seg) tackles this problem with many
constraints. In this paper, we introduce a new benchmark,
called Generalized Few-Shot Semantic Segmentation (GFSSeg), to analyze the generalization ability of simultaneously segmenting the novel categories with very few examples and the base categories with sufficient examples.
It is the first study showing that previous representative
state-of-the-art FS-Seg methods fall short in GFS-Seg and
the performance discrepancy mainly comes from the constrained setting of FS-Seg. To make GFS-Seg tractable,
we set up a GFS-Seg baseline that achieves decent performance without structural change on the original model.
Then, since context is essential for semantic segmentation,
we propose the Context-Aware Prototype Learning (CAPL)
that significantly improves performance by 1) leveraging
the co-occurrence prior knowledge from support samples,
and 2) dynamically enriching contextual information to the
classifier, conditioned on the content of each query image.
Both two contributions are experimentally manifested for
their substantial practical merit. Extensive experiments
on Pascal-VOC and COCO also show that CAPL generalizes well to FS-Seg by achieving competitive performance.
Code is available at https://github.com/dvlabresearch/GFS-Seg.

(a) GFS-Seg

Base Class Learning

(b) FS-Seg

Novel Class Registration

Evaluation

Input: Few support images/labels
containing the novel classes.
Output: The novel classes registered
classifier.

Input: Query image.
Output: Predictions on all possible
base and novel classes without any
prior knowledge.

Evaluation
Input: Query image, support
images/labels.
Output: Predictions on the novel
classes exactly provided by the
support labels.

Figure 1. Pipeline illustrations of GFS-Seg and FS-Seg. (a) GFSSeg has an additional novel class registration phase that registers
the novel information to the new classifier, therefore, in the last
evaluation phase, GFS-Seg methods are able to make predictions
on all possible base and novel classes as testing normal segmentation models without forwarding additional support samples that
provide the prior knowledge of target classes. Contrarily, (b) FSSeg models in the evaluation phase require support images/labels
to provide the information of target classes exactly contained in
each query image.

1. Introduction

ited labeled data, few-shot segmentation (denoted as FSSeg) [31] models are trained on well-labeled base classes
and are tested on previously unseen novel classes. During training, FS-Seg divides data into the support and query
sets. Samples of support set aim to provide FS-Seg models
with target categorical information to identify target regions
in query samples, with the purpose to mimic the situation
where only a few labeled data of novel classes are available.
After training, both support and query samples are sent to
FS-Seg models to yield query predictions on previously unseen classes based on the support information.

Development of deep learning has yielded significant
performance gain to semantic segmentation tasks. Representative semantic segmentation methods [5, 64] benefit a
wide range of applications for robotics, automatic driving,
medical imaging, etc. However, once these frameworks are
trained, without sufficient fully-labeled data, they are unable to deal with unseen classes in new applications. Even
if the required data of novel classes are ready, fine-tuning
costs additional time and resources.
In order to quickly adapt to novel classes with only lim-

Limitations of FS-Seg. However, FS-Seg requires support samples to contain classes that exist in query samples.
It may be overly strong in many situations to have this prior
knowledge because providing support samples in the same
classes requires cumbersome manual selection. Besides,
FS-Seg only evaluates the novel classes, while test samples
in normal semantic segmentation may also contain the base
classes. Experiments show that exemplar FS-Seg models
cannot well tackle the practical situation of evaluation on
both base and novel classes due to these constraints.

11563

