Video Shadow Detection via Spatio-Temporal Interpolation Consistency Training
Xiao Lu1 , Yihong Cao1 , Sheng Liu1 , Chengjiang Long2 ,
*
Zipei Chen3 , Xuanyu Zhou1 , Yimin Yang4,5 , Chunxia Xiao3
1
College of Engineering and Design, Hunan Normal University, Changsha, China
2
Meta Reality Labs, Burlingame, CA, USA
3
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei, China
4
Department of Computer Science, Lakehead University, Canada
5
Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Canada
{luxiao,caoyihong,liusheng,zhouxy}@hunnu.edu.cn, clong1@fb.com,
{czpp19,cxxiao}@whu.edu.cn, yyang48@lakeheadu.ca

Image data with labels

Abstract
It is challenging to annotate large-scale datasets for supervised video shadow detection methods. Using a model
trained on labeled images to the video frames directly may
lead to high generalization error and temporal inconsistent results. In this paper, we address these challenges
by proposing a Spatio-Temporal Interpolation Consistency
Training (STICT) framework to rationally feed the unlabeled video frames together with the labeled images into
an image shadow detection network training. Specifically,
we propose the Spatial and Temporal ICT, in which we define two new interpolation schemes, i.e., the spatial interpolation and the temporal interpolation. We then derive the
spatial and temporal interpolation consistency constraints
accordingly for enhancing generalization in the pixel-wise
classification task and for encouraging temporal consistent
predictions, respectively. In addition, we design a ScaleAware Network for multi-scale shadow knowledge learning in images, and propose a scale-consistency constraint
to minimize the discrepancy among the predictions at different scales. Our proposed approach is extensively validated on the ViSha dataset and a self-annotated dataset.
Experimental results show that, even without video labels,
our approach is better than most state of the art supervised,
semi-supervised or unsupervised image/video shadow detection methods and other methods in related tasks. Code
and dataset are available at https://github.com/
yihong-97/STICT.

* Corresponding author.

(a) SANet results

SANet

Encoder

Decoder

(b) STICT results

Sequential frames
Knowledge Transfer
with STICT

Figure 1. Shadow maps produced by our image shadow detection
network SANet (a) trained on labeled images and (b) trained on
both labeled images and unlabeled videos with STICT.

1. Introduction
Shadow detection is an important problem for many computer vision and graphics tasks, and has drawn interest in
a wide range of vision applications [4, 20, 40, 41], such as
object recognition [13, 23–25], virtual reality scene generation, light position estimation and object shape perception. Recently, shadow detection has achieved significant progress [6, 7, 12, 19, 35, 43, 45] on image benchmark datasets [33, 35, 44] due to the development of deep
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), while lacking of
large-scale annotated datasets is the main reason impending
the applications of deep learning-based methods in video
shadow detection (VSD).
How to rationally feed the unlabeled video samples into
the network training, and transfer knowledge from labeled
images to videos efficiently is critical for promoting the capability of deep learning-based methods on unsupervised
data. However, it is rare and challenging for existing semisupervised methods to transfer the shadow patterns in im-

3116

