VideoINR: Learning Video Implicit Neural Representation for
Continuous Space-Time Super-Resolution
Zeyuan Chen1
Yinbo Chen2 Jingwen Liu2 Xingqian Xu3,6 Vidit Goel6
Zhangyang Wang5 Humphrey Shi6,5,3† Xiaolong Wang2†
USTC

2

UC San Diego

3

UIUC

4

UT Austin

5

U of Oregon

Abstract

1. Introduction
We observe the visual world in the form of streaming and
continuous data. However, when we record such data with
a video camera in a computer, it is often stored with limited
spatial resolutions and temporal frame rates. Because of
the high cost on recording and storing large time-scales of
video data, oftentimes our computer vision system will need
to process low-resolution and low frame rate videos. This
introduces challenges in recognition systems such as video
object detection [53], and we are still struggling at learning
to recognize motion and actions from discrete frames [4,
12]. When presenting the video back to humans (e.g., on
a TV), it is essential to visualize it in high resolution and
† Corresponding authors.

Picsart AI Research (PAIR)

VideoINR

(x,y,t)
ENCODER

Videos typically record the streaming and continuous visual data as discrete consecutive frames. Since the storage cost is expensive for videos of high fidelity, most of
them are stored in a relatively low resolution and frame
rate. Recent works of Space-Time Video Super-Resolution
(STVSR) are developed to incorporate temporal interpolation and spatial super-resolution in a unified framework. However, most of them only support a fixed upsampling scale, which limits their flexibility and applications. In this work, instead of following the discrete
representations, we propose Video Implicit Neural Representation (VideoINR), and we show its applications for
STVSR. The learned implicit neural representation can
be decoded to videos of arbitrary spatial resolution and
frame rate. We show that VideoINR achieves competitive performances with state-of-the-art STVSR methods on
common up-sampling scales and significantly outperforms
prior works on continuous and out-of-training-distribution
scales. Our project page is at here and code is available at https://github.com/Picsart-AI-Research/VideoINRContinuous-Space-Time-Super-Resolution.

6

X

T
Y

Continuous video

DECODER

1

RGB

Interpolated Frame

Query all the coordinates in interpolated frames

Time Scale

T

Space Scale
Basic Interpolation Space

Our Interpolation Space

Figure 1. Video Implicit Neural Representation (VideoINR) maps
any 3D space-time coordinate to an RGB value. This nature enables extending the latent interpolation space of STVSR from fixed
space and time scales to arbitrary frame rate and spatial resolution.

high frame rate for user experience. How to recover the low
resolution video back to high resolution in space and time
becomes an important problem and the first step for many
downstream applications.
Space-Time Video Super-Resolution (STVSR) approaches [15, 21, 28, 37, 38, 47, 48] are developed to increase the spatial resolution and frame rate at the same
time given a low-resolution and low frame rate video as
the input. Instead of performing super-resolution in space
and time separately in two stages, researchers recently propose to simultaneously perform super-resolution in one
stage [15, 21, 47, 48]. Intuitively, the aggregated information in time from multiple frames can reveal missing details
for each frame when spatial scaling is applied, and the temporal interpolation can be more smooth and accurate given
higher and richer spatial representation. The one-stage endto-end training has shown to unify the benefits from both

2047

