Reading to Listen at the Cocktail Party:
Multi-Modal Speech Separation
Akam Rahimi, Triantafyllos Afouras, Andrew Zisserman
VGG, Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, UK
{akam, afourast, az}@robots.ox.ac.uk
https://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/˜vgg/research/voiceformer

Abstract
The goal of this paper is speech separation and enhancement in multi-speaker and noisy environments using
a combination of different modalities. Previous works have
shown good performance when conditioning on temporal or
static visual evidence such as synchronised lip movements
or face identity. In this paper, we present a unified framework for multi-modal speech separation and enhancement
based on synchronous or asynchronous cues. To that end
we make the following contributions: (i) we design a modern Transformer-based architecture tailored to fuse different modalities to solve the speech separation task in the raw
waveform domain; (ii) we propose conditioning on the textual content of a sentence alone or in combination with visual information; (iii) we demonstrate the robustness of our
model to audio-visual synchronisation offsets; and, (iv) we
obtain state-of-the-art performance on the well-established
benchmark datasets LRS2 and LRS3.

1. Introduction
Humans have the remarkable ability to focus on conversations even in a room full of talking people, a phenomenon
known as the “cocktail party effect” [29]. Our brains carry
out this feat by concentrating their attention to a specific
speaker while filtering out the rest of the stimuli originating from interfering voices and other environmental noises.
Although this ability manifests to a limited extent through
hearing alone, it is greatly enhanced when simultaneous information from other modalities is available. For example watching a speaker’s lips can significantly help disambiguate speech in noise [41], while understanding the natural language context of a sentence enables the listener to
anticipate the potential next words of the speaker.
In recent years, progress in audio-visual learning has
made it possible for machines to also achieve this ability
and very effectively isolate individual voices out of multi-

Figure 1. We propose VoiceFormer, a framework for multi-modal
speech separation and enhancement, that isolates speech according to either the text content of the target speaker’s utterance, their
lip movements or both. Our framework allows conditioning on
cues from multiple modalities, without requiring them to be temporally synchronised or have a common temporal rate. This gives
it multiple advantages, such as robustness to temporal misalignments between the inputs.

speaker mixtures of speech or noisy audio [1, 14, 31]. Solving this problem enables a great range of practical applications, such as improving subtitle generation in videos with
noisy audio, developing smart audio-visual hearing aids to
enhance speech conditioned on visual input, or facilitating
teleconferencing in noisy settings such as airports or cars.
Previous works have principally taken two approaches:
either using synchronous cues, most commonly the lip
movements of the target speaker [1, 14]; or using static
(fixed embedding) cues such as the voice [49] or face characteristics [11, 21]. The former has the advantage of using
dynamic evidence that is very strongly correlated to the desired speech output. However, relying on lip movements
has several disadvantages. First they may be momentarily
disrupted – e.g. from visual occlusions – therefore strong
reliance will make the model sensitive to this form of visual
noise; and second, they require synchronisation between
the audio and visual streams. On the other hand, static
cues arising from biometric characteristics of the speaker
are more robust to temporary disruptions, however they are
not dynamically correlated to the speech (so are a weaker
signal) and may be common among different people. For
example it may be increasingly harder to separate speech

10493

