Rethinking Architecture Design for Tackling Data Heterogeneity in
Federated Learning
Liangqiong Qu1∗ Yuyin Zhou2∗ Paul Pu Liang3∗ Yingda Xia4 Feifei Wang1
Ehsan Adeli1 Li Fei-Fei1 Daniel Rubin1
1
Stanford University,2 UC Santa Cruz, 3 Carnegie Mellon University, 4 Johns Hopkins University
{liangqiqu, zhouyuyiner, philyingdaxia}@gmail.com, pliang@cs.cmu.edu,
{ffwang, eadeli, feifeili, rubin}@stanford.edu,

Abstract

CWT

Federated learning is an emerging research paradigm
enabling collaborative training of machine learning models
among different organizations while keeping data private at
each institution. Despite recent progress, there remain fundamental challenges such as the lack of convergence and
the potential for catastrophic forgetting across real-world
heterogeneous devices. In this paper, we demonstrate that
self-attention-based architectures (e.g., Transformers) are
more robust to distribution shifts and hence improve federated learning over heterogeneous data. Concretely, we conduct the first rigorous empirical investigation of different
neural architectures across a range of federated algorithms,
real-world benchmarks, and heterogeneous data splits. Our
experiments show that simply replacing convolutional networks with Transformers can greatly reduce catastrophic
forgetting of previous devices, accelerate convergence, and
reach a better global model, especially when dealing with
heterogeneous data. We release our code and pretrained
models to encourage future exploration in robust architectures as an alternative to current research efforts on the optimization front.

FedAVG

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) is an emerging research
paradigm to train machine learning models on private data distributed over multiple heterogeneous devices [47]. FL
keeps data on each device private and aims to train a global model that is updated only via communicated parameters
instead of the data itself. Therefore, it provides an opportunity for collaborative machine learning across multiple institutions without risking leakage of private data [25,36,54].
This has proved especially useful in domains such as healthcare [4, 7, 15, 40], learning from mobile devices [17, 38], s∗ Equal contribution

Figure 1. Prediction test accuracy on highly heterogeneous data partitions (Split-3) of CIFAR-10 dataset versus model size1 .
Vision Transformers (ViTs and Swin Transformers) significantly
outperform CNNs (ResNets and EfficientNets) on highly heterogeneous data partitions.

mart cities [25], and communication networks [49], where
preserving privacy is crucial. Despite the rich opportunities afforded by FL, there remain fundamental research
problems to be tackled before FL can be readily applicable to real-world data distributions. Most current methods
that aim to learn a single global model across non-IID devices encounter challenges such as non-guaranteed convergence and model weight divergence for parallel FL meth-

10061

