Modeling Motion with Multi-Modal Features for Text-Based Video Segmentation
Wangbo Zhao1,2,3 Kai Wang1 Xiangxiang Chu2 Fuzhao Xue1 Xinchao Wang1 Yang You1 *
1
National University of Singapore 2 Meituan Inc. 3 Northwestern Polytechnical University
wangbo.zhao96@gmail.com, kai.wang@comp.nus.edu.sg, chuxiangxiang@meituan.com,
f.xue@u.nus.edu, xinchao@nus.edu.sg, youy@comp.nus.edu.sg

the car is driving along a road

Abstract
(a)

Text-based video segmentation aims to segment the target object in a video based on a describing sentence. Incorporating motion information from optical flow maps with
appearance and linguistic modalities is crucial yet has been
largely ignored by previous work. In this paper, we design a
method to fuse and align appearance, motion, and linguistic
features to achieve accurate segmentation. Specifically, we
propose a multi-modal video transformer, which can fuse
and aggregate multi-modal and temporal features between
frames. Furthermore, we design a language-guided feature
fusion module to progressively fuse appearance and motion
features in each feature level with guidance from linguistic
features. Finally, a multi-modal alignment loss is proposed
to alleviate the semantic gap between features from different
modalities. Extensive experiments on A2D Sentences and
J-HMDB Sentences verify the performance and the generalization ability of our method compared to the state-of-theart methods.

1. Introduction
Text-based video segmentation aims at locating and segmenting the object described by a language sentence in a
video sequence. Unlike traditional tasks, which do prediction on video- or frame- level, e.g. text-to-video retrieval
[27, 40, 52], video caption [32, 62], video question answering [22, 51], and language-queried video localization
[1, 60], this task requires relatively more fine-grained multimodal and temporal understanding for pixel-level segmentation. The challenge of this task can be thus summarized
as: (1) how to reason between visual and linguistic modalities to locate the target object, and (2) how to leverage temporal information to enhance segmentation.
To solve the former problem, previous works adopt simple concatenation [18], generating dynamic filters [16, 48]
and cross-modal attention modules [21, 49] to achieve interactions between two modalities. When it comes to the
* Corresponding author.

Our code is publicly available at: https : / / github . com /
wangbo-zhao/2022CVPR-MMMMTBVS.

cat jumping over the bar
(b)

a man is jumping into the car
(c)

Baseline

Our

Flow

GT

Figure 1. Comparison between baseline and our model. We adopt
”B” in 4.4 as the baseline model. Compared with the baseline
model, our model can incorporate motion information from optical
flow maps with appearance and linguistic features and generate
better segmentation masks.

latter problem, they usually adopt 3D convolution neural
networks (3D CNNs) e.g. I3D [8] to extract features from a
video clip. However, all these methods ignore exploring the
explicit motion information between frames for text-based
video segmentation. In this task, the target object usually
has action, and the corresponding text contains some words
to describe its motion e.g. driving and jumping in Figure 1.
This means that the motion information may help the model
to find the target object. Despite the fact that some motion
information between frames can be implicitly learned in 3D
CNNs, it can not well interact with other modalities. Introducing motion information has been tried in some video
tasks [9, 15, 24, 30, 53, 61, 63], but how to incorporate the
motion information with appearance and linguistic features
in text-based video segmentation is still challenging.
A common way to introduce explicit motion information is to extract features from flow maps generated from
an optical flow estimation model. From flow maps in Figure 1, we can find that the target object with motion usually is distinctive and can be easily identified. This may
promote the final performance. To leverage the motion information from optical flow, Gavrilyuk et al. [16] adopt two
3D CNNS with different parameters to generate masks from

11737

