Critical Regularizations for Neural Surface Reconstruction in the Wild
Yao Yao2
Shiwei Li2
Tian Fang2
Jingyang Zhang1 *
David McKinnon2
Yanghai Tsin2
Long Quan2
1
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Apple
1
2

jzhangbs@cse.ust.hk

{yaoyao, shiwei, fangtian, dmckinnon, ytsin, quan.long}@apple.com

Abstract
Neural implicit functions have recently shown promising results on surface reconstructions from multiple views.
However, current methods still suffer from excessive time
complexity and poor robustness when reconstructing unbounded or complex scenes. In this paper, we present
RegSDF, which shows that proper point cloud supervisions and geometry regularizations are sufficient to produce high-quality and robust reconstruction results. Specifically, RegSDF takes an additional oriented point cloud
as input, and optimizes a signed distance field and a surface light field within a differentiable rendering framework.
We also introduce the two critical regularizations for this
optimization. The first one is the Hessian regularization
that smoothly diffuses the signed distance values to the entire distance field given noisy and incomplete input. And
the second one is the minimal surface regularization that
compactly interpolates and extrapolates the missing geometry. Extensive experiments are conducted on DTU, BlendedMVS, and Tanks and Temples datasets. Compared with recent neural surface reconstruction approaches, RegSDF is
able to reconstruct surfaces with fine details even for open
scenes with complex topologies and unstructured camera
trajectories.

1. Introduction
Surface reconstruction from multiple calibrated views is
one of the key tasks in 3D computer vision. Traditionally,
the task is solved by first estimating a point cloud from images by multi-view stereo (MVS) [1, 4, 22, 26], and then
extracting a triangular mesh from the point cloud [8,11,14].
Recently, neural implicit surface reconstruction also shows
comparable or even better results especially for textureless and non-Lambertian surfaces. These methods apply
multi-layer perceptrons (MLP) to map a space coordinate
* This work is done when Jingyang Zhang was an intern at Apple

to different geometry properties, such as density [16], occupancy [17] or signed distance to the nearest surface point
[25, 28, 29, 31]. The MLP can be fit into explicit geometry representations such as contour masks [17, 29], depth
maps [31] and point clouds [23], or can be further optimized with the scene appearance through differentiable rendering [16–18, 25, 28–30].
However, it is still a challenging task to conduct surface reconstruction in the wild. First, textureless or nonLambertian surfaces, which exist in real-world scenes, are
hard to be recovered even for learning-based methods. Second, camera trajectories of real-world data may be unstructured instead of object-centric. In traditional mesh reconstruction pipelines, although multi-view stereo [22, 26] has
been proven to be effective for a variety of different scenes,
the reconstructed point cloud inevitably suffers from missing or noisy geometries, which are difficult to be corrected
in later mesh extraction steps. On the other hands, recent
neural surface methods [16, 18, 25, 28] is able to generate
surfaces directly from multi-view images. However, the operation of volumetric rendering [16,18,25,28] with implicit
functions is time-consuming, and those methods are originally designed for reconstructions of object-centric captures
rather than open scenes with unstructured camera trajectories.
In this paper, we propose RegSDF, a neural framework
for surface reconstruction from multi-view images for a
broad variety of scenes. Implementation-wise, we choose a
signed distance field (SDF) as the geometry representation
and a surface light field as the appearance model to generate rendered images for network training. To take advantages of well-established MVS pipelines, we additionally
apply an oriented point cloud from MVS as input to our reconstruction, where the SDF will be fit into observed data
points and also normal directions. Two critical regularizations, namely the Hessian regularization of second derivatives and the minimal surface constraint, are proposed for
robust neural surface reconstruction. The Hessian regularization is designed to let the signed distance value smoothly

6270

