Cross-modal Map Learning for Vision and Language Navigation
Georgios Georgakis, Karl Schmeckpeper, Karan Wanchoo, Soham Dan,
Eleni Miltsakaki, Dan Roth, Kostas Daniilidis
University of Pennsylvania
{ggeorgak,karls,kwanchoo,sohamdan,elenimi,danroth,kostas}@seas.upenn.edu
Project webpage: https://ggeorgak11.github.io/CM2-project/

Abstract
We consider the problem of Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN). The majority of current methods for VLN are
trained end-to-end using either unstructured memory such
as LSTM, or using cross-modal attention over the egocentric observations of the agent. In contrast to other works,
our key insight is that the association between language
and vision is stronger when it occurs in explicit spatial
representations. In this work, we propose a cross-modal
map learning model for vision-and-language navigation
that first learns to predict the top-down semantics on an
egocentric map for both observed and unobserved regions,
and then predicts a path towards the goal as a set of waypoints. In both cases, the prediction is informed by the language through cross-modal attention mechanisms. We experimentally test the basic hypothesis that language-driven
navigation can be solved given a map, and then show competitive results on the full VLN-CE benchmark.

1. Introduction
For mobile robots to be able to operate together with humans, they must be able to execute tasks that are defined
not in the form of machine-readable scripts but rather in the
form of human instructions. A very basic but challenging
task is going from A to B. While robots have been quite
successful in executing this task using metric representations, it has been more challenging for robots to execute
semantic tasks like “go to the kitchen sink” or follow instructions that describe a path and associate actions with
natural language, defined as the Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN) task [4, 32, 33]. In VLN, the robot is given
instructions and has to reach a goal making use of images
of the environment that it can acquire along the way.
The dominant approach for VLN tasks has been using
end-to-end pipelines from images and instructions to actions [17, 23, 31, 32]. While they can be attractive due to
their simplicity, they are expected to implicitly learn end-toend all navigation components such as mapping, planning,

Figure 1. We approach the task of vision-and-language navigation
as a two-stage procedure which learns to semantically and spatially ground the instruction on egocentric maps.

and control, and thus often require considerable amounts of
training data. This approach to designing navigation systems is in direct contrast to research on human spatial navigation, which has shown that humans and other species
build map-like representations of the environment to accomplish way-finding [41, 51]. However, multiple findings
have shown that the ability to build cognitive maps and acquire spatial knowledge deteriorates when humans exclusively use ready to drive or walk paths to a goal [6]. On
the other hand, studies have shown that humans build better spatial representations when presented with landmarkbased navigation instructions rather than full paths [54].
Such spatial representations enable the recall of landmarks
on an egocentric map weeks after the experiment. While
this does not prove that humans build a map during wayfinding when following semantic instructions, it is a strong indication that they can anchor landmarks and other semantics
to a map that they easily recall. Research in learning of
mapping and planning in computer vision and robotics [22]
has also shown that an end-to-end system encompasses semantic maps that naturally emerge in the learning process.
We propose Cross-modal Map Learning (CM2 ), a novel
navigation system for the VLN task in continuous environments, that learns a language-informed representation for
both map and trajectory prediction by applying twice cross-

15460

