ReSTR: Convolution-free Referring Image Segmentation Using Transformers
Namyup Kim1
1
POSTECH

Dongwon Kim1
Cuiling Lan2
Wenjun Zeng3
Suha Kwak1
2
3
Microsoft Research Asia
EIT Institute for Advanced Study
http://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/restr/

Abstract
Referring image segmentation is an advanced semantic
segmentation task where target is not a predeﬁned class but
is described in natural language. Most of existing methods for this task rely heavily on convolutional neural networks, which however have trouble capturing long-range
dependencies between entities in the language expression
and are not ﬂexible enough for modeling interactions between the two different modalities. To address these issues,
we present the ﬁrst convolution-free model for referring image segmentation using transformers, dubbed ReSTR. Since
it extracts features of both modalities through transformer
encoders, it can capture long-range dependencies between
entities within each modality. Also, ReSTR fuses features of
the two modalities by a self-attention encoder, which enables ﬂexible and adaptive interactions between the two
modalities in the fusion process. The fused features are fed
to a segmentation module, which works adaptively according to the image and language expression in hand. ReSTR
is evaluated and compared with previous work on all public
benchmarks, where it outperforms all existing models.

1. Introduction
Throughout the recent years, there have been witnessed
remarkable advances in semantic segmentation in terms of
both efﬁcacy and efﬁciency [4, 5, 15, 28, 33, 51, 52]. However, its application to real-world downstream tasks is still
limited. Since the task is designed to deal with only a predeﬁned set of classes (e.g., “car”, “person”), semantic segmentation models are hard to address undeﬁned classes and
speciﬁc entities of user interest (e.g., “a red Ferrari”, “a man
wearing a blue hat”).
Referring image segmentation [12] has been studied to
resolve this limitation by segmenting an image region corresponding to a natural language expression given as query.
As this task is no longer restricted by predeﬁned classes, it
enables a large variety of applications such as human-robot
interaction and interactive photo editing. Referring image
segmentation is however more challenging than semantic
segmentation since it demands to comprehend individual

: Visual features
: Class seed embedding

: Linguistic features
: Inner product

Patch-level prediction

Composition of Transformers

A white van follows right
behind an orange sedan

Input image

Upsampling and Linear Layers

Pixel-level prediction

Figure 1. Our convolution-free architecture for Referring image
Segmentation using TRansformer (ReSTR) takes a set of nonoverlapped image patches and that of word embeddings, and captures intra- and inter-modality interactions by transformers. Then,
ReSTR takes a class seed embedding to produce an adaptive classiﬁer which examines whether each image patch contains a part
of target entity. Finally, a series of upsampling and linear layers
computes a pixel-level prediction in a coarse-to-ﬁne manner.

entities and their relations expressed in the language expression (e.g., “a car behind the taxi next to the building”), and
to fully exploit such structured and relational information
in the segmentation process. For this reason, models for the
task should be capable of capturing interactions between semantic entities in both modalities as well as joint reasoning
over the two different modalities.
Existing methods for referring image segmentation [3,
11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 22, 25, 31, 37, 46] have adopted convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and recurrent neural networks (RNNs) to extract visual and linguistic features, respectively. In general, these features are integrated into
a multimodal feature map through convolution layers applied to a concatenation of the two features, so-called
concatenation-convolution operation. On top of the multimodal feature map, recent methods [11, 13, 14, 16, 46] further employ attention mechanisms [40, 43] so that the fea-

18145

