SASIC: Stereo Image Compression with Latent Shifts and Stereo Attention
Matthias Wödlinger
TU Wien, Vienna, Austria

Jan Kotera
TU Wien

Jan Xu
Deep Render, London, UK

Robert Sablatnig
TU Wien

mwoedlinger@cvl.tuwien.ac.at

Abstract
We propose a learned method for stereo image compression that leverages the similarity of the left and right
images in a stereo pair due to overlapping fields of view.
The left image is compressed by a learned compression
method based on an autoencoder with a hyperprior entropy
model. The right image uses this information from the previously encoded left image in both the encoding and decoding stages. In particular, for the right image, we encode
only the residual of its latent representation to the optimally shifted latent of the left image. On top of that, we
also employ a stereo attention module to connect left and
right images during decoding. The performance of the proposed method is evaluated on two benchmark stereo image
datasets (Cityscapes and InStereo2K) and outperforms previous stereo image compression methods while being significantly smaller in model size.

1. Introduction
Lossy image compression is a fundamental task in image
processing that aims to preserve the visual image content
while reducing the bitrate needed for storage or transmission. It is a long-studied problem and a very active field
of research both in traditional hand-crafted approaches and
newly emerging learned methods. The traditional image encoding and decoding pipeline (“codec”) typically consist of
partitioning the image into small blocks to be processed separately, a linear transform to decorrelate the image values,
intra block prediction (motion search) and residual coding
to exploit repetition and self-similarity of the image content
and decrease the entropy of its representation, quantization
to obtain a finite set of symbols to code, and an entropy
coder to store the resulting representation most efficiently.
The decoding pipeline performs analogous operations in reverse. In contrast, modern learned compression methods
typically process the image as a whole, without partitioning,
by models, based on variational autoencoders, in which the
latent representation is quantised and entropy coded with a
learned probability distribution. The parametrization of this

distribution, the entropy model, along with the autoencoder,
are trained to minimize the cross-entropy against the true latent distribution so that the whole codec can be trained by
optimizing the weighted rate/distortion loss.
In stereo image compression, the primary objective is
the same with the additional possibility to achieve better
performance by exploiting the mutual information between
left and right images caused by their overlapping fields of
view (albeit from slightly different viewpoints). In traditional methods, this can be achieved by the same set of tools
available for inter-frame or motion prediction. Motion vector search in learned compression methods is far less explicit and extending them to stereo compression is therefore
paradoxically more difficult. In the current literature, there
are two existing deep learning based methods explicitly targeting stereo image compression – the DSIC model by Liu
et al. [21] and HESIC model by Deng et al. [13]. In DSIC, a
dense warp field is estimated, and warped features from the
left image are fed to the encoder and decoder of the right
image. In HESIC, a rigid homography transform in the image space is used. In both cases, the models are augmented
by additional modules for joint entropy modelling and image enhancement, and as a result, they are rather large, and
their training far from straightforward.
In contrast, the proposed model is very lightweight (4%
and 10% the size of DSIC and HESIC, respectively, in number of parameters), conceptually simple, and does not require any special training procedure without sacrificing performance. The “backbone” of our method is an adaption
of [38], but in principle, any general single image compression encoder-decoder model can be used as the backbone.
The left image is encoded normally. After the right image is
processed by the encoder, we find optimal horizontal shifts
(minimizing the mean-square error) of each channel of its
latent representation to the corresponding channel of the
left image latent and subtract the two shifted channels so
that only the residual is encoded for the right latent. This is
motivated by the observation that the dominant rigid transform between rectified images in a stereo pair is a horizontal
shift and working in the latent space results in larger effective disparity range due to downsampling. To account for

661

