Learning Object Context for Novel-view Scene Layout Generation
Xiaotian Qiao1

Gerhard P. Hancke2

Rynson W.H. Lau2

1
2

School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
Input scene layout

Abstract
Novel-view prediction of a scene has many applications.
Existing works mainly focus on generating novel-view images via pixel-wise prediction in the image space, often resulting in severe ghosting and blurry artifacts. In this paper,
we make the first attempt to explore novel-view prediction in
the layout space, and introduce the new problem of novelview scene layout generation. Given a single scene layout
and the camera transformation as inputs, our goal is to
generate a plausible scene layout for a specified viewpoint.
Such a problem is challenging as it involves accurate understanding of the 3D geometry and semantics of the scene
from as little as a single 2D scene layout. To tackle this
challenging problem, we propose a deep model to capture
contextualized object representation by explicitly modeling
the object context transformation in the scene. The contextualized object representation is essential in generating
geometrically and semantically consistent scene layouts of
different views. Experiments show that our model outperforms several strong baselines on many indoor and outdoor
scenes, both qualitatively and quantitatively. We also show
that our model enables a wide range of applications, including novel-view image synthesis, novel-view image editing,
and amodal object estimation.

1. Introduction
Multi-view prediction of a scene is of great importance
in 3D scene understanding and has been studied for a long
time [6, 10], with potential applications such as robotics,
Virtual Reality (VR), and Augmented Reality (AR). There
is a line of research on generating images of a scene from
new viewpoints [5, 31, 42]. However, these works render a
scene in the image space via pixel-wise prediction directly,
often resulting in severe ghosting and blurry artifacts.
In this paper, we take a step towards novel-view prediction of a scene in the layout space. We introduce the
new problem of novel-view scene layout generation. Having a robust novel-view scene layout model not only enables

Output scene layout

(a) Indoor scene

(b) Outdoor scene

Figure 1. Novel-view scene layout generation. Given a single layout of an indoor scene (a) or an outdoor scene (b) as input (1st
column), our model can generate plausible novel-view scene layouts for different viewpoints (2nd and 3rd columns).

generating consistent and sharp scene layouts from different
views even with large camera movements, but also provides
scene understanding priors for a wide range of applications,
including novel-view image synthesis, image editing, and
amodal object estimation. As shown in Figure 1, given a
single layout of an indoor scene (a) or an outdoor scene (b)
as input, our goal is to generate novel-view layouts of the
scene for different viewpoints (2nd and 3rd columns).
However, generating plausible novel-view scene layouts
is a highly challenging problem. It requires an accurate understanding of the 3D geometry and semantics of the scene
from just a single 2D scene layout. The sizes, positions,
and shapes of the objects may change a lot in both observed regions and unseen regions across different viewpoints. Hence, this problem is highly under-determined, as
a result of the ambiguity of the input single 2D scene layout.
Recall how the human cognitive system works in this
task. Consider the input layout of an indoor scene shown
in Figure 1 (a). Human beings may use the geometric priors and semantic relations of the objects in the input layout
to infer the scene layout of a different viewpoint. The geometric priors contain the common object properties (e.g.,
the shape of the window), while semantic relations represent interactions among different types of objects to indi-

16990

