Injecting Semantic Concepts into End-to-End Image Captioning
Zhiyuan Fang♠ , Jianfeng Wang♥ , Xiaowei Hu♥ , Lin Liang♥ , Zhe Gan♥ ,
Lijuan Wang♥ , Yezhou Yang♠ , Zicheng Liu♥
♠
♥
Arizona State University,
Microsoft Corporation
{zy.fang, yz.yang}@asu.edu
{jianfw, xiaowei.hu, lliang, zhe.gan, lijuanw, zliu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Tremendous progresses have been made in recent years
in developing better image captioning models, yet most of
them rely on a separate object detector to extract regional
features. Recent vision-language studies are shifting towards
the detector-free trend by leveraging grid representations
for more flexible model training and faster inference speed.
However, such development is primarily focused on image
understanding tasks, and remains less investigated for the
caption generation task. In this paper, we are concerned with
a better-performing detector-free image captioning model,
and propose a pure vision transformer-based image captioning model, dubbed as ViTCAP, in which grid representations
are used without extracting the regional features. For improved performance, we introduce a novel Concept Token
Network (CTN) to predict the semantic concepts and then
incorporate them into the end-to-end captioning. In particular, the CTN is built on the basis of a vision transformer, and
is designed to predict the concept tokens through a classification task, from which the rich semantic information contained greatly benefits the captioning task. Compared with
the previous detector-based models, ViTCAP drastically simplifies the architectures and at the same time achieves competitive performance on various challenging image captioning datasets. In particular, ViTCAP reaches 138.1 CIDEr
scores on COCO-caption Karpathy-split, 93.8 and 108.6
CIDEr scores on nocaps and Google-CC captioning datasets,
respectively.

1. Introduction
The task of image captioning aims to generate humanreadable descriptive text from an image. Recent studies
have witnessed its great development which are primarily
reflected in the aspects of more advanced cross-modal fusion
architectures [11, 45, 50, 54, 57, 63, 65, 67, 70]; more expressive object-centric features [4, 69] & tags [16, 23, 35, 58]
obtained from a pre-trained object detection model; or learn-

Image
Features

Image
Encoder

IMG
REG.
FEAT.

OD
TAGS

REG.
OPE.

Tags
(Optional)

Grid FEAT.

Multi-Modal
Module

Caption

Concept
Tokens

GRID FEAT.

CTN

ENC

ENC

( ResBlocks or ViT )

( ViT/b )

IMG

IMG

Feature Maps

ENC
IMG

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Comparisons of different image captioning models.
Top: A general image captioning pipeline. Bottom: (a). Prevailing
conventional models [23, 36, 69] which are based on an object
detector to extract regional features. Object tags [35, 69] can be
optionally used to assist the text generation through a multi-modal
decoder network. This usually requires regional operations (REG.
OPE.) that are time consuming. (b). To eliminate the detection
module, a ResNet variant [20] or Vision Transformer [30] can be
applied as substitution to output the grid feature [61, 62]. This
replacement has been studied on the image understanding task
recently but very few works focus on the generation task. (c). Our
proposed ViTCAP, which is detector-free and incorporates a novel
Concept Token Network to predict semantic concepts as tokens for
the image captioning task.

ing general Vision and Language (VL) representations from
large image-text corpus [16, 35, 58, 61, 62, 71].
Despite these significant advances, most of the mainstream captioning models [11, 45, 54, 70] rely heavily on a
bulky object detector to provide regional visual representations for the multimodal interaction, as shown in Figure 1-a.
In spite of the superior performance brought by the object
features, the ensuing difficulties occur as they: 1) lead to
heavy computational load due to the regional operations
(i.e., RPN, RoI Pooling, and NMS). These intermediate operations unavoidably cause training inefficiency and high
inference latency at prediction stage [30, 58]; 2) require

18009

