HARA: A Hierarchical Approach for Robust Rotation Averaging
Seong Hun Lee*
Javier Civera
I3A, University of Zaragoza, Spain
{seonghunlee, jcivera}@unizar.es

Abstract
We propose a novel hierarchical approach for multiple
rotation averaging, dubbed HARA. Our method incrementally initializes the rotation graph based on a hierarchy of
triplet support. The key idea is to build a spanning tree by
prioritizing the edges with many strong triplet supports and
gradually adding those with weaker and fewer supports.
This reduces the risk of adding outliers in the spanning tree.
As a result, we obtain a robust initial solution that enables
us to filter outliers prior to nonlinear optimization. With
minimal modification, our approach can also integrate the
knowledge of the number of valid 2D-2D correspondences.
We perform extensive evaluations on both synthetic and real
datasets, demonstrating state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of multiple rotation averaging
in the presence of outliers, i.e., finding multiple absolute rotations Ri given a partial set of noisy, outlier-contaminated
constraints on relative rotations Rij = Ri R⊤
j [35]. This
problem has direct application to structure-from-motion
(SfM) [1, 13, 15, 17, 18, 20, 44, 47, 62, 65, 67], multiple point
cloud registration [3–5, 28, 32, 36, 46, 56] and simultaneous
localization and mapping (SLAM) [7, 8, 10, 66].
In most global SfM pipelines, multiple rotation averaging is the de facto standard for computing the initial orientations of the cameras: After estimating the relative poses
between image pairs (e.g., by matching feature descriptors
such as SIFT [43] and running the 5-point algorithm [48]
with RANSAC [23]), one can solve the rotation averaging
problem and obtain the absolute rotations with respect to a
common reference frame. These initial rotations are then
used in subsequent operations such as translation estimation [17, 62], pose graph optimization [10, 46], multiview
triangulation [38,41] and bundle adjustment [34,42,57]. As
a result, all these tasks depend critically on the solution produced by the rotation averaging algorithm.
For this reason, numerous research endeavors have been
made in the past decade to develop reliable and versatile ro* This work was partially supported by the Spanish govt. (PGC2018096367-B-I00) and the Aragón regional govt. (DGA FSE T45 20R).

tation averaging methods. However, even without any outliers in the input, solving a large-scale rotation averaging
problem is nontrivial [60, 61]. The problem only gets worse
when the input contains outliers, which is often the case in
practice [12,46,62]. These outliers, if not handled properly,
can easily degrade the estimation accuracy.
Commonly, rotation averaging is formulated as a nonlinear optimization problem and solved iteratively starting
from some initial guess of the absolute rotations [12, 13,
33,54]. If, however, this initial guess is severely affected by
outliers, it becomes extremely difficult to obtain an accurate
result later on. Therefore, a robust initialization is essential
for reliable rotation averaging in the presence of outliers.
In this work, we propose a novel method for robust multiple rotation averaging. Our main contribution is a hierarchical initialization scheme that constructs a spanning tree
of a rotation graph by propagating most reliable constraints
first and less reliable ones later. We establish the hierarchy of reliability based on the number of consistent triplet
constraints, as well as their level of consistency. That is, we
consider a constraint to be more reliable if it is strongly supported by many other constraints and less reliable if it has
weaker or fewer supports. Optionally, we can also incorporate the number of valid 2D-2D correspondences into the
hierarchy. Experimental results show that our approach can
significantly improve the robustness of rotation averaging.
To download our code and the supplementary material, go
to https://seonghun-lee.github.io.

2. Related Work
Early works on motion averaging demonstrated various
methods for estimating absolute rotations from pairwise
constraints [25, 29, 30, 44, 52]. In recent works, the focus
has been on either (1) achieving the global optimality in the
absence of outliers, or (2) obtaining a robust solution in the
presence of outliers. This work belongs to the second group.
(1) Globally optimal methods in outlier-free scenarios:
In [9,24], globally optimal methods using Lagrangian duality are proposed. In later works, more advanced optimization methods have been proposed to enhance the speed and
scalability, while guaranteeing the global optimality of the

15777

