NeuralHDHair: Automatic High-fidelity Hair Modeling from a Single Image
Using Implicit Neural Representations
Keyu Wu1∗
1

Yifan Ye1∗

Lingchen Yang2

Zhejiang University

2

Hongbo Fu3
3

ETH Zurich

Kun Zhou1

Youyi Zheng1†

City University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Undoubtedly, high-fidelity 3D hair plays an indispensable role in digital humans. However, existing monocular
hair modeling methods are either tricky to deploy in digital
systems (e.g., due to their dependence on complex user interactions or large databases) or can produce only a coarse
geometry. In this paper, we introduce NeuralHDHair, a flexible, fully automatic system for modeling high-fidelity hair
from a single image. The key enablers of our system are
two carefully designed neural networks: an IRHairNet (Implicit representation for hair using neural network) for inferring high-fidelity 3D hair geometric features (3D orientation field and 3D occupancy field) hierarchically and a
GrowingNet (Growing hair strands using neural network)
to efficiently generate 3D hair strands in parallel. Specifically, we perform a coarse-to-fine manner and propose a
novel voxel-aligned implicit function (VIFu) to represent the
global hair feature, which is further enhanced by the local
details extracted from a hair luminance map. To improve
the efficiency of a traditional hair growth algorithm, we
adopt a local neural implicit function to grow strands based
on the estimated 3D hair geometric features. Extensive experiments show that our method is capable of constructing a high-fidelity 3D hair model from a single image, both
efficiently and effectively, and achieves the-state-of-the-art
performance.

1. Introduction
As one of the most distinctive human characteristics, hair
plays an indispensable role in digital humans [4, 10, 12, 15,
17]. Undoubtedly, a high-fidelity 3D hair model can significantly improve the realism of a virtual human. However, the existing single-view-based hair modeling methods [6, 11, 28, 36, 40] cannot sufficiently satisfy the require∗ The first two authors contributed equally. The authors are affiliated with the State Key Lab of CAD&CG. † Corresponding author: Youyi
Zheng.

Figure 1. Given a single image, our NeuralHDHair reconstructs a
high-fidelity 3D hair model.

ments of human digitalization in terms of flexibility, simplicity, and realism. On the one hand, data-driven methods
[6, 11] could achieve high-fidelity results, but are complex
and not very robust, e.g., entailing a sophisticated searching and matching process based on a large hair dataset. On
the other hand, deep-learning based methods [28,36,40] are
lightweight and flexible to deploy but could only achieve
coarse results. Thus, in this work, we consider the problem
of automatic high-fidelity 3D hair modeling from a single
image utilizing a learning-based method.
Unlike other parts of the human body, the hair structure
is more challenging to describe and extract due to remarkably intricate structures of interweaving strands, leading to
extreme difficulty in reconstructing a high-fidelity 3D hair
model only from a single view. Generally, almost all the
existing methods tackle this problem in two steps: first estimating a 3D orientation field based on a 2D orientation
map extracted from an input image and then synthesizing
hair strands from the 3D orientation field. However, there
are some problems with such a two-step mechanism. First,
since an 2D orientation map is only a filtered version of
the input hair growing information [24], using the 2D orientation map alone to bridge the domain gap between real
and synthetic data would unavoidably lose hair details (e.g.,
the relationship of occlusive strands [33]). Second, the existing methods for inferring 3D orientation fields are either
time-consuming due to the use of a complex searching and

1526

