Learning to Collaborate in Decentralized Learning of Personalized Models
Shuangtong Li1 Tianyi Zhou2,3 Xinmei Tian1 Dacheng Tao4
1
University of Science and Technology of China; 2 University of Washington, Seattle
3
University of Maryland, College Park; 4 JD Explore Academy
lst2015@mail.ustc.edu.cn, tianyizh@uw.edu, xinmei@ustc.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract
Meta-L2C

L2C

Learning personalized models for user-customized
computer-vision tasks is challenging due to the limited
private-data and computation available on each edge device. Decentralized learning (DL) can exploit the images distributed over devices on a network topology to train a global
model but is not designed to train personalized models for
different tasks or optimize the topology. Moreover, the mixing weights used to aggregate neighbors’ gradient messages
in DL can be sub-optimal for personalization since they are
not adaptive to different nodes/tasks and learning stages.
In this paper, we dynamically update the mixing-weights to
improve the personalized model for each node’s task and
meanwhile learn a sparse topology to reduce communication
costs. Our first approach, “learning to collaborate (L2C)”,
directly optimizes the mixing weights to minimize the local
validation loss per node for a pre-defined set of nodes/tasks.
In order to produce mixing weights for new nodes or tasks,
we further develop “meta-L2C”, which learns an attention
mechanism to automatically assign mixing weights by comparing two nodes’ model updates. We evaluate both methods
on diverse benchmarks and experimental settings for image
classification. Thorough comparisons to both classical and
recent methods for IID/non-IID decentralized and federated
learning demonstrate our method’s advantages in identifying
collaborators among nodes, learning sparse topology, and
producing better personalized models with low communication and computational cost.

1. Introduction
Training large models for computer-vision tasks, like
deep neural networks (DNNs) and vision transformers [6, 38, 40], is known to be data hungry but data in many
applications are distributed over millions or even billions
of personal/IoT devices. Transmitting their local data is
usually forbidden due to privacy protection and limited
communication bandwidth, so centralized learning on all



1

w21

f ()

3

2

1

w23

i

j

3

Node3:
bird vs. duck

Node1:
truck vs. car
Node2:
dog vs. cat

Figure 1. Decentralized learning alternates between local model update
and aggregation of neighbors’ model updates. We propose “learning to collaborate (L2C)” and meta-L2C to optimize and produce the mixing weights
wi,j for model aggregation in each round to achieve better personalization
of local models on their own tasks/data. While L2C directly optimizes the
mixing weights, meta-L2C learns an attention mechanism to automatically
produce mixing weights between two models θi and θj .

data is infeasible. Instead, federated learning (FL) [29] and
decentralized learning (DL) [24], as two widely studied distributed learning schemes, aim at training a global model by
only sharing local models/gradients across multiple devices
without leaking their private data. Both FL and DL iterates
between on-device local model updates and cross-device
model aggregation, i.e., each node uses its local data to
update its model for iterations before updated by aggregating
the models of other nodes. Their main difference is that FL
periodically updates a global model on a central server by
aggregating local models and synchronizes all nodes with
the updated global model. In contrast, DL neither presumes
a central server nor an explicit global model: each device
can only communicate with its neighbor nodes on a network
topology and aggregate their messages to update its own
local model without global synchronization. Under certain
assumptions to the topology and mixing weights for the
aggregation [24], the local models in DL provably converge
to a “consensus” global model. FL and DL target different

9766

