Generalizable Human Pose Triangulation
Kristijan Bartol
David Bojanić
Tomislav Petković
Tomislav Pribanić
University of Zagreb, Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computing, Croatia
name.surname@fer.hr

Abstract

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation is a vision task of detecting the keypoints that represent a standard set of human joints. The
area is extremely competitive, especially due to the advances in deep learning. Pose estimation is particularly important for applications such as medicine, fashion industry,
anthropometry, and entertainment [1]. In this work, we focus on 3D human pose estimation from multiple views in a
single time frame.
The common approach to multi-view pose estimation is
to (1) detect correspondent 2D keypoints in each view using
pretrained pose detector [37, 8, 35], and then (2) triangulate
[15, 25, 13, 26, 18, 32]. A naive approach takes 2D detections as they are and applies triangulation from all available views. Due to the variety of poses and self-occlusions,
some views contain erroneous detections, which should be
ignored or their influence mitigated in the triangulation process. One way to ignore the erroneous detections is to apply

Different
camera
number

Different
camera
configurations

t
en
er ts
iff se
D ata
d

We address the problem of generalizability for multi-view
3D human pose estimation. The standard approach is to
first detect 2D keypoints in images and then apply triangulation from multiple views. Even though the existing methods
achieve remarkably accurate 3D pose estimation on public benchmarks, most of them are limited to a single spatial camera arrangement and their number. Several methods address this limitation but demonstrate significantly degraded performance on novel views. We propose a stochastic framework for human pose triangulation and demonstrate a superior generalization across different camera arrangements on two public datasets. In addition, we apply
the same approach to the fundamental matrix estimation
problem, showing that the proposed method can successfully apply to other computer vision problems. The stochastic framework achieves more than 8.8% improvement on the
3D pose estimation task, compared to the state-of-the-art,
and more than 30% improvement for fundamental matrix
estimation, compared to a standard algorithm.

Figure 1: We propose a stochastic framework for human
pose triangulation from multiple views and demonstrate its
successful generalization across different camera arrangements, their number, and different public datasets. The upper two and the lower left image shows different camera
arrangements and their number on CMU Panoptic Studio
dataset [17]. The lower right part shows the Human3.6M’s
4-camera arrangement [14].

RANSAC [10], marking the keypoints whose reprojection
errors are above a threshold as outliers [30, 13]. The problem with vanilla RANSAC is that it is non-differentiable,
so the gradients are not back-propagated, which disables
end-to-end learning. Most of the state-of-the-art 3D pose
estimation approaches extract 2D image features, such as
heatmaps, from multiple views, and combine them for 3D
elevation in an end-to-end fashion [15, 26, 25]; we refer to those approaches as the learnable triangulation approaches.
Due to a mostly-fixed set of cameras during training,
the learnable triangulation approaches are often limited
to a single camera arrangement and their number. Several works attempt to generalize outside the training data

11028

