Neural Volumetric Object Selection
Zhongzheng Ren1 * Aseem Agarwala2† Bryan Russell2† Alexander G. Schwing1†
1
2
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Adobe Research

Oliver Wang2†

https://jason718.github.io/nvos

2D image & scribble

3D object selection

Novel view

2D image & scribble

Novel view

Figure 1. We present an interactive 3D object selection method from neural volumetric representations (e.g., MPIs [55] or NeRFs [33]).
Blue/Red scribbles denote foreground/background. Please view with Adobe Acrobat or KDE Okular to see animations.

Abstract
We introduce an approach for selecting objects in neural
volumetric 3D representations, such as multi-plane images
(MPI) and neural radiance fields (NeRF). Our approach
takes a set of foreground and background 2D user scribbles
in one view and automatically estimates a 3D segmentation of the desired object, which can be rendered into novel
views. To achieve this result, we propose a novel voxel feature embedding that incorporates the neural volumetric 3D
representation and multi-view image features from all input
views. To evaluate our approach, we introduce a new dataset
of human-provided segmentation masks for depicted objects
in real-world multi-view scene captures. We show that our
approach out-performs strong baselines, including 2D segmentation and 3D segmentation approaches adapted to our
task.

1. Introduction
Object selection is an important task in an artist’s workflow. With the growth of 3D photography, there is a need
to support a suite of editing operations, such as object selection, that are readily available for 2D photographs. In
∗ Work partly done during an internship at Adobe Research.
† Alphabetic order.

this work, we consider object selection in neural volumetric
3D representations. Neural volumetric 3D representations—
explicitly via Multi-plane Images (MPI) [43] or implicitly via Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [33]—recover a
remarkably accurate 3D representation of a scene from a
given set of multi-view images. These representations have
been shown to be particularly useful for novel-view synthesis [6,24,33,48,52,55], as this is the task that they are trained
for. However, beyond just visualizing the same scene from
a novel viewpoint, often we want to create a 3D reconstruction of an object so that we can extract it, and place it in a
different context. There is, of course, substantial research in
automatic object segmentation. However, user-driven methods, e.g., Photoshop, remain the most common means, as
which object to select is fundamentally a high-level decision.
Similar user-driven methods for 3D object segmentation
are particularly important for augmented and virtual reality
(AR/VR) applications, e.g., if one wants to composite a selected object into a new scene, apply a filter to a selected
object, remove a selected object, or share a real-world object
with friends in an AR/VR environment.
While user-driven segmentation for 2D images has been
studied for decades [1, 11, 34, 40], very little is known about
how segmentation would work in those novel 3D scene representations. Specifically, for image segmentation, early
works focus on energy minimization with graph cuts [4],
different forms of user interactions [4, 17, 35, 39], and ways

6133

