SEEG: Semantic Energized Co-speech Gesture Generation
Yuanzhi Liang* 1,2 , Qianyu Feng3 , Linchao Zhu2 , Li Hu1 , Pan Pan1 , and Yi Yang3
1

2

Alibaba DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
ReLER Lab, AAII, University of Technology Sydney
3
Zhejiang University

liangyzh18@outlook.com qianyufeng718@gmail.com linchao.zhu@uts.edu.au
hooks.hl@alibaba-inc.com panpan.pp@alibaba-inc.com yangyics@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Talking gesture generation is a practical yet challenging task that aims to synthesize gestures in line with speech.
Gestures with meaningful signs can better convey useful information and arouse sympathy in the audience. Current
works focus on aligning gestures with the speech rhythms,
which are difficult to mine the semantics and model semantic gestures explicitly. This paper proposes a novel SEmantic Energized Generation (SEEG) method for semanticaware gesture generation. Our method contains two parts:
DEcoupled Mining module (DEM) and Semantic Energizing Module (SEM). DEM decouples the semantic-irrelevant
information from inputs and separately mines information
for the beat and semantic gestures. SEM conducts semantic learning and produces semantic gestures. Apart from
representational similarity, SEM requires the predictions
to express the same semantics as the ground truth. Besides, a semantic prompter is designed in SEM to leverage
the semantic-aware supervision to predictions. This promotes the networks to learn and generate semantic gestures.
Experimental results reported in three metrics on different benchmarks prove that SEEG efficiently mines semantic
cues and generates semantic gestures. SEEG outperforms
other methods in all semantic-aware evaluations on different datasets. Qualitative evaluations also indicate the superiority of SEEG in semantic expressiveness. Code is available via https://github.com/akira-l/SEEG.

1. Introduction
Recently, in synthesizing digital humans, vivid gestures
can primarily improve reality, naturalness, and efficient in* This work was performed at Alibaba DAMO Academy, Alibaba
Group.

To launch• • • • • • • a big • • • • • • • • • investigation

(a) Diverse and expressive semantic gestures

Know • • that • • we • • • • • can • • • • • make • • • • • a decision

(b) Intuitive and semantic-irrelevant beat gestures

Figure 1. Co-speech gestures contain semantic-irrelevant beat and
diverse semantic gestures. SEEG explores both gestures and produces better semantic gestures.

formation expression. Especially, talking gestures provide
nonverbal cues of semantic expression and emphasize highlights and attitudes woven into our daily communication.
Along with digital manipulation techniques, the speechdriven gesture is an emerging application, e.g., digital human animation, visual dubbing in movies, online service,
and education. The goal is to simulate artificial embodied agents to perform harmonious gestures aligned with the
speech contents [14, 21, 29, 34]. Automated speech-driven
gesture generation studies the generation of natural gesture
sequences by exploring the relationships between speech

10473

