FaceVerse: a Fine-grained and Detail-controllable 3D Face Morphable Model
from a Hybrid Dataset
Lizhen Wang1 , Zhiyuan Chen2 , Tao Yu1 , Chenguang Ma2 , Liang Li2 , Yebin Liu1
Tsinhua University1 , Beijing, China
Ant Group2 , Hangzhou, China

Figure 1. Our hybrid dataset, the base and detail model of FaceVerse, as well as our single-image fitting result.

Abstract
We present FaceVerse, a fine-grained 3D Neural Face
Model, which is built from hybrid East Asian face datasets
containing 60K fused RGB-D images and 2K high-fidelity
3D head scan models. A novel coarse-to-fine structure is
proposed to take better advantage of our hybrid dataset. In
the coarse module, we generate a base parametric model
from large-scale RGB-D images, which is able to predict accurate rough 3D face models in different genders, ages, etc.
Then in the fine module, a conditional StyleGAN architecture trained with high-fidelity scan models is introduced to
enrich elaborate facial geometric and texture details. Note
that different from previous methods, our base and detailed
modules are both changeable, which enables an innovative
application of adjusting both the basic attributes and the
facial details of 3D face models. Furthermore, we propose a single-image fitting framework based on differentiable rendering. Rich experiments show that our method
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
3D human face modeling has been a hot topic in computer vision and computer graphics, which enables a wide
range of applications such as film, video games, mixed reality, etc. Since 3D Morphable Model (3DMM) [4] was

proposed in 1999, it has been one of the most powerful
tools in face-related researches due to its effective control
of facial shape, expression and texture. However, recent
researches pose more challenges to 3DMM in terms of accuracy, photo-realistic details and editability. On one hand,
the performance of 3DMMs is limited due to the difficulty
of data acquisition. On the other hand, given a coarse face
model, detailed facial geometry and texture are still not
changeable in the previous methods [26, 43], which limits the detailed adjustment of facial features. To overcome
the above issues, we propose a hybrid dataset and design a
coarse-to-fine structure to combine high generalization ability and fidelity. Furthermore, facial geometry and texture
details, like small changes of facial features, can also be
parameter-changeable.
At one end of the spectrum, existing 3D face datasets
are usually limited in either scale or fidelity. The capturing system can be divided into two categories: sparse or
dense camera arrays [6, 19, 26, 31, 43] and consumer depth
sensors [8, 18, 30, 45]. The former system requires elaborated setup and the data collection process is quite timeconsuming, which limits the scale of captured dataset to a
few hundreds. The latter system is off-the-shelf and takes
less time in data acquisition, which allows collecting RGBD data from a large number of identities. However, the captured RGB-D data usually suffers from low resolution and
low precision. The insufficiency of scale or fidelity limits

20333

