P IX M IX: Dreamlike Pictures
Comprehensively Improve Safety Measures
Dan Hendrycks*
UC Berkeley

Andy Zou*
UC Berkeley

Mantas Mazeika
UIUC

Dawn Song
UC Berkeley

Leonard Tang
Harvard University

Bo Li
UIUC

Jacob Steinhardt
UC Berkeley

Abstract
In real-world applications of machine learning, reliable
and safe systems must consider measures of performance
beyond standard test set accuracy. These other goals include out-of-distribution (OOD) robustness, prediction consistency, resilience to adversaries, calibrated uncertainty
estimates, and the ability to detect anomalous inputs. However, improving performance towards these goals is often a
balancing act that today’s methods cannot achieve without
sacrificing performance on other safety axes. For instance,
adversarial training improves adversarial robustness but
sharply degrades other classifier performance metrics. Similarly, strong data augmentation and regularization techniques often improve OOD robustness but harm anomaly
detection, raising the question of whether a Pareto improvement on all existing safety measures is possible. To meet
this challenge, we design a new data augmentation strategy
utilizing the natural structural complexity of pictures such
as fractals, which outperforms numerous baselines, is near
Pareto-optimal, and roundly improves safety measures.

1. Introduction
A central challenge in machine learning is building models that are reliable and safe in the real world. In addition
to performing well on the training distribution, deployed
models should be robust to distribution shifts, consistent in
their predictions, resilient to adversaries, calibrated in their
uncertainty estimates, and capable of identifying anomalous inputs. Numerous prior works have tackled each of
these problems separately [10, 12, 15, 31], but they can also
be grouped together as various aspects of ML Safety [14].
Consequently, the properties listed above can be thought of
as safety measures.
Ideally, models deployed in real-world settings would
* Equal Contribution.

Figure 1. Normalized performance of different methods on five
different model safety measures. P IX M IX is the only method that
significantly outperforms the baseline in all five safety measures.

perform well on multiple safety measures. Unfortunately,
prior work has shown that optimizing for some desirable
properties often comes at the cost of others. For example,
adversarial training only improves adversarial robustness
and degrades classification performance [46]. Similarly, inducing consistent predictions on out-of-distribution (OOD)
inputs seems to be at odds with better detecting these inputs, an intuition supported by recent work [4] which finds

16783

