ELIC: Efficient Learned Image Compression with
Unevenly Grouped Space-Channel Contextual Adaptive Coding
Dailan He1 *, Ziming Yang1 *, Weikun Peng1 , Rui Ma1 , Hongwei Qin1 , Yan Wang12†
SenseTime Research1 , Tsinghua University2
{hedailan, yangziming, pengweikun, marui, qinhongwei, wangyan1}@sensetime.com
wangyan@air.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, learned image compression techniques have
achieved remarkable performance, even surpassing the best
manually designed lossy image coders. They are promising to be large-scale adopted. For the sake of practicality, a thorough investigation of the architecture design of
learned image compression, regarding both compression
performance and running speed, is essential. In this paper, we first propose uneven channel-conditional adaptive
coding, motivated by the observation of energy compaction
in learned image compression. Combining the proposed
uneven grouping model with existing context models, we
obtain a spatial-channel contextual adaptive model to improve the coding performance without damage to running
speed. Then we study the structure of the main transform
and propose an efficient model, ELIC, to achieve state-ofthe-art speed and compression ability. With superior performance, the proposed model also supports extremely fast
preview decoding and progressive decoding, which makes
the coming application of learning-based image compression more promising.

1. Introduction
In the past years, lossy image compression based on deep
learning develops rapidly [4, 5, 15, 20, 22, 24, 29, 39, 40, 49,
50]. They have achieved remarkable progress on improving the rate-distortion performance, with usually much better MS-SSIM [47] than conventional image formats like
JPEG [26] and BPG [8], which indicates better subjective quality. Some very recent works [18–20, 22, 49, 50]
even outperform the still image coding of VVC [2], one of
the best hand-crafted image and video coding standards at
present, on both PSNR and MS-SSIM. These results are en* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author. This work is done when Ziming Yang, Weikun

Peng and Rui Ma are interns at SenseTime Research.

Figure 1. Rate-speed comparison on Kodak. Left-top is better.

couraging, as learned image compression has been proved
as a strong candidate for next generation image compression techniques. In the near future, it is quite possible to
deploy this line of image compression models in industrial
applications. Yet, to make these approaches practical, we
must carefully assess the running speed, especially the decoding speed of learned image compression.
One of the most important techniques in learned image compression is the joint backward-and-forward adaptive entropy modeling [15,20,22,29,39,40,48–50]. It helps
convert the marginal probability model of coding-symbols
to a joint model by introducing extra latent variables as
prior [5, 39, 40], leading to less redundancy and lower bitrate. However, the backward-adaptive models along spatial dimension significantly break the parallelism, which inevitably slows down the decoding. To address the issue,
He et al. [24] proposes to adopt checkerboard convolution
as a parallel replacement to the serial autoregressive context
model, which has a much better degree of parallelism with
constant complexity. Minnen et al. [40] proposes to adopt
a context model along channel dimension instead of the
serial-decoded spatial ones, which also improves the parallelism. However, to achieve a non-trivial bit-saving with
this channel-conditional model, the symbols are divided to

5718

