Global Tracking Transformers
Xingyi Zhou1 Tianwei Yin1 Vladlen Koltun2
1
The University of Texas at Austin

Philipp Krähenbühl1
2
Apple

Abstract
We present a novel transformer-based architecture for
global multi-object tracking. Our network takes a short
sequence of frames as input and produces global trajectories for all objects. The core component is a global tracking transformer that operates on objects from all frames
in the sequence. The transformer encodes object features
from all frames, and uses trajectory queries to group them
into trajectories. The trajectory queries are object features
from a single frame and naturally produce unique trajectories. Our global tracking transformer does not require
intermediate pairwise grouping or combinatorial association, and can be jointly trained with an object detector. It
achieves competitive performance on the popular MOT17
benchmark, with 75.3 MOTA and 59.1 HOTA. More importantly, our framework seamlessly integrates into stateof-the-art large-vocabulary detectors to track any objects.
Experiments on the challenging TAO dataset show that our
framework consistently improves upon baselines that are
based on pairwise association, outperforming published
work by a significant 7.7 tracking mAP. Code is available
at https://github.com/xingyizhou/GTR.

1. Introduction
Multi-object tracking aims to find and follow all objects
in a video stream. It is a basic building block in application areas such as mobile robotics, where an autonomous
system must traverse dynamic environments populated by
other mobile agents. In recent years, tracking-by-detection
has emerged as the dominant tracking paradigm, powered
by advances in deep learning and object detection [20, 36].
Tracking-by-detection reduces tracking to two steps: detection and association. First, an object detector independently finds potential objects in each frame of the video
stream. Second, an association step links detections through
time. Local trackers [4, 5, 54, 55, 60, 66] primarily consider pairwise associations in a greedy way (Figure 1a).
They maintain a status of each trajectory based on location [5, 68] and/or identity features [55, 66], and associate
current-frame detections with each trajectory based on its

(a) Local trackers

(b) Our global tracker

Figure 1. Local trackers (top) vs. our global tracker (bottom). Local trackers associate objects frame-by-frame, optionally
with a external track status memory (not show in the figure). Our
global tracker take a short video clip as input, and associates objects across all frames using global object queries.

last visible status. This pairwise association is efficient,
but lacks an explicit model of trajectories as a whole, and
sometimes struggles with heavy occlusion or strong appearance change. Global trackers [3, 6, 44, 63, 65] run offline
graph-based combinatorial optimization over pairwise associations. They can resolve inconsistently grouped detections and are more robust, but can be slow and are usually
detached from the detector.
In this work, we show how to represent global tracking (Figure 1b) as a few layers in a deep network (Figure 2). Our network directly outputs trajectories and thus
sidesteps both pairwise association and graph-based optimization. We show that detectors [20, 36, 70] can be augmented by transformer layers to turn into joint detectors and
trackers. Our Global TRacking transformer (GTR) encodes
detections from multiple consecutive frames, and uses trajectory queries to group them into trajectories. The queries
are detection features from a single frame (e.g., the current
frame in an online tracker) after non-maximum suppression,
and are transformed by the GTR into trajectories. Each trajectory query produces a single global trajectory by assigning to it a detection from each frame using a softmax distribution. The outputs of our model are thus detections and
their associations through time. During training, we explicitly supervise the output of our global tracking transformer

8771

