BoosterNet: Improving Domain Generalization of Deep Neural Nets using
Culpability-Ranked Features
Nourhan Bayasi
University of British Columbia

Ghassan Hamarneh
Simon Fraser University

Rafeef Garbi
University of British Columbia

nourhanb@ece.ubc.ca

hamarneh@sfu.ca

rafeef@ece.ubc.ca

Abstract
Deep learning (DL) models trained to minimize empirical risk on a single domain often fail to generalize when
applied to other domains. Model failures due to poor generalizability are quite common in practice and may prove
quite perilous in mission-critical applications, e.g., diagnostic imaging where real-world data often exhibits pronounced variability. Such limitations have led to increased
interest in domain generalization (DG) approaches that improve the ability of models learned from a single or multiple
source domains to generalize to out-of-distribution (OOD)
test domains. In this work, we propose BoosterNet, a lean
add-on network that can be simply appended to any arbitrary core network to improve its generalization capability
without requiring any changes in its architecture or training procedure. Specifically, using a novel measure of feature culpability, BoosterNet is trained episodically on the
most and least culpable data features extracted from critical units in the core network based on their contribution
towards class-specific prediction errors, which have shown
to improve generalization. At inference time, corresponding test image features are extracted from the closest classspecific units, determined by smart gating via a Siamese
network, and fed to BoosterNet for improved generalization. We evaluate the performance of BoosterNet within
two very different classification problems, digits and skin
lesions, and demonstrate a marked improvement in model
generalization to OOD test domains compared to SOTA.

1. Introduction
The remarkable advances in deep learning (DL) models rendered deep neural networks (DNNs) ubiquitous in
various fields, particularly in computer vision including
safety-critical applications such as medical image analysis [21, 32, 60]. Despite their relative success when applied
to new data in certain applications, practical deployment of
DNN based solutions remains very risky with one of the

main concerns being vulnerability to domain shifts which
leads to poor generalizability to out-of-distribution (OOD)
data. Such limitations not only impair model performance
but can result in serious unacceptable failures when test data
is drawn from a different distribution than that of the training data [16,43,58]. This unpredictable performance degradation on real life data continues to hamper reliable practical deployment such as in healthcare.
Recognizing this serious problem, much research has recently focused on improving model generalizability. In unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA), the aim is to transfer
the knowledge of a label-rich training domain to unlabeled
test domains with the same classes as those of the training
data [31, 36, 49, 63, 66]. However, UDA methods have limited value due to the requirement of accessing some of the
test data which may not be available in advance. In Domain
generalization (DG) approaches, the aim is to instead utilize
a single or multiple source domains’ information to better
generalize to OOD domains without requiring any access to
the test data. The field of DG is quite rich with a spectrum of
techniques ranging from domain alignment [28, 46] to data
augmentation [51, 57, 65], meta-learning [7, 34] and ensemble learning [45, 55]. However, despite significant performance improvements, most DG approaches still suffer from
common drawbacks. First, they typically require training
data from multiple domains, which can be rather challenging, costly and even infeasible, e.g., due to privacy issues
in medical data applications. Second, they often require restructuring or changes in the network architecture or learning strategy to achieve the desired performance [8,9,19,30].
For end users who are not seasoned data scientists, e.g., dermatologists trying to classify skin lesions with minimal or
no training in DL, such amendments are impractical.
In this work, we propose a single-source DG framework
for improving generalizability of an arbitrary off-the-shelf
DNN (core network A) by learning from its mistakes. We
argue that BoosterNet ameliorates shortcut learning and
feature suppression, a problem that has only recently gained
more attention [12, 18, 44], where in the presence of multiple predictive input features, a model tends to only use a

538

