Uniﬁed Multivariate Gaussian Mixture for Efﬁcient Neural Image Compression
Xiaosu Zhu1
1

Jingkuan Song1 *

Lianli Gao1

Feng Zheng2

Heng Tao Shen1

Center for Future Media, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Southern University of Science and Technology
xiaosu.zhu@outlook.com, jingkuan.song@gmail.com, shenhengtao@hotmail.com

Abstract
Modeling latent variables with priors and hyperpriors
is an essential problem in variational image compression.
Formally, trade-off between rate and distortion is handled
well if priors and hyperpriors precisely describe latent variables. Current practices only adopt univariate priors and
process each variable individually. However, we ﬁnd intercorrelations and intra-correlations exist when observing latent variables in a vectorized perspective. These ﬁndings
reveal visual redundancies to improve rate-distortion performance and parallel processing ability to speed up compression. This encourages us to propose a novel vectorized
prior. Speciﬁcally, a multivariate Gaussian mixture is proposed with means and covariances to be estimated. Then,
a novel probabilistic vector quantization is utilized to effectively approximate means, and remaining covariances are
further induced to a uniﬁed mixture and solved by cascaded
estimation without context models involved. Furthermore,
codebooks involved in quantization are extended to multicodebooks for complexity reduction, which formulates an
efﬁcient compression procedure. Extensive experiments on
benchmark datasets against state-of-the-art indicate our
model has better rate-distortion performance and an impressive 3.18× compression speed up, giving us the ability
to perform real-time, high-quality variational image compression in practice. Our source code is publicly available
at https://github.com/xiaosu-zhu/McQuic.

1. Introduction
As a crucial technique in image processing, lossy image compression has been studied for an extended period [17, 20, 30, 38]. The goal is to achieve high perceptual
reconstruction performance, extreme compression rate, and
efﬁcient processing pipeline. Classical lossy image compression standards, e.g., JPEG [33,39], BPG [6], HEIF [35],
VVC [8], have been widely applied and adopted as fun* Corresponding author.

(a) y 1



(b) y 2 = y 1 − y1 ↓

Figure 1. UMAP [24] projection of 128-d latent vectors with a toy
2-level 32-codeword model from 24 Kodak images. Left: Latent
vectors extracted from analysis transform are correlated and can be
described by multivariate Gaussian mixture. Right: Next level’s
latents are under similar distribution.

damental components in almost all image processing software. However, the explosion of multimedia content in the
digital era still raises urgent requests to ﬁnd an effective and
efﬁcient compressor to tackle storage costs.
Distinct from the above traditional codecs, learnable
neural image compression is proposed by exploiting advantages of deep neural networks. It adopts neural networks
as nonlinear transforms to extract binaries from images and
restore them, while essential research problem is to handle the trade-off between rate and distortion [7]. Recent
studies propose variational image compression and arrange
above trade-off as a Lagrange multiplier for joint optimization [3, 4, 9, 25, 26]. They introduce univariate priors and
hyperpriors to describe latent variables and make a breakthrough to control rate. We summarize advances in this task
as a series of operational diagrams in Figs. 2(a) to 2(c).
To design an effective compressor in variational image
compression, an appropriate prior that precisely describes
quantized latent variables is needed [4, 9, 26]. Fig. 1(a)
demonstrates observation of latent variables grouped by
channels. This vectorized perspective reveals correlations
of latents that help us to ﬁnd a prior. Note that latent vector comes from a speciﬁc region of an image and represents this region’s visual appearance, correlations between

17612

