Learn from Others and Be Yourself in Heterogeneous Federated Learning

1

Wenke Huang1 , Mang Ye1,2 ,* Bo Du1,2∗
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering,
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China,
2
Hubei Luojia Laboratory, Wuhan, China,
https://github.com/WenkeHuang/FCCL

Abstract

  

Federated learning has emerged as an important distributed learning paradigm, which normally involves collaborative updating with others and local updating on private data. However, heterogeneity problem and catastrophic forgetting bring distinctive challenges. First, due
to non-i.i.d (identically and independently distributed) data
and heterogeneous architectures, models suffer performance degradation on other domains and communication
barrier with participants models. Second, in local updating, model is separately optimized on private data, which
is prone to overﬁt current data distribution and forgets previously acquired knowledge, resulting in catastrophic forgetting. In this work, we propose FCCL (Federated CrossCorrelation and Continual Learning). For heterogeneity
problem, FCCL leverages unlabeled public data for communication and construct cross-correlation matrix to learn
a generalizable representation under domain shift. Meanwhile, for catastrophic forgetting, FCCL utilizes knowledge
distillation in local updating, providing inter and intra domain information without leaking privacy. Empirical results on various image classiﬁcation tasks demonstrate the
effectiveness of our method and the efﬁciency of modules.

1. Introduction
Deep learning algorithms have achieved remarkable
progress, owing to the availability of large-scale data [8, 51,
69]. However, in the real world, data are commonly dispersed over different participants (e.g., mobile devices, organizations). Due to growing privacy concerns and strict
data protection regulations [84], participants cannot integrate data together to train a model. Driven by such realistic issues, federated learning [33, 34, 58, 59, 89] provides
a privacy-preserving paradigm, where participants collabo* Corresponding Author: Mang Ye, Bo Du

10143

     





     

  

  

     

   



   

      

     

     



  

   



Figure 1. Problem illustration of heterogeneous federated
learning. (a) In collaborative updating, how to handle communication problem of heterogeneous models and learn a generalizable
representation under heterogeneous data (domain shift)? (b) In local updating, how to alleviate catastrophic forgetting to present stable and satisfactory performance in both inter and intra domains?

ratively learn a model without leaking private data. It has
been an active and challenging research topic and shows
promising results in real-world setting [17, 19, 29, 52, 54].
Along with its pilot progress, researches on federated
learning are bafﬂed by some key challenges [30, 42]. An
inevitable and practical challenge is heterogeneity problem.
On the one hand, distributed data might be non-i.i.d (identically and independently distributed), leading to data heterogeneity [30,39,95]. A myriad of methods [43,46,73,77]
incorporate extra proximal terms to handle the data in label
distribution skew (prior probability shift) [30], neglecting
the fact that there exists domain shift (same label, different
features) [60, 64, 66]. In particular, private model suffers
severe performance degradation on other domains with no-

