GASP, a generalized framework for agglomerative clustering of signed graphs
and its application to Instance Segmentation
Alberto Bailoni ∗ †

Constantin Pape ‡ † ∗

Thorsten Beier ¶

Nathan Hütsch ∗

Anna Kreshuk †

Abstract
We propose a theoretical framework that generalizes
simple and fast algorithms for hierarchical agglomerative
clustering to weighted graphs with both attractive and repulsive interactions between the nodes. This framework
defines GASP, a Generalized Algorithm for Signed graph
Partitioning1 , and allows us to explore many combinations
of different linkage criteria and cannot-link constraints.
We prove the equivalence of existing clustering methods
to some of those combinations and introduce new algorithms for combinations that have not been studied before.
We study both theoretical and empirical properties of these
combinations and prove that some of these define an ultrametric on the graph. We conduct a systematic comparison of various instantiations of GASP on a large variety
of both synthetic and existing signed clustering problems,
in terms of accuracy but also efficiency and robustness to
noise. Lastly, we show that some of the algorithms included
in our framework, when combined with the predictions from
a CNN model, result in a simple bottom-up instance segmentation pipeline. Going all the way from pixels to final
segments with a simple procedure, we achieve state-of-theart accuracy on the CREMI 2016 EM segmentation benchmark without requiring domain-specific superpixels.

1. Introduction
In computer vision, the partitioning of weighted graphs
has been successfully applied to tasks as diverse as image
segmentation, object tracking and pose estimation. Most
∗ Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing (HCI/IWR), Heidelberg, Germany. {name.surname}@iwr.uni-heidelberg.de
† EMBL, Heidelberg, Germany. {name.surname}@embl.de
‡ Institute for Computer Science, University Göttingen, Germany.
constantin.pape@informatik.uni-goettingen.de
§ MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology,
Cambridge, UK.
swolf@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk
¶ derthorstenbeier@gmail.com
k Corresponding author
1 Code available at: https://github.com/abailoni/GASP

Steffen Wolf §

Fred A. Hamprecht ∗ k

graph clustering methods work with positive edge weights
only, which can be interpreted as similarities or distances
between the nodes. These methods require users to specify
the desired numbers of clusters (as in spectral clustering) or
a termination criterion (e.g. in iterated normalized cuts) or
even to add a seed for each object (e.g. seeded watershed or
random walker).
Other graph clustering methods work with so-called
signed graphs, which feature both positive and negative
edge weights corresponding to attraction and repulsion between nodes. The advantage of signed graphs over unsigned
graphs is that balancing attraction and repulsion allows us to
obtain a clustering without defining additional parameters.
A canonical formulation of the signed graph partitioning
problem is the multicut or correlation clustering problem
[15, 35]. This problem is NP-hard, though many approximate solvers have been proposed [8,47,62,77] together with
greedy agglomerative clustering algorithms [36, 39, 51, 75].
Agglomerative clustering algorithms for signed graphs have
clear advantages: they are parameter-free and efficient. Despite the fact that a variety of these algorithms exist, no
overarching study has so far been conducted to compare
their robustness and efficiency or to provide guidelines for
matching an algorithm to the partitioning problem at hand.
Our first contribution is a simple theoretical framework
that generalizes over agglomerative algorithms for signed
graphs by linking them to hierarchical clustering (HC) on
unsigned graphs (Section 3.2). This framework defines
an underlying basic algorithm and allows us to explore its
combinations with different linkage criteria and cannot-link
constraints (see Fig. 1a, 1b, and Table 1). As second contribution, in Section 3.3, we formally prove that some of the
combinations correspond to existing clustering algorithms,
and introduce new algorithms for combinations which have
not been explored before. By analyzing their theoretical
properties, we also show that some of them define an ultrametric on the graph (see Table 1).
Third, we evaluate the algorithms on a large variety of
both existing and synthetically generated signed graph clustering problems (Section 4). Fourth and finally, we also test

11645

