Block-NeRF: Scalable Large Scene Neural View Synthesis
Matthew Tancik1⇤
Vincent Casser2
Xinchen Yan2
Ben P. Mildenhall3
Pratul Srinivasan3
Jonathan T. Barron3
1

UC Berkeley

2

Waymo

3

Google Research
June

F

uare, S

Sq
Alamo

Sabeek Pradhan2
Henrik Kretzschmar2

Sept.

Block-NeRF
1 km

Figure 1. Block-NeRF is a method that enables large-scale scene reconstruction by representing the environment using multiple compact
NeRFs that each fit into memory. At inference time, Block-NeRF seamlessly combines renderings of the relevant NeRFs for the given area.
In this example, we reconstruct the Alamo Square neighborhood in San Francisco using data collected over 3 months. Block-NeRF can
update individual blocks of the environment without retraining on the entire scene, as demonstrated by the construction on the right. Video
results can be found on the project website waymo.com/research/block-nerf.

Abstract
We present Block-NeRF, a variant of Neural Radiance
Fields that can represent large-scale environments. Specifically, we demonstrate that when scaling NeRF to render
city-scale scenes spanning multiple blocks, it is vital to decompose the scene into individually trained NeRFs. This
decomposition decouples rendering time from scene size, enables rendering to scale to arbitrarily large environments,
and allows per-block updates of the environment. We adopt
several architectural changes to make NeRF robust to data
captured over months under different environmental conditions. We add appearance embeddings, learned pose refinement, and controllable exposure to each individual NeRF,
and introduce a procedure for aligning appearance between
adjacent NeRFs so that they can be seamlessly combined. We
build a grid of Block-NeRFs from 2.8 million images to create the largest neural scene representation to date, capable
of rendering an entire neighborhood of San Francisco.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in neural rendering such as Neural
Radiance Fields [40] have enabled photo-realistic reconstruc*Work done as an intern at Waymo.

tion and novel view synthesis given a set of posed camera images [3, 38, 44]. Earlier works tended to focus on small-scale
and object-centric reconstruction. Though some methods
now address scenes the size of a single room or building,
these are generally still limited and do not naı̈vely scale up
to city-scale environments. Applying these methods to large
environments typically leads to significant artifacts and low
visual fidelity due to limited model capacity.
Reconstructing large-scale environments enables several
important use-cases in domains such as autonomous driving [30, 43, 69] and aerial surveying [14, 33]. For example,
a high-fidelity map of the operating domain can serve as
a prior for robot navigation. Large-scale scene reconstructions can be used for closed-loop robotic simulations [13].
Autonomous driving systems are commonly evaluated by resimulating previously encountered scenarios. Any deviation
from the recorded encounter, however, may change the vehicle’s trajectory, requiring high-fidelity novel view renderings
along the altered path. Scene conditioned NeRFs can further
augment simulation scenarios by changing environmental
lighting conditions, such as camera exposure, weather, or
time of day.
Reconstructing such large-scale environments introduces
additional challenges, including the presence of transient
objects (cars and pedestrians), limitations in model capacity,
18248

