Investigating the Impact of Multi-LiDAR Placement on
Object Detection for Autonomous Driving
Hanjiang Hu1 * Zuxin Liu1 * Sharad Chitlangia2† Akhil Agnihotri3† Ding Zhao1
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Amazon 3 University of Southern California
{hanjianghu,zuxinl,dingzhao}@cmu.edu, chitshar@amazon.com, akhil.agnihotri@usc.edu

Abstract
The past few years have witnessed an increasing interest
in improving the perception performance of LiDARs on autonomous vehicles. While most of the existing works focus
on developing new deep learning algorithms or model architectures, we study the problem from the physical design
perspective, i.e., how different placements of multiple LiDARs inﬂuence the learning-based perception. To this end,
we introduce an easy-to-compute information-theoretic surrogate metric to quantitatively and fast evaluate LiDAR
placement for 3D detection of different types of objects. We
also present a new data collection, detection model training
and evaluation framework in the realistic CARLA simulator to evaluate disparate multi-LiDAR conﬁgurations. Using several prevalent placements inspired by the designs of
self-driving companies, we show the correlation between
our surrogate metric and object detection performance of
different representative algorithms on KITTI through extensive experiments, validating the effectiveness of our LiDAR
placement evaluation approach. Our results show that sensor placement is non-negligible in 3D point cloud-based object detection, which will contribute to 5% ∼ 10% performance discrepancy in terms of average precision in challenging 3D object detection settings. We believe that this is
one of the ﬁrst studies to quantitatively investigate the inﬂuence of LiDAR placement on perception performance.

1. Introduction
LiDAR sensors are becoming the critical 3D sensors for
autonomous vehicles (AVs) since they could provide accurate 3D geometry information and precise distance measures under various driving conditions [26]. The point cloud
data generated from LiDARs has been used to perform a series of perception tasks, such as object detection and tracking [38, 39, 41], SLAM and localization [27, 51], etc.
* equal contribution
† work done while interning at CMU, prior to current afﬁliations

(a) Toyota

(b) Cruise

(c) Pony.ai

(d) Argo AI

(e) Ford

(f) Zoox

Figure 1. Different multi-LiDAR conﬁgurations used in different
autonomous vehicles [1–6].

High-quality point cloud data and effective perception
algorithms are usually both required to achieve accurate
3D object detection in practice [45]. A number of studies propose to improve the 3D object detection performance for point cloud data by developing novel perception algorithms, which assume that the data is of high quality [15, 22, 39, 41, 46]. However, only a little literature considers the LiDAR perception problem from the viewpoint of
data acquisition [21, 25, 28] and LiDAR placement. We believe that this new perspective should be equally crucial for
real-world AV applications since improper LiDAR placement may cause poor-quality sensing data, and thus corrupt the perception algorithm and lead to poor performance
[11, 21, 24, 25, 30, 45]. In addition, LiDAR is an expensive
sensor, so maximizing its utility to save the deployment cost
is also important for mass production. Therefore, we aim to
investigate the interplay between LiDAR sensor placement
and perception performance for AVs. We use placement and
conﬁguration interchangeably throughout this paper.
However, it is not easy to evaluate the efﬁcacy of dif-

2550

