Self-supervised Image-specific Prototype Exploration
for Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Qi Chen1 , Lingxiao Yang1 , Jianhuang Lai1,2,3 and Xiaohua Xie1,2,3*
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University, China
2
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
chenq377@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {yanglx9, stsljh, xiexiaoh6}@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation (WSSS)
based on image-level labels has attracted much attention
due to low annotation costs. Existing methods often rely on
Class Activation Mapping (CAM) that measures the correlation between image pixels and classifier weight. However,
the classifier focuses only on the discriminative regions
while ignoring other useful information in each image, resulting in incomplete localization maps. To address this issue, we propose a Self-supervised Image-specific Prototype
Exploration (SIPE) that consists of an Image-specific Prototype Exploration (IPE) and a General-Specific Consistency (GSC) loss. Specifically, IPE tailors prototypes for every image to capture complete regions, formed our ImageSpecific CAM (IS-CAM), which is realized by two sequential
steps. In addition, GSC is proposed to construct the consistency of general CAM and our specific IS-CAM, which
further optimizes the feature representation and empowers a self-correction ability of prototype exploration. Extensive experiments are conducted on PASCAL VOC 2012
and MS COCO 2014 segmentation benchmark and results
show our SIPE achieves new state-of-the-art performance
using only image-level labels. The code is available at
https://github.com/chenqi1126/SIPE.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation aims to assign a semantic category label to each pixel in an image, which has been
widely applied in autonomous driving [14], medical imaging [38] and remote sensing image interpretation [17]. Benefiting from Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), semantic segmentation has achieved remarkable progress in
fully supervised manner. However, training a fully supervised segmentation model requires a large number of
* Corresponding Author

CAM

IS-CAM

CAM

IS-CAM

CAM

IS-CAM

Image-specific Prototypes
Class Center

CAM

IS-CAM

Figure 1. Main motivation. We visualize the pixel-level feature
distribution of four cat images by t-SNE [39]. The original CAM
activates each pixel using class center (green star). Our method
extracts image-specific prototypes (pink star) to generate ImageSpecific CAM (IS-CAM) that captures more complete regions.

pixel-level annotations, which is notoriously expensive and
time-consuming to collect. An alternative approach is to
learn from weak labels, e.g., image-level labels [2], bounding boxes [26, 49], scribbles [29, 34, 46] and points [3, 5].
Among these works, image-level labels based Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation (WSSS) has enjoyed great
popularity within the community.
Most of existing methods leverage Class Activation
Mapping (CAM) [53] technology to provide localization
cues of target object. Specifically, these methods train a
classifier and regard its learned weights as a general representation of each class, i.e., class center. Then, this class
center is used to correlate with image pixels to obtain localization maps as shown in Fig. 1. However, CAM tends to

4288

