UnweaveNet: Unweaving Activity Stories
Will Price
University of Bristol

Carl Vondrick
Columbia University

Dima Damen
University of Bristol

will.price@bristol.ac.uk

vondrick.cs.columbia.edu

dima.damen@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract
Our lives can be seen as a complex weaving of activities; we switch from one activity to another, to maximise
our achievements or in reaction to demands placed upon
us. Observing a video of unscripted daily activities, we
parse the video into its constituent activity threads through
a process we call unweaving. To accomplish this, we introduce a video representation explicitly capturing activity
threads called a thread bank, along with a neural controller
capable of detecting goal changes and resuming of past activities, together forming UnweaveNet. We train and evaluate
UnweaveNet on sequences from the unscripted egocentric
dataset EPIC-KITCHENS. We propose and showcase the efficacy of pretraining UnweaveNet in a self-supervised manner.

1. Introduction
“It’s the morning and you’ve just walked into the kitchen:
you’re hungry, sleepy, the kitchen is a mess, but you have
a paper to review for CVPR. You put some bread into the
toaster, turn the kettle on to make coffee, and in between
waiting for the kettle to boil and bread to toast, you clean the
dishes. The toast pops up and you put it on a plate, then the
kettle boils and you resume making your coffee, switching
back and forth as necessary until your breakfast is ready.”
As in the storyline described above and depicted in Fig. 1,
activities need not be completed over one continuous block
of time. Instead they are often paused and interleaved with
other activities. This observation gives rise to a new interpre-

tation of video as a weaving of activities. Such a perspective
supports the distinction between two instances of an activity
when the activity is paused and later resumed. This distinction can be important for downstream applications, like
assistive technologies which need to differentiate between
starting a new task vs. resuming a previously paused one.
This novel view of video leads to the task proposed and
tackled in this paper: unweaving a video into its constituent
activity threads. Like a person reading a story mentally unweaves the story’s narrative threads as they unfold, a model
unweaving a video does so similarly, processing video online,
detecting new threads of activity as they appear and updating
its representation of previously discovered threads as they
are resumed. Following this analogy, videos of activities as
referred to as activity stories.
This proposed task is related to two previously proposed
tasks: event boundary detection and unsupervised activity
segmentation. The relationship between unweaving and
these other related tasks is summarised in Fig. 2. Event
boundary detection [37, 1] aims to detect points in the video
where a transition between two events occurs. This task
aims to model the experimental observation that humans
can consistently detect transitions between events as they
watch video online [50, 51, 16]. Typically, these methods are
performed online [37, 1], predicting the future video representation, comparing this against the true representation, and
measuring the prediction error in order to decide whether a
boundary can be detected. Compared to unweaving, event
boundary detection focuses on finding the transitions between activities and doesn’t support the association between

Time
Figure 1. In our daily lives, one switches between activities (e.g. making toast, preparing coffee, washing up) to minimize idle time.
Such behaviour results in video demonstrating multiple activities woven together. This paper introduces a model that learns to undo this,
unweaving video into threads of activity without the need for semantic labels.

13770

