Multi-View Consistent Generative Adversarial Networks
for 3D-aware Image Synthesis
Xuanmeng Zhang1,2 * Zhedong Zheng1 Daiheng Gao2
Bang Zhang2 Pan Pan2 Yi Yang3
1
ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney
2
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group 3 Zhejiang University
{zhangxuanmeng.zxm, zdzheng12}@gmail.com
{daiheng.gdh, zhangbang.zb, panpan.pp}@alibaba-inc.com yangyics@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
3D-aware image synthesis aims to generate images of
objects from multiple views by learning a 3D representation. However, one key challenge remains: existing approaches lack geometry constraints, hence usually fail to
generate multi-view consistent images. To address this
challenge, we propose Multi-View Consistent Generative
Adversarial Networks (MVCGAN) for high-quality 3Daware image synthesis with geometry constraints. By leveraging the underlying 3D geometry information of generated
images, i.e., depth and camera transformation matrix, we
explicitly establish stereo correspondence between views to
perform multi-view joint optimization. In particular, we enforce the photometric consistency between pairs of views
and integrate a stereo mixup mechanism into the training
process, encouraging the model to reason about the correct 3D shape. Besides, we design a two-stage training
strategy with feature-level multi-view joint optimization to
improve the image quality. Extensive experiments on three
datasets demonstrate that MVCGAN achieves the state-ofthe-art performance for 3D-aware image synthesis.

1. Introduction
We study the problem of 3D-aware image synthesis,
aiming at generating images with explicit control over the
camera pose. Generating photorealistic and editable image
content is a long-standing problem in computer vision and
graphics. In the past years, generative adversarial networks
(GAN) [19] have demonstrated impressive results in synthesizing high-resolution images of high quality from unstructured image collections [3, 8, 9, 22, 24–26, 63, 65]. Despite
the tremendous success, most of the methods typically only
* This work was done during an internship at Alibaba.

Figure 1. Images synthesized by MVCGAN on the CELEBAHQ [24] dataset.

learn the manifold of 2D images while ignoring the 3D representation of the scene.
Several works consider the task of 3D-aware image synthesis [1,13,20,29,37,38,66], which can generate images of
objects from multiple views by learning a 3D-aware generative model. Different from 2D generative adversarial networks, 3D-aware image synthesis models learn 3D scene
representations from images, such as voxels [37, 38], intermediate 3D primitives [29], and neural radiance fields
(NeRF) [4, 13, 39, 45]. Among these approaches, NeRFbased approaches [4, 13, 39, 45] have gained a surge of interest due to the extraordinary performance for high-fidelity
view synthesis. However, one key challenge remains in existing approaches [4, 39, 45]: they do not guarantee geometry constraints between views, hence usually fail to generate
multi-view consistent images in some views.
In this paper, we address this problem by proposing

18450

