OW-DETR: Open-world Detection Transformer
Akshita Gupta* 1 Sanath Narayan* 1 K J Joseph2,4
Salman Khan4,3 Fahad Shahbaz Khan4,5 Mubarak Shah6
1
4

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence

Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence

2

IIT Hyderabad
5

3

Australian National University

CVL, Linköping University

6

University of Central Florida

Abstract
Open-world object detection (OWOD) is a challenging
computer vision problem, where the task is to detect a
known set of object categories while simultaneously identifying unknown objects. Additionally, the model must incrementally learn new classes that become known in the
next training episodes. Distinct from standard object detection, the OWOD setting poses significant challenges for
generating quality candidate proposals on potentially unknown objects, separating the unknown objects from the
background and detecting diverse unknown objects. Here,
we introduce a novel end-to-end transformer-based framework, OW-DETR, for open-world object detection. The
proposed OW-DETR comprises three dedicated components
namely, attention-driven pseudo-labeling, novelty classification and objectness scoring to explicitly address the
aforementioned OWOD challenges. Our OW-DETR explicitly encodes multi-scale contextual information, possesses
less inductive bias, enables knowledge transfer from known
classes to the unknown class and can better discriminate
between unknown objects and background. Comprehensive
experiments are performed on two benchmarks: MS-COCO
and PASCAL VOC. The extensive ablations reveal the merits of our proposed contributions. Further, our model outperforms the recently introduced OWOD approach, ORE,
with absolute gains ranging from 1.8% to 3.3% in terms of
unknown recall on MS-COCO. In the case of incremental
object detection, OW-DETR outperforms the state-of-theart for all settings on PASCAL VOC. Our code is available
at https://github.com/akshitac8/OW-DETR.

1. Introduction
Open-world object detection (OWOD) relaxes the
closed-world assumption in popular benchmarks, where
only seen classes appear at inference. Within the OWOD
paradigm [15], at each training episode, a model learns to
detect a given set of known objects while simultaneously
* Equal contribution

Figure 1. Visual illustration of the proposed OW-DETR for
open-world object detection (OWOD). Here, attention maps obtained from the intermediate features are utilized to score the object queries. The objectness scores of queries are then used to
identify the pseudo-unknowns. A separation is enforced between
these pseudo-unknowns and ground-truth knowns to detect novel
classes. In addition, a separation is also learned between the background and foreground (knowns + unknowns) for effective knowledge transfer from known to unknown class w.r.t. characteristics
of foreground objects. Our OW-DETR explicitly encodes multiscale context, has less inductive bias, and assumes no supervision
for unknown objects, thus well suited for OWOD problem.

capable of identifying unknown objects. These flagged unknowns can then be forwarded to an oracle (e.g., human
annotator), which can label a few classes of interest. Given
these new knowns, the model would continue updating its
knowledge incrementally without retraining from scratch
on the previously known classes. This iterative learning
process continues in a cycle over the model’s life-span.
The identification of unknown object classes in OWOD
setting poses significant challenges for conventional detectors. First, besides an accurate proposal set for seen objects,
a detector must also generate quality candidate boxes for
potentially unknown objects. Second, the model should be
able to separate unknown objects from the background utilizing its knowledge about the already seen objects, thereby
learning what constitutes a valid object. Finally, objects

9235

