Bilateral Video Magnification Filter
Shoichiro Takeda1

Kenta Niwa1 Mariko Isogawa1 Shinya Shimizu1
Kazuki Okami2 Yushi Aono1
1
2
NTT Corporation
NTT TechnoCross Corporation

{shoichiro.takeda.us, kenta.niwa.bk, shinya.shimizu.te, yushi.aono.dy}@hco.ntt.co.jp

mariko.isogawa@ieee.org, kazuki.okami.ug@ntt-tx.co.jp

Input Video

Original

2

2.5
3
3.5
Time (sec)

LoGF

2

2.5
3
3.5
Time (sec)

LoGF w/ JAF

2

2.5
3
3.5
Time (sec)

BVMF (Ours)

2

2.5
3
3.5
Time (sec)

Figure 1. Motion magnification results for subtle string vibrations when a tennis racket hits a ball. The top panels show enlarged image
frames in the green dot square in the input video at impact (the ball suddenly stops). The bottom panels show spatiotemporal slices along
the red line in the input video. Our proposed BVMF magnified subtle string vibrations with a target frequency of 4 Hz (see the bottom
panel) while maintaining the ball shape at impact (see the top panel). In contrast, existing methods, LoGF [30] and LoGF with JAF [22],
mis-magnified non-target higher frequency string vibrations and collapsed the ball shape. See supplementary material for the video results.

Abstract
Eulerian video magnification (EVM) has progressed to
magnify subtle motions with a target frequency even under
the presence of large motions of objects. However, existing EVM methods often fail to produce desirable results in
real videos due to (1) mis-extracting subtle motions with a
non-target frequency and (2) collapsing results when large
de/acceleration motions occur (e.g., objects suddenly start,
stop, or change direction). To enhance EVM performance
on real videos, this paper proposes a bilateral video magnification filter (BVMF) that offers simple yet robust temporal
filtering. BVMF has two kernels; (I) one kernel performs
temporal bandpass filtering via a Laplacian of Gaussian
whose passband peaks at the target frequency with unity
gain and (II) the other kernel excludes large motions outside the magnitude of interest by Gaussian filtering on the
intensity of the input signal via the Fourier shift theorem.
Thus, BVMF extracts only subtle motions with the target
frequency while excluding large motions outside the magnitude of interest, regardless of motion dynamics. In addition,
BVMF runs the two kernels in the temporal and intensity
domains simultaneously like the bilateral filter does in the
spatial and intensity domains. This simplifies implementation and, as a secondary effect, keeps the memory usage
low. Experiments conducted on synthetic and real videos
show that BVMF outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
We humans often fail to visually perceive subtle motions
in our world: subtle head motions with blood circulation,
slight deformation of materials absorbing external forces,
or subtle autonomous fluctuations of a flying drone. Such
variations are quite useful for helping us deeply understand
scene context [1, 3, 4, 25, 28] or anomalous behavior [2, 10],
but they are difficult to see with the naked eye.
To magnify such subtle yet important motions in a video,
Eulerian video magnification (EVM) methods have been
widely researched [6, 10, 13, 17, 21, 22, 25, 26, 28, 30]. EVM
methods generally measure local motions in a video as a
phase signal within each spatial subband along each orientation at each pixel position [7, 25]. They then perform
temporal filtering on the oriented-subband phase signal to
extract only subtle motions with a target frequency (e.g.,
respiratory cycle). However, since subtle motions are easily
overwhelmed by large motions of objects, the standard temporal filtering in the early EVM methods [25, 26, 28] often
fail to extract subtle motions when objects move largely.
To overcome this issue, temporal filtering in EVM has
been continually improved [22, 30]. Specifically, Zhang et
al. designed the Laplacian of Gaussian filter (LoGF) to perform temporal bandpass filtering while excluding slow large
motions, which approximate linearly at short time scales,
via its Laplacian property [30]. Furthermore, to exclude

17369

