Upright-Net: Learning Upright Orientation for 3D Point Cloud
Xufang PANG1, ⋆

Feng LI3, ⋆

Ning DING1,2, B

Xiaopin ZHONG3, B

1

2

Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
Institute of Robotics and Intelligent Manufacturing, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
College of Mechatronics and Control Engineering, Shenzhen University
{xufangpang,dingning}@cuhk.edu.cn, 1910294001@email.szu.edu.cn, xzhong@szu.edu.cn

Abstract
A mass of experiments shows that the pose of the input 3D models exerts a tremendous influence on automatic
3D shape analysis. In this paper, we propose Upright-Net,
a deep-learning-based approach for estimating the upright
orientation of 3D point clouds. Based on a well-known postulate of design states that ”form ever follows function”, we
treat the natural base of an object as a common functional
structure, which supports the object in a most commonly
seen pose following a set of specific rules, e.g. physical
laws, functionality-related geometric properties, semantic
cues, and so on. Thus we apply a data-driven deep learning method to automatically encode those rules and formulate the upright orientation estimation problem as a classification model, i.e. extract the points on a 3D model that
forms the natural base. And then the upright orientation is
computed as the normal of the natural base. Our proposed
new approach has three advantages. First, it formulates the
continuous orientation estimation task as a discrete classification task while preserving the continuity of the solution
space. Second, it automatically learns the comprehensive
criteria defining a natural base of general 3D models even
with asymmetric geometry. Third, the learned orientationaware features can serve well in downstream tasks. Results
show that our network outperforms previous approaches on
orientation estimation and also achieves remarkable generalization capability and transfer capability.

1. Introduction
The upright orientation of an object is associated with
its most commonly seen pose in daily life. Such pose usually serves multiple objectives such as functionality, stability, semantic meaning, facility, and so on. Posing object
in their upright orientation is the human preference since it
makes the objects easily recognizable [12].
⋆ Co-first authors, B Co-corresponding authors

In computer graphics and computer vision, registering
objects in upright orientation is usually the first step for
3D model analysis [26, 27], which benefits applications like
shape matching [1], shape retrieval [19], robotic manipulation on object placement problems [13], generation of
thumbnails for 3D shape repositories [11], and so on. With
the thriving of deep learning, neural networks operating
on point clouds have shown superior performance on these
tasks. However, their performance is usually evaluated on
a dataset aligned in a canonical frame. A key challenge in
learning unaligned point cloud data is to learn features that
are invariant or equivariant with respect to geometric transformations [26]. However, either T-Net in PointNet [15]
or ITN [26] is not significantly contributive to performance
due to their weak supervision on pose transformation. Thus,
orientation estimation is used as an auxiliary task for computer graphics tasks, such as shape classification and keypoint prediction [14], to achieve strongly supervised pose
transformation.
However, it is an open challenge to recover the upright
orientation for general 3D models because of two reasons.
Firstly, determining the upright orientation of a 3D object
requires a comprehensive consideration of physical laws,
geometric properties, semantic preference, functionality,
design knowledge, and so on. Thus it is hard to define a
universal rule to upright general 3D shapes effectively [12].
For example, paper [5] tried to infer the upright orientation
of a 3D model based on a series of hand-crafted geometrical
features, however, it failed on some models due to the bias
or conflict among features. Secondly, estimating the upright
orientation is intuitively a continuous rotation problem, for
which, however, the convergence of solutions is fragile due
to the diverse variation between different shape categories.
Although the divide-and-conquer scheme [12], which first
classifies the object and then estimates the orientation via a
regression model, achieves an acceptable result, it is not an
ideal solution to train separate regression models for different categories.
In this paper, we convert the continuous orientation prob-

14911

