Overcoming Catastrophic Forgetting in Incremental Object Detection
via Elastic Response Distillation
Tao Feng1 , Mang Wang1 *, Hangjie Yuan2
1
Alibaba Group 2 Zhejiang University
fengtao.hi@gmail.com, wangmang.wm@alibaba-inc.com, hj.yuan@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

Ours

37
36.3
36

1. Introduction
In the natural world, the visual system of creatures
could constantly acquire, integrate and optimize knowledge. Learning mode is inherently incremental for them.
In contrast, currently, the classic training paradigm of object detection models [19,33] does not have such capability.
Supervised object detection paradigm relies on accessing
pre-defined labeled data. This learning paradigm implicitly assumes data distribution is fixed or stationary [9, 37],
while data from real world is represented by continuous
* Corresponding author.

35.6

35.5
34.9

35

34.8
34.1

34

AP

Traditional object detectors are ill-equipped for incremental learning. However, fine-tuning directly on a welltrained detection model with only new data will lead to
catastrophic forgetting. Knowledge distillation is a flexible way to mitigate catastrophic forgetting. In Incremental Object Detection (IOD), previous work mainly focuses
on distilling for the combination of features and responses.
However, they under-explore the information that contains
in responses. In this paper, we propose a response-based
incremental distillation method, dubbed Elastic Response
Distillation (ERD), which focuses on elastically learning
responses from the classification head and the regression
head. Firstly, our method transfers category knowledge
while equipping student detector with the ability to retain
localization information during incremental learning. In
addition, we further evaluate the quality of all locations and
provide valuable responses by the Elastic Response Selection (ERS) strategy. Finally, we elucidate that the knowledge from different responses should be assigned with different importance during incremental distillation. Extensive experiments conducted on MS COCO demonstrate our
method achieves state-of-the-art result, which substantially
narrows the performance gap towards full training. Code is
available at https://github.com/Hi-FT/ERD.

36.1

33.7

33
32.3
32

31.5

31
30

30

29

Less Responses

All Responses

Figure 1. The effect of various responses for IOD.

and dynamic data flow, whose distribution is non-stationary.
When the model continuously obtains knowledge from
non-stationary distribution, new knowledge would interfere
with the old one, triggering catastrophic forgetting [11, 26].
Based on whether the task identity is provided or must be
inferred [34], researchers divide Incremental Learning (IL)
into three types: task/domain/class IL. In this paper, we focus on the most intractable scenario for object detection:
class incremental object detection.
A flexible way to solve IOD is knowledge distillation
[14]. [28] stressed that the Tower layers could reduce catastrophic forgetting significantly. They implemented incremental learning on an anchor-free detector and selectively
performed distillation on non-regression outputs. Meanwhile, in knowledge distillation for object detection where
incremental learning was not introduced, previous work extracted knowledge from the combined distillation of different components. For example, [5] and [32] distilled all components of the detector. Nevertheless, the nature of these
methods are designed using feature-based knowledge distillation [6], response-based method [12] has not been explored in IOD [25] yet. Besides, the advantage of responsebased method is that it provides the reasoning information
[14, 27] of the teacher detector. Therefore, an elaborate design for different responses is essential [23].
This paper focuses on a practical and challenging problem concerning IOD: how to learn response from classification predictions and bounding boxes. Responses in object

9427

