Zero-Query Transfer Attacks on Context-Aware Object Detectors
Zikui Cai1 , Shantanu Rane2 , Alejandro E. Brito2 , Chengyu Song1 ,
Srikanth V. Krishnamurthy1 , Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury1 , M. Salman Asif1 *
1
University of California, Riverside, USA 2 Palo Alto Research Center, Palo Alto, USA
{zcai032}@ucr.edu, {srane, abrito}@parc.com
{csong, krish}@cs.ucr.edu, {amitrc, sasif}@ece.ucr.edu

Abstract
Adversarial attacks perturb images such that a deep
neural network produces incorrect classification results.
A promising approach to defend against adversarial attacks on natural multi-object scenes is to impose a contextconsistency check, wherein, if the detected objects are not
consistent with an appropriately defined context, then an attack is suspected. Stronger attacks are needed to fool such
context-aware detectors. We present the first approach for
generating context-consistent adversarial attacks that can
evade the context-consistency check of black-box object detectors operating on complex, natural scenes. Unlike many
black-box attacks that perform repeated attempts and open
themselves to detection, we assume a “zero-query” setting,
where the attacker has no knowledge of the classification
decisions of the victim system. First, we derive multiple attack plans that assign incorrect labels to victim objects in a
context-consistent manner. Then we design and use a novel
data structure that we call the perturbation success probability matrix, which enables us to filter the attack plans
and choose the one most likely to succeed. This final attack
plan is implemented using a perturbation-bounded adversarial attack algorithm. We compare our zero-query attack
against a few-query scheme that repeatedly checks if the victim system is fooled. We also compare against state-of-theart context-agnostic attacks. Against a context-aware defense, the fooling rate of our zero-query approach is significantly higher than context-agnostic approaches and higher
than that achievable with up to three rounds of the fewquery scheme.

1. Introduction
Despite achieving significant performance gains on a variety of vision and language tasks, deep neural networks
(DNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial attacks [49]. One
* Corresponding author

man

man stop-sign

man stop-sign

Original image

Context-inconsistent
attack

Context-consistent
attack
boat

boat
man

man
crosswalk

water

boat

boat

cross
walk

man
crosswalk

crosswalk

water
stop-sign
label in context graph

stop-sign
before perturbation

stop-sign
after perturbation

Figure 1. For natural scenes containing multiple objects, applying an evasion attack on an individual object (e.g., crosswalk Ñ boat) violates the
context: A boat and a stop-sign rarely occur together. A context-aware
detector can detect this attack. In this work, we perturb multiple objects in
a context-consistent way (e.g., crosswalk Ñ boat, stop-sign Ñ water) in
a single attempt. The combination (person, boat, water) does not violate
context and thus fools even a context-aware detector.

of the most popular adversarial approaches is the class of
perturbation-bounded evasion attacks [9, 19, 35, 41]. Here,
an attacker can make a model yield arbitrarily wrong classification results by adding imperceptible perturbations to the
input image. These attacks are quite practical and can be
performed at test time without needing access to the training data. The vast majority of work in this area has focused
on attacking classifiers trained on datasets like ImageNet,
MNIST, CIFAR-10, and CIFAR-100, where the classifier
attempts to recognize one dominant object in a given image. In contrast, we are primarily concerned with object
detectors [24,29,39,42,44] that localize and recognize multiple objects in an image, which is the case in most natural
images. Such detectors often take a holistic view of an image, rather than considering it as a collection of arbitrary
objects [55, 57]. The objects in natural scene images form
a context that can help identify the scene or given the scene
we are likely to find the objects that conform to the scene

15024

