TimeReplayer: Unlocking the Potential of Event Cameras for Video Interpolation
Weihua He1
Kaichao You2,4
Zhendong Qiao1
Xu Jia3
Ziyang Zhang2
1
3,5
2
Wenhui Wang
Huchuan Lu
Yaoyuan Wang
Jianxing Liao2
1
Department of Precision Instrument, Tsinghua University
2
Advanced Computing and Storage Lab, Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Dalian University of Technology
4
School of Software, Tsinghua University 5 Peng Cheng Laboratory
{hwh20@mails,wwh@mail}@.tsinghua.edu.cn,youkaichao@gmail.com
{xjia,lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn,{zhangziyang11,wangyaoyuan1,liaojianxing}@huawei.com

Abstract
Recording fast motion in a high FPS (frame-per-second)
requires expensive high-speed cameras. As an alternative,
interpolating low-FPS videos from commodity cameras has
attracted significant attention. If only low-FPS videos are
available, motion assumptions (linear or quadratic) are
necessary to infer intermediate frames, which fail to model
complex motions. Event camera, a new camera with pixels producing events of brightness change at the temporal
resolution of µs (10−6 second ), is a game-changing device to enable video interpolation at the presence of arbitrarily complex motion. Since event camera is a novel sensor, its potential has not been fulfilled due to the lack of
processing algorithms. The pioneering work Time Lens introduced event cameras to video interpolation by designing
optical devices to collect a large amount of paired training
data of high-speed frames and events, which is too costly to
scale. To fully unlock the potential of event cameras, this
paper proposes a novel TimeReplayer algorithm to interpolate videos captured by commodity cameras with events. It
is trained in an unsupervised cycle-consistent style, canceling the necessity of high-speed training data and bringing
the additional ability of video extrapolation. Its state-ofthe-art results and demo videos in supplementary reveal the
promising future of event-based vision.

1. Introduction
Traditionally, recording fast motion in high temporal resolution has been the exclusive functionality of high-speed
cameras, which are too expensive to be embedded in personal devices such as smartphones. Video interpolation, the
research field of inferring intermediate frames between two
Corresponding authors: Xu Jia, Ziyang Zhang, and Wenhui Wang.
Webpage: https://sites.google.com/view/timereplayer.

Ground Truth

SuperSloMo

QVI

Ours

Figure 1. Visual results of interpolating complex motion. Both
models with linear motion assumption (SuperSloMo [9]) and
quadratic motion assumption (QVI [38]) fail to model the motion
of the soccer ball correctly. Benefiting from the high temporal resolution of event data, the proposed method can correctly model
nonlinear motion and interpolate intermediate frames. This figure
contains animations. Best viewed in Acrobat Reader.

given frames, has attracted considerable research interest.
It can go beyond the temporal resolution limit of commodity cameras, and can be applicable in diverse downstream
tasks such as slow motion generation [2,9,38], video editing
[32, 46], and virtual reality [1]. Without any further information or proper assumption, the video interpolation problem is under-determined. In the past years, the computer

17804

