Pop-Out Motion: 3D-Aware Image Deformation
via Learning the Shape Laplacian
Jihyun Lee*1

Input

Minhyuk Sung*†1
Hyunjin Kim1
Tae-Kyun Kim1,2
1
2
KAIST
Imperial College London

Marching Cubes

Pop-Out Motion (Ours)

Deform

Figure 1. 3D-aware image deformation of a 2D human image. Compared to the images generated by directly deforming a mesh
reconstructed using PIFu [39] and Marching Cubes [32] (blue), our method (red) can produce more plausible 3D-aware image deformations
via inferring an additional intrinsic shape property: the shape Laplacian.

Abstract
We propose a framework that can deform an object in
a 2D image as it exists in 3D space. Most existing methods for 3D-aware image manipulation are limited to (1)
only changing the global scene information or depth, or
(2) manipulating an object of specific categories. In this
paper, we present a 3D-aware image deformation method
with minimal restrictions on shape category and deformation type. While our framework leverages 2D-to-3D reconstruction, we argue that reconstruction is not sufficient for
realistic deformations due to the vulnerability to topological errors. Thus, we propose to take a supervised learningbased approach to predict the shape Laplacian of the underlying volume of a 3D reconstruction represented as a point
cloud. Given the deformation energy calculated using the
predicted shape Laplacian and user-defined deformation
handles (e.g., keypoints), we obtain bounded biharmonic
weights to model plausible handle-based image deformation. In the experiments, we present our results of deforming
2D character and clothed human images. We also quantitatively show that our approach can produce more accurate
deformation weights compared to alternative methods (i.e.,
mesh reconstruction and point cloud Laplacian methods).

1. Introduction
The capability of photo editing, which had been confined in 2D space, has recently been popped out into 3D
* equal contributions, † corresponding author

space. For example, predicting depth from a 2D image
enables the composition of objects in an image [41, 57].
Object segmentation allows the projection of an image to a
new view [27, 36, 52]. Lighting and ground plane estimation make it possible to relight objects and generate a new
shadow in an image [9,14,15,54]. Such techniques for 3Daware image editing have allowed the user to manipulate an
image in a more intuitive manner — as if the object exists in
3D space — and opened new opportunities in downstream
applications.
As a missing piece of the existing 3D-aware image manipulation methods, we focus on 3D-aware image deformation. Unlike the aforementioned techniques, 3D-aware
deformation does not just alter the scene information (e.g.,
camera parameters, lighting conditions) or modify the 2.5D
information. Instead, it allows the user to directly manipulate the 3D geometry and appearance of an object. More
relevant topics to 3D-aware deformation would be (1) human pose transfer [6, 29, 33], which works only for human
bodies, (2) novel view synthesis [13, 37, 51], which is limited to altering a viewpoint of an image, and (3) 3D modelbased manipulation [26], which requires the exact 3D model
of the object in an image. To address these limitations, we
aim to enable 3D-aware image deformation with minimal
restrictions on shape category and deformation type.
For 3D-aware deformation, it is necessary to reconstruct
the object in a 2D image to 3D space; however, it is not
sufficient in general. Deformation requires either a surface
or volume information [21, 48]. However, most of existing

18532

