Convolution of Convolution: Let Kernels Spatially Collaborate
Rongzhen Zhao

Jian Li
Lynxi Technologies
Beijing, China, 100097

Zhenzhi Wu∗

{rongzhen.zhao, jian.li, zhenzhi.wu}@lynxi.com

kernels are
shared spatially

Abstract
conv2
conv1
different kernels/channels

rod cell

cone cell
chemical synapse

retina

bipolar cell

amakrine cell

…

In the biological visual pathway especially the retina,
neurons are tiled along spatial dimensions with the electrical coupling as their local association, while in a convolution layer, kernels are placed along the channel dimension
singly. We propose convolution of convolution, associating kernels in a layer and letting them collaborate spatially.
With this method, a layer can provide feature maps with extra transformations and learn its kernels together instead
of isolatedly. It is only used during training, bringing in
negligible extra costs; then it can be re-parameterized to
common convolution before testing, boosting performance
gratuitously in tasks like classification, detection and segmentation. Our method works even better when larger receptive fields are demanded. The code is available on site:
https://github.com/Genera1Z/ConvolutionOfConvolution.

…

…

Figure 1. Current convolutions succeed in modeling many key
features of the retina, except the electrical synapses. The electrical
synapses among close neurons of different types have not been
realized yet. We address this by employing the spatial association
(vertical red arrows on the left) on kernels within a layer.

1. Introduction
In the most recent decades, deep learning methods
have been greatly promoting the performance of algorithms
on various computation vision (CV) tasks. Particularly,
the convolution operation in convolution neural networks
(CNNs) is of great importance because of its powerful capability in feature extraction.
For gains in performance or efficiency, various ways
have been tried to improve the convolution operation. The
very early efforts are light convolution, by lowering connectivities in the channel [1,10,30] or space [19,31,33], or both
[34]. The following trials are increasing the freedom of kernel shape or value [5, 17, 42]. The most recent are dynamic
weights generated by the inputs [18, 27, 40]. Some draw
attention or multi-scale into convolution [4, 9, 12, 22, 39],
which are more like blocks.
In modeling the retina and subsequent visual pathway, as
shown in Fig. 1 [11,36], these methods are no different from
the standard convolution: different populations of neurons
∗ Corresponding author.

are modeled as different convolution layers; connections between populations, i.e., chemical synapses, are modeled as
weights connecting different layers; different neuron types
within a population are modeled by different kernels within
a layer, while neurons of the same type are modeled by one
same kernel shared over spatial dimensions; the electrical
synapses among close neurons (red arrows on Fig. 1 right),
however, is not well handled.
The electrical sysnapses provide the electrical coupling
effect that neural signals are transduced instantly in local areas. And such an effect also plays an important role in coordinating neighboring neurons to perform visual perception
all together [11,36], which we believe should not be ignored
in CNNs’ implementation.
The electrical synapses among close neurons of the same
type, in current methods, are implicated in the spatial overlap of those neighboring convolution sliding windows (horizontal red arrows on Fig. 1 left) of one single kernel within
a layer; the electrical sysnapses among close neurons of dif-

651

