Self-Supervised Global-Local Structure Modeling for Point Cloud Domain
Adaptation with Reliable Voted Pseudo Labels
Hehe Fan1

Xiaojun Chang2

Wanyue Zhang3,4∗

Yi Cheng4

Ying Sun4

Mohan Kankanhalli1
1

School of Computing, National University of Singapore
2
ReLER Lab, AAII, University of Technology Sydney
3
Max Planck Institute for Informatics
4
Institute for Infocomm Research, Agency for Science, Technology, and Research, Singapore
𝑧

Abstract

1. Introduction
Large-scale learning methods based on deep neural networks [7–10, 15, 25, 26, 35, 36, 39] constitute the recent advances in 3D vision, and play an important role for visual
perception in intelligent platforms such as robots, drones
∗ Part of this work was done when Wanyue Zhang was an intern at
Agency for Science, Technology, and Research, Singapore.

𝑥
global scale up/down
squeeze

project a 3D local area onto a 2D plane

deep neural network

In this paper, we propose an unsupervised domain adaptation method for deep point cloud representation learning.
To model the internal structures in target point clouds, we
first propose to learn the global representations of unlabeled data by scaling up or down point clouds and then
predicting the scales. Second, to capture the local structure
in a self-supervised manner, we propose to project a 3D
local area onto a 2D plane and then learn to reconstruct
the squeezed region. Moreover, to effectively transfer the
knowledge from source domain, we propose to vote pseudo
labels for target samples based on the labels of their nearest
source neighbors in the shared feature space. To avoid the
noise caused by incorrect pseudo labels, we only select reliable target samples, whose voting consistencies are high
enough, for enhancing adaptation. The voting method is
able to adaptively select more and more target samples during training, which in return facilitates adaptation because
the amount of labeled target data increases. Experiments on
PointDA (ModelNet-10, ShapeNet-10 and ScanNet-10) and
Sim-to-Real (ModelNet-11, ScanObjectNN-11, ShapeNet-9
and ScanObjectNN-9) demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method.

global structure modeling
𝑦

𝑥: 1.0
𝑦: 1.5
𝑧: 1.0
scale prediction
local structure modeling

local area reconstruction

Figure 1. Illustration of the self-supervised global-local structure
modeling for point cloud domain adaptation. The global structure
is modeled by scaling up/down the point cloud and then predicting
the scale. To capture the local structure, a random 3D local area is
squeezed onto a 2D plane and then reconstructed by the network.

and self-driving cars. These intelligent platforms often employ real-time depth sensors, such as LiDAR, to capture the
accurate geometric information of scenes, which are represented by 3D point clouds. However, deep neural neural
networks usually requires massive amounts of labeled point
clouds for representation learning, which limits the scalability to the real world. To alleviate this problem, unsupervised
point cloud domain adaption is recently attracting increasing attention from the community [1, 27, 31, 43]. Domain
adaptation aims to transfer the knowledge from a labeled
source domain to a related but unlabeled target domain, in
which the source and target domains share the same feature
space. However, due to different point scales, object sizes,
densities, styles, sensor perspectives, etc., point cloud representations in the target domain inevitably deviate from the
corresponding representations in the source domain, result-

6377

