Whose Track Is It Anyway? Improving Robustness to Tracking Errors with
Affinity-based Trajectory Prediction
Xinshuo Weng1,3 , Boris Ivanovic3 , Kris Kitani1 , Marco Pavone2,3
1

2

Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Stanford University
3
NVIDIA Research

Abstract
Multi-agent trajectory prediction is critical for planning
and decision-making in human-interactive autonomous systems, such as self-driving cars. However, most prediction
models are developed separately from their upstream perception (detection and tracking) modules, assuming ground
truth past trajectories as inputs. As a result, their performance degrades significantly when using real-world noisy
tracking results as inputs. This is typically caused by the
propagation of errors from tracking to prediction, such as
noisy tracks, fragments and identity switches. To alleviate this propagation of errors, we propose a new prediction paradigm that uses detections and their affinity matrices across frames as inputs, removing the need for errorprone data association during tracking. Since affinity matrices contain “soft” information about the similarity and
identity of detections across frames, making prediction directly from affinity matrices retains strictly more information than making prediction from the tracklets generated by
data association. Experiments on large-scale, real-world
autonomous driving datasets show that our affinity-based
prediction scheme1 reduces overall prediction errors by up
to 57.9%, in comparison to standard prediction pipelines
that use tracklets as inputs, with even more significant error reduction (up to 88.6%) if restricting the evaluation to
challenging scenarios with tracking errors.

1. Introduction
Tightly integrating multi-object tracking and trajectory
prediction methods within an autonomy stack is a significant challenge due to the fact the most prior works develop
multi-object tracking [5,14,17,28,38,39,41,42,49] and trajectory prediction [8, 12, 15, 16, 20, 32, 43, 46] approaches
in isolation. Recently, [40, 45] showed that feeding the out1 Our project website is at https://www.xinshuoweng.com/
projects/Affinipred.

Affinity matrices

Directly using affinity matrices as inputs

……
Trajectory
Prediction

Data
Association

……
Detections

Objects’
past tracklets

Predictions

Removed, no past tracklets anymore

Figure 1. In contrast to standard tracking-prediction pipelines,
our affinity-based prediction (Affinipred) skips data association,
directly using detections and affinity matrices as prediction inputs.

puts of a modern tracking method directly into a prediction model can significantly degrade performance (e.g., up
to 28× higher prediction error) in comparison to the common idealized prediction setting using perfect inputs (i.e.,
ground truth trajectories). Unfortunately, this challenge of
integration with an explicit consideration of robustness to
tracking errors is still largely under-explored in the field.
Why does prediction accuracy significantly drop when
using tracking results as inputs? Prior work [40, 45] has
shown that tracking errors such as identity switches and
fragments, which induce velocity or orientation estimation
errors, are to blame. Typically, identity switches occur from
mistakes in data association when two different objects are
marked as the same due to ambiguity, e.g., their appearance or geometric features are similar or they are very close.
Fragments occur when data association fails to find a detection to match with an existing tracklet.
Now, is there an effective way to avoid these tracking errors from propagating to prediction? In this work, we argue
that there is: skip data association altogether as shown in
Fig. 1, since it may cause identity switches and fragments.
Our key insight can be summarized as follows: Broadly,
data association converts a “soft” affinity matrix (comprised
of scalars between 0 and 1) to a boolean matrix (containing
only 0 or 1) through a “hard” matching. By removing the

6573

