Expanding Low-Density Latent Regions for Open-Set Object Detection
Jiaming Han1,2∗ , Yuqiang Ren3 , Jian Ding1,2 , Xingjia Pan3 , Ke Yan3† , Gui-Song Xia1,2†
1
NERCMS, School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
2
State Key Lab. LIESMARS, Wuhan University
3
YouTu Lab, Tencent
{hanjiaming, jian.ding, guisong.xia}@whu.edu.cn
{condiren, kerwinyan}@tencent.com, xjia.pan@gmail.com

(a)

Abstract
Modern object detectors have achieved impressive
progress under the close-set setup. However, open-set object detection (OSOD) remains challenging since objects
of unknown categories are often misclassified to existing
known classes. In this work, we propose to identify unknown objects by separating high/low-density regions in the
latent space, based on the consensus that unknown objects
are usually distributed in low-density latent regions. As
traditional threshold-based methods only maintain limited
low-density regions, which cannot cover all unknown objects, we present a novel Open-set Detector (OpenDet) with
expanded low-density regions. To this aim, we equip OpenDet with two learners, Contrastive Feature Learner (CFL)
and Unknown Probability Learner (UPL). CFL performs
instance-level contrastive learning to encourage compact
features of known classes, leaving more low-density regions for unknown classes; UPL optimizes unknown probability based on the uncertainty of predictions, which further divides more low-density regions around the cluster
of known classes. Thus, unknown objects in low-density
regions can be easily identified with the learned unknown
probability. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
method can significantly improve the OSOD performance,
e.g., OpenDet reduces the Absolute Open-Set Errors by
25%-35% on six OSOD benchmarks. Code is available at:
https://github.com/csuhan/opendet2.

1. Introduction
Although the past decade has witnessed significant
progress in object detection [3, 17, 29, 37, 39, 45], modern object detectors are often developed with a close-set as∗ Work done during internship at Tencent YouTu Lab.
† Corresponding author.

close-set training image

Detector

(a) Faster R-CNN

Ω𝒰𝒰
proposal embedding space

(b) OpenDet (Ours)

(b)

open-set testing image

Figure 1. Trained on close-set images, (a) threshold-based methods, e.g., Faster R-CNN, usually misclassify unknown objects
(black triangles, e.g. zebra) into known classes (colored dots, e.g.
horse) due to limited low-density regions (in gray color). (b) Our
method identifies unknown objects by expanding low-density regions. We encourage compact proposal features and learn clear
separation between known and unknown classes.

sumption that the object categories appearing in the testing
process are contained by the training sets, and quickly lose
their efficiency when handling real-world scenarios as many
objects categories have never been seen in the training. See
Fig. 1 for an instance, where a representative object detector, i.e., Faster R-CNN [39] trained on PASCAL VOC [14],
misclassifies zebra into horse with high confidence, as
the new class zebra is not contained by PASCAL VOC.
To alleviate this issue, Open-Set Object Detection (OSOD)
has been recently investigated, where the detector trained
on close-set datasets is asked to detect all known objects
and identify unknown objects in open-set conditions.
OSOD can be seen as an extension of Open-Set Recognition (OSR) [40]. Although OSR has been extensively studied [2, 7, 16, 40, 51, 53], rare works attempted to solve
the challenging OSOD. Dhamija et al. [12] first benchmarked the open-set performance of some representative
methods [29, 37, 39], which indicates most detectors are
overestimated in open-set conditions. Miller et al. [32, 33]
adopt dropout sampling [15] to improve the robustness of

9591

