Local Texture Estimator for Implicit Representation Function
Jaewon Lee
Kyong Hwan Jin*
Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology (DGIST), Korea
{ljw3136, kyong.jin}@dgist.ac.kr

https://github.com/jaewon-lee-b/lte

Abstract
Recent works with an implicit neural function shed light
on representing images in arbitrary resolution. However,
a standalone multi-layer perceptron shows limited performance in learning high-frequency components. In this
paper, we propose a Local Texture Estimator (LTE), a
dominant-frequency estimator for natural images, enabling
an implicit function to capture fine details while reconstructing images in a continuous manner. When jointly
trained with a deep super-resolution (SR) architecture, LTE
is capable of characterizing image textures in 2D Fourier
space. We show that an LTE-based neural function achieves
favorable performance against existing deep SR methods
within an arbitrary-scale factor. Furthermore, we demonstrate that our implementation takes the shortest running
time compared to previous works.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) is one of the most
fundamental problems in computer vision and graphics.
SISR aims to reconstruct high-resolution (HR) images from
its degraded low-resolution (LR) counterpart. Dominant approaches [3, 5, 14, 15, 18, 24, 34, 35] are to extract feature
maps using a deep vision architecture and then upsample to
HR images at the end of a network. However, we need to
train and store several models for each scale factor when an
upsampler is implemented by sub-pixel convolution [24].
In contrast, arbitrary-scale SR methods [4, 9] are promising
since such ideas pave the way to restore images in a continuous manner with only a single network.
Recently, implicit neural functions parameterized by a
multi-layer perceptron (MLP) achieved remarkable performance in representing continuous-domain signals, such as
images [4], occupancy [19], signed distance [21], shape representation [11], and view synthesis [20, 26]. Such MLPs
take coordinates as inputs and are trained in a framework
of gradient descent optimization and machine learning. In* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Overview of Local Texture Estimator (LTE). Our LTE
estimates dominant frequencies and corresponding Fourier coefficients for natural images. Then, an MLP makes use of the estimated essential Fourier information to reconstruct an HR image
in arbitrary resolution. We provide low-frequency information by
adding an upscaled LR image to the output of MLP.

spired by recent progress in implicit representation, LIIF [4]
replaced sub-pixel convolution with MLPs to accomplish
arbitrary-scale SR, even at substantial scale factors.
One limitation of implicit neural representations is that a
standalone MLP is biased towards learning low-frequency
components [23] and fails to capture fine details [29]. Such
phenomenon is referred to as spectral bias, and recent lines
of research in resolving this problem are projecting input
coordinates into a high-dimensional Fourier feature space
[20, 29] or substituting a ReLU with a sinusoidal activation
[25]. Motivated from previous works, we study arbitraryscale SISR problems through the lens of Fourier analysis.
In this paper, we propose a Local Texture Estimator
(LTE), a dominant-frequency estimator for natural images,
to allow an implicit function to learn fine details while
restoring images in arbitrary resolution. We assume that an
implicit function prioritizes learning image textures when
utilizing dominant frequencies of images, as described in

1929

