Protecting Facial Privacy: Generating Adversarial Identity Masks via
Style-robust Makeup Transfer
Shengshan Hu1, 4, 5, 6 , Xiaogeng Liu1, 4, 5, 6 , Yechao Zhang1, 4, 5, 6 , Minghui Li3
Leo Yu Zhang8 , Hai Jin2, 4, 5, 7 , Libing Wu9
1
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
3
School of Software Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
4
National Engineering Research Center for Big Data Technology and System
5
Services Computing Technology and System Lab
6
Hubei Engineering Research Center on Big Data Security
7
Cluster and Grid Computing Lab 8 School of Information Technology, Deakin University
9
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University
{hushengshan, liuxiaogeng, ycz, minghuili, hjin}@hust.edu.cn
leo.zhang@deakin.edu.au, wu@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
While deep face recognition (FR) systems have shown
amazing performance in identification and verification, they
also arouse privacy concerns for their excessive surveillance on users, especially for public face images widely
spread on social networks. Recently, some studies adopt
adversarial examples to protect photos from being identified
by unauthorized face recognition systems. However, existing methods of generating adversarial face images suffer
from many limitations, such as awkward visual, white-box
setting, weak transferability, making them difficult to be applied to protect face privacy in reality.
In this paper, we propose adversarial makeup transfer
GAN (AMT-GAN)1 , a novel face protection method aiming at constructing adversarial face images that preserve
stronger black-box transferability and better visual quality
simultaneously. AMT-GAN leverages generative adversarial networks (GAN) to synthesize adversarial face images
with makeup transferred from reference images. In particular, we introduce a new regularization module along with a
joint training strategy to reconcile the conflicts between the
adversarial noises and the cycle consistence loss in makeup
transfer, achieving a desirable balance between the attack
strength and visual changes. Extensive experiments verify
that compared with state of the arts, AMT-GAN can not only
preserve a comfortable visual quality, but also achieve a
higher attack success rate over commercial FR APIs, in1 https://github.com/CGCL-codes/AMT-GAN

(a) Patch-based

(c) Source Image

GenAP-DI

Adv-Hat
Adv-Glasses
(b) Perturbation-based

(d) Ours

TIP-IM
70.838/62.423/0.445

74.097/66.961/0.614

Figure 1. Comparison with existing adversarial attacks on FR systems in the black-box setting. The images in (a) are directly extracted from their papers. The numbers listed below images are the
verification confidence of the target identity given by commercial
FR APIs, and a higher score represent a stronger attack ability. The
blue is from Face++, the green is from Aliyun, and the red is from
Microsoft Azure (The same color code will be used hereinafter).

cluding Face++, Aliyun, and Microsoft.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the fast development of face
recognition (FR) based on deep neural networks (DNNs).

15014

