RSCFed: Random Sampling Consensus Federated Semi-supervised Learning
Xiaoxiao Liang1 , Yiqun Lin1 , Huazhu Fu2 , Lei Zhu3,1 , Xiaomeng Li1‡
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 2 IHPC, A*STAR
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
{xliangak, ylindw}@connect.ust.hk, hzfu@ieee.org, {leizhu, eexmli}@ust.hk

Abstract
Federated semi-supervised learning (FSSL) aims to derive a global model by training fully-labeled and fullyunlabeled clients or training partially labeled clients. The
existing approaches work well when local clients have independent and identically distributed (IID) data but fail
to generalize to a more practical FSSL setting, i.e., NonIID setting. In this paper, we present a Random Sampling
Consensus Federated learning, namely RSCFed, by considering the uneven reliability among models from fullylabeled clients, fully-unlabeled clients or partially labeled
clients. Our key motivation is that given models with large
deviations from either labeled clients or unlabeled clients,
the consensus could be reached by performing random
sub-sampling over clients. To achieve it, instead of directly aggregating local models, we first distill several subconsensus models by random sub-sampling over clients and
then aggregating the sub-consensus models to the global
model. To enhance the robustness of sub-consensus models,
we also develop a novel distance-reweighted model aggregation method. Experimental results show that our method
outperforms state-of-the-art methods on three benchmarked
datasets, including both natural and medical images. The
code is available at https://github.com/XMed-Lab/RSCFed.

1. Introduction
The core idea of federated learning (FL) is to train machine learning models on separate datasets that are distributed across different places or devices, which can preserve local data privacy to a certain extent. Over the past
few years, FL has emerged as an important research area
and attracted many researchers’ attention to study its application in medical image diagnosis [10, 14, 28], image classification [16] and object detection [22].
Considerable efforts have been devoted to design various FL methods, such as FedAvg [23], SCAFFOLD [12]
‡ Project lead and corresponding author.

Figure 1. Illustration of the existing FSSL method, i.e., [28]
and our RSCFed. Existing methods simply perform the standard
model aggregation in FedAvg [23], while our RSCFed distills multiple sub-consensus models from local models and updates the
global model via aggregating sub-consensus models.

and MOON [16]. Although the results are quite promising,
these methods require fully labeled images on each local
client, limiting its application in real practice.
Recently, federated semi-supervised learning (FSSL) [8,
19, 21, 28] is becoming a new research topic, aiming at utilizing the unlabeled images to enhance the global model development. One line of the research studies FSSL by considering each client has partially labeled and unlabeled images. For example, Jeong et al. [8] introduced inter-client
consistency loss to improve the global model by encouraging the consistent outputs from multiple clients. Another
line of FSSL [21, 28] assumes that some local clients have
fully labeled images while some clients contain unlabeled
images, which we denote as labeled clients and unlabeled
clients respectively. However, existing methods have two
main limitations. First, they do not consider not independent and identically distributed data (Non-IID) among local clients, which is a key problem for FL and can cause
a deterioration in accuracy [9, 15]. Second, some solutions [21] share the correlation matrix among local clients,
which might cause information leakage.
This paper studies the FSSL with two widely used settings: (1) jointly training fully-labeled and fully-unlabeled
clients; (2) jointly training partially-labeled clients. A
straightforward solution is to extend existing FSSL meth-

10154

