Neural Rays for Occlusion-aware Image-based Rendering
Yuan Liu1 Sida Peng2 Lingjie Liu3 Qianqian Wang4 Peng Wang1
Christian Theobalt3 Xiaowei Zhou2 Wenping Wang5
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 Zhejiang University 3 Max Planck Institute for Informatics
4
Cornell University 5 Texas A&M University

Abstract
We present a new neural representation, called Neural
Ray (NeuRay), for the novel view synthesis task. Recent
works construct radiance fields from image features of input views to render novel view images, which enables the
generalization to new scenes. However, due to occlusions,
a 3D point may be invisible to some input views. On such a
3D point, these generalization methods will include inconsistent image features from invisible views, which interfere
with the radiance field construction. To solve this problem,
we predict the visibility of 3D points to input views within
our NeuRay representation. This visibility enables the radiance field construction to focus on visible image features,
which significantly improves its rendering quality. Meanwhile, a novel consistency loss is proposed to refine the visibility in NeuRay when finetuning on a specific scene. Experiments demonstrate that our approach achieves stateof-the-art performance on the novel view synthesis task
when generalizing to unseen scenes and outperforms perscene optimization methods after finetuning. Project page:
https://liuyuan-pal.github.io/NeuRay/

1. Introduction
Novel View Synthesis (NVS) is an important problem in
computer graphics and computer vision. Given a set of input images with known camera poses, the goal of NVS is to
synthesize images of the scene from arbitrary virtual camera
poses. Recently, neural rendering methods have achieved
impressive improvements on the NVS problem compared
to earlier image-based rendering methods [14, 19, 30]. Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [31] shows that photo-realistic
images of novel views can be synthesized by volume rendering on a 5D radiance field encoded in a neural network
which maps a position and a direction to a density and a
color. However, these methods cannot generalize to unseen
scenes as they learn scene-specific networks, which usually
take hours or days for a single scene.
Recent works [5, 55, 56, 63] propose NeRF-like neural

Input view

(a) Consistency

Test view

Surface

(b) Inconsistency

(c) Inconsistency

Figure 1. (a) Without occlusions, local image features are consistent on the surface point. (b) Local image features are inconsistent
on a surface point due to occlusions. (c) Local image features
are inconsistent on a non-surface point. Generalization methods
will correctly assign a large density to the surface point in (a) due
to the feature consistency. However, when features are not very
consistent in (b) and (c), it is relatively hard for these methods to
correctly determine the density.

rendering frameworks that can generalize to unseen scenes.
Given a set of input views, they construct a radiance field
on-the-fly by extracting local image features on these views
and matching multi-view features to predict colors and density on 3D points. This is similar to traditional stereo matching methods [47, 60] that check the multi-view feature consistency to find a surface point, as shown in Fig. 1 (a). However, when features are not consistent on a point, it is relatively hard for these methods to correctly determine whether
such inconsistency is caused by occlusions as shown in
Fig. 1 (b) or this point is a non-surface point as shown in
Fig. 1 (c), leading to rendering artifacts.
To address this problem, we introduce a new neural representation called Neural Rays (NeuRay) in this paper. NeuRay consists of pixel-aligned feature vectors on every input
view. On a camera ray emitting from a pixel on the input
view, the associated NeuRay feature vector on this pixel is
able to predict visibility to determine whether a 3D point
at a specific depth is visible or not. With such visibility,
we can easily distinguish the occlusion-caused feature inconsistency from the non-surface-caused feature inconsistency in Fig. 1, which leads to more accurate radiance field
construction and thus better rendering quality on difficult

7824

