Zero Experience Required: Plug & Play Modular Transfer Learning
for Semantic Visual Navigation
Ziad Al-Halah1
Santhosh K. Ramakrishnan1,2
Kristen Grauman1,2
1
2
The University of Texas at Austin
Meta AI
ziadlhlh@gmail.com, srama@cs.utexas.edu, grauman@cs.utexas.edu

Find:

Abstract
In reinforcement learning for visual navigation, it is
common to develop a model for each new task, and train
that model from scratch with task-specific interactions in
3D environments. However, this process is expensive; massive amounts of interactions are needed for the model to
generalize well. Moreover, this process is repeated whenever there is a change in the task type or the goal modality.
We present a unified approach to visual navigation using a
novel modular transfer learning model. Our model can effectively leverage its experience from one source task and
apply it to multiple target tasks (e.g., ObjectNav, RoomNav, ViewNav) with various goal modalities (e.g., image,
sketch, audio, label). Furthermore, our model enables zeroshot experience learning, whereby it can solve the target
tasks without receiving any task-specific interactive training. Our experiments on multiple photorealistic datasets
and challenging tasks show that our approach learns faster,
generalizes better, and outperforms SoTA models by a significant margin. Project page: https://vision.cs.
utexas.edu/projects/zsel/

1. Introduction
In visual navigation, an agent must intelligently move
around in an unfamiliar environment to reach a goal, using
its egocentric camera to avoid obstacles and decide where
to go next. As a fundamental research problem in embodied AI, visual navigation has many potential applications—
such as service robots in the home or workplace, mobile
search and rescue robots, assistive technology for the visually impaired, and augmented reality systems to help people
navigate or find objects.
Recent work in computer vision explores visual navigation from many different fronts. In PointNav, an agent is
asked to go to a specific position in an unmapped environment (e.g., go to (x, y)) [6, 56, 57]. In ObjectNav, the agent
must find an object by name (e.g., go to the nearest tele-

Find:
Potted Plant

Plug & Play
Modular Transfer
Learning

Water Dripping

Living Room

Figure 1. Our novel modular transfer learning approach for semantic visual navigation learns a general purpose semantic search policy by finding image views sampled randomly in the environment
(top). Then, this experience is leveraged to search for previously
unseen types of goals and search tasks (bottom). Our approach
enables zero-shot experience learning (i.e., perform the target task
without receiving any new experiences) and it adapts its policy
much faster using fewer target-specific interactions.

phone) [6,9]. In RoomNav, the agent must find a room (e.g.,
go to the kitchen) [49, 56, 67]. In AudioNav, the agent must
find a sounding target (e.g., find the ringing phone) [16,28].
In ImageNav, the agent must go to where a given photo
was taken [14, 55, 75]. Each case presents a distinct goal
to the agent. Accordingly, researchers have pursued taskspecific models to treat each one, typically training policies
with deep reinforcement learning (RL).
Despite exciting advances, learning task-specific navigation policies has inherent limitations. Training embodied agents from scratch for each new task and relying on
special-purpose architectures and priors (e.g., room layout
maps for RoomNav, object co-occurrence priors for ObjectNav, directional cues for AudioNav, etc.) requires repeated
access to training environments for gathering new agent ex-

17031

