Consistent Explanations by Contrastive Learning
Vipin Pillai
University of Maryland, Baltimore County

Soroush Abbasi Koohpayegani
University of Maryland, Baltimore County

vp7@umbc.edu

soroush@umbc.edu

Ashley Ouligian
Northrop Grumman

Dennis Fong
Northrop Grumman

Hamed Pirsiavash
University of California, Davis

Ashley.Rothballer@ngc.com

Dennis.Fong@ngc.com

hpirsiav@ucdavis.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have become ubiquitous in many
applications owing to their performance on several computer vision tasks. Although they have been instrumental
in achieving state-of-the-art accuracy, deep neural networks
are widely considered to be black box systems, which is
not desirable. For example, if an AI system is deployed to
identify a malignant tumor from CT scans, it is important
for medical experts to understand the reasoning behind the
decision-making process [38]. This not only enables building trust, but also helps identify any spurious correlations

Original

Augmented

Baseline

Augmented

Ours

Post-hoc explanation methods, e.g., Grad-CAM, enable
humans to inspect the spatial regions responsible for a particular network decision. However, it is shown that such
explanations are not always consistent with human priors,
such as consistency across image transformations. Given
an interpretation algorithm, e.g., Grad-CAM, we introduce
a novel training method to train the model to produce more
consistent explanations. Since obtaining the ground truth
for a desired model interpretation is not a well-defined task,
we adopt ideas from contrastive self-supervised learning,
and apply them to the interpretations of the model rather
than its embeddings. We show that our method, Contrastive
Grad-CAM Consistency (CGC), results in Grad-CAM interpretation heatmaps that are more consistent with human annotations while still achieving comparable classification accuracy. Moreover, our method acts as a regularizer and improves the accuracy on limited-data, finegrained classification settings. In addition, because our
method does not rely on annotations, it allows for the incorporation of unlabeled data into training, which enables
better generalization of the model. The code is available
here: https://github.com/UCDvision/CGC

Original

R.V

Puma

Figure 1. Our method significantly improves the consistency of
Grad-CAM explanation heatmaps under data augmentation. For
both the RV and the Puma, our method highlights the same portions of the image in both the original and augmented versions.

that the network may have inadvertently learned to use to
make its decision [33]. In recent years, there have been attempts to open this black box by designing frameworks to
explain the network’s decision-making process. Post-hoc
explanation methods such as CAM [45], Grad-CAM [31],
and Full-Grad [35] generate a heatmap in the size of the
image with higher values corresponding to the regions that
contributed most to the network’s decision.
Unlike image labels, there can be multiple valid explanations for a given image category. Furthermore, a valid explanation might not involve the entire object-segmentation
area. For example, in order to correctly classify an image
of a dog, the network might rely on just the facial features
of the dog, or the texture of the fur and the tail, or a combination of both. Each of these are valid explanations, and
hence, generating ground truth annotations for explanations

10213

