The Two Dimensions of Worst-case Training
and Their Integrated Effect for Out-of-domain Generalization
Zeyi Huang1,2⋆
Haohan Wang1⋆
Dong Huang1
Yong Jae Lee2†
Eric P. Xing1†
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
University of Wisconsin-Madison
{zeyih@andrew, haohanw@cs, donghuang@, epxing@cs}.cmu.edu

high loss

Abstract

Feature dimension loss

Training with an emphasis on “hard-to-learn” components of the data has been proven as an effective method
to improve the generalization of machine learning models,
especially in the settings where robustness (e.g., generalization across distributions) is valued. Existing literature discussing this “hard-to-learn” concept are mainly expanded
either along the dimension of the samples or the dimension
of the features. In this paper, we aim to introduce a simple
view merging these two dimensions, leading to a new, simple yet effective, heuristic to train machine learning models by emphasizing the worst-cases on both the sample and
the feature dimensions. We name our method W2D following the concept of “Worst-case along Two Dimensions”.
We validate the idea and demonstrate its empirical strength
over standard benchmarks.

0

1. Introduction
The remarkable empirical performance of deep learning
over i.i.d data, sometimes paralleling the human visual system [23, 37], has encouraged the community to challenge
potentially more demanding scenarios where the models are
trained with data from one or more distributions but tested
with data from other distributions. We refer to this scenario
as the out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization testing setting following the terminology used in [74].
In this OOD test scenario, deep learning techniques often
underdeliver the promising results made with i.i.d data, as
observed by multiple preceding works with different strategies to generate the test data, such as with salient patterns
added to the data [17, 27], with carefully constructed imperceptible noise perturbing the data (adversarial attacks)
[20, 60], or with additionally collected datasets that humans
can nonetheless generalize to despite potentially significant
disparities between the training and test distributions (e.g.,
domain adaptation/generalization) [6, 48].
⋆ ,† equal contribution

yongjaelee@cs.wisc.edu

W2D

Sample dimension loss

high loss

Figure 1. The conceptual illustration of our main idea W2D for
a simple example of canary vs. goldfish image classification. For
a regular model trained on standard images (left-bottom block),
there are two dimensions of hard samples: following the categorization in [74], the vertical dimension corresponds to the “diversity shift” of the images (e.g., photos of the animals vs. cartoons
of the animals) and the horizontal dimension corresponds to the
“correlation shift” of the images (e.g., birds in cage and fish in
water vs. fish in cage and birds in water). The W2D algorithm
conceptually selects the images that are hard at the sample dimension and augment these samples toward being harder at the feature
dimension.

Despite the variation in multiple OOD settings, the underlying reason leading to the performance drop may have
a shared theme: the models’ incapability to learn what humans will consider important in the data, as discussed previously in empirical [70] and statistical [68] perspectives.
Thus, we conjecture that a key to training models that
can perform consistently well in the OOD setting is to design a new training heuristic that can better imitate the hu-

9631

