UBoCo : Unsupervised Boundary Contrastive Learning
for Generic Event Boundary Detection

Hyolim Kang *, Jinwoo Kim *, Taehyun Kim , Seon Joo Kim
Yonsei University
{hyolimkang,jinwoo-kim,kimth0101,seonjookim}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Generic Event Boundary Detection (GEBD) is a newly
suggested video understanding task that aims to find one
level deeper semantic boundaries of events. Bridging the
gap between natural human perception and video understanding, it has various potential applications, including
interpretable and semantically valid video parsing. Still at
an early development stage, existing GEBD solvers are simple extensions of relevant video understanding tasks, disregarding GEBD’s distinctive characteristics. In this paper,
we propose a novel framework for unsupervised/supervised
GEBD, by using the Temporal Self-similarity Matrix (TSM)
as the video representation. The new Recursive TSM Parsing (RTP) algorithm exploits local diagonal patterns in
TSM to detect boundaries, and it is combined with the
Boundary Contrastive (BoCo) loss to train our encoder to
generate more informative TSMs. Our framework can be
applied to both unsupervised and supervised settings, with
both achieving state-of-the-art performance by a huge margin in GEBD benchmark. Especially, our unsupervised
method outperforms the previous state-of-the-art “supervised” model, implying its exceptional efficacy.

1. Introduction
With the proliferation of video platforms, video understanding tasks are drawing substantial attention in computer
vision community. The prevailing convention for video processing [3,15,16,21,28] is still dividing the whole video into
short non-overlapping snippets with a fixed duration, which
neglects the semantic continuity of the video. On the other
hand, cognitive scientists have observed that human senses
the visual stream as a set of events [39], which alludes that
there is room for research to find out a video parsing method
* equal contribution, ordered by surname

that preserves semantic validity and interpretability of video
snippets.
From this perspective, Generic Event Boundary Detection (GEBD) [37] can be seen as a new attempt to interconnect human perception mechanisms to video understanding.
The goal of GEBD is to pinpoint the content change moments in which humans perceive them as event boundaries.
To reflect human perception, labels for the task are annotated following the instruction of finding boundaries of one
level deeper granularity compared to the video-level event,
regardless of action classes. This characteristic differentiates GEBD from the previous video localization tasks [42]
in the sense that the labels are only given by natural human
perception, not the predefined action classes.
Recently released Kinetics-GEBD [37] is the first dataset
for the GEBD. The distinctive point in the dataset is that
the event boundary labels are annotated by 5 different annotators, making the dataset convey the subjectivity of human perception. Besides, various baseline methods for the
GEBD task were also included in [37]. Based on the similarity to Temporal Action Localization (TAL), many of
the suggested GEBD methods were extensions of previous
TAL works [26, 27], while several unsupervised methods
exploited shot detection methods and event segmentation
theory [25, 36, 43]. Detailed explanations about baseline
GEBD methods can be found in Section 2.
Nevertheless, straightforward adoptions of existing
methods have a clear limitation in that they directly use pretrained features to predict boundary points. As the features
are extracted from the classification-pretrained networks
like ResNet-50 [19], they inevitably focus on class-specific
or object-centric information. However, many event boundaries, especially those that are hard to detect, do not entail
scene change (e.g. Stand-by frame and Running frame in
Figure 1 share most of the scene information). For capturing event boundaries, what really matters is the relationship between adjacent frames, implying the need for a new

20073

