FocalClick: Towards Practical Interactive Image Segmentation
Xi Chen1

Zhiyan Zhao1 Yilei Zhang1 Manni Duan1 Donglian Qi2 Hengshuang Zhao3,4
1
Alibaba Group 2 Zhejiang University 3 The University of Hong Kong
4
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Abstract
Interactive segmentation allows users to extract target
masks by making positive/negative clicks. Although explored by many previous works, there is still a gap between academic approaches and industrial needs: first,
existing models are not efficient enough to work on lowpower devices; second, they perform poorly when used to
refine preexisting masks as they could not avoid destroying
the correct part. FocalClick solves both issues at once by
predicting and updating the mask in localized areas. For
higher efficiency, we decompose the slow prediction on the
entire image into two fast inferences on small crops: a
coarse segmentation on the Target Crop, and a local refinement on the Focus Crop. To make the model work with
preexisting masks, we formulate a sub-task termed Interactive Mask Correction, and propose Progressive Merge
as the solution. Progressive Merge exploits morphological information to decide where to preserve and where to
update, enabling users to refine any preexisting mask effectively. FocalClick achieves competitive results against
SOTA methods with significantly smaller FLOPs. It also
shows significant superiority when making corrections on
preexisting masks. Code and data will be released at
github.com/XavierCHEN34/ClickSEG

1. Introduction
In recent years, interactive segmentation has aroused interest from both academia and industry. It enables users
to annotate masks conveniently using simple interactions
like scribbles [1, 11, 21], boxes [20, 34, 40], or clicks [5, 18,
27, 35, 36, 44]. In this work, we focus on the click-based
method. Under this setting, the users successively place
positive/negative clicks (like the red/green points in Fig. 1)
to define the foreground and background, and the model returns new predictions after each user click.
The basic paradigm [44] for click-based interactive segmentation is using Gaussian maps or disks to represent the
clicks, then concatenating the click maps with the image
as input, and sending it to a segmentation model to predict

User: Add Click

New Click

Target Crop
Coarse Segmentation

Focus Crop
Local Refinement

Previous Prediction

Coarse Segmentation

Local Refinement

Progressive Merge

Progressive Merge

Figure 1. After receiving a new click, FocalClick first selects a
Target Crop (yellow box) based on the previous mask to execute
coarse segmentation. Then, we pick a Focus Crop (red box) to
make refinement according to the maximum different region between the coarse prediction and the previous mask. At last, Progressive Merge selects part of the new prediction to update.

the mask. Based on this paradigm, previous works make
improvements from different angles and keep improving
SOTA. However, when applying them to practical scenarios, we find them not satisfactory in the following aspects.
Efficiency on low-power devices. A good annotation
tool is expected to produce fine masks with quick responses.
Most previous works only focus on accuracy and take advantage of big models and high-resolution inputs. However, they struggle when deployed on personal laptops, edge
devices, or web service applications with high volume requests. When we attempt to reduce the input size for faster
turnover, their accuracy drops significantly.
Working with preexisting mask. In practical applications, there are not many mask annotation tasks that need
to start from scratch. Preexisting masks are often provided
by offline models or other forms of pre-processing. Making modifications on them could facilitate the annotation.
Nevertheless, previous methods are not compatible with externally given masks. Most works [5, 18, 22, 27, 35, 44] do
not consider the previous mask as input. Although [10, 36]
concatenate the previous mask with the input image and
the click maps, they do not perform well. As shown in
Fig. 2, RITM [36] hardly removes the mask of the cabin

1300

