Image-to-Lidar Self-Supervised Distillation for Autonomous Driving Data
Corentin Sautier 1 , Gilles Puy1 , Spyros Gidaris1 , Alexandre Boulch1 , Andrei Bursuc1 , Renaud Marlet1,2
1
valeo.ai, Paris, France
2
LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, Univ. Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, Marne-la-Vallée, France

Abstract
Segmenting or detecting objects in sparse Lidar point
clouds are two important tasks in autonomous driving to
allow a vehicle to act safely in its 3D environment. The
best performing methods in 3D semantic segmentation or
object detection rely on a large amount of annotated data.
Yet annotating 3D Lidar data for these tasks is tedious and
costly. In this context, we propose a self-supervised pretraining method for 3D perception models that is tailored
to autonomous driving data. Specifically, we leverage the
availability of synchronized and calibrated image and Lidar sensors in autonomous driving setups for distilling selfsupervised pre-trained image representations into 3D models. Hence, our method does not require any point cloud
nor image annotations. The key ingredient of our method
is the use of superpixels which are used to pool 3D point
features and 2D pixel features in visually similar regions.
We then train a 3D network on the self-supervised task of
matching these pooled point features with the corresponding pooled image pixel features. The advantages of contrasting regions obtained by superpixels are that: (1) grouping together pixels and points of visually coherent regions
leads to a more meaningful contrastive task that produces
features well adapted to 3D semantic segmentation and 3D
object detection; (2) all the different regions have the same
weight in the contrastive loss regardless of the number of
3D points sampled in these regions; (3) it mitigates the
noise produced by incorrect matching of points and pixels
due to occlusions between the different sensors. Extensive
experiments on autonomous driving datasets demonstrate
the ability of our image-to-Lidar distillation strategy to produce 3D representations that transfer well on semantic segmentation and object detection tasks.

1. Introduction
Lidar sensors deliver rich information about the 3D
world, and making sense of this kind of information is cruCode available at https://github.com/valeoai/SLidR

cial for an autonomous driving vehicle to properly act in
its environment, across different external conditions. Stateof-the-art methods for semantic segmentation or object detection in Lidar point clouds rely on deep neural networks
trained on large collections of annotated point clouds. Yet,
annotating 3D Lidar point clouds is a long and costly
task [3, 20]. Self-supervision reduces the burden of annotating large datasets by exploiting a large amount of nonannotated data to pre-train neural networks, which are subsequently fine-tuned on a smaller set of annotated data.
The current best performing self-supervised techniques
for 3D neural networks working on real point clouds are
mostly adapted to indoor scenes with dense point clouds.
These methods suffer from several shortcomings when dealing with sparse point clouds, such as those acquired outdoor
by a moving vehicle. For example, PointContrast [66] requires pairs of registered point clouds and a list of matching points between them. While multiple reliable matching points can be found in a densely sampled static scene,
the number of such pairs of points is much lower in autonomous driving datasets, in particular on objects of interest (cars, trucks, pedestrians, etc.) as they are sparsely sampled and likely to move between two acquisitions. DepthContrast [71] avoids the need of finding pairs of corresponding points as it only requires a single representation for each
scene. This representation is computed by global pooling
and therefore loses information on small objects. These
design choices limit significantly the performance of these
methods in our experiments on autonomous driving scenes.
Our goal is to design a self-supervised method for tasks
such as semantic segmentation or object detection in Lidar
point clouds, and tailored to autonomous driving data. Most
autonomous driving vehicles are equipped with an array of
cameras and Lidar sensors that are synchronized and calibrated, offering rich surround-view information. These data
are a lot easier to acquire than to annotate, and we propose
to leverage them to distill self-supervised pre-trained image
representations into a 3D network. This whole pre-training
process does not require any annotation of the images nor of
the point clouds. Self-supervised pre-training on images has
proven very successful for learning generic representations

9891

