UDA-COPE: Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
for Category-level Object Pose Estimation
Taeyeop Lee

Byeong-Uk Lee

Inkyu Shin

In So Kweon

Jaesung Choe

Ukcheol Shin

Kuk-Jin Yoon
KAIST

Abstract
Learning to estimate object pose often requires groundtruth (GT) labels, such as CAD model and absolute-scale
object pose, which is expensive and laborious to obtain in
the real world. To tackle this problem, we propose an unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) for category-level object pose estimation, called UDA-COPE. Inspired by recent
multi-modal UDA techniques, the proposed method exploits
a teacher-student self-supervised learning scheme to train a
pose estimation network without using target domain pose
labels. We also introduce a bidirectional filtering method
between the predicted normalized object coordinate space
(NOCS) map and observed point cloud, to not only make
our teacher network more robust to the target domain but
also to provide more reliable pseudo labels for the student
network training. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method both quantitatively and qualitatively. Notably, without leveraging
target-domain GT labels, our proposed method achieved
comparable or sometimes superior performance to existing
methods that depend on the GT labels.

1. Introduction
Object pose estimation is one of the crucial tasks used
in various robotics and computer vision applications for
robot manipulation [8, 34, 37, 39] and augmented reality
(AR) [23,24,28]. Using sensor data such as images or point
clouds, this task aims to estimate the poses of target objects
including 3D orientation, 3D location, and size information.
Previous 6D object pose estimation methods follow the
instance-level pose estimation schemes [12, 13, 25, 27, 31,
34, 38] that rely on given 3D CAD model information (e.g.,
keypoints, geometry) and the size of known objects. However, these methods typically have difficulty estimating the
pose of unknown objects since they do not yet have 3D
CAD models as priors.

In contrast to the instance-level scheme, category-level
object pose estimation [4, 5, 20, 30, 35, 36] approaches are
more efficient in that a single network can infer multiple
classes at once. In particular, Wang et al. [35] introduced
a pioneering representation called Normalized Object Coordinate Space (NOCS), to align different object instances
within one category in a shared 3D orientation. By estimating per-category NOCS maps, it is able to estimate the 6D
pose of unseen objects without prior 3D CAD models. Its
strengths have led to the use of NOCS representation in the
following studies [4, 5, 20, 30, 36].
However, current object pose estimation research mostly
relies on supervised learning, which requires expensive GT
labels such as 3D object CAD models and absolute object
pose. These labels are not only difficult to obtain in the real
world but are also unreliable due to the human-annotation.
Because of this difficulty, most of the training depends on
synthetic datasets [15, 29, 31] and is usually not feasible in
real-world applications due to domain gaps.
To cope with the real-world data scarcity problem, we
take a look at unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) methods [14, 19, 42]. UDA approaches often consider two types
of datasets, the source domain (i.e. synthetic dataset) and
the target domain (i.e. real-world dataset) dataset. The main
goal of the UDA methods is to successfully make deep
learning networks robust to the target domain using only the
GT labels of the source domain. Various techniques exist,
such as pseudo label generation [14, 19], teacher and student networks with momentum updates [1, 40], adversarial
learning [2, 3, 16], and etc.
In this paper, we propose an Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation for Category-level Object Pose Estimation
(UDA-COPE). The proposed method effectively transfers
task knowledge from a synthetic domain to a real domain by
exploiting a multi-modal self-supervised learning scheme
using pseudo labels. Our UDA-COPE concentrates on how
to make high-quality pseudo-labels that are efficiently tar-

14891

