DoubleField: Bridging the Neural Surface and Radiance Fields for High-fidelity
Human Reconstruction and Rendering
Ruizhi Shao1 , Hongwen Zhang1 , He Zhang2 , Mingjia Chen1 , Yan-Pei Cao3 , Tao Yu1 , Yebin Liu1
1
Tsinghua University 2 Beihang University 3 Kuaishou Technology

Abstract
We introduce DoubleField, a novel framework combining the merits of both surface field and radiance field for
high-fidelity human reconstruction and rendering. Within
DoubleField, the surface field and radiance field are associated together by a shared feature embedding and a
surface-guided sampling strategy. Moreover, a view-to-view
transformer is introduced to fuse multi-view features and
learn view-dependent features directly from high-resolution
inputs. With the modeling power of DoubleField and
the view-to-view transformer, our method significantly improves the reconstruction quality of both geometry and appearance, while supporting direct inference, scene-specific
high-resolution finetuning, and fast rendering. The efficacy
of DoubleField is validated by the quantitative evaluations
on several datasets and the qualitative results in a realworld sparse multi-view system, showing its superior capability for high-quality human model reconstruction and
photo-realistic free-viewpoint human rendering. Data and
source code will be made public for the research purpose.

1. Introduction
The surface fields [2, 31, 35] and the radiance fields [32,
63] have recently emerged as promising solutions for geometry modeling [12, 39, 40, 66] and texture rendering [37,
59, 65] of 3D human in an implicit and continuous manner, respectively. However, their limitations become apparent when considering simultaneous geometry and appearance reconstruction, not to say under sparse multi-view settings. Specifically, the surface fields [12, 39, 64, 67] separate the geometry learning from appearance learning and
thus block the joint finetuning ability for more detailed
geometry and rendering results. Moreover, the radiance
fields [21, 32, 36, 37, 44] entangle the learning of geometry and appearance in an implicit manner without effective
mutual constraints, leading to inconsistent geometry reconstruction and relatively low training efficiency. Despite the
representations, the feature fusion strategy also dominates
the final reconstruction quality when deploying the algo-

Figure 1. Given sparse multi-view RGB images, our method
achieves high-fidelity human reconstruction and rendering.

rithms under multi-view setups, especially in the real-world
systems. Even with high-resolution images as input, the
limited representation power of features (feature map or feature volume) [37, 40] as well as the calibration and the geometry inference errors (especially for real captured data)
will significantly deteriorate the detail reconstruction performance due to multi-view inconsistency for current implicit field based methods [37, 39, 64].
To overcome the limitations above for achieving highquality 3D human reconstruction from sparse-view setups,
we propose a novel DoubleField framework (to effectively
bridge the surface and radiance fields and enable a shared
learning space for both geometry and radiance reconstruction) and a view-to-view transformer (to build self attention
between multi-view inputs and cross attention between the
input views and the query viewpoints for multi-view fea-

15872

