NeuralHOFusion: Neural Volumetric Rendering under Human-object
Interactions
Yuheng Jiang1 Suyi Jiang1 Guoxing Sun1 Zhuo Su2 Kaiwen Guo3
Minye Wu4 Jingyi Yu1,5 Lan Xu1,5
1

2
3
4
ShanghaiTech University
Tencent
Meta Reasearch Lab
KU leuven
5
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging

Abstract
4D modeling of human-object interactions is critical for
numerous applications. However, efficient volumetric capture and rendering of complex interaction scenarios, especially from sparse inputs, remain challenging. In this
paper, we propose NeuralHOFusion, a neural approach
for volumetric human-object capture and rendering using
sparse consumer RGBD sensors. It marries traditional
non-rigid fusion with recent neural implicit modeling and
blending advances, where the captured humans and objects
are layer-wise disentangled. For geometry modeling, we
propose a neural implicit inference scheme with non-rigid
key-volume fusion, as well as a template-aid robust object
tracking pipeline. Our scheme enables detailed and complete geometry generation under complex interactions and
occlusions. Moreover, we introduce a layer-wise humanobject texture rendering scheme, which combines volumetric and image-based rendering in both spatial and temporal
domains to obtain photo-realistic results. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our
approach in synthesizing photo-realistic free-view results
under complex human-object interactions.

1. Introduction
Human-centric 4D content generation enables numerous
applications for VR/AR, telepresence and education. However, conveniently reconstructing and rendering human activities under human-object interactions remain unsolved.
Early high-end solutions [5,7,12,13,20,29] require dense
cameras and custom-designed lighting conditions for highfidelity reconstruction. But such a complicated and expensive system setup is undesirable for consumer-level usage.
Light-weight volumetric performance capture is more practical and attractive. Early solutions [14, 21, 22, 51] rely
on pre-scanned templates which are unsuitable for on-thefly human-object interaction modeling. The volumetric fu-

: src view
: novel view

Sparse RGBD Reconstruction

Layer-wise Free-view Rendering

Figure 1. Our NeuralHOFusion achieves layer-wise and photorealistic reconstruction results, using only 6 RGBD cameras.

sion approaches Fusion4D [9] and Motion2Fusion [8] further reconstruct complex human-object interaction scenes
with topology changes in real-time. But they heavily
rely on high-quality depth sensors and up to 9 high-end
GPUs, which are infeasible for consumer usage. Besides,
the low-end fusion approaches [34, 43, 44, 57, 63] adopt
the most handy monocular setup with a temporal fusion
pipeline [35], but suffer from the inherent self-occlusion
constraint. Moreover, the appearance results of the fusion
methods are restricted by the limited geometry resolution.
Recent learning-based techniques enable robust human
modeling from only light-weight inputs. In particular, various approaches [40,41,48] utilize implicit function to model
human geometry, which is also widely adopted in the volumetric capture pipeline [25, 26, 44, 62]. But these methods are restricted to only human without modeling humanobject interactions, let alone generating compelling photorealistic texture. Similarly, despite the progress for realistic human rendering [30, 32, 33, 48, 56], few researchers explore the neural rendering strategies for human-object interactions, especially under the volumetric capture framework.
On the other hand, various researchers [16,17,38,50,64–67]
model the interactions between humans and the surrounding
objects or environments. But they only recover the parametric human model rather than reconstructing and rendering
the interaction scenes. Only recently, a few methods [45,47]
explicitly model human and object simultaneously in the

6155

