Dynamic Scene Graph Generation via Anticipatory Pre-training
Yiming Li1
1
2

Xiaoshan Yang2,3,4

∗

Changsheng Xu2,3,4

School of Information Engineering, Zhengzhou University (ZZU)

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
3

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
4

PengCheng Laboratory (PCL)

liym.zzu@gmail.com, {xiaoshan.yang, csxu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Humans can not only see the collection of objects
in visual scenes, but also identify the relationship between objects. The visual relationship in the scene can
be abstracted into the semantic representation of a triple
hsubject, predicate, objecti and thus results in a scene
graph, which can convey a lot of information for visual understanding. Due to the motion of objects, the visual relationship between two objects in videos may vary, which
makes the task of dynamically generating scene graphs from
videos more complicated and challenging than the conventional image-based static scene graph generation. Inspired
by the ability of humans to infer the visual relationship, we
propose a novel anticipatory pre-training paradigm based
on Transformer to explicitly model the temporal correlation of visual relationships in different frames to improve
dynamic scene graph generation. In pre-training stage,
the model predicts the visual relationships of current frame
based on the previous frames by extracting intra-frame spatial information with a spatial encoder and inter-frame temporal correlations with a progressive temporal encoder. In
the fine-tuning stage, we reuse the spatial encoder and the
progressive temporal encoder while the information of the
current frame is combined for predicting the visual relationship. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance on Action Genome
dataset.

1. Introduction
Scene graph abstracts the visual relationships as a graph
structure, where the objects are represented as nodes and
their relationships are represented as edges. It is a promising way to represent semantics of visual content, which
can bridge the large gap between vision and natural language. In recent years, scene graph generation has at∗ indicates corresponding author: Changsheng Xu.

t-2

t-1

looking at

looking at

person

cup
holding

person

t

drinking from
cup

holding

person

holding

cup

looking at

Figure 1. Given previous frames, humans can easily infer the visual relationship contained in the current frame. Because the temporal correlation of different relationships is a kind of common
sense to humans. But this kind of temporal reasoning is difficult
for computers.

tracted more and more attention and has been successfully
applied in multiple tasks, e.g., image retrieval [19], image captioning [14, 21, 48, 49] and visual question answering [11, 12, 53].
Existing scene graph generation methods can be roughly
grouped into two categories, the static scene graph generation, i.e, generating scene graph from a single image,
and dynamic scene graph generation, i.e., generating scene
graph from a video. For static scene graph generation, existing methods [4, 22, 51, 52] generally use popular object detectors, such as Faster R-CNN [34] and Mask R-CNN [15],
to extract objects, and then predict the relationship between
objects based on the visual and semantic features. Although
static scene graph generation methods have achieved significant progress, the dynamic scene graph generation is less
studied, which is more challenging because the objects in
video are moving, and thus cause the change of the relationships. The static scene graph generation methods cannot be
directly applied to solve dynamic scene graph generation
since they ignore the temporal information in videos. To improve the prediction accuracy, existing dynamic scene graph
generation methods focus on capturing temporal information by 3D convolution model [39] and transformer [7, 32].

13874

