Interactive Disentanglement:
Learning Concepts by Interacting with their Prototype Representations
Wolfgang Stammer1,3
Marius Memmel1
Patrick Schramowski1,3
Kristian Kersting1,2,3
1
2
Computer Science Department, TU Darmstadt; Centre for Cognitive Science, TU Darmstadt
3
Hessian Center for AI (hessian.AI)
{wolfgang.stammer@cs, marius.memmel@stud, schramowski@cs, kersting@cs}.tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract
Learning visual concepts from raw images without
strong supervision is a challenging task. In this work, we
show the advantages of prototype representations for understanding and revising the latent space of neural concept
learners. For this purpose, we introduce interactive Concept Swapping Networks (iCSNs), a novel framework for
learning concept-grounded representations via weak supervision and implicit prototype representations. iCSNs learn
to bind conceptual information to specific prototype slots by
swapping the latent representations of paired images. This
semantically grounded and discrete latent space facilitates
human understanding and human-machine interaction. We
support this claim by conducting experiments on our novel
data set “Elementary Concept Reasoning” (ECR), focusing
on visual concepts shared by geometric objects.1

1. Introduction
Learning an adequate representation of concepts from
raw data without strong supervision is a challenging task.
However, it remains important for research in areas of
knowledge discovery where sufficient prior knowledge is
missing, and the goal is to attain novel understandings. With
better representations and architectural components of machine learning models, this appears to become more and
more achievable [73]. However, if remained unchecked
this bears the danger of learning incorrect concepts or even
confounding features [18, 70]. A further difficult aspect of
concept learning, regardless of the level of supervision, is
its dynamic and subjective nature. One downstream task
might require more fine-grained concepts than others, but
also when encountering evidence on novel concepts (e.g. in
an online learning setting), the knowledge and hierarchy of
concepts should be constantly re-approved, discussed, and
1 Code available at: https://github.com/ml- research/
XIConceptLearning

Would you consider these objects
to share an underlying concept?
Yes, they all have the color blue.

Would you consider these objects
to share an underlying concept?
Yes, they all have a triangular shape.

What about these objects?
No, I think these three and these
three objects share a concept:

Figure 1. A trained model (left) queries the human user (right)
if the concepts that it has extracted from the data coincides with
the knowledge of the user. Subsequently, the model can receive
revisions from the user.

possibly updated. It thus remains desirable that the representations learned by such concept learners to be humanunderstandable and revisable.
An evident approach to teaching concept information to
a machine learning model is to train it in a supervised fashion through symbolic representations, e.g., one-hot encoding vectors and corresponding raw input [44, 84]. However,
this requires extensive prior knowledge of relevant concepts
and seems impractical given the subjective and dynamic nature of concept learning.
Another branch of research focuses on learning disentangled latent distribution models [27, 31, 80]. Although
initially focused on unsupervised approaches, many recent studies have shifted away from unsupervised learning and show promising results with weak supervision
[41, 49, 51, 58, 74, 81]. An often implicit assumption of dis-

10317

