Learning to Detect Scene Landmarks for Camera Localization
Tien Do1

Ondrej Miksik2
1

Joseph DeGol2

University of Minnesota

Hyun Soo Park1
2

Sudipta N. Sinha2

Microsoft

Figure 1. We present a new method to recognize scene-specific scene landmarks to localize a camera, which preserves privacy and
achieves high accuracy. [Left] Scene landmark detections in a query image obtained from a heatmap-based CNN architecture. [Middle] A
visualization of the predicted heatmap scores. [Right] The 3D scene landmarks (in red) and the estimated camera pose (in blue) are shown
over the 3D point cloud (in gray). The 3D point cloud is shown only for the purpose of visualization.

Abstract
Modern camera localization methods that use image retrieval, feature matching, and 3D structure-based pose estimation require long-term storage of numerous scene images
or a vast amount of image features. This can make them unsuitable for resource constrained VR/AR devices and also
raises serious privacy concerns. We present a new learned
camera localization technique that eliminates the need to
store features or a detailed 3D point cloud. Our key idea is
to implicitly encode the appearance of a sparse yet salient
set of 3D scene points into a convolutional neural network
(CNN) that can detect these scene points in query images
whenever they are visible. We refer to these points as scene
landmarks. We also show that a CNN can be trained to
regress bearing vectors for such landmarks even when they
are not within the camera’s field-of-view. We demonstrate
that the predicted landmarks yield accurate pose estimates
and that our method outperforms DSAC*, the state-of-theart in learned localization. Furthermore, extending HLoc
(an accurate method) by combining its correspondences
with our predictions boosts its accuracy even further.

1. Introduction
Camera localization is the task of estimating the 3D position and 3D orientation of a camera from a query image
with respect to a pre-built scene map. This task is a fun-

damental building block to enable VR/AR systems that allow users to persistently interact with the surrounding 3D
scene. These scenes are often private spaces; e.g., homes,
where existing localization methods that use retrieval and
feature matching [1,4,16,38,57,62] are not suitable because
stored images or features can be inverted to reveal sensitive
scene content (raising serious privacy concerns [54,72,73]).
Furthermore, existing localization methods usually require
long term storage of many images or a vast amount of features and 3D points. In lifelong localization settings, new
images and features will be continuously added, causing
the database to grow over time. The ensuing memory footprint may also exceed the limits of on-device localization
for VR/AR systems. Map pruning can help [12, 39, 71], but
it’s efficacy for lifelong localization is unproven.
Learned localization approaches such as absolute pose
regression [29,30,84] and scene coordinate regression [7,8,
10, 69] address both aforementioned issues. These methods
implicitly encode scene information in the learned parameters of a convolutional neural network (CNN), rather than
explicitly storing images or features. Thus, they preserve
privacy by design. However, their performance is not yet on
par with the top performing methods that use retrieval, feature matching, and structure-based pose estimation [65,67].
In this paper, we present a new learned method for camera localization that (1) preserves privacy, (2) requires low
storage, and (3) outperforms the state-of-the-art storagefree pose regression methods. Our idea is inspired by the

11132

