Eigencontours: Novel Contour Descriptors Based on Low-Rank Approximation
Wonhui Park
Korea University

Dongkwon Jin
Korea University

Chang-Su Kim
Korea University

whpark@mcl.korea.ac.kr

dongkwonjin@mcl.korea.ac.kr

changsukim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Novel contour descriptors, called eigencontours, based
on low-rank approximation are proposed in this paper.
First, we construct a contour matrix containing all object
boundaries in a training set. Second, we decompose the
contour matrix into eigencontours via the best rank-M approximation. Third, we represent an object boundary by a
linear combination of the M eigencontours. We also incorporate the eigencontours into an instance segmentation
framework. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed eigencontours can represent object boundaries more
effectively and more efﬁciently than existing descriptors in
a low-dimensional space. Furthermore, the proposed algorithm yields meaningful performances on instance segmentation datasets.

‫ܝ‬ଵ
͵ǤͶͶ

‫ܝ‬ଶ
ͳǤͲͷ

‫ܝ‬ଷ
ͲǤʹͷ

‫ܝ‬ସ

Image

ͲǤͳ͹

Linear combination

ൎ

Rank-1

Rank-2

Rank-3

Rank-4

Ground-truth

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Illustration of the eigencontour representation. The
boundary of a vehicle is represented by a linear combination of
four eigencontours: u1 , u2 , u3 and u4 . First, u1 approximates the
object boundary roughly. Next, u2 is used to reﬁne the boundary
by adjusting top and bottom parts, as well as front and rear ones.
To reconstruct more complex parts, such as wheels and bumper,
u3 and u4 should be used as well. These eigencontours were determined by analyzing the boundaries of all objects in the ‘car’
category in the KINS dataset [22].

Contour is one of the most important object descriptors,
along with texture and color. The boundary of an object in
an image is encoded in contour description, which is useful
in various applications, such as image retrieval [4, 31, 32],
recognition [17,25,29], and segmentation [16,19,27,28,34].
It is desirable to represent object boundaries compactly, as
well as faithfully, but it is challenging to design such contour descriptors due to the diversity and complexity of object shapes.
Early contour descriptors were developed mainly for image retrieval [4,17,31,32]. An object contour can be simply
represented based on the area, circularity, and/or eccentricity of the object [30]. For more precise description, there
are several approaches, including shape signature [6,18,27],
structural analysis [5, 7, 10, 21, 28], spectral analysis [4, 31],
and curvature scale space (CSS) [8, 17].
Recently, contour descriptors have been incorporated
into deep-learning-based object detection, tracking, and
segmentation systems. In [35], bounding boxes are replaced
by polygons to enclose objects more tightly. In [3], ellipse ﬁtting is done to produce a rotated box of a target
object to be tracked. For instance segmentation, contour-

based techniques have been proposed that represent pixelwise masks by contour descriptors based on shape signature [27] or polynomial ﬁtting [28]. Even though these descriptors can localize an object effectively, they may fail to
reconstruct the object boundary faithfully. Also, they consider the structural information of an individual object only,
without exploiting the shape correlation between different
objects.
In this paper, we propose novel contour descriptors,
called eigencontours, based on low-rank approximation.
First, we construct a contour matrix containing all object
boundaries in a training set. Second, we decompose the
contour matrix into eigencontours, based on the best rankM approximation of singular value decomposition (SVD)
[2]. Then, each contour is represented by a linear combination of the M eigencontours, as illustrated in Figure 1. Also,
we incorporate the eigencontours into an instance segmentation framework. Experimental results demonstrate that
the proposed eigencontours can represent object boundaries
more effectively and more efﬁciently than the existing contour descriptors [27, 28]. Moreover, utilizing the existing
2667

