Few-shot Keypoint Detection with Uncertainty Learning for Unseen Species
Changsheng Lu† , Piotr Koniusz*,§,†
†
The Australian National University § Data61/CSIRO
ChangshengLuu@gmail.com, firstname.lastname@anu.edu.au

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep fully-supervised pose estimation has proven its excellence in detecting keypoints on humans [6,14,18,35,47].
However, these keypoint detectors are dedicated to specific
species and body parts on which they are trained. They are
not reusable for unseen species, and consume large amounts
of annotated data. In contrast, given a few samples, a child
can adequately recognize and generalize a keypoint on a
paw of rabbit, cat, dog, kangaroo under varying poses e.g.,
jumping, crouching, or walking. By comparison, machine
* The corresponding author.

Support image & keypoints

FSKD with
Uncertainty Learning

Current non-rigid object keypoint detectors perform well
on a chosen kind of species and body parts, and require a
large amount of labelled keypoints for training. Moreover,
their heatmaps, tailored to specific body parts, cannot recognize novel keypoints (keypoints not labelled for training)
on unseen species. We raise an interesting yet challenging question: how to detect both base (annotated for training) and novel keypoints for unseen species given a few annotated samples? Thus, we propose a versatile Few-shot
Keypoint Detection (FSKD) pipeline, which can detect a
varying number of keypoints of different kinds. Our FSKD
provides the uncertainty estimation of predicted keypoints.
Specifically, FSKD involves main and auxiliary keypoint
representation learning, similarity learning, and keypoint
localization with uncertainty modeling to tackle the localization noise. Moreover, we model the uncertainty across
groups of keypoints by multivariate Gaussian distribution to
exploit implicit correlations between neighboring keypoints.
We show the effectiveness of our FSKD on (i) novel keypoint
detection for unseen species, (ii) few-shot Fine-Grained Visual Recognition (FGVR) and (iii) Semantic Alignment (SA)
downstream tasks. For FGVR, detected keypoints improve
the classification accuracy. For SA, we showcase a novel
thin-plate-spline warping that uses estimated keypoint uncertainty under imperfect keypoint corespondences.

Predicted keypoints
with uncertainty

Output

Query image

Figure 1. Illustration of few-shot keypoint detection (4-way, 2-shot
protocol) with uncertainty learning. Our FSKD model successfully detects four novel keypoints and estimates the localization
uncertainty given two annotated instances in unseen species.

perception is inferior to biological perception [51]. Inspired
by the progress in few-shot learning [25, 26, 41, 45, 49, 58],
we propose Few-shot Keypoint Detection (FSKD) which
can learn from few keypoints and recognise previously unseen keypoint types even for species unseen during training
(Fig. 1).
As keypoints provide crucial structural and semantic
information, FSKD has numerous promising applications
such as semi-automatic labelling, face alignment [27, 44],
Fine-Grained Visual Recognition (FGVR) [46], animal behavior analysis [37], etc. The use of keypoints can also simplify the labor-intensive surveillance of wildlife [34, 56].
In this paper, we propose a versatile FSKD approach
which copes with various levels of domain shift. Fig. 2
shows that the categories of species used for training and
testing may be the same or different (top branches), and also
the keypoint types of specific body parts may be the same
or disjoint (bottom branches). The easiest problem setting
assumes the same kind of species and the same types of
keypoints throughout training and testing. However, if the
species as well as keypoint types used for training and testing are both disjoint, the problem is challenging due to high
levels of domain shift.
We note that learning and generalizing based on a few
of samples is hard due to the limited number of annotations
and a large variability of samples. Moreover, there exist

19416

