Proactive Image Manipulation Detection
Vishal Asnani1 , Xi Yin2 , Tal Hassner2 , Sijia Liu1 , Xiaoming Liu1
1
Michigan State University, 2 Meta AI
1

{asnanivi, liusiji5, liuxm}@msu.edu, 2 {yinxi, thassner}@fb.com

Abstract
Image manipulation detection algorithms are often
trained to discriminate between images manipulated with
particular Generative Models (GMs) and genuine/real images, yet generalize poorly to images manipulated with
GMs unseen in the training. Conventional detection algorithms receive an input image passively. By contrast, we
propose a proactive scheme to image manipulation detection. Our key enabling technique is to estimate a set of templates which when added onto the real image would lead to
more accurate manipulation detection. That is, a template
protected real image, and its manipulated version, is better
discriminated compared to the original real image vs. its
manipulated one. These templates are estimated using certain constraints based on the desired properties of templates. For image manipulation detection, our proposed approach outperforms the prior work by an average precision
of 16% for CycleGAN and 32% for GauGAN. Our approach
is generalizable to a variety of GMs showing an improvement over prior work by an average precision of 10% averaged across 12 GMs. Our code is available at https://
www.github.com/vishal3477/proactive_IMD.

1. Introduction
It’s common for people to share personal photos on social networks. Recent developments of image manipulation techniques via Generative Models (GMs) [13] result
in serious concerns over the authenticity of the images. As
these techniques are easily accessible [7,8,21,27,31,44,61],
the shared images are at a greater risk for misuse after manipulation. Generation of fake images can be categorized
into two types: entire image generation and partial image
manipulation [46, 48]. While the former generates entirely
new images by feeding a noise code to the GM, the latter involves the partial manipulation of a real image. Since
the latter alters the semantics of real images, it is generally
considered as a greater risk, and thus partial image manipulation detection is the focus of this work.

Figure 1. Passive vs. proactive image manipulation detection Classic passive schemes take an image as it is to discriminate a real image vs. its manipulated one created by a
Generative Model (GM). In contrast, our proactive scheme
performs encryption of the real image so that our detection
module can better discriminate the encrypted real image vs.
its manipulated counterpart.

Detecting such manipulation is an important step to alleviate societal concerns on the authenticity of shared images. Prior works have been proposed to combat manipulated media [12]. They leverage properties that are prone
to being manipulated, including mouth movement [39], steganalysis features [51], attention mechanism [11, 23], etc.
However, these methods are often overfitted to the image
manipulation method and the dataset used in training, and
suffer when tested on data with a different distribution.
All the aforementioned methods adopt a passive scheme
since the input image, being real or manipulated, is accepted
as is for detection. Alternatively, there is also a proactive
scheme proposed for a few computer vision tasks, which
involves adding signals to the original image. For example,
prior works add a predefined template to real images which
either disrupt the output of the GM [40, 41, 54] or tag images to real identities [46]. This template is either a one-hot
encoding [46] or an adversarial perturbation [40, 41, 54].
Motivated by improving the generalization of manipulation detection, as well as the proactive scheme for other
tasks, this paper proposes a proactive scheme for the purpose of image manipulation detection, which works as follows. When an image is captured, our algorithm adds an
imperceptible signal (termed as template) to it, serving as an

15386

