Robust Egocentric Photo-realistic Facial Expression Transfer for Virtual Reality
Amin Jourabloo* Fernando De la Torre† Jason Saragih Shih-En Wei Stephen Lombardi
Te-Li Wang Danielle Belko Autumn Trimble Hernan Badino
Facebook Reality Labs, Pittsburgh, PA
†
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Social presence, the feeling of being there with a “real”
person, will fuel the next generation of communication systems driven by digital humans in virtual reality (VR). The
best 3D video-realistic VR avatars that minimize the uncanny effect rely on person-specific (PS) models. However,
these PS models are time-consuming to build and are typically trained with limited data variability, which results in
poor generalization and robustness. Major sources of variability that affects the accuracy of facial expression transfer
algorithms include using different VR headsets (e.g., camera configuration, slop of the headset), facial appearance
changes over time (e.g., beard, make-up), and environmental factors (e.g., lighting, backgrounds). This is a major
drawback for the scalability of these models in VR.
This paper makes progress in overcoming these limitations by proposing an end-to-end multi-identity architecture (MIA) trained with specialized augmentation strategies. MIA drives the shape component of the avatar from
three cameras in the VR headset (two eyes, one mouth), in
untrained subjects, using minimal personalized information
(i.e., neutral 3D mesh shape). Similarly, if the PS texture
decoder is available, MIA is able to drive the full avatar
(shape+texture) robustly outperforming PS models in challenging scenarios. Our key contribution to improve robustness and generalization, is that our method implicitly decouples, in an unsupervised manner, the facial expression from nuisance factors (e.g., headset, environment, facial appearance). We demonstrate the superior
performance and robustness of the proposed method versus
state-of-the-art PS approaches in a variety of experiments.

1. Introduction
Our experience with communication systems is twodimensional, mostly via video teleconferencing (e.g., Messenger), that includes both audio and video transmissions.
Recent studies on videoconferencing have shown that the
* corresponding author: jourabloo@fb.com

Figure 1. 3D Photo-realistic avatar driven by three headsetmounted camera (HMC) images in a VR headset. This paper
presents a system to drive photo-realistic avatars robustly with
variability in headsets, lighting, environmental background, head
pose, and facial appearance.

more closely technology can simulate a face-to-face interaction, the more participants are able to focus, engage, and
retain information [43]. A more advanced level of communication with virtual reality (VR) via telepresence [5, 8, 12,
19, 30, 34, 44, 45] will allow virtual presence at a distant location and a more authentic interaction. If successful, this
new form of face-to-face interaction can reduce the time
and financial commitments of travel, make sales meetings
or family meetings more immersive, with a huge impact for
the environment and use of personal time.
Today most real-time systems for avatars in AR/VR are
cartoon-like (e.g., Hyprsense, Loom AI); on the other hand,
Hollywood has animated nearly uncanny digital humans as
virtual avatars using advanced computer graphics technology and person-specific models (e.g., Siren). While some
of these avatars can be driven in real-time from cameras,
building the PS model is an extremely time-consuming and
hand-tuned process that prevents democratization of this
technology. This paper makes progress in this direction by
generating video-realistic avatars by transferring subtle facial expressions from the headset mounted cameras (HMC)
images in a VR headset to a 3D talking head (see Fig. 1).
We build on recent work on codec avatars (CA) [26]
that learn a PS model from a Plenoptic study. Recall that
driving an avatar from HMC cameras is typically more

20323

