Killing Two Birds with One Stone:
Efficient and Robust Training of Face Recognition CNNs by Partial FC
Xiang An 1,3
Jiankang Deng * 2,3
Jia Guo 3
1
4
3
Ziyong Feng
XuHan Zhu
Jing Yang
Tongliang Liu5
1
2
3
DeepGlint
Huawei
InsightFace
4
5
Peng Cheng Laboratory
University of Sydney
{xiangan,ziyongfeng}@deepglint.com, tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au
{jiankangdeng,guojia,zhuxuhan.research,y.jing2016}@gmail.com

Abstract
Learning discriminative deep feature embeddings by using million-scale in-the-wild datasets and margin-based
softmax loss is the current state-of-the-art approach for face
recognition. However, the memory and computing cost of
the Fully Connected (FC) layer linearly scales up to the
number of identities in the training set. Besides, the largescale training data inevitably suffers from inter-class conflict and long-tailed distribution. In this paper, we propose a sparsely updating variant of the FC layer, named
Partial FC (PFC). In each iteration, positive class centers
and a random subset of negative class centers are selected
to compute the margin-based softmax loss. All class centers are still maintained throughout the whole training process, but only a subset is selected and updated in each iteration. Therefore, the computing requirement, the probability of inter-class conflict, and the frequency of passive
update on tail class centers, are dramatically reduced. Extensive experiments across different training data and backbones (e.g. CNN and ViT) confirm the effectiveness, robustness and efficiency of the proposed PFC. The source code is
available at https://github.com/deepinsight/
insightface/tree/master/recognition.

1. Introduction
Face recognition is playing an increasingly important
role in modern life and has been widely used in many
real-world applications, such as face authentication on mobile devices. Recently, face recognition has witnessed
great advance along with the collection of large-scale training datasets [3, 50], the evolution of network architectures
* corresponding author. InsightFace is a nonprofit Github project for
2D and 3D face analysis.

Figure 1. PFC picks the positive center by using the label and randomly selects a significantly reduced number of negative centers
to calculate partial image-to-class similarities. PFC kills two birds
(efficiency and robustness) with one stone (partial sampling).

[13, 30], and the design of margin-based and mining-based
loss functions [8, 17, 25, 30, 35, 36, 38, 41].
Even though the softmax loss [3] and its margin-based
[8, 25, 35, 36] or mining-based [17, 38, 41] variants achieved
state-of-the-art performance on deep face recognition, the
training difficulty accumulates along with the growth of
identities in the training data, as the memory and computing consumption of the Fully Connected (FC) layer linearly
scales up to the number of identities in the training set.
When there are large-scale identities in the training dataset,
the cost of storage and calculation of the final linear matrix
can easily exceed the capabilities of current GPUs, resulting
in tremendous training time or even a training failure.
To break the computing resource constraint, the most
straightforward solution is to reduce the number of classes
used during training. Zhang et al. [42] propose to use a
hashing forest to partition the space of class weights into
small cells but the complexity of walking through the forest
to find the closest cell is O(logN). Li et al. [22] randomly
split training identities into groups and identities from each
group share one anchor, which is used to construct the virtual fully-connected layer. Even though Virtual FC reduces

4042

