FIFO: Learning Fog-invariant Features for Foggy Scene Segmentation
Sohyun Lee
GSAI, POSTECH

Taeyoung Son*
NALBI

Suha Kwak
GSAI, POSTECH

lshig96@postech.ac.kr

taeyoung@nalbi.ai

suha.kwak@postech.ac.kr

http://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/FIFO/

Input

1. Introduction
We have witnessed great advances in semantic segmentation for the last decade. However, most of existing models and datasets focus merely on improving accuracy under
controlled environments, without considering image degradation caused by adverse weather conditions (e.g., fog, rain,
and snow), over- and under-exposure, motion blur, sensor
noise, etc. The robustness of semantic segmentation models against these factors is of great importance in safetycritical applications and recently has gained increasing attention [3, 6, 8, 50–52, 56, 66].
Motivated by this, we study semantic segmentation of
foggy scenes, whose goal and results are illustrated in Fig. 1.
The task is challenging since fog often damages visibility of
images seriously, leading to substantial performance degradation. Attaching a fog removal network to the front of
* This work was done while Taeyoung Son was in POSTECH.

Ours

Clear

Robust visual recognition under adverse weather conditions is of great importance in real-world applications. In
this context, we propose a new method for learning semantic segmentation models robust against fog. Its key idea is
to consider the fog condition of an image as its style and
close the gap between images with different fog conditions
in neural style spaces of a segmentation model. In particular, since the neural style of an image is in general affected
by other factors as well as fog, we introduce a fog-pass filter
module that learns to extract a fog-relevant factor from the
style. Optimizing the fog-pass filter and the segmentation
model alternately gradually closes the style gap between
different fog conditions and allows to learn fog-invariant
features in consequence. Our method substantially outperforms previous work on three real foggy image datasets.
Moreover, it improves performance on both foggy and clear
weather images, while existing methods often degrade performance on clear scenes.

Baseline

Real foggy

Abstract

Figure 1. A summary of our results. Predictions of FIFO are
accurate for both clear weather and real foggy images while the
baseline, an ordinary segmentation model trained on clear weather
images, fails to handle foggy images.

an existing model is not always useful for mitigating this
issue [47, 52] as well as being heavy in computation and
memory. The other reason for the difficulty is the absence
of fully annotated data for the task. Collecting a large set of
foggy scenes is not straightforward since they can be captured under only a specific condition, and it is hard to label
them due to their limited visibility.
Existing methods [8, 51, 52] tackle these issues through
synthetic foggy image datasets, which are obtained by applying realistic fog effects to fully annotated clear weather
images and are used for supervised learning of semantic segmentation. Furthermore, they introduce curriculum
learning approaches [8, 51] that gradually adapt a model
from light synthetic fog to dense real fog using unlabeled
real foggy images additionally. Although these methods
have achieved impressive robustness, there remains room
for further improvement in that their training strategies are
limited to ordinary supervised learning. In addition, the curriculum adaptation demands external modules to control the
fog density of real foggy images in training, and tends to
make the final model biased to foggy scenes; it thus requires
extra computation and additional hyper-parameters in training, and often degrades performance on clear images.
To resolve the above issues, we propose a new method
that learns Fog-Invariant features for FOggy scene segmentation, dubbed FIFO. Its overall pipeline is illustrated in
Fig. 2. FIFO considers the fog condition of an image as its

18911

