Quantifying Societal Bias Amplification in Image Captioning
Yusuke Hirota
Osaka University

Yuta Nakashima
Osaka University

Noa Garcia
Osaka University

y-hirota@is.ids.osaka-u.ac.jp

n-yuta@ids.osaka-u.ac.jp

noagarcia@ids.osaka-u.ac.jp

Bias Score

Abstract

Humans
NIC

We study societal bias amplification in image captioning. Image captioning models have been shown to perpetuate gender and racial biases, however, metrics to measure,
quantify, and evaluate the societal bias in captions are not
yet standardized. We provide a comprehensive study on the
strengths and limitations of each metric, and propose LIC,
a metric to study captioning bias amplification. We argue
that, for image captioning, it is not enough to focus on the
correct prediction of the protected attribute, and the whole
context should be taken into account. We conduct extensive
evaluation on traditional and state-of-the-art image captioning models, and surprisingly find that, by only focusing
on the protected attribute prediction, bias mitigation models
are unexpectedly amplifying bias.

1. Introduction
The presence of undesirable biases in computer vision
applications is of increasing concern. The evidence shows
that large-scale datasets, and the models trained on them,
present major imbalances in how different subgroups of
the population are represented [7, 8, 10, 47]. Detecting
and addressing these biases, often known as societal biases, has become an active research direction in our community [1, 11, 21, 30, 32, 37, 44].
Contrary to popular belief, the presence of bias in
datasets is not the only cause of unfairness [16]. Model
choices and how the systems are trained also have a large
impact on the perpetuation of societal bias. This is supported by evidence: 1) models are not only reproducing the
inequalities of the datasets but amplifying them [47], and 2)
even when trained on balanced datasets, models may still be
biased [40] as the depth of historical discrimination is more
profound than what it can be manually annotated, i.e., bias
is not always evident to the human annotator eye.
The prevalence of accuracy as the single metric to optimize in most popular benchmarks [33] has made other aspects of the models, such as fairness, cost, or efficiency,
not a priority (and thus, something to not look into). But

Equalizer

a close up of a child eating something
a man eating a slice of pizza in a restaurant

a young girl is sitting on a bed with a teddy bear
0

1

Bias Score
Humans

a woman wearing a fight suit in a garage

NIC

a woman standing next to a fire truck

Equalizer a woman in a red dress standing in front of a bus
0

Female

1

Male

Figure 1. Measuring gender bias in MSCOCO captions [9]. For
each caption generated by humans, NIC [36], or NIC+Equalizer
[8], we show our proposed bias score for female and male attributes. This bias score indicates how much a caption is biased
toward a certain protected attribute. The contribution of each word
to the bias score is shown in gray-scale (bold for the word with the
highest contribution). Gender revealing words are masked.

societal bias is a transversal problem that affects a variety of tasks within computer vision, such as facial recognition, with black women having higher error rates than white
men [7]; object classification, with kitchen objects being
associated with women with higher probabilities than with
men [47]; or pedestrian detection, with lighter skin individuals showing higher detection rates than darker skin people [42]. Although the causes of societal bias in different
computer vision systems may be similar, the consequences
are particular and require specific solutions for each task.
We examine and quantify societal bias in image captioning (Figure 1). Image captioning has achieved state-of-theart accuracy on MSCOCO captions dataset [9] by means
of pre-trained visual and language Transformers [23]. By
leveraging very large-scale collections of data (e.g., Google
Conceptual Captions [29] with about 3.3 million imagecaption pairs crawled from the Internet), self-attentionbased models [34] have the potential to learn world representations according to the training distribution. However,
these large amounts of data, often without (or with minimal) curation, conceal multiple problems, including the
normalization of abuse or the encoding of discrimination
[5,10,27]. So, once image captioning models have achieved
outstanding performance on evaluation benchmarks, a ques-

13450

