EDTER: Edge Detection with Transformer
Mengyang Pu1,3 , Yaping Huang1 ,* Yuming Liu2 , Qingji Guan1 , Haibin Ling3
1
Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing Jiaotong University, China
2
Shenzhen Urban Transport Planning Center Co.,Ltd., China
3
Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University, USA
{mengyangpu, yphuang, qjguan}@bjtu.edu.cn;

liuyuming@sutpc.com;

hling@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks have made significant
progresses in edge detection by progressively exploring
the context and semantic features. However, local details
are gradually suppressed with the enlarging of receptive
fields. Recently, vision transformer has shown excellent
capability in capturing long-range dependencies. Inspired
by this, we propose a novel transformer-based edge detector, Edge Detection TransformER (EDTER), to extract
clear and crisp object boundaries and meaningful edges
by exploiting the full image context information and detailed local cues simultaneously. EDTER works in two
stages. In Stage I, a global transformer encoder is used
to capture long-range global context on coarse-grained image patches. Then in Stage II, a local transformer encoder
works on fine-grained patches to excavate the short-range
local cues. Each transformer encoder is followed by an
elaborately designed Bi-directional Multi-Level Aggregation decoder to achieve high-resolution features. Finally,
the global context and local cues are combined by a Feature
Fusion Module and fed into a decision head for edge prediction. Extensive experiments on BSDS500, NYUDv2, and
Multicue demonstrate the superiority of EDTER in comparison with state-of-the-arts. The source code is available at
https://github.com/MengyangPu/EDTER.

1. Introduction
Edge detection is one of the most fundamental problems
in computer vision and has a wide variety of applications,
such as image segmentation [8, 23, 39, 44, 45, 47], object
detection [23], and video object segmentation [5, 57, 59].
Given an input image, edge detection aims to extract accurate object boundaries and visually salient edges. It is
challenging due to many factors including complex backgrounds, inconsistent annotations, and so on.
* Corresponding author.

a

c

e

b

d

f

g

h

Figure 1. Examples of edge detection. Our method, EDTER,
extracts clear boundaries and edges by exploiting both global and
local cues. (a, e): Input images from BSDS500 [1]. (b,f): Detected
edges by EDTER. (c,d,g,h): Zoomed-in patches.

Edge detection is closely related to the context and semantic image cues. It is thus crucial to obtain appropriate representation to capture both high and low level visual
cues. Traditional methods [6,14,28,34,41,63] mostly obtain
edges based on low-level local cues, e.g., color and texture.
Benefiting from the effectiveness of convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) in learning semantic features, significant
progress has been made for edge detection [3,4,29,48]. The
CNN features progressively capture global and semanticaware visual concepts with the enlargement of the receptive
fields, while many essential fine details are inevitably and
gradually lost at the mean time. To include more details,
methods in [22,36,37,65,66] aggregate the features of deep
and shallow layers. However, such shallow features reflect
mainly local intensity variation without considering semantic context, resulting in noisy edges.
Inspired by the recent success of vision transformers [9,
16, 61, 72], especially their capability of modeling longrange contextual information, we propose to tailor transformers for edge detection. Two main challenges, however,
need to be solved. Firstly, transformers are often applied
to patches with a relatively large size due to computation
concerns, while coarse-grained patches are unfavorable for
learning accurate features for edges. It is crucial to perform
self-attention on fine-grained patches without increasing the
computational burden. Second, as shown in Fig. 1 (d), extracting precise edges from intersected and thin objects is
challenging. So it is necessary to design an effective de-

1402

