ABPN: Adaptive Blend Pyramid Network for Real-Time Local
Retouching of Ultra High-Resolution Photo
Biwen Lei† , Xiefan Guo*, Hongyu Yang, Miaomiao Cui† , Xuansong Xie† , Di Huang
†
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
biwen.lbw@alibaba-inc.com, {guoxiefan, hongyu.yang.cv}@gmail.com,
miaomiao.cmm@alibaba-inc.com, xingtong.xxs@taobao.com, dhuang.cv@outlook.com

Abstract
Photo retouching ﬁnds many applications in various
ﬁelds. However, most existing methods are designed for
global retouching and seldom pay attention to the local
region, while the latter is actually much more tedious
and time-consuming in photography pipelines. In this paper, we propose a novel adaptive blend pyramid network,
which aims to achieve fast local retouching on ultra highresolution photos. The network is mainly composed of
two components: a context-aware local retouching layer
(LRL) and an adaptive blend pyramid layer (BPL). The
LRL is designed to implement local retouching on lowresolution images, giving full consideration of the global
context and local texture information, and the BPL is then
developed to progressively expand the low-resolution results to the higher ones, with the help of the proposed
adaptive blend module and reﬁning module. Our method
outperforms the existing methods by a large margin on
two local photo retouching tasks and exhibits excellent
performance in terms of running speed, achieving realtime inference on 4K images with a single NVIDIA Tesla
P100 GPU. Moreover, we introduce the ﬁrst high-deﬁnition
cloth retouching dataset CRHD-3K to promote the research
on local photo retouching. The dataset is available at
https://github.com/youngLBW/CRHD-3K.

1. Introduction
Photo retouching [25], especially portrait photo retouching, ﬁnds a vast range of applications in photography scenarios including wedding, advertisement, personal recording, etc. While extensive works [5, 12, 14, 21, 46, 57] yield
impressive results on photo retouching, most of them manipulate the attributes of the entire image, such as color,
illumination, and exposure. Few methods deal with the local region in photos (e.g., face, clothing, and commodity),
* This work was done while Xiefan Guo was an intern at the DAMO.

  

  

 



Figure 1. High-ﬁdelity retouched photos. From left to right: (a)
raw photos, (b) our retouched results, and (c) ground-truth images.

which is actually the most tedious and time-consuming step
in professional photography pipelines.
To focus on this kind of problem, we summarize them
as the Local Photo Retouching (LPR) task, whose goal
is to edit the target region in the photo and keep the rest
area unchanged. Different from general local image editing tasks (such as image inpainting and rain removal), LPR
pays more attention to enhancing the aesthetic perception
and visual quality of the target object. Fig. 1 gives some
LPR examples.
We conclude three main challenges of the LPR task as:
(1) accurate localization of the target region; (2) local generation with global consistency and detail ﬁdelity; and (3)
efﬁcient processing of ultra high-resolution images. The
ﬁrst two are brought by the characteristics of the task itself, while the last one is determined by the application scenarios of LPR. As ultra high-resolution photos have been
widely used in various photographic scenes, the ability to
process them becomes a key factor of LPR methods in practice. Given these challenges above, we in this paper analyze
the applicability of existing methods to the LPR task and
attempt to propose a more suitable solution to it.

2108

