Revisiting Temporal Alignment for Video Restoration
Kun Zhou1,2 * Wenbo Li3 * Liying Lu3 Xiaoguang Han1 Jiangbo Lu2†
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen), 2 SmartMore Corporation
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
kunzhou@link.cuhk.edu.cn, {wenboli,lylu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
hanxiaoguang@cuhk.edu.cn,jiangbo.lu@gmail.com

Abstract

37.9

Ours (17.0M)

1. Introduction
Frame alignment plays an essential role in aggregating
temporal information in video restoration tasks, e.g., video
super-resolution (Video SR), video deblurring, and video
denoising. In recent years, great attempts have been made to
study this problem. Especially, deep learning-based methods are successful in building temporal correspondences
and achieve promising results.
The existing alignment methods can be roughly categorized into two classes: (i) independent alignment that
conducts frame-to-frame alignments totally independently
(see Fig. 2(a)) and (ii) progressive alignment that performs
temporally consecutive alignments sequentially in a recursive manner (see Fig. 2(b)). Those independent alignment
approaches typically focus on designing effective feature
descriptors and motion estimation modules to improve the
performance. For example, EDVR [29] develops pyramid,
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

37.7

PSNR (dB)

Long-range temporal alignment is critical yet challenging for video restoration tasks. Recently, some works attempt to divide the long-range alignment into several subalignments and handle them progressively. Although this
operation is helpful in modeling distant correspondences,
error accumulation is inevitable due to the propagation
mechanism. In this work, we present a novel, generic iterative alignment module which employs a gradual refinement
scheme for sub-alignments, yielding more accurate motion
compensation. To further enhance the alignment accuracy
and temporal consistency, we develop a non-parametric reweighting method, where the importance of each neighboring frame is adaptively evaluated in a spatial-wise way for
aggregation. By virtue of the proposed strategies, our model
achieves state-of-the-art performance on multiple benchmarks across a range of video restoration tasks including
video super-resolution, denoising and deblurring.

EDVR (20.6M)
VSR-T (43.8M)

IconVSR+IAM(7.8M)
37.5

0.1dB՛
IconVSR (8.7M)

37.3

MuCAN(19.9M)

BasicVSR (6.3M)
37.1

0

500

1000

1500

Average Inference Time (ms) on Vimeo-90K-T

Figure 1. Performance and efficiency comparison on Vimeo-90KT [33]. Besides high PSNR and fast inference, our alignment algorithm can be easily integrated into existing frameworks (e.g.,
IconVSR [3]) to further improve performance. Circle sizes are set
proportional to the numbers of parameters.

cascading and deformable convolutions (PCD) for more accurate alignment. Whereas, without exploiting the correlations between multiple alignments, this strategy is still facing challenges to estimate the long-range motion fields. The
second line typically adopts a recurrent framework for gradual alignment. Taking BasicVSR [3] for example, the authors propose an optical-flow-based recurrent architecture
for video super-resolution. They predict the bidirectional
optical flow between two neighboring frames and then conduct a bidirectional propagation, where the temporal information is aggregated by warping image features produced
by previous steps. This kind of methods is mainly proposed
to model long-range dependencies since it only needs to
handle relatively small motion between neighboring frames
in one step. However, such chain-rule-based propagation
has no chance to correct the misalignment caused by previous steps and may suffer from the error accumulation issue.
As illustrated in Fig. 2(c), we observe that different long-range alignments (Ai ) actually share some subalignments (ai ), e.g., a1 is shared among A1 , A2 and A3 ,
so as a2 in A2 and A3 . How can we utilize this property

6053

