Contrastive Conditional Neural Processes
Zesheng Ye

Lina Yao

The University of New South Wales
zesheng.ye@unsw.edu.au

Abstract
Conditional Neural Processes (CNPs) bridge neural networks with probabilistic inference to approximate functions of Stochastic Processes under meta-learning settings.
Given a batch of non-i.i.d function instantiations, CNPs are
jointly optimized for in-instantiation observation prediction and cross-instantiation meta-representation adaptation
within a generative reconstruction pipeline. There can be a
challenge in tying together such two targets when the distribution of function observations scales to high-dimensional
and noisy spaces. Instead, noise contrastive estimation
might be able to provide more robust representations by
learning distributional matching objectives to combat such
inherent limitation of generative models. In light of this, we
propose to equip CNPs by 1) aligning prediction with encoded ground-truth observation, and 2) decoupling metarepresentation adaptation from generative reconstruction.
Specifically, two auxiliary contrastive branches are set up
hierarchically, namely in-instantiation temporal contrastive
learning (TCL) and cross-instantiation function contrastive
learning (FCL), to facilitate local predictive alignment and
global function consistency, respectively. We empirically
show that TCL captures high-level abstraction of observations, whereas FCL helps identify underlying functions,
which in turn provides more efficient representations. Our
model outperforms other CNPs variants when evaluating
function distribution reconstruction and parameter identification across 1D, 2D and high-dimensional time-series.

1. Introduction
Supervised generative models learn to reconstruct joint
distribution with certain prior incorporated to achieve parameter estimation. This brings in a natural fit to metalearning [2, 12, 30] paradigm, where knowledge acquired
from previous tasks can help fast adaptation in solving novel
tasks drawn from the same task distribution. Conditional
Neural Processes [6, 9,16] (CNPs) lie at the intersection between these two. Mathematically, for T steps of a function instantiation D = {(xt , y t )}Tt=1 sampled from a time-

lina.yao@unsw.edu.au

series, where each time index x has an associated observation y ⊆ Rd , CNPs learn to reconstruct the observation
of a given query index xq , with a set of time-observation
pairs C ⊆ D as input. Specifically, CNPs are built upon an
encoder-decoder, where the encoder h : C → rC summarizes all the input as a contextual representation rC . The
decoder takes rC and query index xq and outputs estimated
observation g : rC , xq → ŷ q ≈ y q . In a meta-learning context, CNPs may deal with some non-i.i.d function instantiations. If, for instance, given two function instantiations
D1 ∼ f1 = 5x + 10 and D2 ∼ f2 = 8x + 1, the representation derived from f1 cannot be used directly to reconstruct
observations of f2 , but rather requires a cross-instantiation
adaption step for meta-representation. In CNPs, the adaptation takes place implicitly along with data reconstruction.
The Bayesian principles enable CNPs to quantify uncertainties while performing predictive tasks under limited
data volume. Moreover, CNPs are designed to model a distribution over functions whereas conventional deep learning models do not, suggesting better generalization when
multiple functions are in play. These properties are desirable in applications like traffic forecasting, trajectory prediction, and activity recognition [13, 21, 24], where observations might be corrupted or sampled from different datageneration functions.
The CNP’s variants attempt to improve the encoder h by
introducing a range of inductive biases [9, 15, 16] to learn
appropriate structures from data. Despite the performance
gains achieved, the inherent generative nature of these models has raised some concerns, especially when they are
considered together: 1) Correlations between observations
are not modeled in CNPs. While introducing a global latent variable can yield more coherent predictions [4, 7, 16],
these attempts are also fraught with intractable likelihood;
2) High-dimensional observations challenge the capacity of
CNPs since generative models reconstruct low-level details
but hardly form high-level abstractions [17, 23]; and 3) Supervision collapse in meta-learning [3] occurs when prediction and transfer tasks are entangled in CNPs [8].
To address this, our first motivation centers on decoupling model adaptation from generative reconstruction

9687

