StyleGAN-V: A Continuous Video Generator with the Price, Image Quality and
Perks of StyleGAN2

1. Introduction
Recent advances in deep learning pushed image generation to the unprecedented photo-realistic quality [8, 28] and
spawned a lot of its industry applications. Video generation,
however, does not enjoy a similar success and struggles to
fit complex real-world datasets. The difficulties are caused
not only by the more complex nature of the underlying
data distribution, but also due to the computationally inten-

DIGAN
Ours

0

1/4 sec

1/2 sec

1 sec

5 sec

1 min

1 hour

0

1/4 sec

1/2 sec

1 sec

5 sec

1 min

1 hour

MoCoGAN-HD

Videos show continuous events, yet most — if not all —
video synthesis frameworks treat them discretely in time.
In this work, we think of videos of what they should be —
time-continuous signals, and extend the paradigm of neural
representations to build a continuous-time video generator.
For this, we first design continuous motion representations
through the lens of positional embeddings. Then, we explore
the question of training on very sparse videos and demonstrate that a good generator can be learned by using as few
as 2 frames per clip. After that, we rethink the traditional
image + video discriminators pair and design a holistic discriminator that aggregates temporal information by simply
concatenating frames’ features. This decreases the training
cost and provides richer learning signal to the generator,
making it possible to train directly on 10242 videos for the
first time. We build our model on top of StyleGAN2 and it
is just ⇡5% more expensive to train at the same resolution
while achieving almost the same image quality. Moreover,
our latent space features similar properties, enabling spatial manipulations that our method can propagate in time.
We can generate arbitrarily long videos at arbitrary high
frame rate, while prior work struggles to generate even 64
frames at a fixed rate. Our model is tested on four modern 2562 and one 10242 -resolution video synthesis benchmarks. In terms of sheer metrics, it performs on average
⇡30% better than the closest runner-up. Project website:
https://universome.github.io/stylegan-v.

DIGAN

Abstract

Mohamed Elhoseiny
KAUST

MoCoGAN-HD

Sergey Tulyakov
Snap Inc.

Ours

Ivan Skorokhodov
KAUST

Figure 1. Examples of 1-hour long videos, generated with different
methods. MoCoGAN-HD [65] fails to generate long videos due
to the instability of the underlying LSTM model when unrolled
to large lengths. DIGAN [80] struggles to generate long videos
due to the entanglement of spatial and temporal positional embeddings. StyleGAN-V (our method) generates plausible videos of
arbitrary length and frame-rate. Also, unlike DIGAN, it learns
temporal patterns not only in terms of motion, but also appearance
transformations, like time of day and weather changes.

sive video representations employed by modern generators.
They treat videos as discrete sequences of images, which
is very demanding for representing long high-resolution
videos and induces the use of expensive conv3d-based architectures to model them [13, 54, 55, 67]. 1
In this work, we argue that this design choice is not
optimal and propose to treat videos in their natural form:
as continuous signals x(t), that map any time coordinate
1 E.g., DVD-GAN [13] requires ⇡$30k to train on 2562 resolution [65]

3626

