Towards Efficient and Scalable Sharpness-Aware Minimization
Yong Liu1 , Siqi Mai1 , Xiangning Chen2 , Cho-Jui Hsieh2 , Yang You1
1
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
2
Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles
{liuyong, siqimai, youy}@comp.nus.edu.sg, {xiangning, chohsieh}@cs.ucla.edu
Abstract
Recently, Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM), which
connects the geometry of the loss landscape and generalization, has demonstrated a significant performance boost
on training large-scale models such as vision transformers. However, the update rule of SAM requires two sequential (non-parallelizable) gradient computations at each
step, which can double the computational overhead. In this
paper, we propose a novel algorithm LookSAM - that only
periodically calculates the inner gradient ascent, to significantly reduce the additional training cost of SAM. The empirical results illustrate that LookSAM achieves similar accuracy gains to SAM while being tremendously faster - it enjoys comparable computational complexity with first-order
optimizers such as SGD or Adam. To further evaluate the
performance and scalability of LookSAM, we incorporate
a layer-wise modification and perform experiments in the
large-batch training scenario, which is more prone to converge to sharp local minima. Equipped with the proposed
algorithms, we are the first to successfully scale up the batch
size when training Vision Transformers (ViTs). With a 64k
batch size, we are able to train ViTs from scratch in minutes while maintaining competitive performance. The code
is available here: https://github.com/yong-6/LookSAM

1. Introduction
It has been observed that sharp local minima usually
leads to significantly dropped generalization performance
of deep networks, and many methods have been proposed
for mitigating this issue [3, 12, 19, 23, 26, 38]. In particular, Foret et al. [13] recently proposed an algorithm named
Sharpness Aware Minimization (SAM), which explicitly
penalizes the sharp minima and biases the convergence to
a flat region. SAM has been used to achieve state-of-the-art
performance in many applications. For instance, Chen et al.
[4] showed that SAM optimizer can improve the validation accuracy of Vision Transformer models (ViTs) [10] on
ImageNet-1k by a significant amount (+5.3% when training

from scratch). However, the update rule of SAM involves
two sequential (non-parallelizable) gradient computations
at each step, which will double the training time.
In this paper, we aim to improve the efficiency of SAM
and apply it to large-scale training problems. Each step of
SAM consists of two gradient computations – one for adversarial perturbation to the weights and the other for computing the final update. A naive idea to speedup SAM is
to compute the first gradient (adversarial perturbation on
weights) only periodically and use standard SGD/Adam updates in between. Unfortunately, this leads to significantly
degraded performance, as shown in our experiments. To
resolve this issue, we decompose the SAM’s update direction into two components — the one that lies parallel to
the original SGD direction and the other orthogonal component. Since the second direction captures the differences
between SAM’s update and SGD’s update, we hypothesize
that this component can bias learning towards a flat region.
Interestingly, we show this second direction tends to remain
similar across nearby iterations, both empirically and theoretically. Based on this finding, we develop a novel LookSAM optimizer to reuse this direction across nearby iterations. The resulting LookSAM only needs to periodically
calculate the inner gradient ascent and significantly reduce
the computational complexity of SAM while maintaining
similar generalization performance.
As SAM has become a crucial component for training
large-scale Vision Transformer models (ViTs) [4], to further evaluate the performance and scalability of the proposed algorithm, we consider a challenging task — applying LookSAM to conduct large-batch training for ViTs. As
pointed out in [45, 48], large-batch training often introduces
the non-uniform instability problem across different layers.
Hence, we also adopt a layer-wise scaling rule for weight
perturbation, namely Look-LayerSAM optimizer. The proposed optimizer can successfully train ViTs with 64K batch
size within an hour while maintaining competitive performance.
Our contributions can be summarized in three folds.
• We develop a novel algorithm, called LookSAM, to

12360

