QS-Attn: Query-Selected Attention for Contrastive Learning in I2I Translation
Xueqi Hu1 , Xinyue Zhou1 , Qiusheng Huang1 , Zhengyi Shi1 , Li Sun1,2 ,* Qingli Li1
1
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing,
2
Key Laboratory of Advanced Theory and Application in Statistics and Data Science,
East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
Abstract
Unpaired image-to-image (I2I) translation often requires
to maximize the mutual information between the source and
the translated images across different domains, which is
critical for the generator to keep the source content and prevent it from unnecessary modiﬁcations. The self-supervised
contrastive learning has already been successfully applied
in the I2I. By constraining features from the same location to be closer than those from different ones, it implicitly
ensures the result to take content from the source. However, previous work uses the features from random locations to impose the constraint, which may not be appropriate since some locations contain less information of source
domain. Moreover, the feature itself does not reﬂect the
relation with others. This paper deals with these problems by intentionally selecting signiﬁcant anchor points for
contrastive learning. We design a query-selected attention
(QS-Attn) module, which compares feature distances in the
source domain, giving an attention matrix with a probability distribution in each row. Then we select queries
according to their measurement of signiﬁcance, computed
from the distribution. The selected ones are regarded as
anchors for contrastive loss. At the same time, the reduced attention matrix is employed to route features in both
domains, so that source relations maintain in the synthesis. We validate our proposed method in three different I2I
datasets, showing that it increases the image quality without adding learnable parameters. Codes are available at
https://github.com/sapphire497/query-selected-attention.

Source

E

QS-Attn
Module

G

Contrastive
Loss

E
Target

D
anchor:

positive:

real
or
fake
negative:

Figure 1. The overall structure of our model. The source domain
image Ix is translated by the generator G into a target domain
image G(Ix ). The encoder E extracts features from these two
images, then the QS-Attn module selects signiﬁcant features to
establish the contrastive loss. We also use a discriminator D to
construct the adversarial loss.

1. Introduction
In image-to-image (I2I) translation, an input from the
source domain X is mapped into the target domain Y while
keeping its original content from unnecessary modiﬁca* Corresponding author, email:

sunli@ee.ecnu.edu.cn. This work is
supported by the Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality (No.19511120800) and Natural Science Foundation of China
(No.61302125).

tions. The translation is usually achieved by a generator G
in the structure of auto-encoder with its output constraining
by a discriminator D, so that it fulﬁlls the requirement of
the domain Y . In many I2I tasks, paired data are impossible to obtain, hence G can not be directly guided by the real
image in Y . Ensuring that the output takes the input content
is important for increasing its quality. Typical methods pro-

18291

