Learning Fair Classifiers with Partially Annotated Group Labels
Sangwon Jung1 * Sanghyuk Chun2† Taesup Moon1,3†
1

Department of ECE/ASRI, Seoul National University 2 NAVER AI Lab
3
Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence, Seoul National University
group-labeled only

Abstract

CGL (ours)

scratch

1. Introduction
Recent advances of machine learning (ML) models have
witnessed promising outcomes even in societal applications, such as credit estimation [28], crime assessment systems [7, 23], automatic job interviews [33], face recognition [8, 38], and law enforcement [17]. However, machines
* Works done while doing an internship at NAVER AI Lab.
† Corresponding authors

80
78
76
74
72
70

fully annotated group labels

42

Fairness ( M), is better

Recently, fairness-aware learning have become increasingly crucial, but most of those methods operate by assuming the availability of fully annotated demographic group
labels. We emphasize that such assumption is unrealistic
for real-world applications since group label annotations
are expensive and can conflict with privacy issues. In this
paper, we consider a more practical scenario, dubbed as
Algorithmic Group Fairness with the Partially annotated
Group labels (Fair-PG). We observe that the existing methods to achieve group fairness perform even worse than the
vanilla training, which simply uses full data only with target labels, under Fair-PG. To address this problem, we propose a simple Confidence-based Group Label assignment
(CGL) strategy that is readily applicable to any fairnessaware learning method. CGL utilizes an auxiliary group
classifier to assign pseudo group labels, where random labels are assigned to low confident samples. We first theoretically show that our method design is better than the vanilla
pseudo-labeling strategy in terms of fairness criteria. Then,
we empirically show on several benchmark datasets that by
combining CGL and the state-of-the-art fairness-aware inprocessing methods, the target accuracies and the fairness
metrics can be jointly improved compared to the baselines.
Furthermore, we convincingly show that CGL enables to
naturally augment the given group-labeled dataset with external target label-only datasets so that both accuracy and
fairness can be improved. Code is available at https:
//github.com/naver-ai/cgl_fairness.

Accuracy (%), is better

82

100

80

50

25

Group-label ratio (%)

10

40
38
36
34
32
30

100

80

50

25

Group-label ratio (%)

10

Figure 1. Can fair-training methods still learn fair classifiers when group labels are partially annotated? We note the
state-of-the-art fairness fair-training FairHSIC [34] using only
the group-labeled subset (yellow) shows worse fairness criterion
(∆M , Eq. (2), lower the better) than the “scratch” (i.e., no consideration of a fairness criteria) in the low group label regime (e.g.,
10%) on UTKFace [44]. Our CGL (red), on the other hand, can
be potentially applied to any fair-training method, and when it is
combined with FairHSIC, both the target accuracy and the fairness
criteria are significantly improved for the low group label regime.

are often more inaccurate to a particular group (e.g., darkerskinned females) than other groups (e.g., lighter-skinned
males) [8], i.e., machines are discriminatory. To mitigate
the issue, fairness-aware learning has recently emerged;
a model should not discriminate against any demographic
group with sensitive attributes, e.g., age, gender, or race.
Many existing approaches for group fairness [1, 12, 22,
24, 34, 41, 42] utilize two types of labels: target labels,
which are task-oriented (e.g., crime assessment) and group
labels, which are defined by socially sensitive attribute
groups (e.g., ethnicity or gender). Many existing methods
for achieving group fairness rely on the group labels to
train fair classifiers. For example, many approaches explicitly minimize the statistical parity metrics between groups
defined by sensitive attributes. However, in many realistic applications, e.g., computer vision, assuming that all
images have sensitive group labels can be unrealistic and
make the existing methods impractical. First, in many image datasets, group labels are not explicitly given as in tabular datasets [7, 23, 28] but are defined in high-level se-

10348

