Learning to Affiliate: Mutual Centralized Learning for Few-shot Classification
Yang Liu1 , Weifeng Zhang1 , Chao Xiang1 , Tu Zheng1,2 , Deng Cai1,2 , Xiaofei He1,2
1
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University 2 Fabu Inc., Hangzhou, China
{lyng_95, zhangwf, chaoxiang, zhengtu}@zju.edu.cn dengcai@cad.zju.edu.cn hexiaofei@fabu.ai
Nearest Neighbor sc1

EMD Pairs sc1

q
sc2

∝ exp 

q
sc3

(a) Pr 
DN4 (c | q, S)
X

Linear Combination sc1

sc2



cos(q, NNsc (q))

q
sc3

sc2

∝ exp −

q∈q

q
sc3

(b) Pr 
DeepEMD (c | q, S)
X

Bidirectional Random Walk sc1

FRN (c | q, S)

 (c) Pr 
X
kq − EMDsc (q)k2  ∝ exp −
kq − sc wk2 

q∈q

q∈q

sc2

sc3

(d) PrMCL (c | q, S)
#
"∞
X
X
1[Xt ∈ sc ] X0 = z
∝
E
z∈q∪S

t=1

Figure 1. Illustrations of four dense features based methods in a 3-way 1-shot scenario, where each colored pane indicates an image and
particles within each pane indicate three feature vectors of that image. The arrow line indicates a direct connection between two feature
vectors in inference. For example, (a) DN4 [12] accumulates cosine similarities between the nearest features; (b) DeepEMD [31] finds the
optimal matching flow that has the minimum cost; (c) FRN [29] reconstructs query features with the linear combination of support features.
(d) Our MCL lets query and support features bidirectionally random walk to the opposite dense features set and measures the expected
number of visits in a Markov process {Xt }. Difference from them, MCL considers mutual affiliations between the dense features instead of
following the unidirectional paradigm whose evident character is an accumulation over all query features followed by a softmax probability.

Abstract
Few-shot learning (FSL) aims to learn a classifier that
can be easily adapted to accommodate new tasks, given
only a few examples. To handle the limited-data in few-shot
regimes, recent methods tend to collectively use a set of local
features to densely represent an image instead of using a
mixed global feature. They generally explore a unidirectional paradigm, e.g., finding the nearest support feature
for every query feature and aggregating local matches for a
joint classification. In this paper, we propose a novel Mutual
Centralized Learning (MCL) to fully affiliate these two disjoint dense features sets in a bidirectional paradigm. We first
associate each local feature with a particle that can bidirectionally random walk in discrete feature space. To estimate
the class probability, we propose the dense features’ accessibility that measures the expected number of visits to the
dense features of that class in a Markov process. We relate
our method to learning a centrality on an affiliation network
and demonstrate its capability to be plugged in existing methods by highlighting centralized local features. Experiments
show that our method achieves the new state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Few-shot classification aims to learn a classifier that can
be readily adapted to novel classes given just a small number
of labeled instances. To address this problem, a line of
previous literature adopts metric-based methods [23, 25, 26]
that learn a global image representation in an appropriate
feature space and use a distance metric to predict their labels.
Recent approaches [12, 14, 17, 31] have demonstrated
that the significant intra-class variations would inevitably
drive the image-level embedding from the same category far
apart in a given metric space under low-data regimes. In
contrast, densely representative local features can provide
transferrable information across categories that have shown
promising performances in the few-shot scenario. Among
those methods illustrated in Figure 1, DN4 [12] finds the
nearest neighbor support feature for each query feature and
accumulates all the local matches in a Naive-Bayes way
to represent an image-to-class similarity; DeepEMD [31]
uses the earth mover distance to compare the complex structured representations composed of local features. FRN [29]
reconstructs each of query dense features with a linear combination of support dense features in a latent space and use
the reconstruction distance to measure the image-to-class

14411

