R(Det)2 : Randomized Decision Routing for Object Detection
Ya-Li Li
Shengjin Wang∗
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University and BNRist, Beijing, China
liyali13,wgsgj@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In the paradigm of object detection, the decision head is
an important part, which affects detection performance significantly. Yet how to design a high-performance decision
head remains to be an open issue. In this paper, we propose a novel approach to combine decision trees and deep
neural networks in an end-to-end learning manner for object detection. First, we disentangle the decision choices
and prediction values by plugging soft decision trees into
neural networks. To facilitate effective learning, we propose randomized decision routing with node selective and
associative losses, which can boost the feature representative learning and network decision simultaneously. Second, we develop the decision head for object detection with
narrow branches to generate the routing probabilities and
masks, for the purpose of obtaining divergent decisions
from different nodes. We name this approach as the randomized decision routing for object detection, abbreviated
as R(Det)2 . Experiments on MS-COCO dataset demonstrate that R(Det)2 is effective to improve the detection performance. Equipped with existing detectors, it achieves
1.4 ∼ 3.6% AP improvement.

1. Introduction
Object detection, which aims to recognize and localize
the objects of interest in images, is a fundamental yet challenging task in computer vision. It is important for various applications, such as video surveillance, autonomous
driving, and robotics vision. Due to its practical importance, object detection has attracted significant attention in
the community. In recent decades, deep neural networks
(DNNs) have brought significant progress into object detection. Typically, existing deep learning-based detection
methods include one-stage detectors [22, 25, 31], two-stage
detectors [1, 7, 16, 30, 33], end-to-end detectors [3, 39, 51].
Generally, current deep architectures constructed for object detection involve two components. One is the backbone
∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed approach. (a) Inspired by
decision trees, we disentangle the decision choices and predictive
values by introducing tree structure for decision head in object detection. With multi-node prediction, we can explore more diverse
cues. (b) We use the soft probability to denote decision choices for
different routes of nodes. The overall decision is the weighted sum
of prediction values from different nodes. Specially, we propose
randomized decision routing to learn divergent decisions from different nodes for overall performance improvement.

for feature extraction, which can be pre-trained with largescale visual recognition datasets such as ImageNet [35].
The other is the decision head, which produces the predictions for computing losses or inferring detection boxes.
Collaborated with region sampling, object detection can be
converted into a multitask learning issue, where the decision
tasks include classification and bounding box (bbox) regression. For existing detection networks, the decision head is
simply constructed by sequentially connecting several convolution or fully-connected layers. For one-stage detectors,
the decision head is commonly constructed by stacking several convolutional layers. The decision head for region proposal in two-stage detectors is similar. For two-stage detectors, the region-wise decision in R-CNN stage is typically
implemented with 2 fully-connected layers. Since the decision head is quite important for high-performance detectors,
there are recently devoted researches [8, 12, 37, 43]. However, most of these works focus on task disentanglement and

4825

