Closing the Generalization Gap of Cross-silo Federated Medical Image
Segmentation
An Xu*
Univ. of Pittsburgh
Ali Hatamizadeh
NVIDIA

Wenqi Li
NVIDIA
Can Zhao
NVIDIA

Pengfei Guo
Johns Hopkins University
Daguang Xu
NVIDIA

Abstract
Cross-silo federated learning (FL) has attracted much
attention in medical imaging analysis with deep learning in
recent years as it can resolve the critical issues of insufficient data, data privacy, and training efficiency. However,
there can be a generalization gap between the model trained
from FL and the one from centralized training. This important issue comes from the non-iid data distribution of the
local data in the participating clients and is well-known as
client drift. In this work, we propose a novel training framework FedSM to avoid the client drift issue and successfully
close the generalization gap compared with the centralized
training for medical image segmentation tasks for the first
time. We also propose a novel personalized FL objective
formulation and a new method SoftPull to solve it in our
proposed framework FedSM. We conduct rigorous theoretical analysis to guarantee its convergence for optimizing the
non-convex smooth objective function. Real-world medical
image segmentation experiments using deep FL validate the
motivations and effectiveness of our proposed method.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models have shown success in computer
vision tasks in recent years [19, 41, 42]. However, training
deep models that generalize well on unseen test data may
require massive training data. Unfortunately, we are usually faced with insufficient data in a single medical institution for the medical image segmentation task due to the expensive procedure of collecting enough patients’ data with
experts’ labeling.
A straightforward solution to address the insufficient
data issue is gathering data from all the available medical
* Work done during an internship at NVIDIA. A.X. and H.H. were
partially supported by NSF IIS 1845666, 1852606, 1838627, 1837956,
1956002, IIA 2040588. Implementation of this work is available at
https://github.com/NVIDIA/NVFlare/examples/FedSM

Dong Yang
NVIDIA

Heng Huang
Univ. of Pittsburgh

Holger Roth
NVIDIA
Ziyue Xu
NVIDIA

institutions, while the amount of data owned by any single institution may be insufficient to train a well-performing
deep model. However, this approach will raise the concern
for data privacy. On one hand, collecting medical data is
expensive as mentioned above, and those data have become
a valuable asset at a medical institution. Institutions with
more data may be more reluctant to contribute their data.
In addition, medical institutions bear the obligation to keep
the data collected from patients secure. Gathering data may
expose patients to the risk of data leakage.
Of course, we can leverage the existing vanilla distributed training method [31,49,50] to keep the institution’s
data local and share only the gradient with a central server.
But the training of deep model requires many iterations to
converge, leading to unacceptable communication complexity for vanilla distributed training. It is not secure neither as recent works [14, 52, 54, 55] have shown that pixellevel images can be recovered from the leaked gradient.
Recently, federated learning (FL) [13, 16, 29, 48] have
been proposed to tackle all the above issues (insufficient
data, data privacy, training efficiency). In medical applications, we are most interested in the cross-silo federated
learning where we have a limited number of participating
clients compared with cross-device federated learning (e.g.,
mobile devices) [17, 26, 36]. Specifically, in each training
round of FedAvg [38], the de facto algorithm for FL, each
client will perform local training with the global model received from a central server for multiple iterations. Then
the server gathers all the local models from each client
and averages them as the new global model. Nevertheless,
for FedAvg and its variants, a non-negligible issue called
“client drift” arises due to non-iid data distribution on different clients. The local models on different clients will
gradually diverge from each other during the local training. Client drift can drastically jeopardize the training performance of the global model when the data similarity decreases (more non-iid) [20, 21]. Theoretically, it leads to
a convergence rate more sensitive to the number of local

20866

