Online Learning of Reusable Abstract Models for Object Goal Navigation
Tommaso Campari1,2
1

Leonardo Lamanna2,3

Paolo Traverso2

Luciano Serafini2

Lamberto Ballan1

University of Padova, Italy 2 Fondazione Bruno Kessler (FBK), Trento, Italy
3
University of Brescia, Italy

{tcampari,llamanna,traverso,serafini}@fbk.eu

Abstract
Abstract model

In this paper, we present a novel approach to incrementally learn an Abstract Model of an unknown environment,
and show how an agent can reuse the learned model for
tackling the Object Goal Navigation task. The Abstract
Model is a finite state machine in which each state is an abstraction of a state of the environment, as perceived by the
agent in a certain position and orientation. The perceptions
are high-dimensional sensory data (e.g., RGB-D images),
and the abstraction is reached by exploiting image segmentation and the Taskonomy model bank. The learning of the
Abstract Model is accomplished by executing actions, observing the reached state, and updating the Abstract Model
with the acquired information. The learned models are
memorized by the agent, and they are reused whenever it
recognizes to be in an environment that corresponds to the
stored model. We investigate the effectiveness of the proposed approach for the Object Goal Navigation task, relying on public benchmarks. Our results show that the reuse
of learned Abstract Models can boost performance on Object Goal Navigation.

s0

lamberto.ballan@unipd.it

act0

chair
table
apple
oven

s1

act1

oven
table
chair
fork

s2

act2

sink
table
chair
...

s3
pizza
table
chair
...

map

act0

act1

act2

Figure 1. During its navigation in a complex 3D scenario, an agent
incrementally acquires knowledge about the environment by storing rich semantic information in an Abstract Model. For instance,
when the robot is in s0 , chair and table are visible; by performing
act0 , other objects become visible, thus the Abstract Model is updated to s1 . Our work shows how knowledge can be incrementally
learned and effectively reused over time.

1. Introduction
In Embodied AI, agent’s intelligence emerges from the
interaction with the environment as the result of sensorimotor activities [39]. While acting in a real environment, an
agent should acquire and effectively represent some knowledge of its surrounding, obtained through sensors (such as
RGB or depth cameras). However, this knowledge acquisition process is a key challenge. To this end, two major directions can be followed. On the one hand, knowledge can be
codified in a sub-symbolic model (e.g., a neural network),
which is learned, for instance, by designing supervised or
reinforcement learning techniques that can be directly applied to the sensory data [17, 42]. On the other hand, one
can adopt a symbolic/semantic representation of the environment (e.g., by exploiting a semantically rich relational

structure) which captures the high-level critical aspects of
the environment, abstracting away useless details [24, 37].
In our work, we follow this second approach, in the attempt of obtaining a more abstract and general knowledge
representation that can be, eventually, reused across time.
To this end, an agent, such as a robot navigating in a complex scenario, will represent the acquired knowledge of the
environment in an Abstract Model that encodes the following key features: (i) some semantic insights about objects,
scene elements, and their relations; e.g., it represents a specific state such as “the agent is close to a fridge and a table is
visible from that position” (see Fig. 1); (ii) the elements of
the Abstract Model are “grounded” to the perceptions; for
instance, the agent stores in the Abstract Model some in-

14870

