Cross-modal Representation Learning for Zero-shot Action Recognition
Chung-Ching Lin, Kevin Lin, Lijuan Wang, Zicheng Liu, Linjie Li
Microsoft
{chungching.lin, keli, lijuanw, zliu, lindsey.li}@microsoft.com

Abstract
We present a cross-modal Transformer-based framework, which jointly encodes video data and text labels for
zero-shot action recognition (ZSAR). Our model employs a
conceptually new pipeline by which visual representations
are learned in conjunction with visual-semantic associations in an end-to-end manner. The model design provides a
natural mechanism for visual and semantic representations
to be learned in a shared knowledge space, whereby it encourages the learned visual embedding to be discriminative
and more semantically consistent. In zero-shot inference,
we devise a simple semantic transfer scheme that embeds
semantic relatedness information between seen and unseen
classes to composite unseen visual prototypes. Accordingly,
the discriminative features in the visual structure could be
preserved and exploited to alleviate the typical zero-shot
issues of information loss, semantic gap, and the hubness
problem. Under a rigorous zero-shot setting of not pretraining on additional datasets, the experiment results show
our model considerably improves upon the state of the arts
in ZSAR, reaching encouraging top-1 accuracy on UCF101,
HMDB51, and ActivityNet benchmark datasets. Code will
be made available.1

1. Introduction
Action recognition with supervised training is highly
successful [9, 22, 36, 58, 59, 65], e.g., AssemblyNet++ [52]
and X3D [17]. In comparison, zero-shot action recognition
(ZSAR) generally lags behind because it requires a model to
make meaningful inferences about unseen concepts, given
only the data provided from seen training concepts and additional high-level semantic label information [55]. Addressing the general zero-shot challenges, e.g., distribution
shift and semantic gap, recent ZSAR methods mainly exploit visual features extracted from off-the-shelf pretrained
action recognition models and focus on studying a more robust visual-to-semantic mapping or learning a joint embed1 https://github.com/microsoft/ResT

Figure 1. ResT is a cross-modal transformer network, which
learns visual representations along with visual-semantic associations for ZSAR. In ResT, visual tokens attend to visual tokens
(modality-specific attention); Word tokens attend to visual and text
tokens on the left (cross-modal attention).

ding space on which to project visual and semantic features.
However, there are limitations in this typical framework.
First, visual features are usually acquired by pretrained
action recognition models and remain unchanged during
training (e.g., C3D [58] is employed in [4, 24, 42, 42, 62],
I3D [9] is adopted in [21, 37, 45, 51]). Hence, they may
not contain enough information for learning a fair representation [34]. Besides, when directly using pretrained action recognition models to extract visual features, the intrinsic zero-shot setting may not be preserved. The pretrained
model acquires the knowledge of classes that should not be
seen during training [51]. For example, I3D was trained
on the ImageNet [13] and Kinetics [28] datasets. C3D was
trained on the I380K and Sports-1M datasets [27]. Similar to Kinetics, between Sports-1M and UCF101 [53], they
share 23 identical classes [16].
Second, action classes are usually manually labeled with
limited descriptions of many complex actions, causing the
semantic information is often imprecise or incomplete. For
example, many action classes are only labeled by a noun
(e.g., ”uneven bars,” ”hula hoop”), or a single verb (e.g.,
”pour,” ”dive”). In contrast, videos, upon which the words
are placed, are true visual reflections of various classes of
actions. Visual observations are unstructured and complex.
It follows, there is richer and more discriminative information in the visual feature space. Despite the visual and semantic spaces being connected, the visual discrimination after mapping or projection of the two spaces often shrinks

19978

