Learning to Estimate Robust 3D Human Mesh from
In-the-Wild Crowded Scenes
Hongsuk Choi1
1

Gyeongsik Moon1

JoonKyu Park1

Kyoung Mu Lee1,2

Dept. of ECE & ASRI, 2 IPAI, Seoul National University, Korea
{redarknight,mks0601,jkpark0825,kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We consider the problem of recovering a single person’s
3D human mesh from in-the-wild crowded scenes. While
much progress has been in 3D human mesh estimation, existing methods struggle when test input has crowded scenes.
The first reason for the failure is a domain gap between
training and testing data. A motion capture dataset, which
provides accurate 3D labels for training, lacks crowd data
and impedes a network from learning crowded scene-robust
image features of a target person. The second reason is a
feature processing that spatially averages the feature map of
a localized bounding box containing multiple people. Averaging the whole feature map makes a target person’s feature
indistinguishable from others. We present 3DCrowdNet that
firstly explicitly targets in-the-wild crowded scenes and estimates a robust 3D human mesh by addressing the above
issues. First, we leverage 2D human pose estimation that
does not require a motion capture dataset with 3D labels
for training and does not suffer from the domain gap. Second, we propose a joint-based regressor that distinguishes a
target person’s feature from others. Our joint-based regressor preserves the spatial activation of a target by sampling
features from the target’s joint locations and regresses human model parameters. As a result, 3DCrowdNet learns
target-focused features and effectively excludes the irrelevant features of nearby persons. We conduct experiments on
various benchmarks and prove the robustness of 3DCrowdNet to the in-the-wild crowded scenes both quantitatively
and qualitatively. Codes are available here 1 .

1. Introduction
Extensive research has been committed to reconstructing
an accurate 3D human mesh, which represent both the pose
and shape of a human, from a single image. However, 3D
1 https : / / github . com / hongsukchoi / 3DCrowdNet _
RELEASE

lack crowded scenes
(MoCap training data)

contain crowded scenes
(in-the-wild crowd testing data)

(a) Domain gap (occlusion/pose/appearance, etc)

input

3DCrowdNet (Ours)

SOTA

(b) Qualitative comparison

Figure 1. 3DCrowdNet resolves (a) a domain gap issue in estimating a 3D human mesh from in-the-wild crowded scenes. Due to
the large domain gap between motion capture data and in-the-wild
crowd data, (b) existing state-of-the-art methods such as SPIN [19]
produce inaccurate results, while 3DCrowdNet gives an accurate
3D human mesh despite severe inter-person occlusion. We conceal
a person’s face in this paper to abide by the ethical policy.

human mesh estimation from in-the-wild crowded scenes
has been barely studied, despite their common presence.
Consequently, most of the previous works show results on
scenes without inter-person occlusion and provide inaccurate results on crowded scenes. The inter-person occlusion
is the essential challenge of in-the-wild crowded scenes,
and many practical applications including abnormal behavior detection [8] and person re-identification [35] encounter
such situations. This paper investigates the limitation of the
current literature and proposes a novel method for robust 3D
human mesh estimation from in-the-wild crowded scenes.

1475

