U NI C ON: Combating Label Noise Through Uniform Selection and Contrastive
Learning
Nazmul Karim†

Mamshad Nayeem Rizve‡

Nazanin Rahnavard†

Ajmal Mian§

Mubarak Shah‡

† Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, UCF, USA
‡ Center for Research in Computer Vision, UCF, USA
§ Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering, UWA, Australia

{nazmul.karim18, nayeemrizve}@knights.ucf.edu, nazanin.rahnavard@ucf.edu
ajmal.mian@uwa.edu.au, shah@crcv.ucf.edu

SSL Training

Abstract
Supervised deep learning methods require a large repository of annotated data; hence, label noise is inevitable.
Training with such noisy data negatively impacts the generalization performance of deep neural networks. To combat
label noise, recent state-of-the-art methods employ some
sort of sample selection mechanism to select a possibly
clean subset of data. Next, an off-the-shelf semi-supervised
learning method is used for training where rejected samples
are treated as unlabeled data. Our comprehensive analysis
shows that current selection methods disproportionately select samples from easy (fast learnable) classes while rejecting those from relatively harder ones. This creates class
imbalance in the selected clean set and in turn, deteriorates performance under high label noise. In this work,
we propose UNICON, a simple yet effective sample selection method which is robust to high label noise. To address
the disproportionate selection of easy and hard samples, we
introduce a Jensen-Shannon divergence based uniform selection mechanism which does not require any probabilistic
modeling and hyperparameter tuning. We complement our
selection method with contrastive learning to further combat the memorization of noisy labels. Extensive experimentation on multiple benchmark datasets demonstrates the effectiveness of UNICON; we obtain an 11.4% improvement
over the current state-of-the-art on CIFAR100 dataset with
a 90% noise rate. Our code is publicly available.1

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have proven to be highly
effective in solving various computer vision tasks [9, 18, 22,
36, 43, 48, 49, 53, 62]. Most state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods require supervised training with a large pool of annotated data [4, 8, 27, 28, 57]. Collecting and manually an1 https : / / github . com / nazmul - karim170 / UNICON Noisy-Label

Feature
Extractor
Cls. Layer

Proj. Head

Semi
Supervised
Loss

Contrastive
Loss

Uniform Selection
Training
Set

Uniform Selection
Training
Set

SSL Training
Clean Set

Feature
Extractor

Noisy Set
Cls. Layer

Proj. Head

Semi
Supervised
Loss

Contrastive
Loss

Clean Set

Noisy Set

-- Clean Label
-- Noisy Label

Figure 1. U NI C ON training overview: At each iteration, we employ a uniform selection technique to partition the training set into
clean and noisy sets. Upon separation, we perform SSL-training
with an additional contrastive loss function. The uniform selection
and subsequent SSL-training is repeated until convergence.
Noise Rate (%)

90%

92%

95%

98%

DMix [25]
U NI C ON (Ours)

76.08
90.81

57.62
87.61

51.28
80.82

17.18
50.63

Table 1. Classification performance (%) of the proposed method
on CIFAR10 under severe label noise.

notating such data is challenging and oftentimes very expensive. Most large-scale data collection techniques rely
on open-source web data that can be automatically annotated using search engine queries and user tags [33, 52].
This annotation scheme inevitably introduces label noise
[27, 57]. Training with such noisy labels is challenging
since DNNs can effectively memorize arbitrary (noisy) labels over the course of training [2]. Combating label
noise is one of the fundamental problems in deep learning [15, 24, 38, 46, 54, 54, 58, 60, 61, 65], and is the focus
of this study.
Training with noisy label data has been the subject of

9676

