Estimating Structural Disparities for Face Models
Shervin Ardeshir
Netflix
Los Gatos, CA

Cristina Segalin
Netflix
Los Gatos, CA

Nathan Kallus
Cornell University & Netflix
New York, NY

shervina@netflix.com

csegalin@netflix.com

kallus@cornell.edu

Abstract
In machine learning, disparity metrics are often defined
by measuring the difference in the performance or outcome
of a model, across different sub-populations (groups) of datapoints. Thus, the inputs to disparity quantification consist
of a model’s predictions ŷ, the ground-truth labels for the
predictions y, and group labels g for the data points. Performance of the model for each group is calculated by comparing ŷ and y for the datapoints within a specific group,
and as a result, disparity of performance across the different groups can be calculated. In many real world scenarios
however, group labels (g) may not be available at scale during training and validation time, or collecting them might
not be feasible or desirable as they could often be sensitive
information. As a result, evaluating disparity metrics across
categorical groups would not be feasible. On the other
hand, in many scenarios noisy groupings may be obtainable
using some form of a proxy, which would allow measuring disparity metrics across sub-populations. Here we explore performing such analysis on computer vision models
trained on human faces, and on tasks such as face attribute
prediction and affect estimation. Our experiments indicate
that embeddings resulting from an off-the-shelf face recognition model, could meaningfully serve as a proxy for such
estimation.

1. Introduction
Studying bias in machine learning has recently become
an active area of research [3, 27]. Inconsistent performance
of machine learning models on sensitive data could have
dire consequences, if/when the technology gets adopted
in areas such as healthcare [5], financial loan applications
[2], law enforcement [31], etc. As a result, measuring
the performance of machine learning models across different groups, and ensuring that the models are not learning shortcuts based on irrelevant demographic-related confounding variables would be crucial. One of the sensitive types of data often used in training machine learning

3UR[\

]L

0RGHO

HL

1VL

[L

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed approach. Using the proxy
(face recognition) embeddings, a neighborhood, and thus a neighborhood error for each datapoint is calculated. We show that the
disparity in the performance of a model across different neighborhoods, could roughly estimate it’s performance disprity across
individuals (for small neighborhood sizes), and across groups (for
larger neighborhood sizes). In the toy example illustrated here,
analysis on the model results in the green curve. Comparing that
to other hypothetical baselines (blue and yellow), the green model
is estimated to have the lowest performance disparity across individuals, as it has lower disparity for smaller neighborhood sizes.
However, the blue curve is estimated to have lower group-level
disparity, as it has lower estimated disparity in large neighborhood
sizes. In this work, we empirically verify this phenomenon for
face models, and when face recognition embeddings are used as
proxy features.

models, is images of human faces. A face image could
reveal demographic-based information about individuals,
from which the model’s bias should be mitigated. Also,
there is the known issue of data imbalance in many facebased data sets [19], which could lead to models learning
shortcuts and therefore, ignoring less represented groups in
the dataset.
There has been research conducted in the area of disparity of performance of face-model such as face detection [1],
face recognition [19], generation [38], expression prediction [39], etc, focused on using demographic information
for directly measuring, and often for training fairer models.
In many scenarios however, such data is not available
for evaluation, and collecting it may be not scalable and/or
desirable. In this work, our goal is to empirically verify whether we can estimate performance disparity of a

10358

