Learning Video Representations of Human Motion from Synthetic Data
Xi Guo*
Beihang University

Wei Wu∗
SenseTime Research

Dongliang Wang
SenseTime Research

guoxi@buaa.edu.cn

wuwei@sensetime.com

wangdongliang@sensetime.com

Jing Su
SenseTime Research

Haisheng Su
SenseTime Research

Weihao Gan
SenseTime Research

sujing@sensetime.com

suhaisheng@sensetime.com

ganweihao@sensetime.com

Jian Huang
Beihang University

Qin Yang
Beihang University

hj@buaa.edu.cn

yangqin@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

Spatiotemporal semantic features are important for video
understanding. Early works [41, 44] adopt two-stream networks to extract appearance features and motion information separately. However, the extraction of optical flow is
expensive in both time and space. And the flow of objects
and background are also retained, which introduce scene
* Equal Contribution.

𝑥!"

…
𝑥#"

random time window

Web videos

𝑞"

𝑥!$
online data
augment
𝑥#$

GATA queue
……

𝑘"

top-K NN

𝑞$
Video
Encoder

1. Introduction

…

offline
render

Video
Encoder

In this paper, we take an early step towards video representation learning of human actions with the help of largescale synthetic videos, particularly for human motion representation enhancement. Specifically, we first introduce
an automatic action-related video synthesis pipeline based
on a photorealistic video game. A large-scale human action dataset named GATA (GTA Animation Transformed
Actions) is then built by the proposed pipeline, which includes 8.1 million action clips spanning over 28K action classes. Based on the presented dataset, we design
a contrastive learning framework for human motion representation learning, which shows significant performance
improvements on several typical video datasets for action recognition, e.g., Charades, HAA 500 and NTU-RGB.
Besides, we further explore a domain adaptation method
based on cross-domain positive pairs mining to alleviate the
domain gap between synthetic and realistic data. Extensive
properties analyses of learned representation are conducted
to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed dataset for
enhancing human motion representation learning.

GATA dataset

……
𝑘 $ real data queue

Figure 1. The proposed contrastive learning framework for our
GATA dataset. Unlike previous methods, we construct positive
pairs offline, which are different views rendered using the same
semantic 3D skeleton action sequence with diverse backgrounds,
human appearances and camera views. Our method samples real
views rather than simple traditional data augmentation for contrastive unsupervised learning.

bias and thus affect the human motion representation learning. [20] adopts 3D convolutions to capture the spatiotemporal features directly from raw videos. However, stacked
3D convolutions require tremendous parameters and the
motion dynamics are capture implicitly. Recently, many researchers [21, 25, 49] attempts to design elaborate architectures to extract motion features explicitly through neighboring feature-level difference, which provide complementary
features for action recognition and achieve convincing performance. Therefore, learning a strong motion representation is essential for human action understanding. In contrast
to the task-specific architecture designs for motion modeling, we try to solve this problem from the data perspective.
To analyze the human motion extraction process, a largescale motion-oriented human action dataset is essential.
However, existing public datasets, e.g., Kinetics [7, 8] and
YouTube-8M [3], fail to effectively support the motion rep-

20197

