Out-of-distribution Generalization with Causal Invariant Transformations
Ruoyu Wang1,2∗

Mingyang Yi1,2∗
Zhitang Chen3
Shengyu Zhu3†
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{wangruoyu17,yimingyang17}@mails.ucas.edu.cn, {chenzhitang2,zhushengyu}@huawei.com

Abstract
In real-world applications, it is important and desirable
to learn a model that performs well on out-of-distribution
(OOD) data. Recently, causality has become a powerful tool to tackle the OOD generalization problem, with
the idea resting on the causal mechanism that is invariant across domains of interest. To leverage the generally
unknown causal mechanism, existing works assume a linear form of causal feature or require sufficiently many and
diverse training domains, which are usually restrictive in
practice. In this work, we obviate these assumptions and
tackle the OOD problem without explicitly recovering the
causal feature. Our approach is based on transformations
that modify the non-causal feature but leave the causal part
unchanged, which can be either obtained from prior knowledge or learned from the training data in the multi-domain
scenario. Under the setting of invariant causal mechanism, we theoretically show that if all such transformations
are available, then we can learn a minimax optimal model
across the domains using only single domain data. Noticing
that knowing a complete set of these causal invariant transformations may be impractical, we further show that it suffices to know only a subset of these transformations. Based
on the theoretical findings, a regularized training procedure
is proposed to improve the OOD generalization capability.
Extensive experimental results on both synthetic and real
datasets verify the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm,
even with only a few causal invariant transformations.

1. Introduction
The success of many machine learning algorithms with
empirical risk minimization (ERM) relies on the independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) hypothesis that training and test data originate from a common distribution. In
∗ Equal contribution. Work was done during an internship at Huawei
Noah’s Ark Lab.
† Corresponding author.

practice, however, data in different domains or environments are often heterogeneous, due to changing circumstances, selection bias, and time-shifts in the distributions
[47, 57]. Accessing data from all the domains of interest,
on the other hand, is expensive or even impossible. Consequently, the problem of learning a model that generalizes
well on the unseen target distributions is a practically important but also challenging task and has gained much research
attention in the past decades [6, 7, 17, 49, 68].
Since data from some domains are unavailable, assumptions or prior knowledge on the unseen domains are generally required to achieve a guaranteed out-of-distribution
(OOD) generalization performance. Recently, causality
has become a powerful tool to tackle the OOD problem
[2, 51, 55, 57]. This is based on the assumption or observation that the underlying causal mechanism is invariant in
general, even though the data distributions may vary with
domains. It has been shown that a model would perform
well across different domains in the minimax sense if such
a causal mechanism is indeed captured.
To capture the invariant causal mechanism, existing
works have assumed a particular form of the causal diagram [25,46,48,57,67], which may be restrictive in practice
and is untestable from the observed data. Other works try to
recover the so-called “causal feature” from the data to improve the OOD generalization performance [10, 22, 44, 55].
These works usually assume a linear form of causal feature [10, 22, 44, 57] or that there are sufficiently many and
diverse training domains so that the causal feature could
be identified via certain invariant properties [2, 50, 55]. In
the absence of these assumptions, existing methods such as
invariant risk minimization [2] can fail to capture the invariance or recover the causal feature even in simple examples [30]. In real applications like image classification, the
linearity assumption may not hold, and it may be expensive
or even impossible to ensure that the available domains are
indeed sufficient. As such, the identifiability issue of causal
feature can hardly be resolved in practice.
In this paper, we obviate the aforementioned assump-

375

