SoftGroup for 3D Instance Segmentation on Point Clouds
Thang Vu Kookhoi Kim Tung M. Luu Thanh Nguyen Chang D. Yoo
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{thangvubk,rlarnrghlapz,tungluu2203,thanhnguyen,cd yoo}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Existing state-of-the-art 3D instance segmentation methods perform semantic segmentation followed by grouping.
The hard predictions are made when performing semantic
segmentation such that each point is associated with a single class. However, the errors stemming from hard decision propagate into grouping that results in (1) low overlaps between the predicted instance with the ground truth
and (2) substantial false positives. To address the aforementioned problems, this paper proposes a 3D instance
segmentation method referred to as SoftGroup by performing bottom-up soft grouping followed by top-down refinement. SoftGroup allows each point to be associated with
multiple classes to mitigate the problems stemming from semantic prediction errors and suppresses false positive instances by learning to categorize them as background. Experimental results on different datasets and multiple evaluation metrics demonstrate the efficacy of SoftGroup. Its
performance surpasses the strongest prior method by a significant margin of +6.2% on the ScanNet v2 hidden test
set and +6.8% on S3DIS Area 5 in terms of AP50 . SoftGroup is also fast, running at 345ms per scan with a single Titan X on ScanNet v2 dataset. The source code and
trained models for both datasets are available at https:
//github.com/thangvubk/SoftGroup.git.

1. Introduction
Scene understanding on 3D data has received increasing
attention for the rapid development of 3D sensors and availability of large-scale 3D datasets. Instance segmentation on
point clouds is a 3D perception task, serving as the foundation for a wide range of applications such as autonomous
driving, virtual reality, and robot navigation. Instance segmentation processes the point clouds to output a category
and an instance mask for each detected object.
State-of-the-art methods [4, 15, 20] consider 3D instance
segmentation as a bottom-up pipeline. They learn the
point-wise semantic labels and center offset vectors and
then group points of the same labels with small geomet-

Semantic ground-truth

Instance predict w/o SoftGroup

Semantic prediction

Instance predict w/ SoftGroup

Semantic
color map
Cabinet

Otherfurniture

Figure 1. Instance segmentation with and without SoftGroup from
the same semantic prediction results. The last row shows the
palette for semantic predictions only. Instance predictions are illustrated by different random colors for different objects. In the semantic prediction results, some regions of cabinet are wrongly
predicted as other furniture. Without SoftGroup, these errors are propagated to instance prediction. SoftGroup addresses
this problem and produces more accurate instance masks.

ric distances into instances. These grouping algorithms
are performed on the hard semantic prediction, where a
point is associated with a single class. In many cases, objects are locally ambiguous, the output semantic predictions
show different categories for different parts, and thus using hard semantic predictions for instance grouping leads to
two problems: (1) low overlap between predicted instance
and the ground-truth and (2) extra false-positive instances
from wrong semantic regions. Figure 1 shows a visualization example. Here, in the semantic prediction results,
some parts of cabinet is wrongly predicted as other
furniture. When hard semantic predictions are used
to perform grouping, the semantic prediction error is propagated to instance prediction. As a result, the predicted
cabinet instance has low overlap with the ground truth,
and the other furniture instance is a false positive.
This paper proposes SoftGroup to address these prob-

2708

