Comprehending and Ordering Semantics for Image Captioning
Yehao Li, Yingwei Pan, Ting Yao, and Tao Mei
JD Explore Academy
{yehaoli.sysu, panyw.ustc, tingyao.ustc}@gmail.com, tmei@jd.com
Ground Truth: a man rides a cow through a parking lot
Faster
R-CNN

sky bushes man horse ... van

(a)

man woman parking parked
cars walking lot ... horse

(b)

Abstract
Semantic
Ranker

parking
man
lot
cow
...

Text
Encoder

Semantic
Comprehender

Retrieval

The ability to describe visual content with a descriptive utterance is a fundamental human capability that children are taught from childhood. To formalize such unique
capability, the task of image captioning [7, 11, 21, 33] is
developed to simulate the human-like interaction between
vision and language. The ultimate target of this task is
to produce a visually-grounded and linguistically coher-

Image
Encoder

1. Introduction

Training
Sentences

Comprehending the rich semantics in an image and ordering them in linguistic order are essential to compose
a visually-grounded and linguistically coherent description
for image captioning. Modern techniques commonly capitalize on a pre-trained object detector/classiﬁer to mine
the semantics in an image, while leaving the inherent linguistic ordering of semantics under-exploited. In this paper, we propose a new recipe of Transformer-style structure, namely Comprehending and Ordering Semantics Networks (COS-Net), that novelly uniﬁes an enriched semantic comprehending and a learnable semantic ordering processes into a single architecture. Technically, we initially
utilize a cross-modal retrieval model to search the relevant
sentences of each image, and all words in the searched sentences are taken as primary semantic cues. Next, a novel
semantic comprehender is devised to ﬁlter out the irrelevant semantic words in primary semantic cues, and meanwhile infer the missing relevant semantic words visually
grounded in the image. After that, we feed all the screened
and enriched semantic words into a semantic ranker, which
learns to allocate all semantic words in linguistic order
as humans. Such sequence of ordered semantic words
are further integrated with visual tokens of images to trigger sentence generation. Empirical evidences show that
COS-Net clearly surpasses the state-of-the-art approaches
on COCO and achieves to-date the best CIDEr score of
141.1% on Karpathy test split. Source code is available at
https://github.com/YehLi/xmodaler/tree/
master/configs/image_caption/cosnet.

man->rides->cow->parking->lot (c)

rides

Figure 1. Semantics produced by (a) pre-trained object detector,
(b) cross-modal retrieval model (CLIP), and (c) our semantic comprehender & ranker for image captioning.

ent sentence, which covers most semantics in an image
that are worthy of mention and meanwhile describes them
in linguistic order. Modern image captioning techniques
generally focus on the former aspect of enhancing visionlanguage alignment by ﬁrst capturing ﬁne-grained semantics (e.g., attributes [40, 41], objects [2, 14, 37], or scene
graph [36,38,39]) via pre-trained image encoder (object detector/classiﬁer). Then, a series of innovations that employ
visual attention over these ﬁne-grained semantics [6,10] are
present to strengthen vision-language interaction. However,
the capability of semantic comprehending in pre-trained detector/classiﬁer is severely limited by the pre-deﬁned semantic/class labels. In addition, the pre-trained detector/classiﬁer is not optimized along with sentence decoding
process, thereby hardly to be tuned for emphasizing visually
salient semantics in output sentence. As shown in Figure 1
(a), the pre-trained object detector (Faster R-CNN) solely
captures one major semantic word (“man”), while the other
mined semantic words are either irrelevant (e.g., “horse”) or
trivial (e.g., “sky” and “bushes”).
To enhance the scalability and generalization of image
encoder, a recent pioneering practice [29] is to leverage
CLIP model (i.e., image encoder and text encoder [24])
that is trained on diverse and large-scale data. In this work,
we regard CLIP model as a powerful cross-modal retrieval
model that retrieves relevant sentences from the humanannotated sentence pool. Such way naturally accumulates
more salient semantic words that tend to be mentioned in visually similar images, while more irrelevant semantic words
are also introduced (see Figure 1 (b)). To alleviate this issue,
we uniquely design a semantic comprehender that further
reﬁnes the primary semantic cues in the searched sentences
based on visual content. By doing so, the semantic compre-

17990

