Cannot See the Forest for the Trees:
Aggregating Multiple Viewpoints to Better Classify Objects in Videos
Sukjun Hwang1

Miran Heo1
Seoung Wug Oh2
Seon Joo Kim1
1
2
Yonsei University
Adobe Research

{sj.hwang, miran, seonjookim}@yonsei.ac.kr

seoh@adobe.com

Abstract

Tracklet

…

Recently, both long-tailed recognition and object tracking have made great advances individually. TAO benchmark presented a mixture of the two, long-tailed object
tracking, in order to further reflect the aspect of the realworld. To date, existing solutions have adopted detectors
showing robustness in long-tailed distributions, which derive per-frame results. Then, they used tracking algorithms
that combine the temporally independent detections to finalize tracklets. However, as the approaches did not take temporal changes in scenes into account, inconsistent classification results in videos led to low overall performance. In
this paper, we present a set classifier that improves accuracy
of classifying tracklets by aggregating information from
multiple viewpoints contained in a tracklet. To cope with
sparse annotations in videos, we further propose augmentation of tracklets that can maximize data efficiency. The
set classifier is plug-and-playable to existing object trackers, and highly improves the performance of long-tailed object tracking. By simply attaching our method to QDTrack
on top of ResNet-101, we achieve the new state-of-the-art,
19.9% and 15.7% TrackAP50 on TAO validation and test
sets, respectively. Our code is available at this link1 .

1. Introduction
Object tracking is a long standing problem in computer
vision as it plays a key role in surveillance and self-driving
applications. There are numerous datasets and benchmarks
for tracking [1, 14, 23, 31, 47] and also a long list of tracking algorithms [3, 4, 41, 51, 58]. As with many other computer vision tasks, the performance of tracking algorithms
has also taken a leap with deep learning.
Even with the great progress in object tracking, the performance of state-of-the-art trackers starts to degrade in the
real-world scenarios with a large vocabulary of objects [9].
This is because most tracking benchmarks include only a
small set of objects such as pedestrian, vehicles, and an1 https://github.com/sukjunhwang/set classifier

Per-frame
Classifier

…

Set
Classifier

(a)

(b)

Person

Person

Person

Person

Wheelchair

Chair

Chair

Chair

Person

Wheelchair

Figure 1. (a) Per-frame classifier receiving an instantaneous scene
struggles on tail categories (e.g., wheelchair). On the other hand,
(b) our proposed set classifier shows robustness on tail categories
by aggregating multiple viewpoints of a tracklet, taking the whole
spatio-temporal feature into account.

imals, for targeting specific applications like autonomous
driving. To deploy the trackers in the real-world in a general environment, it is essential for the trackers to be able to
deal with a much larger set of objects as in the image detection problem [15]. For this purpose, a new benchmark
called TAO [9] for tracking any object has been recently introduced. This dataset contains over 800 categories, an order of magnitude more than previous tracking benchmarks.
In [9], it was shown that most up-to-date trackers do
not adapt well with increased number of object vocabulary.
While tracking algorithms have focused on accurately finding object boxes and tracking them, less attention has been
paid on the classification of objects, primarily due to a small
set of vocabulary. As the object category grows to a realistic
size, classification becomes crucial for the overall tracking
performance. After a thorough analysis, it was suggested
in [9] that “large-vocabulary tracking requires jointly improving tracking and classification accuracy”.

17052

