Pushing the Performance Limit of Scene Text Recognizer
without Human Annotation
Caiyuan Zheng1,2∗, Hui Li3 , Seon-Min Rhee4 , Seungju Han4 , Jae-Joon Han4 , Peng Wang1,2†
1
School of Computer Science and Ningbo Institute, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China,
2
National Engineering Laboratory for Integrated Aero-Space-Ground-Ocean
Big Data Application Technology, China,
3
Samsung R&D Institute China Xi’an (SRCX),
4
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT), South Korea
2020202704@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, {hui01.li, s.rhee, sj75.han, jae-joon.han}@samsung.com
peng.wang@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Scene text recognition (STR) attracts much attention over
the years because of its wide application. Most methods train STR model in a fully supervised manner which requires large amounts of labeled data. Although synthetic
data contributes a lot to STR, it suffers from the real-tosynthetic domain gap the restricts model performance. In
this work, we aim to boost STR models by leveraging both
synthetic data and the numerous real unlabeled images, exempting human annotation cost thoroughly. A robust consistency regularization based semi-supervised framework is
proposed for STR, which can effectively solve the instability issue due to domain inconsistency between synthetic and
real images. A character-level consistency regularization is
designed to mitigate the misalignment between characters in sequence recognition. Extensive experiments on standard text recognition benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method. It can steadily improve existing STR models, and boost an STR model to achieve new
state-of-the-art results. To our best knowledge, this is the
ﬁrst consistency regularization based framework that applies successfully to STR.

1. Introduction
Scene text recognition (STR) is to recognize text in natural scenes and is widely used in many applications such
as image retrieval, robot navigation and instant translation.
Compared to traditional OCR, STR is more challenging because of multiple variations from the environment, various
∗ Part of the work was done when C.Zheng was an intern at SRCX.
† P. Wang is the corresponding author.

14116

(a) cross-domain.

(b) in-domain.

Figure 1. Scene text recognition test accuracy by using supervised
training, existing consistency regularization SSL (UDA [50] and
FixMatch [43]) and our method. Cross-domain means the labeled
and unlabeled training data are from different domains (e.g. synthetic labeled vs. real unlabeled in our setting), while in-domain
means they are from similar condition. UDA and FixMatch are
feasible in in-domain condition but fail in cross-domain setting.
It is observed that the test accuracy drops drastically during the
training process, and the highest accuracy is even lower than that
obtained by supervised training. By contrast, our method is able
to stabilize the training process and improve test performance in
both in-domain and cross-domain conditions.

font styles and complicated layouts.
Although STR has made great success, it is mainly researched in a fully supervised manner. Real labeled datasets
in STR are usually small because the annotation work is expensive and time-consuming. Hence, two large synthetic
datasets MJSynth [16, 17] and SynthText [15] are commonly used to train STR models and produce competitive results. However, there exists domain gap between synthetic and
real data which restricts the effect of synthetic data. Brieﬂy
speaking, synthetic dataset can improve STR performance,
but STR model is still hungry for real data.
Considering that it is easy to obtain a large scale of unla-

