Interactive Segmentation and Visualization for
Tiny Objects in Multi-megapixel Images
Chengyuan Xu1 Boning Dong1 Noah Stier1 Curtis McCully2
D. Andrew Howell1,2 Pradeep Sen1 Tobias Höllerer1
1
2
University of California, Santa Barbara
Las Cumbres Observatory
{cxu, boning, noahstier, psen, thollerer}@ucsb.edu, {cmccully, ahowell}@lco.global

Abstract
We introduce an interactive image segmentation and visualization framework for identifying, inspecting, and editing tiny objects (just a few pixels wide) in large multimegapixel high-dynamic-range (HDR) images. Detecting
cosmic rays (CRs) in astronomical observations is a cumbersome workflow that requires multiple tools, so we developed an interactive toolkit that unifies model inference,
HDR image visualization, segmentation mask inspection
and editing into a single graphical user interface. The feature set, initially designed for astronomical data, makes
this work a useful research-supporting tool for human-inthe-loop tiny-object segmentation in scientific areas like
biomedicine, materials science, remote sensing, etc., as
well as computer vision. Our interface features mousecontrolled, synchronized, dual-window visualization of the
image and the segmentation mask, a critical feature for locating tiny objects in multi-megapixel images. The browserbased tool can be readily hosted on the web to provide
multi-user access and GPU acceleration for any device.
The toolkit can also be used as a high-precision annotation tool, or adapted as the frontend for an interactive machine learning framework. Our open-source dataset, CR
detection model, and visualization toolkit are available at
https:// github.com/ cy-xu/ cosmic-conn.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is not only a common computer
vision task, but also a decades-old problem in astronomy.
For astrophysicists whose research relies on observing the
universe with optical telescopes and charge-coupled device
(CCD) imagers, identifying cosmic rays (CRs) in their observations has been a challenging task [3, 8, 12, 13]. Telescope images can be a few megapixels or up to 3,200
megapixels [7], in contrast, CR-contaminated pixels are often just a few pixels wide. Because these bright pixels can

be mistaken for real astronomical sources, it is necessary
to reject them before further scientific interpretation of the
data (see CR detection examples in Fig. 1 5 ).
Identifying tiny CRs in multi-megapixel images is only
the first step. Astronomy telescope imagers are often cooled
to operate below freezing temperature to minimize detector
dark current and other noise sources [2], and these highly
sensitive CCD sensors produce 16-bit floating point high
dynamic range (HDR) images that require special software
for visualization. Without a scientific visualization tool
that supports native integration with popular deep-learning
frameworks, the detection and mask verification are divided
into separate steps that involve exporting and reading files
between different tools.
Given existing tools, the workflow of segmentation, image visualization, human inspection, and possible editing of
the mask is a cumbersome process involving switching between multiple tools or software, making it worthwhile to
develop a dedicated tool to streamline this workflow. In our
video demonstration, we show an interactive process that
involves continuous adjustments to both the science image
and the segmentation mask to acquire the accurate coverage of a CR that might affect the analysis of an adjacent
stellar object. This level of seamless interaction was previously impossible if one were switching between different
tools after each adjustment.
Computer vision researchers can integrate this visualization toolkit with other segmentation models to provide
end users, especially domain experts who are not machine
learning researchers, an interactive graphical user interface
(GUI) (Fig. 1) in production. The streamlined workflow
enables the user to do real-time segmentation, HDR image
visualization, and interactive mask inspection and editing
without switching tools. The GUI toolkit allows any user to
benefit from deep-learning-powered tools without having to
know programming. The browser-based tool can be readily
hosted on a graphics processing unit-ready (GPU) server so
users in the private/public network can enjoy GPU acceleration from any device (Section 3.2).

