Optical Flow Estimation for Spiking Camera
Liwen Hu1,2 ,* Rui Zhao1* , Ziluo Ding1 , Lei Ma1,2†, Boxin Shi1,2,3 , Ruiqin Xiong1 , Tiejun Huang1,2,3
1
NERCVT, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
6\QWKHWLF'DWDVHW

Abstract
6FHQH

As a bio-inspired sensor with high temporal resolution,
the spiking camera has an enormous potential in real applications, especially for motion estimation in high-speed
scenes. However, frame-based and event-based methods are
not well suited to spike streams from the spiking camera
due to the different data modalities. To this end, we present,
SCFlow, a tailored deep learning pipeline to estimate optical flow in high-speed scenes from spike streams. Importantly, a novel input representation is introduced which can
adaptively remove the motion blur in spike streams according to the prior motion. Further, for training SCFlow,
we synthesize two sets of optical flow data for the spiking
camera, SPIkingly Flying Things and Photo-realistic Highspeed Motion, denoted as SPIFT and PHM respectively,
corresponding to random high-speed and well-designed
scenes. Experimental results show that the SCFlow can predict optical flow from spike streams in different high-speed
scenes. Moreover, SCFlow shows promising generalization
on real spike streams. Codes and datasets refer to https:
//github.com/Acnext/Optical-Flow-For-Spiking-Camera.

1. Introduction
Optical flow estimation has always been a popular topic
in computer vision and played important roles in a wide
range of applications, such as object segmentation [2],
video enhancement [32], and action recognition [31]. However, the breakthrough of this field in high-speed scenes is
impeded by blurry images from traditional cameras with
low frame rate. The emergence of neuromorphic cameras
[5, 6, 10, 13, 24, 30, 41] provides a new perspective for optical flow estimation in high-speed scenes. Some works
[17,38,40] raise the interest in event cameras [5,6,13,24,30]
and show optical flow in high-speed scene can be directly
estimated from an event stream. However, the event stream
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.

6SLNH

)ORZ

7UDLQ

7KH6SLNLQJ&DPHUD

6SLNH
)ORZ1HW

$6SLNH6WHDP

5$)7

6&)ORZ
2XUV

Figure 1. The optical flow estimation for a real spike stream
which records a car traveling at a speed of 100 km/h. We compare our SCFlow to event-based method (Spike-FlowNet [17])
and frame-based method (RAFT [29]). All methods use spike
streams as input and are trained on proposed dataset (SPIFT).
Results show that our proposed method has better performance
which clearly distinguishes regions with different motion and accurately predict optical flow in each region. On the top right corner
of results is a visualization of the color coding of the optical flow.

that only encodes the change of luminance intensity might
be insufficient for optical flow estimation in all regions of a
scene, especially for regions with weak textures. Also as a
neuromorphic camera, the spiking camera [10, 41] not only
has high temporal resolution (40000Hz) but can report perpixel luminance intensity by firing spikes asynchronously.
Specifically, each pixel in the spiking camera can accumu-

17844

