OSKDet: Orientation-sensitive Keypoint Localization for
Rotated Object Detection
Dongchen Lu, Dongmei Li, Yali Li, Shengjin Wang∗
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
ludc19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {lidmei, liyl13, wgsgj}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Rotated object detection is a challenging issue in computer vision field. Inadequate rotated representation and
the confusion of parametric regression have been the bottleneck for high performance rotated detection. In this paper,
we propose an orientation-sensitive keypoint based rotated
detector OSKDet. First, we adopt a set of keypoints to represent the target and predict the keypoint heatmap on ROI to
get the rotated box. By proposing the orientation-sensitive
heatmap, OSKDet could learn the shape and direction of
rotated target implicitly and has stronger modeling capabilities for rotated representation, which improves the localization accuracy and acquires high quality detection results. Second, we explore a new unordered keypoint representation paradigm, which could avoid the confusion of
keypoint regression caused by rule based ordering. Furthermore, we propose a localization quality uncertainty module to better predict the classification score by the distribution uncertainty of keypoints heatmap. Experimental results on several public benchmarks show the state-of-theart performance of OSKDet. Specifically, we achieve an AP
of 80.91% on DOTA, 89.98% on HRSC2016, 97.27% on
UCAS-AOD, and a F-measure of 92.18% on ICDAR2015,
81.43% on ICDAR2017, respectively.

1. Introduction
With the success of deep convolutional neural networks
(CNN), object detection has made an unprecedented breakthrough in recent years. General detection models [10, 16,
33] regress the horizontal bounding box of objects. However, real scenes objects may have arbitrary directions, such
as cars in drone cameras and texts in streetscape. Only determining the horizontal box is not enough to locate the target accurately. Rotated object detection has a wide range of
This study was supported by the state key development program in
14th Five-Year under Grant No. 2021YFF0602103, 2021YFF0602102
and 2021QY1702. We also thank for the research fund under Grant No.
044007016.
*Corresponding author

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 1. (a) a rotated target represented by 8 keypoints in (b). (c)
and (d) display the proposed orientation-sensitive heatmap, we encode the keypoint to cross-star shape in corner and straight shape
in edge areas, which represents the outline of target more accurately. (e) OSKDet: keypoint based detector. OSKDet generates the orientation-sensitive keypoint heatmap, which has a strong
modeling ability of spatial representation.

applications, but still faces great challenges.
Recently, CNN based rotated detection has made a considerable progress. Some works [2, 5, 30, 46, 49] use the angle definition (coordinates of the center point, width, height,
and rotated angle) to represent the rotated target. Other
works [8, 23, 27, 32, 41] use vertex definition (coordinates
of four vertices) to describe the rotated quadrilateral. Mainstream models mainly face the following issues: i) Inadequate target representation. For angle definition, it is difficult for the model to learn the non intuitive angle and
small deviations could lead to a sharp decline in IOU, while
for the vertex difinition, existing heatmaps, like Gaussian
heatmap, could not accurately represent the spatial characteristics of the rotated target. ii) Confusion of parametric
order, which is caused by the parametric exchangeability
and definition periodicity of rotated targets, and manual labeling errors exacerbate this problem. Similar samples with
different optimization directions will cause learning confusion. In fact, these issues could largely affect detection performance.

1182

