SAR-Net: Shape Alignment and Recovery Network
for Category-level 6D Object Pose and Size Estimation
Haitao Lin1§

Zichang Liu1
1

Chilam Cheang1

Fudan University

Yanwei Fu1†‡
2

1. Introduction
Estimating accurate 6D poses of objects plays a pivotal
role in the tasks of augmented reality [34], scene under† indicates corresponding author.
§ Haitao Lin is with Academy for Engineering and Technology, and Engineering Research Center of AI and Robotics, Shanghai, China.
‡ Yanwei Fu is with the School of Data Science, Fudan University, and
Fudan ISTBI—ZJNU Algorithm Centre for Brain-inspired Intelligence,
Zhejiang Normal University, Jinhua, China. This work was supported in
part by NSFC under Grant (No. 62076067), Shanghai Municipal Science
and Technology Major Project (2018SHZDZX01).
1 Project webpage. https://hetolin.github.io/SAR-Net

Xiangyang Xue1†

IDL, Baidu Research

Abstract

Real

Synthetic

Instances from mug category

Color/Texture

Consistent
3D rotation

Shape-aligned
Mug
(b) Shape alignment
...

...
...

Geometry/Shape

Given a single scene image, this paper proposes a
method of Category-level 6D Object Pose and Size Estimation (COPSE) from the point cloud of the target object,
without external real pose-annotated training data. Specifically, beyond the visual cues in RGB images, we rely on
the shape information predominately from the depth (D)
channel. The key idea is to explore the shape alignment
of each instance against its corresponding category-level
template shape, and the symmetric correspondence of each
object category for estimating a coarse 3D object shape.
Our framework deforms the point cloud of the categorylevel template shape to align the observed instance point
cloud for implicitly representing its 3D rotation. Then we
model the symmetric correspondence by predicting symmetric point cloud from the partially observed point cloud. The
concatenation of the observed point cloud and symmetric
one reconstructs a coarse object shape, thus facilitating object center (3D translation) and 3D size estimation. Extensive experiments on the category-level NOCS benchmark
demonstrate that our lightweight model still competes with
state-of-the-art approaches that require labeled real-world
images. We also deploy our approach to a physical Baxter robot to perform grasping tasks on unseen but categoryknown instances, and the results further validate the efficacy of our proposed model. Code and pre-trained models
are available on the project webpage 1 .

Guodong Guo2

Artificial objects
(a) Shape vs. Color

Reflectional
symmetry

Rotational
symmetry

(c) Symmetric correspondence

Figure 1. (a) The visual difference between synthetic and real images. They may have different textures and colors, but the shape
and geometry maintain the same. (b) Illustration of shape alignment. Objects within a category have consistent 3D rotation if
their shapes are visually aligned. (c) Illustration of symmetric correspondence. Most objects are manufactured with (near) symmetric shapes with reflectional symmetry or rotational symmetry.

standing [49], and robotic manipulation [7, 9, 33, 51, 53].
However, most 6D pose estimation works [8,9,15,19,28,37,
39,55,57] assume exact 3D CAD object models at instancelevel, which unfortunately greatly limits their practical applicability in real-world applications. To this end, this paper studies the task of Category-level 6D Object Pose and
Size Estimation (COPSE). Thus the model is trained only
by category-level supervision, reducing reliance on the exact CAD model for each instance.
Generally, the key challenge of COPSE task lies in the
huge color and shape variations of instances from the same
category [43–45]. To handle intra-class variations, previous works [5,24,52,58] learn the RGB(-D) features of each
instance to help map these instances into a unified space
and minimize the intra-class variations. On the other hand,
as the COPSE task relies on supervised learning from large
amounts of well-labeled data, recent works [5, 30, 52, 58]
utilize synthetic data to train the COPSE model. Unfortunately, as illustrated in Fig. 1(a), the domain gap between
synthetic and real images potentially hinders the perfor-

6707

