POCO: Point Convolution for Surface Reconstruction
Alexandre Boulch1
1

Valeo.ai, Paris, France

2

Renaud Marlet1,2

LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, Marne-la-Vallée, France

Abstract
Implicit neural networks have been successfully used for
surface reconstruction from point clouds. However, many
of them face scalability issues as they encode the isosurface function of a whole object or scene into a single latent
vector. To overcome this limitation, a few approaches infer latent vectors on a coarse regular 3D grid or on 3D
patches, and interpolate them to answer occupancy queries.
In doing so, they lose the direct connection with the input points sampled on the surface of objects, and they attach information uniformly in space rather than where it
matters the most, i.e., near the surface. Besides, relying
on fixed patch sizes may require discretization tuning. To
address these issues, we propose to use point cloud convolutions and compute latent vectors at each input point.
We then perform a learning-based interpolation on nearest
neighbors using inferred weights. Experiments on both object and scene datasets show that our approach significantly
outperforms other methods on most classical metrics, producing finer details and better reconstructing thinner volumes. The code is available at https://github.com/
valeoai/POCO.

Input (65536 pts)

SA-ConvONet

POCO (ours)

(a) Scene 1

56 min 40 s

10 min 19 s

(b) Scene 2

1 h 38 min

17 min 22 s

1. Introduction
Constructing a surface or volume representation from 3D
points sampled at the surface of an object or scene has numerous applications, from digital twins processing to augmented and virtual reality. Cheaper sensors directly producing 3D points (depth cameras, low-cost lidars) and mature
multi-view stereo techniques [88, 89] operating on images
offer increasing opportunities for such reconstructions.
Traditional 3D reconstruction approaches [4] generally
express the target surface as the solution to an optimization problem under some prior constraints. Possibly leveraging visibility or normal information, they are generally
scalable to large scenes and offer a substantial robustness
to noise and outliers [47, 51, 71, 81, 94, 103, 110, 123]. Although some try to cope with density variation [9, 42, 43],
a common limitation of these approaches is their inability
to properly complete parts of the scene that are less densely

Figure 1. MatterPort3D. POCO trains on Synthetic Rooms 10k.

sampled or that are missing (typically due to occlusions). A
variety of hand-crafted priors try to address this completeness issue: local or global smoothness [58], decomposition
into geometric primitives [87] (in particular for piecewiseplanar man-made environments [3, 6, 14, 28, 72]) and structural regularities [53, 79]. Data-driven priors have also been
explored, based on shape retrieval [30], possibly with de-

6302

