Speed up Object Detection on Gigapixel-level Images with Patch Arrangement
Jiahao Fan1 , Huabin Liu1 , Wenjie Yang1 , John See2 , Aixin Zhang1, ,* Weiyao Lin1, *
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China, 2 Heriot-Watt University, Malaysia
{jiahaofan, huabinliu, 13633491388}@sjtu.edu.cn, J.See@hw.ac.uk, {axzhang, wylin}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
With the appearance of super high-resolution (e.g.,
gigapixel-level) images, performing efficient object detection on such images becomes an important issue. Most existing works for efficient object detection on high-resolution
images focus on generating local patches where objects may
exist, and then every patch is detected independently. However, when the image resolution reaches gigapixel-level,
they will suffer from a huge time cost for detecting numerous
patches. Different from them, we devise a novel patch arrangement framework for fast object detection on gigapixellevel images. Under this framework, a Patch Arrangement
Network (PAN) is proposed to accelerate the detection by
determining which patches could be packed together into a
compact canvas. Specifically, PAN consists of (1) a Patch
Filter Module (PFM) (2) a Patch Packing Module (PPM).
PFM filters patch candidates by learning to select patches
between two granularities. Subsequently, from the remaining patches, PPM determines how to pack these patches together into a smaller number of canvases. Meanwhile, it
generates an ideal layout of patches on canvas. These canvases are fed to the detector to get final results. Experiments
show that our method could improve the inference speed on
gigapixel-level images by 5× while maintaining great performance.

1. Introduction
With the widespread use of super high-resolution cameras, image resolution has increased rapidly and recently
reached the gigapixel level (e.g., 25,000 × 14,000 pixels) [20]. Therefore, it’s a great challenge to analyze such
images efficiently. Recently, some object detection methods [8, 23] have been proposed for efficient high-resolution
object detection. As shown in Figure 1a, in order to speedup object detection, they focused on generating local regions (termed as ‘patch’) that may contain object candidates from high-resolution images. Then detection is only
* Corresponding authors.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. Comparison between pipelines. (a) Previous: it first
generates patches where object candidates exist, then detection is
conducted on all patches separately. (b) Ours: based on a multigrained patch tree, certain patches are selected and packed together
into compact canvases with a smaller number. Detection is only
conducted on canvases.

performed on these resized patches instead of the whole image to achieve the speed-up. Therefore, their time cost is
dependent on the number of patches. However, when being applied to super high-resolution images (e.g., gigapixellevel images), these methods may require numerous patches
to ensure performance. Thus, they may still suffer huge
time costs on gigapixel-level images.
In gigapixel-level images, we observed that it is neither
necessary nor ideal to perform detection separately on each
generated patch. As shown in Figure 1b, some patches can
be packed together to form a new and compact one (called
‘canvas’). In this way, processing a smaller number of
canvases rather than numerous patches could significantly
speed up the detection.
Based on the above intuition, we propose a novel framework for object detection on gigapixel-level images. Under this detection framework, a Patch Arrangement Network (PAN) arranges patches into compact canvases in a
local-to-global view, into compact canvases for final de-

4653

