Self-supervised Video Transformer
Kanchana Ranasinghe1,2 Muzammal Naseer2,3 Salman Khan2,3
Fahad Shahbaz Khan2,4 Michael S. Ryoo1
1

Stony Brook University 2 Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI
3
Australian National University 4 Linköping University
kranasinghe@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose self-supervised training for
video transformers using unlabeled video data. From a
given video, we create local and global spatiotemporal
views with varying spatial sizes and frame rates. Our selfsupervised objective seeks to match the features of these different views representing the same video, to be invariant
to spatiotemporal variations in actions. To the best of our
knowledge, the proposed approach is the first to alleviate
the dependency on negative samples or dedicated memory
banks in Self-supervised Video Transformer (SVT). Further,
owing to the flexibility of Transformer models, SVT supports slow-fast video processing within a single architecture
using dynamically adjusted positional encoding and supports long-term relationship modeling along spatiotemporal dimensions. Our approach performs well on four action
recognition benchmarks (Kinetics-400, UCF-101, HMDB51, and SSv2) and converges faster with small batch sizes.
Code is available at: https://git.io/J1juJ

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning enables extraction of meaningful representations from unlabeled data, alleviating the need
for expensive annotations. Recent self-supervised methods
perform on-par with supervised learning for certain vision
tasks [11,12,16,37]. The necessity of self-supervised learning is even greater in domains such as video analysis where
annotations are more expensive [40, 44, 63, 65].
At the same time, the emergence of vision transformers (ViTs) [26] and their successful adoption to different computer vision tasks including video understanding
[4,9,29,53,67,68] within the supervised setting shows their
promise in the video domain. In fact, recent works using
simple ViT backbones [9] surpass convolutional neural networks (CNN) for supervised video analysis with reduced
compute. Motivated by the ability of self-attention to model

Figure 1. Our Self-supervised Video Transformer (SVT) learns
cross-view and motion correspondences by jointly matching video
clips sampled with varying field of view and temporal resolutions.
Specifically, Global views (top and bottom right) with different
temporal resolutions as well as Local views (bottom left) from different spatiotemporal windows are sampled. The representations
of these multiple views are matched in a student-teacher framework to learn cross-view and motion correspondences (middle
block). The proposed self-supervised framework can learn highquality spatiotemporal features while converging faster.

long-range dependencies, we propose a simple yet effective
method to train video transformers [9] in a self-supervised
manner. This process uses spatial and temporal context as a
supervisory signal (from unlabelled videos) to learn motion,
scale, and viewpoint invariant features.
Many existing self-supervised representation learning
methods on videos [64, 65, 88] use contrastive learning objectives which can require larger batch sizes, longer training regimes, careful negative mining and dedicated memory banks. Further, the contrastive objectives require careful temporal sampling [64] and multiple networks looking
at similar/different clips to develop attract/repel loss formulations [65]. In contrast, we propose to learn self-supervised
features from unlabelled videos via self-distillation [72] by
a twin network strategy (student-teacher models) [13, 34].

2874

