Meta Distribution Alignment for Generalizable Person Re-Identification
Hao Ni1
1

Jingkuan Song1 *

Xiaopeng Luo1

Feng Zheng2

Wen Li1

Heng Tao Shen1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Southern University of Science and Technology
haoni0812@gmail.com, jingkuan.song@gmail.com, xpluo1949@gmail.com

Original Feature Distribution

Abstract
Domain Generalizable (DG) person ReID is a challenging task which trains a model on source domains yet generalizes well on target domains. Existing methods use
source domains to learn domain-invariant features, and
assume those features are also irrelevant with target domains. However, they do not consider the target domain
information which is unavailable in the training phrase of
DG. To address this issue, we propose a novel Meta Distribution Alignment (MDA) method to enable them to share
similar distribution in a test-time-training fashion. Specifically, since high-dimensional features are difficult to constrain with a known simple distribution, we first introduce
an intermediate latent space constrained to a known prior
distribution. The source domain data is mapped to this latent space and then reconstructed back. A meta-learning
strategy is introduced to facilitate generalization and support fast adaption. To reduce their discrepancy, we further propose a test-time adaptive updating strategy based
on the latent space which efficiently adapts model to unseen domains with a few samples. Extensive experimental
results show that our model outperforms the state-of-theart methods by up to 5.2% R-1 on average on the largescale and 4.7% R-1 on the single-source domain generalization ReID benchmark. Source code is publicly available
at https://github.com/haoni0812/MDA.git.

1. Introduction
Person Re-identification (ReID) aims to match persons
with the same ID across different camera views. Thanks
to the development of deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) [14], supervised ReID and unsupervised domain
adaptation (UDA) [42] have achieved remarkable performance. However, they both need data of target domain for
training. In real-world applications, the ReID system will
inevitably search persons in unseen domains. Therefore,
* Corresponding author.

Source
Target
Prior
Distribution

Prior
Generated

Training
Testing
Generated Feature Distribution

Figure 1. Illustration of our idea. Since target domain data (green)
is unavailable during training, we cannot directly align source and
target distributions. To address this issue, we align them to a prior
distribution (purple) during training (source domains) and testing
(target domains). Considering that high-dimensional ID features
are difficult to constrain to a prior distribution, ID features are encoded into latent embedding space. The same prior distribution
and decoder guarantee the same generated feature distribution.

domain generalization (DG) ReID has attracted extensive
research attention in a practical setting.
Compared with supervised ReID and UDA setting, DG
ReID does not use target domain data for training. Only one
or more labeled source datasets are available. Thus, most
existing DG methods aim to learn domain invariant feature through multiple source domains to generalize unseen
domains. These methods explore generalization at featurelevel based on disentanglement [13] or meta-learning [2, 3,
43]. However, a typical and effective cross-domain solution
has been ignored in DG, that is, to align feature distributions
across source and target domains. Methods based on distribution alignment have not been researched because only
source data is available for DG ReID. These method usually

2487

