Attentive Fine-Grained Structured Sparsity for Image Restoration
Junghun Oh1 Heewon Kim1 Seungjun Nah1,3 Cheeun Hong1 Jonghyun Choi4 Kyoung Mu Lee1,2
1
1

Dept. of ECE, ASRI, 2 IPAI, Seoul National University

{dh6dh, ghimhw, cheeun914, kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr,

3

3

NVIDIA

4

Yonsei University

seungjun.nah@gmail.com, 4 jc@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Image restoration tasks have witnessed great performance improvement in recent years by developing large
deep models. Despite the outstanding performance, the
heavy computation demanded by the deep models has restricted the application of image restoration. To lift the restriction, it is required to reduce the size of the networks
while maintaining accuracy. Recently, N :M structured
pruning has appeared as one of the effective and practical
pruning approaches for making the model efficient with the
accuracy constraint. However, it fails to account for different computational complexities and performance requirements for different layers of an image restoration network.
To further optimize the trade-off between the efficiency
and the restoration accuracy, we propose a novel pruning
method that determines the pruning ratio for N :M structured sparsity at each layer. Extensive experimental results
on super-resolution and deblurring tasks demonstrate the
efficacy of our method which outperforms previous pruning methods significantly. PyTorch implementation for the
proposed methods will be publicly available at https:
//github.com/JungHunOh/SLS_CVPR2022

1. Introduction
Advances in deep learning has brought success in image
restoration tasks such as super-resolution [29, 48] and deblurring [39, 60, 61]. Due to the heavy computational burden required by such methods, however, computing highresolution images in practical applications has been challenging. Network pruning is one of the most popular tools
to alleviate the computational burden of neural networks by
eliminating weights that are less critical to the accuracy. It
has shown remarkable efficacy in finding submodels for a
better trade-off between accuracy and efficiency for image
classification [9, 15, 17, 30, 34] and segmentation [14, 57].
Unstructured pruning [11, 13, 26] aims to find and remove individual weights that have relatively less impact on
model accuracy. Still, accelerating the resulting models is
difficult due to irregular sparsity patterns of weight tensors,

≈

v
≈

Figure 1. Trade-off between image restoration performance
(PSNR) vs computational costs (MACs) on super-resolution (top)
and deblurring tasks (bottom). We compare our method to the
magnitude-based filter pruning [28] and the existing methods on
N :M sparsity (One-shot pruning [37] and SR-STE [64]).

considering the complex nature of parallelization on GPUs.
On the other hand, structured pruning removes predetermined structures (e.g., a filter in convolution layers [28] or a
channel of feature maps [17]) to enable the acceleration of
pruned networks on GPUs. However, we empirically find
image restoration models to be often susceptible to substantial performance degradation from structured pruning.
Recently, N :M fine-grained structured sparsity [19,
37, 64] has emerged as a better alternative, combining
the strengths of both pruning methods: namely, finegrained sparsity from unstructured pruning and hardware
acceleration-ability from structured pruning. N :M structured sparsity enforces N number of weights in each group
of M number of consecutive weights to have non-zero val-

17673

