MeMOT: Multi-Object Tracking with Memory
Jiarui Cai1 * Mingze Xu2† Wei Li2 Yuanjun Xiong2
1
University of Washington

Wei Xia2 Zhuowen Tu2
2
AWS AI Labs

Stefano Soatto2

jrcai@uw.edu, {xumingze,wayl,yuanjx,wxia,ztu,soattos}@amazon.com

Frame t

Abstract

MeMOT

We propose an online tracking algorithm that performs
the object detection and data association under a common
framework, capable of linking objects after a long time
span. This is realized by preserving a large spatio-temporal
memory to store the identity embeddings of the tracked objects, and by adaptively referencing and aggregating useful information from the memory as needed. Our model,
called MeMOT, consists of three main modules that are
all Transformer-based: 1) Hypothesis Generation that produce object proposals in the current video frame; 2) Memory Encoding that extracts the core information from the
memory for each tracked object; and 3) Memory Decoding
that solves the object detection and data association tasks
simultaneously for multi-object tracking. When evaluated
on widely adopted MOT benchmark datasets, MeMOT observes very competitive performance.

1. Introduction
Online multi-object tracking (MOT) [3, 13, 57, 70] aims
at localizing a set of objects (e.g., pedestrians), while following their trajectories over time so that the same object
bears the same identities in the entire input video stream.
Earlier methods mostly solved this problem with two separate stages: 1) the object detection stage that detects object
instances in individual frames [14, 17, 28, 42, 72]; and 2)
the data association stage that links the detected object instances across time [5, 70] by modeling the state changes
of tracked objects and solving a matching problem between them and the detection results. Though recent studies [34, 69] suggest that combining these two stages could
be beneficial, the combination usually leads to the undesired simplification of the association module in modeling
the change of the objects in time.
In this paper, we propose a Transformer-based tracking
model, called MeMOT, that performs object detection and
* The work was done during an Amazon internship.
† Corresponding Author.

Object i

…

Object j

…

Object k

…
t-T

t+1-T t+2-T

t+3-T

t+4-T t+5-T

t-4

t-3

t-2

t-1

Memory Buffer

Figure 1. Illustration of the idea of MeMOT. A spatio-temporal
memory stores a long range states of all tracked objects and is
updated over time. Each row in the memory buffer represents an
active tracklet. The “person crops” indicate that their the history
states are preserved in the memory, and the blank box indicates
this person does not appear in the frame at that time, occluded or
not detected. The tracking plots show that MeMOT can maintain
active tracks (yellow and blue boxes), link reappearing tracks after
occlusion (red box), and generate new objects (green box).

association under a common framework in an online manner. The key design of MeMOT is to build a large spatiotemporal memory that stores the past observations of the
tracked objects. The memory is actively encoded in every time step by referencing relevant information so that the
states of the objects are more accurately approximated for
the association task. The rich representation of the tracked
objects extracted from the spatial-temporal memory enables
us to solve the object detection and association tasks in
a unified decoding module. It directly outputs object instances that have been tracked and reappears in the latest
frame and novel object instances that are first time seen.
The idea of MeMOT is illustrated in Fig. 1.
At each time step, MeMOT runs the following three
main components: 1) a hypothesis generation module that
produces object proposals from input image feature maps as

8090

