Point2Cyl: Reverse Engineering 3D Objects
from Point Clouds to Extrusion Cylinders
Mikaela Angelina Uy⇤1 Yen-Yu Chang⇤1 Minhyuk Sung2 Purvi Goel1
Joseph Lambourne3 Tolga Birdal1 Leonidas Guibas1
1
Input
Point Cloud

Stanford University
Extrusion
Cylinders

Decomposition

ale
Sc

it
ed

2

KAIST

Autodesk Research
Input
Point Cloud

Reconstruction

it
ed
ter
n
Ce

3

dit
te
n
e
t
Ex

Decomposition

dit
ne
a
e
ol
Bo

Extrusion
Cylinders

Reconstruction

& it
is
d
Ax an e
e
l
o
bo

Editing

Figure 1. Overview. Point2Cyl takes a raw point cloud as input and decomposes it into extrusion cylinders while predicting all parameters
including the extrusion axis, extent, and the 2D sketch (first row). The output set of extrusion cylinders can be loaded in CAD software and
is editable in various ways thus creating a wide array of variations (second and third rows).

Abstract
We propose Point2Cyl, a supervised network transforming a raw 3D point cloud to a set of extrusion cylinders.
Reverse engineering from a raw geometry to a CAD model
is an essential task to enable manipulation of the 3D data
in shape editing software and thus expand their usages in
many downstream applications. Particularly, the form of
CAD models having a sequence of extrusion cylinders —
a 2D sketch plus an extrusion axis and range — and their
boolean combinations is not only widely used in the CAD
community/software but also has great expressivity of shapes,
compared to having limited types of primitives (e.g., planes,
spheres, and cylinders). In this work, we introduce a neural
network that solves the extrusion cylinder decomposition
problem in a geometry-grounded way by first learning underlying geometric proxies. Precisely, our approach first
predicts per-point segmentation, base/barrel labels and normals, then estimates for the underlying extrusion parameters in differentiable and closed-form formulations. Our
experiments show that our approach demonstrates the best
performance on two recent CAD datasets, Fusion Gallery
and DeepCAD, and we further showcase our approach on
reverse engineering and editing.

1. Introduction
Our everyday environments are filled with objects fabricated following a carefully engineered computer-aided design. This makes reverse engineering in the wild a vital
workflow in situations where copies or variations of a physical object are required, but the corresponding CAD model is
not available [51]. This situation often occurs when repairing machinery or digitizing objects manufactured in the predigital era [11]. To this end, an object is first scanned using
a 3D sensor producing a point cloud and later decomposed
into a set of consistent primitives or surfaces which could be
parsed by existing shape modelers such as Fusion360 [3] or
SolidWorks [45]. However, at the user level, a CAD model
is designed as a sequence of operations, where the designer
first draws a planar 2D sketch as a closed curve and later
extrudes it into a 3D solid [55] (cf . Fig. 2). These Extrusion
Cylinders can then be combined through boolean operations.
As this modeling paradigm is hard to summarize using
traditional primitives such as planes or cylinders, we set off
to ask: how can we reverse engineer point clouds into primi0 ⇤ denotes equal contribution

11850

