Modular Action Concept Grounding in Semantic Video Prediction
Wei Yu1,2 ,Wenxin Chen1,2 , Songheng Yin1,2 , Steve Easterbrook1 , Animesh Garg1,2,3
1
University of Toronto, 2 Vector Institute, 3 Nvidia

Abstract
Recent works in video prediction have mainly focused
on passive forecasting and low-level action-conditional prediction, which sidesteps the learning of interaction between
agents and objects. We introduce the task of semantic actionconditional video prediction, which uses semantic action
labels to describe those interactions and can be regarded
as an inverse problem of action recognition. The challenge
of this new task primarily lies in how to effectively inform
the model of semantic action information. Inspired by the
idea of Mixture of Experts, we embody each abstract label
by a structured combination of various visual concept learners and propose a novel video prediction model, Modular
Action Concept Network (MAC). Our method is evaluated
on two newly designed synthetic datasets, CLEVR-BuildingBlocks and Sapien-Kitchen, and one real-world dataset
called Tower-Creation. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that MAC can correctly condition on given instructions and
generate corresponding future frames without need of bounding boxes. We further show that the trained model can
make out-of-distribution generalization, be quickly adapted
to new object categories and exploit its learnt features for
object detection, showing the progression towards higherlevel cognitive abilities. More visualizations can be found at
http://www.pair.toronto.edu/mac/.

1. Introduction
Recently, video prediction has drawn a lot of attention due
to its ability to capture meaningful representations through
self-supervision [37, 42]. Although modern video prediction methods have made significant progress in improving
predictive accuracy, most of their applications are limited in
the scenarios of passive forecasting [5, 18, 33, 36], meaning
models can only passively observe a short period of dynamics and accordingly make a short-term extrapolation. Such
settings neglect the fact that the observer can also become
an active participant in the environment.
To model the movements of active manipulators, several
low-level action-conditional video prediction models have
been proposed in the community [2, 8, 15, 25, 26, 27]. In

Figure 1. Concept Grounding in Semantic Video Prediction. After observing the scene, an agent predicts future frames conditioned
on a series of semantic actions describing agent-object interactions.
Neither bounding boxes nor key points are provided. Conditioning
on different action labels leads to Counterfactual generations.

this work, we go one step further by introducing the task
of semantic action-conditional video prediction which emphasizes the modeling of interactions between agents and
environment. Instead of using low-level single-entity actions such as action vectors of robot arms as done in prior
works [9, 22], our new task provides semantic descriptions
of interactive actions, e.g. "Open the door", and asks the
model to imagine "What if I open the door" in the form of
future frames. This task requires the model to recognize
the object identity, assign correct affordances to objects and
envision the long-term expectation by planning a reasonable
trajectory toward the goal, which resembles how humans
might imagine conditional futures. The ability to predict
correct and semantically consistent future perceptual information is indicative of conceptual grounding of actions, in a
manner similar to object grounding in image-based detection
and generation tasks.
The challenge of action-conditional video prediction primarily lies in how to correctly inform the model of more
abstract semantic action information. Existing low-level
counterparts usually achieve this by employing a naive concatenation [2, 9] with action vector of each timestep. While
this implementation might enable model to move the desired
objects, it fails to produce consistent long-term predictions

3605

