PSMNet: Position-aware Stereo Merging Network for Room Layout Estimation
Haiyan Wang1,2† Will Hutchcroft1∗ Yuguang Li1∗ Zhiqiang Wan1 Ivaylo Boyadzhiev1
Yingli Tian2 Sing Bing Kang1
1
2
Zillow Group
The City College of New York
hwang005@citymail.cuny.edu, ytian@ccny.cuny.edu
{willhu,yuguangl,zhiqiangw,ivaylob,singbingk}@zillowgroup.com

(a)

(b)

(c)

CP2
Panorama 1

SP2
Panorama 2

PSMNet

Joint 2D Layout Output

Figure 1: Estimating the complete layout of complex indoor spaces from a pair of 360◦ panoramas. We use GT data for the sake of demonstration. Due to
occlusion, a single panorama may view only a portion of the whole space. (a) shows the 2D and 3D room layout components, representing only portion of the
whole space that is visible to each panorama. In practice, the input relative pose may be only approximately known; this is represented by the noisy alignment
between the two partially visible components. Our proposed end-to-end PSMNet shown in (b) takes the two panoramas as input and jointly estimates the
complete visible room layout in 2D, while refining a given noisy relative pose. (c) visualizes the estimated layout in 3D. (a) and (c) are used for visualization.
The input and output of PSMNet are shown in (b).

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new deep learning-based
method for estimating room layout given a pair of 360◦
panoramas. Our system, called Position-aware Stereo Merging Network or PSMNet, is an end-to-end joint layout-pose
estimator. PSMNet consists of a Stereo Pano Pose (SP2 )
transformer and a novel Cross-Perspective Projection (CP2 )
layer. The stereo-view SP2 transformer is used to implicitly
infer correspondences between views, and can handle noisy
poses. The pose-aware CP2 layer is designed to render
features from the adjacent view to the anchor (reference)
view, in order to perform view fusion and estimate the visible
layout. Our experiments and analysis validate our method,
which significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art layout
estimators, especially for large and complex room spaces.

1. Introduction
Image-based room layout estimation is an important step
to constructing models of home interiors for a variety of
applications, such as virtual tours, path planning, floor plan
† Work done while Haiyan Wang was an intern at Zillow.
∗ Authors contributed equally.

generation, and home insights on square footage and architectural style. Much work has been done in room layout
estimation, and current techniques perform well on simple
Manhattan and Atlanta-world layouts. However, their performance degrade for large and complex rooms, e.g., those
that have more than 10 corners.
It is not unusual (at least in North America) to find room
layouts that are significantly more complex than cuboids or
L-shapes. Examples include large open spaces with merged
kitchen, dining room, and living room. The prevalence of
complex rooms is evidenced by the statistics of real residential homes in ZInD [4]. Figure 1 illustrates the difficulty
of layout estimation for a complex indoor space with many
self-occlusions. Here, single image solutions would not be
adequate due to occlusion. This is because no panorama is
able to see the entire open space. Using both panoramas
would, in principle, be able to better extract the layout. In
addition, given that reliability is distance dependent (due to
reductions in resolution at farther distances), such dependence is reduced with multiple views.
In this paper, we recover the room layout from two 360◦
panoramas. This has its challenges, because relative camera
pose of the panorama pair needs to be estimated jointly with
layout. While techniques such as structure-from-motion

8616

