Use All The Labels: A Hierarchical Multi-Label Contrastive Learning
Framework
Shu Zhang

Ran Xu Caiming Xiong
Salesforce Research

Chetan Ramaiah

{shu.zhang,ran.xu,cxiong,cramaiah}@salesforce.com

Abstract
Current contrastive learning frameworks focus on leveraging a single supervisory signal to learn representations,
which limits the efficacy on unseen data and downstream
tasks. In this paper, we present a hierarchical multi-label
representation learning framework that can leverage all
available labels and preserve the hierarchical relationship
between classes. We introduce novel hierarchy preserving losses, which jointly apply a hierarchical penalty to
the contrastive loss, and enforce the hierarchy constraint.
The loss function is data driven and automatically adapts
to arbitrary multi-label structures. Experiments on several
datasets show that our relationship-preserving embedding
performs well on a variety of tasks and outperform the baseline supervised and self-supervised approaches. Code is
available at https://github.com/salesforce/
hierarchicalContrastiveLearning.

1. Introduction
In the real world, hierarchical multi-labels occur naturally and frequently. Biological classification of organisms
is structured in a taxonomic hierarchy. In e-commerce websites, retail spaces and grocery stores, products are organized by several levels of categories. The hierarchical representation is a natural categorization of classes, and serves
to efficiently represent the relationship between different
classes. However, this relationship is seldom utilized in
learning tasks, with traditional supervised approaches preferring to organize their classes in a flat list. In single task
learning problems, where a model is learned for one objective only, a flat list of classes is a reasonable approach.
However, in representation learning frameworks, where a
single embedding function can be used in a variety of downstream tasks, utilizing all of the supervisory signal available
is vital. In order to generalize to unknown downstream tasks
and unseen data, the embedding function must represent the
data concisely and accurately, which includes preserving

the hierarchical categorization in the embedding space.
However, representation learning approaches that exploit
this hierarchical relationship between labels have received
very little attention. In recent years, several unsupervised
[5, 13, 16] and supervised [17, 18, 30, 42] metric learning
frameworks have been proposed. These approaches typically rely on minimizing the distance between representations of a positive pair and maximizing the distance between negative pairs. In the unsupervised (self-supervised)
setting [5, 13, 33, 46], the positive pairs are different views
of the same image, most typically obtained by random augmentations of the anchor image [5, 13, 33]. In the supervised setting, labels are used to construct a wider variety
of positive pairs, from different images of the same class
and their augmentations [17, 18]. Positive pairs constructed
from augmentations of the anchor image, and pairs constructed from the anchor image and other images of the
same class are considered to be equivalent, and the learning
process attempts to minimize the distance between images
in all of these positive pairs to the same degree. While representations learned in this paradigm may be satisfactory for a
downstream task based on the supervisory label such as category prediction, other tasks such as instance prediction, retrieval, attribute prediction and clustering can suffer due to
the absence of direct supervision for these tasks. Additionally, these approaches do not support multi-label learning
and are unable to utilize information about the relationship
between labels.
Formally, in the hierarchical multi-label setting, each
data point has multiple dependent labels, and the relationship between labels is best represented in a hierarchy. See
Figure 1(b) for a sample representation in a tree structure. For example, in the DeepFashion dataset [21], each
data point has 3 hierarchically structured labels: category
(Denim, Cardigan, Shirts etc), product (identified by product id) and variation (typically color / pattern variations).
For the anchor image in Figure 1(a), which belongs to a
specific product in the Denim category , the sub-category
image is a different sample from the same product, and the
category image is from a different product in the same cate-

16660

