Weakly Supervised Segmentation on Outdoor 4D point clouds with Temporal
Matching and Spatial Graph Propagation
Hanyu Shi1 , Jiacheng Wei1 , Ruibo Li1,2 , Fayao Liu3 and Guosheng Lin1,2 *
1
Nanyang Technological University,
2
S-Lab for Advanced Intelligence, Nanyang Technological University,
3
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR,
E-mail: hanyu001@ntu.edu.sg, gslin@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Existing point cloud segmentation methods require a
large amount of annotated data, especially for the outdoor
point cloud scene. Due to the complexity of the outdoor
3D scenes, manual annotations on the outdoor point cloud
scene are time-consuming and expensive. In this paper,
we study how to achieve scene understanding with limited
annotated data. Treating 100 consecutive frames as a sequence, we divide the whole dataset into a series of sequences and annotate only 0.1% points in the first frame of
each sequence to reduce the annotation requirements. This
leads to a total annotation budget of 0.001%. We propose a
novel temporal-spatial framework for effective weakly supervised learning to generate high-quality pseudo labels
from these limited annotated data. Specifically, the framework contains two modules: an matching module in temporal dimension to propagate pseudo labels across different frames, and a graph propagation module in spatial dimension to propagate the information of pseudo labels to
the entire point clouds in each frame. With only 0.001%
annotations for training, experimental results on both SemanticKITTI and SemanticPOSS shows our weakly supervised two-stage framework is comparable to some existing
fully supervised methods. We also evaluate our framework
with 0.005% initial annotations on SemanticKITTI, and
achieve a result close to fully supervised backbone model.

1. Introduction
Recently, outdoor 3D semantic segmentation is attracting more research attention since the introduce of several large datasets, e.g., SemanticKITTI [1] and SemanticPOSS [19]. The outdoor 3D point cloud dataset organises
the data as several sequences of point clouds, i.e. 4D point
cloud. Then, multiple scans in point cloud sequences are
* Corresponding author: G. Lin. (e-mail: gslin@ntu.edu.sg)

(a) Full annotation.

(b) Unsupervised super-voxel segmentation.

(c) Partially annotated super-voxel level labels.

Figure 1. An example of super-voxel segmentation and our
weak annotation. Super-voxel segmentation segments the whole
point cloud scan into several small units, each containing points
within the same class. Therefore, we assign the point level initial
annotation to all the points in the same super-voxel.

superimposed together and divided as small tiles to reduce
manual annotation costs. However, the annotation cost on
the small tiles is still high. In SemanticKITTI [1], the annotation on one 100m × 100m tile of highway scene requires
an average of 1.5 hours, and the annotation on one tile
of more complex scenes requires an average of 4.5 hours.
The whole annotation task on SmeanticKITTI requires over
1700 hours. Therefore, the research on accelerating the annotation process is valuable and desirable. We here resort to
weakly supervised learning to tackle this annotation issue.
For indoor 3D point cloud scenes, there are several
weakly supervised methods [18,27, 29, 33] proposed for ac-

11840

