Appearance and Structure Aware Robust Deep Visual Graph Matching:
Attack, Defense and Beyond
Qibing Ren, Qingquan Bao, Runzhong Wang, Junchi Yan*
Department of CSE & MoE Key Lab of Artifical Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{renqibing,faust-bqq,runzhong.wang,yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn

Pixel attack (epsilon= 8/255)

Abstract
Despite the recent breakthrough of high accuracy deep
graph matching (GM) over visual images, the robustness
of deep GM models is rarely studied which yet has been
revealed an important issue in modern deep nets, ranging
from image recognition to graph learning tasks. We first
show that an adversarial attack on keypoint localities and
the hidden graphs can cause significant accuracy drop to
deep GM models. Accordingly, we propose our defense
strategy, namely Appearance and Structure Aware Robust
Graph Matching (ASAR-GM). Specifically, orthogonal to
de facto adversarial training (AT), we devise the Appearance Aware Regularizer (AAR) on those appearance-similar
keypoints between graphs that are likely to confuse. Experimental results show that our ASAR-GM achieves better robustness compared to AT. Moreover, our locality attack can serve as a data augmentation technique, which
boosts the state-of-the-art GM models even on the clean test
dataset. Code is available at https://github.com/
Thinklab-SJTU/RobustMatch.

1. Introduction
Graph matching (GM), as one of the most important research topics in the graph domain with wide applications in
vision and pattern recognition, aims to find node-to-node
correspondence among graphs. The matching of visual
graphs has been intensively studied over the decades, such
as image keypoint matching [42], scene graph discovery [6],
and vision-text retrieval [46], especially since the recent advances in combining deep neural networks and (visual) GM
[51]. Despite the success of deep GM, deep neural networks
(DNN)s are found vulnerable to small input perturbations
which are imperceptible to humans [3, 38]. For example, in
image classification, carefully designed small perturbations
on image pixels can fool neural classifiers [18], and in graph
* Correspondence author. This work was in part supported by China
Key Research and Development Program (2020AAA0107600), Shanghai
Municipal Science and Technology Major Project (2021SHZDZX0102).

Cat: 9 / 11

locality attack (epsilon= 8)

Cat: 2 / 11

Figure 1. The proposed imperceptible adversarial attacks. Left:
input paired images and their graphs; Middle: adversarial perturbations on the pixel and locality; Right: induced adversarial data.
After being attacked, the appearance around the keypoints remains
unchanged while the graph structure get perturbed: the red dotted
line means the edge on the original graph being removed while the
blue real line denotes the added edge on the new perturbed graph.

domain, attackers perturb graph structures and its attributes
to cause failures of graph learning tasks such as node classification [10, 13, 37, 40, 59], community detection [7, 27],
link prediction [32], etc. However, there is little work which
considers the vulnerability of deep GM for vision, or more
specifically matching image keypoints, which is recently a
trending research topic [16, 17, 23, 24, 34, 42, 44, 48, 49, 57].
Since noise can be easily injected into images and graphs, a
natural question that we would answer in our work is: How
to design an effective adversarial attack on GM, perturbing
images and their hidden graphs simultaneously?
In the context of visual GM, it is natural for the attacker to consider perturbing image pixels, which are directly related to node features of visual graphs. Besides,
deep GM also takes the keypoint locality and the induced
hidden graphs as input. However, such way of adding or
removing edges of the hidden graphs, as a common graph
attack baseline [33, 56], is NOT feasible to visual GM: with
the annotated keypoint locality, graph structure of GM is
determined by certain domain knowledge, e.g., Delaunay
triangulation [11], such that any operation on graph edges
can be easily recovered. We instead focus on the location of
keypoints. Among the common deep GM pipelines [44,51],
the location property of keypoints in each graph is crucial to

15263

