Temporal Alignment Networks for Long-term Video
Tengda Han1 Weidi Xie1,2 Andrew Zisserman1
1
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
https://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/˜vgg/research/tan/

Abstract
The objective of this paper is a temporal alignment network that ingests long term video sequences, and associated text sentences, in order to: (1) determine if a sentence
is alignable with the video; and (2) if it is alignable, then
determine its alignment. The challenge is to train such
networks from large-scale datasets, such as HowTo100M,
where the associated text sentences have significant noise,
and are only weakly aligned when relevant.
Apart from proposing the alignment network, we also
make four contributions: (i) we describe a novel cotraining method that enables to denoise and train on raw
instructional videos without using manual annotation, despite the considerable noise; (ii) to benchmark the alignment performance, we manually curate a 10-hour subset of
HowTo100M, totalling 80 videos, with sparse temporal descriptions. Our proposed model, trained on HowTo100M,
outperforms strong baselines (CLIP, MIL-NCE) on this
alignment dataset by a significant margin; (iii) we apply the trained model in the zero-shot settings to multiple downstream video understanding tasks and achieve
state-of-the-art results, including text-video retrieval on
YouCook2, and weakly supervised video action segmentation on Breakfast-Action. (iv) we use the automaticallyaligned HowTo100M annotations for end-to-end finetuning
of the backbone model, and obtain improved performance
on downstream action recognition tasks.

1. Introduction
The recent CLIP and ALIGN papers [30, 53] have
demonstrated that a combination of large scale paired
image-caption data, and a simple noise contrastive learning
loss can be used to learn powerful image-text embeddings
from scratch. The image-caption data can be crawled from
the internet at scale, for example from image alt-text, and
the resulting embeddings demonstrate strong “zero-shot”
generalization abilities. In the video domain, there also
exists large-scale sources of text supervision, e.g. narrated
instructional videos such as the HowTo100M [47] dataset,
where demonstrators explain their actions while performing a complex task. The narrations are unconstrained and

can be combinatorially complex, including information on
“what”, “where” and “when”, such as the actions, the objects, human-object interactions, etc.
However, these instructional videos pose additional fundamental challenges over the image-caption scenario due to
the temporal alignment problem (illustrated in Figure 1):
(i) the demonstrator often makes statements that are unrelated to the visual signal, such as describing food taste or
explaining the consequence of actions. These texts are not
visually alignable. (ii) the demonstrator might explain their
action before or after performing it, and their statements often do not follow the same order as their actions, resulting in
the text and visual entities being asynchronous. These texts
are not temporally aligned to the visual signal. Additionally, unlike spatial segmentation in images, where objects
boundaries are often formed by a discontinuity between regions with strong gradients, temporal actions in videos are
often continuous, making it difficult to clearly define the
start and end points for the temporal interval. Last but not
the least, there is additional noise coming from the imperfect Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) systems on the
spoken narrations. Note that the image-caption data does
not face these problems since captions are provided by human annotators for that image; although they may be incomplete, there is no temporal alignment issue.
The extent of these alignment challenges is significant [46, 47]. In 10 hours of instructional videos (sourced
from HowTo100M) that we annotated for this work, only
30% of the narration sentences are visually alignable, and
only 15% are naturally well-aligned. This means that the
demonstrator is describing their action synchronously with
the video only 15% of the time. If the alignment issues are
resolved then the benefits of learning from such narrated instruction videos can potentially be substantial: with the extra time axis alignment, models can be trained to deal with
fine-grained tasks, and predict temporal action localization
and segmentation.
In this paper, we tackle the sentence-to-video temporal alignment problem, and propose a Temporal Alignment
Network (TAN) that ingests a video sequence and its associated narrative sentences, attends to a large temporal con-

2906

