The Devil is in the Pose: Ambiguity-free 3D Rotation-invariant
Learning via Pose-aware Convolution
Ronghan Chen1,2,3
1

Yang Cong1,2∗

State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences †
2
Institutes for Robotics and Intelligent Manufacturing, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
chenronghan@sia.cn, congyang81@gmail.com

Vanilla Convolution

Our Pose-aware Convolution

*

*

1. Introduction
With the development of 3D scanning technology, deep
learning on 3D point clouds has achieved remarkable
progress in various tasks [9]. However, most methods
∗ The corresponding author is Prof. Yang Cong.
† This work is supported in part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant 2019YFB1310300 and the National Nature Science Foundation of China under Grant 62127807.

=

𝑅1

𝑅2

𝑅3

=

=

=

Recent progress in introducing rotation invariance (RI)
to 3D deep learning methods is mainly made by designing
RI features to replace 3D coordinates as input. The key
to this strategy lies in how to restore the global information that is lost by the input RI features. Most state-of-thearts achieve this by incurring additional blocks or complex
global representations, which is time-consuming and ineffective. In this paper, we real that the global information
loss stems from an unexplored pose information loss problem, i.e., common convolution layers cannot capture the relative poses between RI features, thus hindering the global
information to be hierarchically aggregated in the deep networks. To address this problem, we develop a Pose-aware
Rotation Invariant Convolution (i.e., PaRI-Conv), which
dynamically adapts its kernels based on the relative poses.
Specifically, in each PaRI-Conv layer, a lightweight Augmented Point Pair Feature (APPF) is designed to fully encode the RI relative pose information. Then, we propose to
synthesize a factorized dynamic kernel, which reduces the
computational cost and memory burden by decomposing it
into a shared basis matrix and a pose-aware diagonal matrix that can be learned from the APPF. Extensive experiments on shape classification and part segmentation tasks
show that our PaRI-Conv surpasses the state-of-the-art RI
methods while being more compact and efficient.

=

Abstract
≠

*
CNN
Kernel

=
≠

=

*
Rotation-invariant
Feature Map

Input
Image

Rotation-invariant
Feature Map

≠

PaRI-Conv
Kernel

Figure 1. Illustration of the geometric ambiguity caused by the
pose information loss problem in rotation-invariant (RI) learning.
RI features naturally neglect their own pose information, and remain the same under rotations {Ri }3i=1 . Thus, the vanilla convolution (whether on images or 3D point clouds) cannot capture the
relative poses between the eyes and the mouth, leading to an ambiguous representation that fails to distinguish a smile face from
an angry face. Our Pose-aware convolution dynamically adapts
the weight based on relative pose, thus eliminating the ambiguity.

[14, 15, 35] assume a strong prior, i.e., the data are prealigned to the same canonical pose, and the performance
will degrade drastically on unaligned data, even when extensive rotation augmentation is applied. This hinders the
application of current methods to real scenarios, where objects typically appear with arbitrary rotations.
To this end, most methods design rotation-invariant (RI)
representations as input [1, 11, 13, 43], and have achieved
consistent invariance to rotation. However, such RI features
lose global positional information, comparing to 3D coordinates. Thus, state-of-the-art methods either design auxiliary blocks [42, 45] that directly process coordinates, or
handcraft complex representations that record pair-wise relationship in a much larger neighbourhood [13, 38], which
incur large computational cost while still being less competitive than rotation-sensitive methods [14, 35] on aligned
data. Moreover, they fail to explain why 3D convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) [15, 24, 31, 38] cannot acquire intact global information from RI features via hierarchical abstraction, as 2D CNNs can from pixels, since both pixels
and RI features are lack of positional information.

7472

