Fixing Malfunctional Objects With
Learned Physical Simulation and Functional Prediction
Yining Hong
UCLA

Kaichun Mo
Stanford University

Antonio Torralba
MIT

Li Yi
Tsinghua University

Joshua B. Tenenbaum
MIT BCS, CBMM, CSAIL

Leonidas J. Guibas
Stanford University

Chuang Gan
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Malfunctional
Shape

Video

Possible Fix
Physical
Simulation
Figure 1. We introduce F IX I T, a dataset that requires machines to fix malfunctional objects based on functionality. Each malfunctional
object is paired with a video presenting how the object is interacted. Functionality of fixed objects can be evaluated via physical simulation.

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of fixing malfunctional
3D objects. While previous works focus on building passive
perception models to learn the functionality from static 3D
objects, we argue that functionality is reckoned with respect
to the physical interactions between the object and the user.
Given a malfunctional object, humans can perform mental
simulations to reason about its functionality and figure out
how to fix it. Inspired by this, we propose F IX I T, a dataset
that contains about 5k poorly-designed 3D physical objects
paired with choices to fix them. To mimic humans’ mental
simulation process, we present FixNet, a novel framework
that seamlessly incorporates perception and physical dynamics. Specifically, FixNet consists of a perception module
to extract the structured representation from the 3D point

cloud, a physical dynamics prediction module to simulate
the results of interactions on 3D objects, and a functionality
prediction module to evaluate the functionality and choose
the correct fix. Experimental results show that our framework outperforms baseline models by a large margin, and
can generalize well to objects with similar interaction types.
Code and dataset are publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
What defines a good 3D object shape? Aspects like aesthetics, comfort and fun etc play critical roles in shape design. However, these perspectives are all rendered meaningless without the utmost consideration of an object for
1 http://fixing-malfunctional.csail.mit.edu

1413

