RAGO: Recurrent Graph Optimizer For Multiple Rotation Averaging
Heng Li1 Zhaopeng Cui2 Shuaicheng Liu4 Ping Tan1,3
1 Simon Fraser University 2 State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University 3 Alibaba XR Lab
4 University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{lihengl,pingtan}@sfu.ca, zhpcui@zju.edu.cn, liushuaicheng@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Multiple Rotation Averaging (MRA) [4, 21, 28, 38] is a
fundamental problem in 3D computer vision that aims to determine the global absolute orientations {R𝑢 , 1 ≤ 𝑢 ≤ 𝑁 }
of 𝑁 cameras given their relative orientations R𝑢𝑣 . It has
been widely studied in 3D vision applications, e.g., global
Structure from Motion (SfM) [12, 24], pose graph optimization in Visual Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) [14, 27, 35], and other sensor network problems [36, 37].
MRA is usually solved by minimizing the discrepancy
between the observed relative orientations R𝑢𝑣 and the
one calculated from the estimated global orientations, i.e.

Average Mean Error in Degree

This paper proposes a deep recurrent Rotation Averaging Graph Optimizer (RAGO) for Multiple Rotation Averaging (MRA). Conventional optimization-based methods usually fail to produce accurate results due to corrupted and
noisy relative measurements. Recent learning-based approaches regard MRA as a regression problem, while these
methods are sensitive to initialization due to the gauge freedom problem. To handle these problems, we propose a
learnable iterative graph optimizer minimizing a gaugeinvariant cost function with an edge rectification strategy to
mitigate the effect of inaccurate measurements. Our graph
optimizer iteratively refines the global camera rotations by
minimizing each node’s single rotation objective function.
Besides, our approach iteratively rectifies relative rotations
to make them more consistent with the current camera orientations and observed relative rotations. Furthermore, we
employ a gated recurrent unit to improve the result by tracing the temporal information of the cost graph. Our framework is a real-time learning-to-optimize rotation averaging
graph optimizer with a tiny size deployed for real-world
applications. RAGO outperforms previous traditional and
deep methods on real-world and synthetic datasets. The
code is available at github.com/sfu-gruvi-3dv/RAGO.

Weiszfeld
Arrigoni
Wang
Chatterjee
NeuRoRA
RAGO*

4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0

5

10

15
20
Iteration times

25

30

Figure 1. The average mean error of RAGO on the synthetic
dataset compared with various MRA methods [5,6,20,30,39]. The
optimized results of the previous approaches are visualized as the
dash lines. The vertical axis represents the average mean angular
error, while the horizontal axis shows the number of iterations.

R𝑢 R⊤
𝑣 . It is a difficult classical problem with several challenges [21]. Firstly, it is a highly nonlinear problem since
the distance between two rotation matrices is a nonlinear
function. Secondly, rotation matrices lie on the 𝑆𝑂 (3)
group, which requires careful parameterization and normalization during optimization. Thirdly, there are many outliers and various noises in input relative orientations R𝑢𝑣 ,
which are often computed from noisy visual correspondences across images. These problems make the minimization objective function full of saddle points and local minimums in separate basins of attraction. Most of the time, the
global optimum cannot be guaranteed. The MRA problem
is typically solved by iterative optimization with careful initialization [6, 20, 40]. Robust cost functions with additional
outlier filtering and iterative reweighting of the measurements are usually adopted, while these still do not tolerate
severe corruptions and various noises.
Recently, some learning-based methods [30, 42] formulate MRA as a regression problem in order to benefit from
data-driven prior knowledge. These methods rely on a good
initialization, since they do not enforce any geometric constraint during inference, which may lead to an inferior re-

15787

