Deep Hierarchical Semantic Segmentation
Liulei Li1,5∗, Tianfei Zhou2 , Wenguan Wang3†, Jianwu Li1 , Yi Yang4
1

Beijing Institute of Technology 2 ETH Zurich 3 ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney 4 CCAI, Zhejiang University 5 Baidu Research
https://github.com/0liliulei/HieraSeg

Abstract
Humans are able to recognize structured relations in observation, allowing us to decompose complex scenes into
simpler parts and abstract the visual world in multiple levels. However, such hierarchical reasoning ability of human
perception remains largely unexplored in current literature
of semantic segmentation. Existing work is often aware of
flatten labels and predicts target classes exclusively for each
pixel. In this paper, we instead address hierarchical semantic segmentation (HSS), which aims at structured, pixel-wise
description of visual observation in terms of a class hierarchy. We devise H SSN, a general HSS framework that tackles
two critical issues in this task: i) how to efficiently adapt existing hierarchy-agnostic segmentation networks to the HSS
setting, and ii) how to leverage the hierarchy information to
regularize HSS network learning. To address i), H SSN directly casts HSS as a pixel-wise multi-label classification task,
only bringing minimal architecture change to current segmentation models. To solve ii), H SSN first explores inherent
properties of the hierarchy as a training objective, which enforces segmentation predictions to obey the hierarchy structure. Further, with hierarchy-induced margin constraints,
H SSN reshapes the pixel embedding space, so as to generate
well-structured pixel representations and improve segmentation eventually. We conduct experiments on four semantic segmentation datasets (i.e., Mapillary Vistas 2.0, Cityscapes, LIP, and PASCAL-Person-Part), with different class
hierarchies, segmentation network architectures and backbones, showing the generalization and superiority of H SSN.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, which aims to identify semantic
categories for pixel observations, is viewed as a vital step towards intelligent scene understanding [82]. The vast majority of modern segmentation models simply assume that all
the target classes are disjoint and should be distinguished exclusively during pixel-wise prediction. This fails to capture
∗ Work done during an internship at Baidu Research.
† Corresponding author: Wenguan Wang.

Vehicle
Human

Largevehicle
Twowheels
Person
Rider
Car
Bus
Truck
Motorcycle
Bicycle
Person-group
Individual
Motorcyclist
Bicyclist

Figure 1. Hierarchical semantic segmentation explains visual
scenes with multi-level abstraction (left), by considering structured
class relations (right). The class taxonomy is borrowed from [58].

the structured nature of the visual world [53]: complex scenes
arise from the composition of simpler entities. Walking city,
vehicles and pedestrian fill our view (Fig. 1). After focusing
on the vehicles, we identify cars, buses, and trucks, which
consist of more fine-grained parts like wheel and window.
On the other hand, structured understanding of our world in
terms of relations and hierarchies is a central ability in human cognition [68,95]. We group chair and bed as furniture,
while cat and dog as pet. We understand this world over
multiple levels of abstraction, in order to maintain stable,
coherent percepts in the face of complex visual inputs [37].
The ubiquity of hierarchical decomposition serves as a core
motivation behind many structured machine learning models [20, 85], which have shown wide success in document
classification [39,55] and protein function prediction [8,75].
In semantic segmentation literature, surprisingly little is
understood about how to accommodate pixel recognition
into semantic hierarchies. [43, 45, 56, 80, 81, 83, 89] are rare
exceptions that exploit class hierarchies in segmentation
networks. Nevertheless, they either focus specifically on
the structured organization of human body parts [80,81,83],
or introduce hierarchy-induced architectural changes to the

1246

