Revisiting the “Video” in Video-Language Understanding
Shyamal Buch1 , Cristóbal Eyzaguirre1 , Adrien Gaidon2 , Jiajun Wu1 , Li Fei-Fei1 , Juan Carlos Niebles1
1
Stanford University, 2 Toyota Research Institute
{shyamal, ceyzagui, jiajunwu, feifeili, jniebles}@cs.stanford.edu, adrien.gaidon@tri.global

Abstract
What makes a video task uniquely suited for videos, beyond what can be understood from a single image? Building on recent progress in self-supervised image-language
models, we revisit this question in the context of video and
language tasks. We propose the atemporal probe (ATP),
a new model for video-language analysis which provides
a stronger bound on the baseline accuracy of multimodal
models constrained by image-level understanding. By applying this model to standard discriminative video and language tasks, such as video question answering and text-tovideo retrieval, we characterize the limitations and potential of current video-language benchmarks. We find that understanding of event temporality is often not necessary to
achieve strong or state-of-the-art performance, even compared with recent large-scale video-language models and in
contexts intended to benchmark deeper video-level understanding. We also demonstrate how ATP can improve both
video-language dataset and model design. We describe a
technique for leveraging ATP to better disentangle dataset
subsets with a higher concentration of temporally challenging data, improving benchmarking efficacy for causal and
temporal understanding. Further, we show that effectively
integrating ATP into full video-level temporal models can
improve efficiency and state-of-the-art accuracy.1

1. Introduction
Videos offer the promise of understanding not only what
can be discerned from a single image (e.g. scenes, people,
and objects), but also multi-frame event temporality, causality, and dynamics (Figure 1(a)). Correspondingly, there
lies a central question at the heart of video research: What
makes a video task uniquely suited for videos, beyond what
can be understood from a single image?
As a field, video analysis has considered this question deeply in the context of action classification in videos
[3, 17, 43, 50]. The emergence of strong convolutional mod1 Project website: https://stanfordvl.github.io/atp-revisit-video-lang/

Figure 1. (a) The promise of videos lies in the potential to go
beyond image-level understanding (scenes, people, etc.) to capture
event temporality, causality, and dynamics. (b) In this work, we
propose an atemporal probe (ATP) model to revisit the video in
standard benchmarks [29,53,55] for video question answering and
text-to-video retrieval, offering a stronger image-centric baseline
and analytical tool. For example, ATP finds non-trivial subsets of
“causal” questions that can be answered with (c) only image-level
understanding, rather than (d) full video-level understanding.

els for image classification [15] enabled researchers to better characterize the limits of single-frame understanding for
recognizing actions [17, 50]. A key finding from this analysis was that, in many standard video datasets [24, 47] at
the time, temporal understanding was simply not required

2917

