It’s About Time: Analog Clock Reading in the Wild
Charig Yang1
1

Weidi Xie1,2

Andrew Zisserman1

VGG, Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{charig,weidi,az}@robots.ox.ac.uk

https://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/˜vgg/research/time
Abstract
In this paper, we present a framework for reading analog clocks in natural images or videos. Specifically, we
make the following contributions: First, we create a scalable pipeline for generating synthetic clocks, significantly
reducing the requirements for the labour-intensive annotations; Second, we introduce a clock recognition architecture based on spatial transformer networks (STN), which
is trained end-to-end for clock alignment and recognition.
We show that the model trained on the proposed synthetic
dataset generalises towards real clocks with good accuracy,
advocating a Sim2Real training regime; Third, to further
reduce the gap between simulation and real data, we leverage the special property of “time”, i.e. uniformity, to generate reliable pseudo-labels on real unlabelled clock videos,
and show that training on these videos offers further improvements while still requiring zero manual annotations.
Lastly, we introduce three benchmark datasets based on
COCO, Open Images, and The Clock movie, with full annotations for time, accurate to the minute.

1. Introduction
Humans are able to sense the time to some level of granularity given environmental cues, such as luminance or the
extent of shadows. However, in order to know the exact
time we read from a time-keeping instrument such as a
clock or watch. Clocks come in different shapes, forms and
styles, and humans are able to read them despite not having
seen the particular clock before. In this paper our objective
is to enable a machine to perform the same task of telling
the time from clocks in the wild.
Nowadays, clocks come in two main types – digital and
analog. Digital clocks can be handled by text spotting methods [25, 27–29, 32] with relative ease, which we show in
the Appendix, but reading analog clocks is a different and
challenging problem: there are significant appearance variations between clock faces (see Figures 2 and 5), their im-

aged shape and the position of the numbering is severely
affected by camera viewpoint, and the presence of shadows
and specular reflections add confusion with the clock hands.
While this problem has existed for a long time [1, 9, 35],
no previous solutions are able to robustly read the time
from clocks, apart from under extremely limited situations.
And, somewhat surprisingly, reading analog clocks in unconstrained images has been largely overlooked in the computer vision literature. Additionally, there are no reliable
benchmarks for evaluation, hindering the research community from tackling this task.
However, there are similarities between analog clock
reading and text spotting in natural scenes – since in both
cases the design (of the clock face or text font) is chosen
to be readable, and in both cases there is a detection stage
and then a reading stage. Clock reading has the additional
challenges outlined above, but it also has an additional redundancy cue in that the position of the hour hand gives
some information about the position of the minute hand.
Given the similarities between the two tasks, we start with
an approach that has been successful for text spotting: using synthetic datasets [12, 18] and spatial transformer networks [34], and ask if these ideas transfer to our task. We
find that they do to an extent, and provide further contributions to bridge the Sim2Real generalisation gap.
While being able to carry out a new task is a sufficient
reward in itself, there are a number of applications that are
opened up, once we are able to automate time reading in
images in the wild: first, it will now be possible to offer
corrections where the image’s EXIF metadata differs from
the time read in the image; second, in video forensics, it will
now be possible to spot if the video has been tampered with
if the temporal ordering does not progress monotonically or
if there is manipulation of the speed [15]; third, it provides
a new method of searching, retrieving and grouping images
and videos; and, finally, clocks are just a (rather difficult)
instance of an analog scale, and the methods we have proposed can be applied with a simple adaptation to other type
of scales – from scientific instruments to industrial gauges.
In this paper, we provide the first working solution to

2508

