Segment, Magnify and Reiterate: Detecting Camouflaged Objects the Hard Way
Qi Jia, Shuilian Yao, Yu Liu,* Xin Fan, Risheng Liu, Zhongxuan Luo
International School of Information Science & Engineering, Dalian University of Technology
{jiaqi,liuyu8824,xin.fan,rsliu,zxluo}@dlut.edu.cn, Shuilian Yao@mail.dlut.edu.cn

Stage-1

Abstract

Stage-2

Stage-3

Stage-N
…

It is challenging to accurately detect camouflaged objects from their highly similar surroundings. Existing methods mainly leverage a single-stage detection fashion, while
neglecting small objects with low-resolution fine edges requires more operations than the larger ones. To tackle
camouflaged object detection (COD), we are inspired by
humans attention coupled with the coarse-to-fine detection
strategy, and thereby propose an iterative refinement framework, coined SegMaR, which integrates Segment, Magnify
and Reiterate in a multi-stage detection fashion. Specifically, we design a new discriminative mask which makes the
model attend on the fixation and edge regions. In addition,
we leverage an attention-based sampler to magnify the object region progressively with no need of enlarging the image size. Extensive experiments show our SegMaR achieves
remarkable and consistent improvements over other stateof-the-art methods. Especially, we surpass two competitive
methods 7.4% and 20.0% respectively in average over standard evaluation metrics on small camouflaged objects. Additional studies provide more promising insights into SegMaR, including its effectiveness on the discriminative mask
and its generalization to other network architectures. Code
is available at https://github.com/dlut-dimt/SegMaR.

1. Introduction
Camouflaged object detection (COD) is a task which
aims to identify any object hidden in the background [8, 22,
29]. It has been commonly useful for many applications in
different fields [9, 38], including agriculture (e.g. locust detection to prevent invasion), art (e.g. photo-realistic blending and recreational art) and medical diagnosis (e.g. polyp
segmentation). Biological and psychological studies have
shown that various camouflage strategies can easily deceive
the human’s visual perceptual system [38], since the camouflaged objects always have similar visual features as the
background surroundings. The major difficulty in COD is
* Corresponding author

Our SegMaR framework for camouflaged object detection

…

Figure 1. Illustration of our SegMaR (Segment, Magnify and
Reiterate) framework for camouflaged object detection. Multiple
stages are performed iteratively in the framework. Each stage involves two main steps: segment the camouflaged object (the solid
line) and magnify the camouflaged object (the dotted line).

how to accurately distinguish the subtle differences between
the target object and the background in the image.
Different from traditional methods [5, 29, 51], a number
of recent works [4,7,8,20,28,45], by making use of sophisticated deep learning techniques [3, 43, 53], have achieved
new state-of-the-art performance on all the COD benchmarks. Despite the quantitative performance by the latest
methods looks promising (e.g. 0.80 of Sα on COD10K test
set [8]), several difficulties in COD are still remaining unsolved. Particularly, when one certain camouflaged object
accounts for a very small proportion of the whole image, it
becomes more difficult to detect accurate edges around the
object. For instance the crab in the first column in Fig. 1,
its size is much smaller than the beach in the background.
Unfortunately, existing COD methods fail to detect small
camouflaged objects accurately.
Their detection and segmentation results lead to high deviation on low-resolution and small objects. One main reason is these methods employ a single-stage detection fashion, but many camouflaged objects are hardly detectable at
the first time. In fact, when humans cannot watch any target object in the scene clearly, they will consciously move
closer to the target till its resolution is large enough for visual recognition. We expect every person in front of the

4713

