Fine-tuning Image Transformers using Learnable Memory
Mark Sandler

Andrey Zhmoginov Max Vladymyrov Andrew Jackson
Google Inc.
{sandler, azhmogin, mxv, jacksona}@google.com

Abstract
Modified Transformer Encoder With Memory

In this paper we propose augmenting Vision Transformer
models with learnable memory tokens. Our approach allows the model to adapt to new tasks, using few parameters,
while optionally preserving its capabilities on previously
learned tasks. At each layer we introduce a set of learnable embedding vectors that provide contextual information useful for specific datasets. We call these “memory tokens”. We show that augmenting a model with just a handful of such tokens per layer significantly improves accuracy
when compared to conventional head-only fine-tuning, and
performs only slightly below the significantly more expensive full fine-tuning. We then propose an attention-masking
approach that enables extension to new downstream tasks,
with a computation reuse. In this setup in addition to being
parameters efficient, models can execute both old and new
tasks as a part of single inference at a small incremental
cost.

1. Introduction
Transformers [38], originally introduced for sequence
problems, such as NLP and speech recognition, have been
very successful in advancing state-of-the-art for vision
tasks. “Vision transformers” most commonly have been
trained on large amounts of data, either in supervised [21]
or self-supervised [7] modes. The resulting model is then
“fine-tuned” on a downstream task, either in whole or in
part. This fine-tuning has been shown to help achieve high
performance on a variety of downstream tasks, from classical tasks like image super-resolution [6] and object detection [3] to novel ones, such as Ising model simulations [19].
It has been observed that in order to reach the highest accuracy it is best to fine-tune the entire model on the target
task [7,21]. However, this is often problematic, since Transformer models can have hundreds of millions or billions of
parameters, making maintaining, transmitting and storing a
full size model for each new task an expensive proposition.
Additionally, full fine-tuning is often sensitive to the choice

“*” denotes extra learnable class token.
“+” indicates residual connection
T(*) denotes the output corresponding to class token

MLP Head

K-class
bird
ball
car…

T(*)

MLP

MLP

MLP

MLP

Norm

Norm

Norm

Norm

Attention

Attention

Attention

Attention

Norm

Norm

Norm

Norm

Input Memory

Input Memory

Input Memory

Input Memory

Patches with added position encoding
0*

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Linear projection of patches

Figure 1. Structure of an encoder with learned memory. The input
to each encoder layer is augmented with learned memory, which
is used as an optional source of attention by the embeddings that
propagate from previous layers. Memory tokens do not attend to
other tokens. For detailed design of individual layer see Fig. 2.

of the learning rate [30]. In this paper we propose a method
where we augment a pre-trained model with learnable tokens that are appended at each layer of the transformer
block. These extra tokens can be intuitively thought of as
a permanent memory that are used as a contextual reference
to improve the final prediction. Another point of analogy is
that these tokens can represent concepts at varying levels of
abstractions: starting from tokens that run alongside pixelbased patches, and all the way to the tokens representing
final concepts.
Our approach allows significant improvements to downstream task accuracy compared to head-only fine-tuning.
Further, we believe that our particular architecture design
is of independent interest as it provides a novel way of extending a trained model to perform new tasks while retain-

12155

