Continual Object Detection via
Prototypical Task Correlation Guided Gating Mechanism
Binbin Yang1 * Xinchi Deng1∗ Han Shi2 Changlin Li3 Gengwei Zhang1
Hang Xu4 Shen Zhao1 Liang Lin1† Xiaodan Liang1
1

Sun Yat-sen University 2 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
ReLER, AAII, UTS 4 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

{yangbb3, dengxch5}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, hshiac@cse.ust.hk, zhaosh35@mail.sysu.edu.cn,
{changlinli.ai, zgwdavid, chromexbjxh, xdliang328}@gmail.com, linliang@ieee.org

Abstract

Task1 only
Task2 only

Continual learning is a challenging real-world problem
for constructing a mature AI system when data are provided
in a streaming fashion. Despite recent progress in continual classification, the researches of continual object detection are impeded by the diverse sizes and numbers of objects in each image. Different from previous works that tune
the whole network for all tasks, in this work, we present
a simple and flexible framework for continual object detection via pRotOtypical taSk corrElaTion guided gaTing
mechAnism (ROSETTA). Concretely, a unified framework
is shared by all tasks while task-aware gates are introduced to automatically select sub-models for specific tasks.
In this way, various knowledge can be successively memorized by storing their corresponding sub-model weights
in this system. To make ROSETTA automatically determine which experience is available and useful, a prototypical task correlation guided Gating Diversity Controller
(GDC) is introduced to adaptively adjust the diversity of
gates for the new task based on class-specific prototypes.
GDC module computes class-to-class correlation matrix to
depict the cross-task correlation, and hereby activates more
exclusive gates for the new task if a significant domain gap
is observed. Comprehensive experiments on COCO-VOC,
KITTI-Kitchen, class-incremental detection on VOC and sequential learning of four tasks show that ROSETTA yields
state-of-the-art performance on both task-based and classbased continual object detection. 1

1. Introduction
Thanks to the development of computer vision and deep
learning, a great progress have been made in object detec* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.
1 Codes are available at: https : / / github . com / dkxocl /

ROSSETA.

Task3 only
Share
Sharedbybytask1
Task1
and
and task2
Task2
Share
Sharedby
bytask2
Task2
and task3
and
Task3

Gated
Detector
Gated
Detector

Task Correlation

Task1

Task2

Task3

Figure 1. Overview of our pRotOtypical taSk corrElaTion guided
gaTing mechAnism (ROSETTA) for continual object detection.
Sequential detection tasks share a unified backbone of the gated
detector. Knowledge from previous tasks can be stored in the
weights of the corresponding sub-models which are activated by
the stored gates. Boxes in colors indicate the channels activated
by task-aware gates for different tasks. Best viewed in color.

tion [31, 32, 41]. The mainstream of existing works typically follows the offline training paradigm: an individual model is trained on a dataset and then evaluated on
the test set with similar distribution. Nevertheless, online training on streaming data plays a more important role
in real-world applications, especially large-scale industrial
systems. More significantly, an artificial intelligent system
is expected to continually learn different skills, e.g., detect
more and more objects in multiple scenarios, resembling
the memorizing and learning abilities of humans instead of

9255

