Joint Video Summarization and Moment Localization by Cross-Task Sample Transfer
Hao Jiang
Peking University

Yadong Mu*
Peking University

jianghao@stu.pku.edu.cn

myd@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Video summarization has recently engaged increasing
attention in computer vision communities. However, the
scarcity of annotated data has been a key obstacle in this
task. To address it, this work explores a new solution for
video summarization by transferring samples from a correlated task (i.e., video moment localization) equipped with
abundant training data. Our main insight is that the annotated video moments also indicate the semantic highlights
of a video, essentially similar to video summary. Approximately, the video summary can be treated as a sparse,
redundancy-free version of the video moments. Inspired
by this observation, we propose an importance Propagation based collaborative Teaching Network (iPTNet). It
consists of two separate modules that conduct video summarization and moment localization, respectively. Each
module estimates a frame-wise importance map for indicating keyframes or moments. To perform cross-task sample transfer, we devise an importance propagation module
that realizes the conversion between summarization-guided
and localization-guided importance maps. This way critically enables optimizing one of the tasks using the data
from the other task. Additionally, in order to avoid error
amplification caused by batch-wise joint training, we devise a collaborative teaching scheme, which adopts a crosstask mean teaching strategy to realize the joint optimization of the two tasks and provide robust frame-level teaching signals. Extensive experiments on video summarization
benchmarks demonstrate that iPTNet significantly outperforms previous state-of-the-art video summarization methods, serving as an effective solution that overcomes the data
scarcity issue in video summarization.

1. Introduction
In recent years, with the popularization of video-sharing
platforms, the number of videos that record activities of
daily living has witnessed an explosive growth. Techniques
that help people quickly browse videos and search the key
* Corresponding author.

Joint Optimization

Query: Person puts the bag of groceries down.

Summarization-guided
Localization-guided
Importance Map Propagation Importance Map

Video Summarization Model

Moment Localization Model

Annotated Data for
Video Summarization

Annotated Data for
Moment Localization

Figure 1. The video summarization and video moment localization models can be jointly optimized using the proposed cross-task
sample transfer.

information become a valuable research topic. Video summarization [5, 20, 46], a technology that automatically extracts representative segments from untrimmed videos to
concisely depict the original video content, has attracted increasing attention from both academia and industries.
The earlier work in video summarization mostly adopts
hand-crafted heuristics to attain certain properties of frames
(e.g., diversity, representativeness) [11, 31, 34, 42, 49, 52].
These modeling paradigms are recently less used since the
revival of deep learning techniques [2, 30, 50, 53, 56, 75, 85].
Specifically, the latest video summarization models have
been empowered by recurrent neural networks (RNN) [24,
86, 87, 93] and the attention mechanism [29, 46, 70], which
drastically advance the state-of-the-art.
Most of these methods employ a data-hungry supervised learning setting for training [24, 46, 93]. Despite the
performance gains achieved by these efforts, current research has been still suffering from the scarcity of large-

16388

