Learning to Learn by Jointly Optimizing Neural Architecture and Weights
Yadong Ding1 Yu Wu2 Chengyue Huang1 Siliang Tang1 *
Yi Yang1 Longhui Wei3 Yueting Zhuang1 Qi Tian4
1
Zhejiang University 2 Princeton University
3
University of Science and Technology of China 4 Huawei Cloud & AI
{dyadongcs, hcyue, siliang, yangyics, yzhuang}@zju.edu.cn , yuwu@princeton.edu
longhuiwei@pku.edu.cn, tian.qi1@huawei.com

Abstract
Meta-learning enables models to adapt to new environments rapidly with a few training examples. Current
gradient-based meta-learning methods concentrate on finding good model-agnostic initialization (meta-weights) for
learners. In this paper, we aim to obtain better meta-learners
by co-optimizing the architecture and meta-weights simultaneously. Existing NAS-based meta-learning methods apply a
two-stage strategy, i.e., first searching architectures and then
re-training meta-weights on the searched architecture. However, this two-stage strategy would break the mutual impact
of the architecture and meta-weights since they are optimized
separately. Differently, we propose progressive connection
consolidation, fixing the architecture layer by layer, in which
the layer with the largest weight value would be fixed first.
In this way, we can jointly search architectures and train the
meta-weights on fixed layers. Besides, to improve the generalization performance of the searched meta-learner on all
tasks, we propose a more effective rule for co-optimization,
namely Connection-Adaptive Meta-learning (CAML). By
searching only once, we can obtain both adaptive architecture and meta-weights for meta-learning. Extensive experiments show that our method achieves state-of-the-art
performance with 3x less computational cost, revealing our
method’s effectiveness and efficiency.

1. Introduction
As a popular solution for the few-shot learning problem1 ,
meta-learning develops deep learning models with the ability
to fit unseen tasks using only a few training examples [6, 30,
37]. Particularly, the gradient-based meta-learning methods
like MAML [6] attempt to find a set of initialization of
models’ weights (meta-weights). The model with meta* Siliang Tang is the corresponding author.
1 A N -way, K-shot task denotes K samples from each class and N

classes in few-shot learning.

weights can produce good generalization performance on
an unseen task quickly with only a few gradient steps. In
addition, to obtain the optimized meta-weights, it’s also vital
to find better architectures good at meta-learning. Unlike
previous methods built on hand-crafted architectures, we
aim to obtain better meta-learners by enriching architecture
flexibility via Neural Architecture Search (NAS).
In this work, our target is to find optimal architecture and
meta-weights for a meta-learner which can quickly adapt
to new tasks with a few training samples. We represent the
candidate operations (e.g., conv and pooling) in each layer
as connections. Each of them is weighted by an attention
value over all candidate operations in the same layer, which
is called connection parameters. Larger values mean more
important operations/connections and we call each layer’s
adaptive connection as meta-connections. Thus the adaptive
architecture is composed of meta-connections, and the training process can be regarded as a co-optimization problem of
the connection parameters and the network weights.
There have been some recent works focusing on the exploration of architecture impact in meta-learning [10, 15].
However, most of these works either fall into the dilemma
of breaking the mutual impact between the architecture and
meta-weights or optimize the learner with a biased updating
rule. First, both Auto-Meta [10] and Auto-MAML [15]
apply a two-stage training strategy that obtains architectures
and meta-weights separately, i.e., first searching architectures and then retraining meta-weights using the searched
architecture, as illustrated in Figure 1 (b). As mentioned in
the lottery ticket hypothesis [7], sub-networks pruned from
the supernet2 cannot get optimized effectively unless they are
initialized with the supernet’s network weights. It inspires us
that architectures and network weights have a mutual impact
on each other. Therefore, in NAS-based meta-learning, we
need to preserve the mutual impact between the architecture
2 A supernet is a neural network whose layers consist of more than one
candidate operation (e.g., convolution, pooling). When searching finished,
each layer is pruned, leaving one specific operation at most.

129

