Visible-Thermal UAV Tracking: A Large-Scale Benchmark and New Baseline
Pengyu Zhang1 , Jie Zhao1 , Dong Wang1† , Huchuan Lu1,2 , Xiang Ruan3
1
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory 3 Tiwaki Co.Ltd.

1. Introduction
Given the initial position of a model-agnostic target, visual object tracking is to capture the target in the subsequent
frames [28], where the target may suffer out-of-view, occlusion, illumination variation, and motion blur. Previous
algorithms solve those challenges within visible modality,
providing limited information when the target is in dark,
rainy, foggy and other extreme conditions (the first row in
Fig. 1). By contrast, thermal image, as a complementary
cue, is insensitive to illumination variation, while it cannot
distinguish the target when the target and background are
† Corresponding author: Dr. Dong Wang, wdice@dlut.edu.cn

Park - Pedestrian (23128)

Sea - Ship (16413)

Parking lot - Animal (2046)

E D O C F M S S H

C D S L

P F S HM

H P

C H

C D P S M

C D S M

C S

Park - Pedestrian (2755)

Visible Dominant

With the popularity of multi-modal sensors, visiblethermal (RGB-T) object tracking is to achieve robust performance and wider application scenarios with the guidance
of objects’ temperature information. However, the lack of
paired training samples is the main bottleneck for unlocking the power of RGB-T tracking. Since it is laborious to
collect high-quality RGB-T sequences, recent benchmarks
only provide test sequences. In this paper, we construct
a large-scale benchmark with high diversity for visiblethermal UAV tracking (VTUAV), including 500 sequences
with 1.7 million high-resolution (1920 ∗ 1080 pixels) frame
pairs. In addition, comprehensive applications (short-term
tracking, long-term tracking and segmentation mask prediction) with diverse categories and scenes are considered for
exhaustive evaluation. Moreover, we provide a coarse-tofine attribute annotation, where frame-level attributes are
provided to exploit the potential of challenge-specific trackers. In addition, we design a new RGB-T baseline, named
Hierarchical Multi-modal Fusion Tracker (HMFT), which
fuses RGB-T data in various levels. Numerous experiments
on several datasets are conducted to reveal the effectiveness
of HMFT and the complement of different fusion types. The
project is available at here.

V-T Complementary

Abstract

Thermal Dominant

{pyzhang, zj982853200}@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {wdice, lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn, ruanxiang@tiwaki.com

Park - Vehicle (5778)

Pathway - Pedestrian (646)

School - Vehicle (25294)

Pathway - Pedestrian (1440)

Road - Train (4013)

Figure 1. Sample frames in our dataset. Scenes - super class (sequence length) are shown on the top. Sequence-level attributes
are shown at bottom, including camera movement (C), deformation (D), extreme illumination (E), partial occlusion (P), full occlusion (F), scale variation (S), thermal clustering (H), fast moving (M), out-of-view (O), and low resolution (L).

in similar temperature (the second row in Fig. 1). To this
end, with the portability and low-price of multi-modality
sensors, tracking with visible-thermal (RGB-T) data enlarges the application scope by providing complementary
information, which has attached more attentions [23, 47].
Li et al. [19] release a gray-scale RGB-T dataset with 50
videos. Later, RGBT210 [25] and RGBT234 [20] are proposed, containing 210 and 234 test videos. In 2019 [15] and
2020 [16], VOT committee holds the VOT-RGBT tracking
subchallenge, which selects 60 sequences from RGBT234
to evaluate the accuracy and robustness of competitors. Furthermore, various algorithms are proposed by considering
performance and time cost. Li et al. [22] propose a Multi-

8886

