Novel Class Discovery in Semantic Segmentation
Yuyang Zhao1
1
2

Zhun Zhong2

Nicu Sebe2

Gim Hee Lee1

Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore

Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science, University of Trento
Project: https://ncdss.github.io

Abstract
We introduce a new setting of Novel Class Discovery in
Semantic Segmentation (NCDSS), which aims at segmenting unlabeled images containing new classes given prior
knowledge from a labeled set of disjoint classes. In contrast to existing approaches that look at novel class discovery in image classification, we focus on the more challenging semantic segmentation. In NCDSS, we need to distinguish the objects and background, and to handle the
existence of multiple classes within an image, which increases the difficulty in using the unlabeled data. To tackle
this new setting, we leverage the labeled base data and a
saliency model to coarsely cluster novel classes for model
training in our basic framework. Additionally, we propose
the Entropy-based Uncertainty Modeling and Self-training
(EUMS) framework to overcome noisy pseudo-labels, further improving the model performance on the novel classes.
Our EUMS utilizes an entropy ranking technique and a dynamic reassignment to distill clean labels, thereby making
full use of the noisy data via self-supervised learning. We
build the NCDSS benchmark on the PASCAL-5i dataset and
COCO-20i dataset. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
feasibility of the basic framework (achieving an average
mIoU of 49.81% on PASCAL-5i ) and the effectiveness of
EUMS framework (outperforming the basic framework by
9.28% mIoU on PASCAL-5i ).

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved significant success in semantic segmentation [3, 19] in recent
years. However, the success of DNNs heavily relies on the
large number of annotated data, which incurs high annotation cost, especially for semantic segmentation where pixelwise labeling is required. Several settings are proposed to
alleviate the cost, such as semi-supervised learning (SSL),
unsupervised learning (USL), etc. SSL [4, 41] utilizes a
proportion of annotated data, aiming to achieve comparable performance with fully-supervised methods. Generally,

Class‐Known Images

Class‐Partially Known Images

Class‐Unknown Images

Novel Class Discovery

Predictions of Novel Images
Person

Horse

Motor

Car

Boat

Bike

Figure 1. Illustration of Novel Class Discovery in Semantic Segmentation (NCDSS). Given a labeled set (person, horse, motorbike
and car) and a class disjoint unlabeled set (bike and boat), NCDSS
aims at leveraging all the data to segment novel images.

SSL is based on the assumption that the labeled and unlabeled data share the same label space. Nevertheless, it
is possible to have data from the unseen novel classes in
real-world semantic segmentation settings. Such data can
be easily collected but difficult to annotate. USL [14, 30] is
also introduced to mitigate the annotation cost. Due to the
complexity of unlabeled data, USL cannot achieve satisfactory results without any prior knowledge.
In contrast to machine learning models, humans can easily discover new categories with prior knowledge. For example, a kid can easily discover sheep when he/she knows
how to distinguish between horse and cow. Based on
this observation, a practical setting of Novel Class Discovery (NCD) [10] is introduced in the computer vision

4340

