Masked Feature Prediction for Self-Supervised Visual Pre-Training
Chen Wei *, 1, 2 Haoqi Fan1 Saining Xie1 Chao-Yuan Wu1 Alan Yuille2 Christoph Feichtenhofer*, 1
∗

1

equal technical contribution
2

Facebook AI Research

Abstract
We present Masked Feature Prediction (MaskFeat) for
self-supervised pre-training of video models. Our approach
first randomly masks out a portion of the input sequence and
then predicts the feature of the masked regions. We study
five different types of features and find Histograms of Oriented Gradients (HOG), a hand-crafted feature descriptor,
works particularly well in terms of both performance and
efficiency. We observe that the local contrast normalization in HOG is essential for good results, which is in line
with earlier work using HOG for visual recognition. Our
approach can learn abundant visual knowledge and drive
large-scale Transformer-based models. Without using extra model weights or supervision, MaskFeat pre-trained on
unlabeled videos achieves unprecedented results of 86.7%
with MViTv2-L on Kinetics-400, 88.3% on Kinetics-600,
80.4% on Kinetics-700, 38.8 mAP on AVA, and 75.0% on
SSv2. MaskFeat further generalizes to image input, which
can be interpreted as a video with a single frame and obtains competitive results on ImageNet.

Johns Hopkins University
masked input

HOG prediction

original image

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Example HOG predictions on unseen validation input.
Our model is learned by predicting features (middle) given masked
inputs (left). Original images (right) are not used for prediction.
More qualitative examples are in the Appendix.

Self-supervised pre-training has been phenomenally successful in natural language processing powering large-scale
Transformers [66] with billion-scale data [6, 21]. The underlying idea is an astonishingly simple mask-and-predict
task, that is, first masking out some tokens within a text and
then predicting the invisible content given the visible text.
Humans have a remarkable ability to predict how the
world appears and moves when observing it as a continuous stream of spatiotemporal information. Consider the
examples in the 1st column of Fig. 1. Even without seeing
the masked content, we are able to understand the object
structure and draw a rough outline or silhouette of imagined
information (up to some details), by using visual knowledge about the visible structures. In this work, we show
that predicting certain masked features (e.g. gradient histograms in the 2nd column) can be a powerful objective for
self-supervised visual pre-training, especially in the video
domain which contains rich visual information.

One essential difference between vision and language is
that vision has no pre-existing vocabulary to shape the prediction task into a well-defined classification problem. In
contrast, the raw spatiotemporal visual signal is continuous
and dense posing a major challenge to masked visual prediction. One immediate solution is to imitate the language
vocabulary by building a visual vocabulary that discretizes
frame patches into tokens, as explored in BEiT [2, 58].
However, this requires an external tokenizer which can be
limited in compute-intensive video understanding scenario.
We present Masked Feature Prediction (MaskFeat), a
pre-training objective that directly regresses features of the
masked content. Specifically, our approach ingests the
masked space-time input with a vision Transformer backbone [23, 46] and predicts a certain feature representation
of the masked content. In this way, the pre-trained model
acquires an adequate understanding of the complex spacetime structures within dense visual signals.

14668

