Merry Go Round: Rotate a Frame and Fool a DNN
Daksh Thapar, Aditya Nigam
Indian Institute of Technology Mandi

Chetan Arora
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi

dakshthapar.github.io,faculty.iitmandi.ac.in/˜aditya

www.cse.iitd.ac.in/˜chetan

Abstract
A large proportion of videos captured today are first person videos shot from wearable cameras. Similar to other
computer vision tasks, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are
the workhorse for most state-of-the-art (SOTA) egocentric
vision techniques. On the other hand DNNs are known to
be susceptible to Adversarial Attacks (AAs) which add imperceptible noise to the input. Both black-box, as well as
white-box attacks on image as well as video analysis tasks
have been shown. We observe that most AA techniques basically add intensity perturbation to an image. Even for
videos, the same process is essentially repeated for each
frame independently. We note that definition of imperceptibility used for images may not be applicable for videos,
where a small intensity change happening randomly in two
consecutive frames may still be perceptible. In this paper
we make a key novel suggestion to use perturbation in optical flow to carry out AAs on a video analysis system. Such
perturbation is especially useful for egocentric videos, because there is lot of shake in the egocentric videos anyways,
and adding a little more, keeps it highly imperceptible. In
general our idea can be seen as adding structured, parametric noise as the adversarial perturbation. Our implementation of the idea by adding 3D rotations to the frames,
reveal that using our technique, one can mount a black-box
AA on an egocentric activity detection system in one-third
of the queries compared to the SOTA AA technique.

1. Introduction
Despite achieving superior performance on a variety of
computer vision tasks [3,11,12,33], Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) remain remarkably susceptible to imperceptible adversarial perturbations [37]. The goal of an adversarial attack (AA) is, given a clean image, I, create an adversarial perturbation (P ), which when added to the clean image,
generates an adversarial sample Iadv = I + P , which tricks
a DNN model into producing an incorrect prediction. Since
the purpose is to attack a system, the perturbation should be
imperceptible to the humans.

Current Techniques

Intensity-based noise

Intensity-based
Perturbation

Iterative
Optimization

Intensity-based attack.
High SR, High ANQ

Clean video segment

Combined attack.
High SR, Low ANQ

Iterative
Optimization
Applying
Perturbation
Camera Rotational
noise

Camera Rotational attack.
Low SR, Low ANQ

Camera Rotational
Perturbation

Proposed Technique

Figure 1. A brief pipeline for the proposed system. SR denote
Success Rate, and ANQ denotes Average Number of Queries. Successful Attack demands high SR and low ANQ. For a given input video of size T × H × W × C, where T is the number of
frames, and H, W , and C are height, width, and channel respectively of each frame, an intensity based attack needs to predict
T × H × W × C parameters. Whereas, our proposed parametric
perturbation attack, using rotation based transformation, predicts
only T × 3 parameters. This reduces the query budget to predict
the parameters. Geometric transformations are natural perturbations and do not disturb semantic integrity of an image or a video.

The simplest setting to mount such an AA is when the
adversary gets full access to the model (M ), including
input(X)/output(Y ), and the exact gradients (G). One can,
then, simply backpropagate the loss corresponding to the
desired (incorrect) output, and use it guide the perturbation
in the input [16, 25, 37]. The setting is called white box attacks, but is usually impractical in real life, due to unavailability of the full access to the model. The alternate setting
is the black box setting when an adversary has access to X,
and Y , but not G. In this formulation the primary challenge
becomes estimating the gradient at the input without having access to G [6, 16, 17]. The quality of an AA technique
is usually determined by how imperceptible the P is, and
additionally in case of black box attacks, how many (X,Y )
pairs a technique needs to find a P corresponding to a particular I.

15054

