Long-tailed Visual Recognition via Gaussian Clouded Logit Adjustment
Mengke Li1 Yiu-ming Cheung1 * Yang Lu2
1
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
{csmkli, ymc}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, luyang@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Long-tailed data is still a big challenge for deep neural
networks, even though they have achieved great success on
balanced data. We observe that vanilla training on longtailed data with cross-entropy loss makes the instance-rich
head classes severely squeeze the spatial distribution of the
tail classes, which leads to difficulty in classifying tail class
samples. Furthermore, the original cross-entropy loss can
only propagate gradient short-lively because the gradient
in softmax form rapidly approaches zero as the logit difference increases. This phenomenon is called softmax saturation. It is unfavorable for training on balanced data,
but can be utilized to adjust the validity of the samples in
long-tailed data, thereby solving the distorted embedding
space of long-tailed problems. To this end, this paper proposes the Gaussian clouded logit adjustment by Gaussian
perturbation of different class logits with varied amplitude.
We define the amplitude of perturbation as cloud size and
set relatively large cloud sizes to tail classes. The large
cloud size can reduce the softmax saturation and thereby
making tail class samples more active as well as enlarging
the embedding space. To alleviate the bias in a classifier,
we therefore propose the class-based effective number sampling strategy with classifier re-training. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets validate the superior performance of the proposed method. Source code is available at
https://github.com/Keke921/GCLLoss.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been widely utilized
in a variety of visual recognition problems [6, 7, 21, 28]
by virtue of the large-scale, high-quality, and annotated
datasets. DNNs usually require the training dataset to be
artificially balanced and have sufficient samples of each
class. Unfortunately, from a practical perspective, object
frequency usually follows a power law and typically ex* Yiu-ming Cheung is the Corresponding Author.

Figure 1. t-SNE visualization of the distorted embedding space.
(Color for the best view.) The embeddings are calculated with
ResNet-32 on a subset with four classes of CIFAR-10-LT. We randomly select four classes with the training numbers 500, 200, 100,
and 50, respectively. The gray areas show the obscure regions between different classes.

hibits a long-tailed distribution. Naive learning on such data
is prone to undesirable bias towards the head classes which
occupy the majority of the training samples [37]. Since
tail classes have few training samples that cannot cover the
real distribution in embedding space, their spatial span is
severely compressed by head classes. In addition, a vast
number of head class samples generate overwhelming discouraging gradients for tail classes. Thus, the learning of
a classifier is biased towards the head classes. As a result,
directly training on long-tailed data brings two key problems: 1) the distorted embedding space, and 2) the biased
classifier.
In the literature, most of the recently proposed approaches focus on addressing the second problem only, i.e.,
the biased classifier. For example, Menon et al. [17] and
Hong et al. [8] applied post-adjust strategy to the trained
model to calibrate the class boundary. Nevertheless, the
distorted embedding cannot be adjusted with the post-hoc
calibration, which is not conducive to further improving the

6929

