Text Spotting Transformers
Xiang Zhang1 Yongwen Su2 Subarna Tripathi3
1
UC San Diego 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Zhuowen Tu1
3
Intel Labs

{xiz102, ztu}@ucsd.edu, heyue2001@gmail.com, subarna.tripathi@intel.com

Abstract
Transformer
Encoder

In this paper, we present TExt Spotting TRansformers
(TESTR), a generic end-to-end text spotting framework using Transformers for text detection and recognition in the
wild. TESTR builds upon a single encoder and dual decoders for the joint text-box control point regression and
character recognition. Other than most existing literature, our method is free from Region-of-Interest operations
and heuristics-driven post-processing procedures; TESTR
is particularly effective when dealing with curved text-boxes
where special cares are needed for the adaptation of the traditional bounding-box representations. We show our canonical representation of control points suitable for text instances in both Bezier curve and polygon annotations. In
addition, we design a bounding-box guided polygon detection (box-to-polygon) process. Experiments on curved
and arbitrarily shaped datasets demonstrate state-of-theart performances of the proposed TESTR algorithm.

1. Introduction
Text detection and recognition in natural scenes, called
text spotting, is an active area of research in computer vision [11, 15, 23, 24, 29, 33, 38]. Text spotting is of great
importance in real-world applications such as mapping, autonomous driving, and image retrieval. The text spotting
problem typically consists of two sub-tasks: 1) text detection that localizes text boxes in a natural image, and 2) text
recognition that reads the characters from the detected text.
Despite its practical significance and a steady progress observed recently, text spotting remains a challenging problem that requires further improvement. The main difficulty
in text spotting is contributed by multiple factors including
large variations in font, size, style, color, shape, occlusion,
distortion, and layout for natural scene images.
Classical text spotting methods [24, 38] often perform
text detection and recognition in two separate steps. In the
detection module, the regions of interest are proposed for

Location
Decoder

FFN
FFN
FFN

KEM

Backbone

Character
Decoder

FFN

LIGHTHOUSE

DISTRICT

FFN
FFN

Figure 1. Illustration of the overall TESTR pipeline. The input
image is passed through a feature backbone and Transformer encoder, and the multi-scale feature is shared across the location and
character decoder, which predict the coordinates of control points
and characters of the text instance respectively. The canonical
representation of control points serves both polygon vertices and
Bezier curve control points.

text instance detection. After alignment, the features are
then used in the text recognition module. In natural scenes,
text-boxes often appear in arbitrary orientations [50] and
are non-rectangular [24]. This poses further challenges for
the algorithm development that typically requires a number
of heuristics designs with intermediate and post-processing
steps [11, 15, 29, 34].
Transformers [43] have achieved a remarkable success
in natural language processing [4] and computer vision [6].
DEtection TRansformers (DETR) [2] have also made a
profound impact to object detection by removing the proposal anchors and the non-maximum suppression processes
needed in the sliding window based approaches [36]. LETR
[49] extends DETR by adopting Transformers to directly
detect geometric structures such as line segments beyond
the bounding box representation.
Inspired by the DETR family models [2, 16, 49, 52],
we propose TExt Spotting TRansformers (TESTR), a
Transformer-based text spotting method that performs text
detection and recognition in a unified framework. TESTR
avoids the heuristics design and the intermediate stages required in many of the existing text spotting approaches.
The contribution of TESTR is listed as follows.
• We propose a single-encoder dual-decoder framework
that jointly performs curved text instance detection
and recognition using Transformers beyond the stan-

Code available at https://github.com/mlpc-ucsd/TESTR.

9519

