Unsupervised Domain Generalization by Learning a Bridge Across Domains
Sivan Harary*1 , Eli Schwartz*1,2 , Assaf Arbelle*1 ,
Peter Staar1 , Shady Abu-Hussein1,2 , Elad Amrani1,3 , Roei Herzig1,2 ,
Amit Alfassy1,3 , Raja Giryes2 , Hilde Kuehne6,7 , Dina Katabi5 ,
Kate Saenko4,7 , Rogerio Feris7 , Leonid Karlinsky** 1
1

IBM Research, 2 Tel-Aviv University, 3 Technion, 4 Boston University,
5

MIT, 6 Goethe University, 7 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
Painting

Abstract
The ability to generalize learned representations across
significantly different visual domains, such as between real
photos, clipart, paintings, and sketches, is a fundamental
capacity of the human visual system. In this paper, different from most cross-domain works that utilize some (or full)
source domain supervision, we approach a relatively new
and very practical Unsupervised Domain Generalization
(UDG) setup of having no training supervision in neither
source nor target domains. Our approach is based on selfsupervised learning of a Bridge Across Domains (BrAD) an auxiliary bridge domain accompanied by a set of semantics preserving visual (image-to-image) mappings to BrAD
from each of the training domains. The BrAD and mappings
to it are learned jointly (end-to-end) with a contrastive selfsupervised representation model that semantically aligns
each of the domains to its BrAD-projection, and hence implicitly drives all the domains (seen or unseen) to semantically align to each other. In this work, we show how using
an edge-regularized BrAD our approach achieves significant gains across multiple benchmarks and a range of tasks,
including UDG, Few-shot UDA, and unsupervised generalization across multi-domain datasets (including generalization to unseen domains and classes).

1. Introduction
When observing some technical manual with schematic
drawings of equipment for the first time, people do not need
any supervision to associate these schematic drawings to
real complex objects. This demonstrates the importance and
efficiency of one of the basic human capacities - ability to
learn with little to no supervision across multiple visual domains, as well as to effectively generalize to new domains
and even new object classes without additional supervision.
* Equal contribution

Real

BrAD
Sketch

Clipart

Figure 1. Originally, same domain instances are closer to each
other than to instances of the same class in other domains. Naive
application of popular self-supervised learning techniques tends
to separate domains before classes (Section 4). Our approach is
to learn a BrAD - an auxiliary bridge domain (e.g. of edge-like
images) that helps aligning instances of the same class across domains. Arrows indicate forces in feature space applied by our
training losses (Section 3). green = attraction; red = repulsion.

Recent literature, extensively discussed in Section 2, is
rich in works on learning to semantically generalize across
domains without supervision in the target domain(s). The
target domains can be observed as a collection of unlabeled images in Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA),
or even completely unseen during training in Domain Generalization (DG). For both UDA and DG, success in generalization would mean that the desired downstream tasks
(classification, detection, etc.) would successfully transfer
to a new seen or unseen domain. However, in most UDA
and DG works an abundant source domain supervision for
corresponding authors: sivangl∥elisch∥assaf.arbelle∥leonidka@il.ibm.com

5280

