Semi-supervised Semantic Segmentation with Error Localization Network
Donghyeon Kwon1
Suha Kwak1,2
Dept. of CSE, POSTECH1
Graduate School of AI, POSTECH2
http://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/ELN/

Abstract
This paper studies semi-supervised learning of semantic segmentation, which assumes that only a small portion
of training images are labeled and the others remain unlabeled. The unlabeled images are usually assigned pseudo
labels to be used in training, which however often causes
the risk of performance degradation due to the confirmation bias towards errors on the pseudo labels. We present
a novel method that resolves this chronic issue of pseudo
labeling. At the heart of our method lies error localization network (ELN), an auxiliary module that takes an image and its segmentation prediction as input and identifies
pixels whose pseudo labels are likely to be wrong. ELN
enables semi-supervised learning to be robust against inaccurate pseudo labels by disregarding label noises during
training and can be naturally integrated with self-training
and contrastive learning. Moreover, we introduce a new
learning strategy for ELN that simulates plausible and diverse segmentation errors during training of ELN to enhance its generalization. Our method is evaluated on PASCAL VOC 2012 and Cityscapes, where it outperforms all
existing methods in every evaluation setting.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in semantic segmentation have been attributed to supervised learning of deep neural networks [6,
7, 33, 37, 50] on large-scale datasets [10, 12, 15, 32]. However, collecting training data for semantic segmentation is
labour-intensive and time-consuming due to the prohibitive
cost of pixel-wise class labeling, which often leads to a
dataset limited in terms of the number of annotated data and
class diversity. To address this issue, label efficient learning,
such as semi-supervised learning [3, 5, 19, 24, 26, 27, 29,
30, 35, 36], unsupervised learning [9, 46], weakly supervised learning [1, 2, 4, 11, 23, 28, 42, 48], and synthetic-toreal domain adaptation [20, 25, 31, 44, 45, 47, 53], has been
proposed for semantic segmentation.
This paper studies semi-supervised learning of semantic
segmentation, which assumes that only a subset of train-

ing images are assigned segmentation labels while the others remain unlabeled. Undoubtedly, the key to the success of this task is to utilize the unlabeled images effectively. Self-training [5, 27, 35, 49] and contrastive learning [3, 29, 51, 52] are techniques commonly used for the
purpose in literature. Self-training generates pseudo labels
of unlabeled images using a model trained on labeled ones,
and uses them for supervised learning. Meanwhile, contrastive learning forces feature vectors corresponding to the
same pseudo label to be close to each other. Although
these techniques have improved the performance of semisupervised semantic segmentation substantially, they share
a common drawback: Since predictions for unlabeled images are usually corrupted by errors, learning using such
predictions as supervision causes confirmation bias towards
the errors and returns corrupted models consequently. Most
existing methods alleviate this issue simply by not using uncertain predictions as supervision [3, 19, 29, 36], but their
performance depends heavily on hand-tuned thresholds.
A recent approach deals with errors on pseudo labels by
learning and exploiting an auxiliary network that corrects
the errors [27, 35]; this model, called error correction network (ECN), learns from the difference between predictions
of the main segmentation network and their ground truth labels on the labeled subset of training images. Ideally, ECN
can significantly improve the quality of pseudo labels, but
in practice, its advantage is often limited due to the challenges in its training. Since the segmentation network is
quickly overfitted to a small number of labeled images, its
outputs used as input to ECN do not cover a wide variety of
prediction errors that ECN faces in testing, which results in
limited generalization capability of ECN.
We present a novel method that is also dedicated to handling errors on pseudo labels yet better generalizes to those
of arbitrary unlabeled images. The core of our method is
the error localization network (ELN), which identifies pixels with erroneous pseudo labels in the form of binary segmentation. As will be demonstrated empirically, simply disregarding invalid pseudo labels, instead of correcting them,
is sufficient to alleviate the confirmation bias and to learn
accurate segmentation models. More importantly, since er-

9957

