Learning Adaptive Warping for Real-World Rolling Shutter Correction
Mingdeng Cao1 Zhihang Zhong2 Jiahao Wang1 Yinqiang Zheng2
Yujiu Yang1
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
The University of Tokyo

Abstract
This paper proposes the first real-world rolling shutter (RS) correction dataset, BS-RSC, and a corresponding
model to correct the RS frames in a distorted video. Mobile devices in the consumer market with CMOS-based sensors for video capture often result in rolling shutter effects
when relative movements occur during the video acquisition
process, calling for RS effect removal techniques. However, current state-of-the-art RS correction methods often
fail to remove RS effects in real scenarios since the motions are various and hard to model. To address this issue,
we propose a real-world RS correction dataset BS-RSC.
Real distorted videos with corresponding ground truth are
recorded simultaneously via a well-designed beam-splitterbased acquisition system. BS-RSC contains various motions of both camera and objects in dynamic scenes. Further, an RS correction model with adaptive warping is proposed. Our model can warp the learned RS features into
global shutter counterparts adaptively with predicted multiple displacement fields. These warped features are aggregated and then reconstructed into high-quality global shutter frames in a coarse-to-fine strategy. Experimental results
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method, and
our dataset can improve the model’s ability to remove the
RS effects in the real world. The project is available at
https://github.com/ljzycmd/BSRSC.

1. Introduction
Most consumer cameras adopt CMOS sensors for imaging due to their low power consumption, compact design,
and fast imaging. At the same time, most CMOS sensors
have rolling shutter (RS) effects during imaging. Unlike a
global shutter (GS) camera capturing all pixels simultaneously, an RS camera sequentially captures the image pixels row by row. Therefore, the RS distortions would occur in the recorded images and videos when relative movements arise between the camera and objects. The RS distortions significantly impair the visual quality. Moreover, the

distorted images and videos deteriorate the performance of
some downstream tasks, like 3D reconstruction, pose estimation, and depth prediction [3, 8, 10, 16], leading to erroneous, undesirable, and distorted results.
There are usually two ways to mitigate the performance
gap of existing computer vision algorithms working on the
RS distorted and GS images. The first is to keep the original RS images unchanged and adapt the algorithms to the
RS distorted images. Thus, many RS-aware algorithms are
proposed in 3D vision field, e.g., RS structure-from-motion
reconstruction [13, 34], RS stereo [27], RS camera calibration [22] and RS absolute camera pose [1, 3, 4, 18]. An arguable better way is to correct the RS distorted images into
GS images. In this way, we don’t need to modify existing vision algorithms and can obtain visual-friendly images.
Therefore, correcting the rolling shutter (RSC) images is increasingly becoming significant in photography and has attracted considerable research attention recently [2,9,20,24].
Existing RS effect removal methods can be categorized
into single-image- and multi-frame-based. When restoring
the GS image from only one RS image, many external constraints or priors (e.g., geometric priors) are adopted [17,
24, 25, 35] since it is a highly ill-posed problem. Compared
to single-image-based correction, multi-frame-based methods are more general and can utilize motion information
for correction. Due to the great success of convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) on various computer vision tasks
and the proposed synthesized RSC datasets, researchers designed specific model architectures to remove the RS distortions in an end-to-end manner based on multiple frames.
Usually, the motions across multiple frames are modeled
first. Then the GS image corresponding to the reference
RS frame is restored by warping operations. For instance,
Liu et al. [20] predict velocity field from the correlation volume, and Fan et al. [9] utilize PWC-Net framework [28] to
estimate the undistortion flow to correct the RS frame. They
both adopt forward warping to remove the RS effect, and
have achieved some promising results. However, the corrected GS images still suffer from blurs and texture detail
loss for the following reasons: 1) The modeled motions are
inaccurate since there is no ground truth for supervision dur-

17785

