Deterministic Point Cloud Registration via Novel Transformation Decomposition
Yun-Hui Liu1,†
Wen Chen1, * Haoang Li1, * Qiang Nie1,2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
2
Tencent Youtu Lab, Shenzhen, China

Abstract
Given a set of putative 3D-3D point correspondences,
we aim to remove outliers and estimate rigid transformation
with 6 degrees of freedom (DOF). Simultaneously estimating these 6 DOF is time-consuming due to high-dimensional
parameter space. To solve this problem, it is common to
decompose 6 DOF, i.e. independently compute 3-DOF rotation and 3-DOF translation. However, high non-linearity
of 3-DOF rotation still limits the algorithm efficiency, especially when the number of correspondences is large. In
contrast, we propose to decompose 6 DOF into (2+1) and
(1+2) DOF. Specifically, (2+1) DOF represent 2-DOF rotation axis and 1-DOF displacement along this rotation
axis. (1+2) DOF indicate 1-DOF rotation angle and 2DOF displacement orthogonal to the above rotation axis.
To compute these DOF, we design a novel two-stage strategy based on inlier set maximization. By leveraging branch
and bound, we first search for (2+1) DOF, and then the remaining (1+2) DOF. Thanks to the proposed transformation
decomposition and two-stage search strategy, our method
is deterministic and leads to low computational complexity. We extensively compare our method with state-of-theart approaches. Our method is more accurate and robust
than the approaches that provide similar efficiency to ours.
Our method is more efficient than the approaches whose accuracy and robustness are comparable to ours.

1. Introduction
Rigid point cloud registration is to align two 3D point
clouds by an unknown-but-sought transformation with 6 degrees of freedom (DOF) [1]. It is a fundamental problem
in computer vision and robotics. Existing methods can be
classified into two categories in terms of whether the putative 3D-3D point correspondences (corrupted by outliers)
are required. The methods that do not require correspondences typically rely on the initial value, which leads to
low generality [6, 7], or provides low efficiency [36, 8]. To
overcome these limitations, several methods requiring puta* Wen Chen and Haoang Li contributed equally to this work.
† Yun-Hui Liu is corresponding author.

× ×
×
√
√√

√ √
√
√ √
√

2 DOF
of Rotation
2 DOF
ofStage
Rotation
(a)
I
1 of
DOF of
Translation
1 2DOF
Translation
DOF of Rotation

√√
√

True Inlier
Pseudo Inlier
1True
DOFInlier
of TranslationPseudo Inlier

True Inlier

Pseudo Inlier

××
×
√√
√

1 DOF
Rotation
1(b)
DOF
of ofII
Rotation
Stage
DOF
Translation
2 2
DOF
of of
Translation
1 DOF of Rotation
Partial
Outlier
Partial
Outlier
2 DOF of Translation

Partial Outlier

Figure 1. The proposed two-stage transformation estimation and
outlier removal method. (xi , yi ) denotes a 3D-3D point correspondence. (a) In stage I, we search for 2 DOF of rotation, i.e.
rotation axis, and 1 DOF of translation, i.e. displacement along
the rotation axis. The optimal (2+1) DOF fit the most candidate
inliers composed of both true and pseudo inliers. We save candidate inliers and discard partial outliers. (b) In stage II, we search
for the remaining 1 DOF of rotation, i.e. rotation angle, and 2 DOF
of translation, i.e. displacement orthogonal to rotation axis. The
optimal (1+2) DOF fit the largest number of true inliers. We save
true inliers and discard pseudo inliers.

tive correspondences have been proposed [4, 24, 35, 38]. In
practice, putative correspondences can be relatively easily
obtained using the handcrafted or deep learning-based descriptors [11, 14, 29]. In this paper, we consider the cases
that putative correspondences are known.
For a set of putative correspondences, only inliers but
not outliers can be fitted by the same transformation. Accordingly, point cloud registration with putative correspondences is commonly formulated as the inlier set maximization problem [20, 26]. Specifically, our problem aims to
find the optimal 6-DOF transformation that fits the largest
number of (inlier) correspondences. To tackle this problem, a straightforward way is to simultaneously search the
6 DOF [8, 27, 36]. However, their efficiency is unsatisfactory due to the high-dimensional search space. To overcome this limitation, a common strategy is to decompose
the 6 DOF, i.e. independently compute 3-DOF rotation and
3-DOF translation [12, 16, 26, 31, 35]. However, existing
decomposition methods have two main limitations. First,
high non-linearity of 3 DOF of rotation still limits the al-

6348

