Hierarchical Modular Network for Video Captioning
Hanhua Ye1 Guorong Li1 * Yuankai Qi2 Shuhui Wang3,4
Qingming Huang1,3,4 Ming-Hsuan Yang5
1
University of Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing, China
2
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, The University of Adelaide,
3
Key Lab of Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS, Beijing, China,
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China, 5 University of California, Merced
{yehanhua20, liguorong}@mails.ucas.ac.cn, qykshr@gmail.com, wangshuhui@ict.ac.cn,
qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn, mhyang@ucmerced.edu

Abstract
Global content

Video captioning aims to generate natural language descriptions according to the content, where representation
learning plays a crucial role. Existing methods are mainly
developed within the supervised learning framework via
word-by-word comparison of the generated caption against
the ground-truth text without fully exploiting linguistic semantics. In this work, we propose a hierarchical modular
network to bridge video representations and linguistic semantics from three levels before generating captions. In
particular, the hierarchy is composed of: (I) Entity level,
which highlights objects that are most likely to be mentioned in captions. (II) Predicate level, which learns the
actions conditioned on highlighted objects and is supervised by the predicate in captions. (III) Sentence level,
which learns the global semantic representation and is supervised by the whole caption. Each level is implemented by
one module. Extensive experimental results show that the
proposed method performs favorably against the state-ofthe-art models on the two widely-used benchmarks: MSVD
104.0% and MSR-VTT 51.5% in CIDEr score. Code will be
made available at https://github.com/MarcusNerva/HMN.

1. Introduction
Video captioning aims to automatically generate natural language descriptions from videos, which plays an important role in numerous applications, such as assisting
visually-impaired people, human-computer interaction, and
video retrieval [7, 27, 36, 42, 43, 45, 49]. Despite recent advances in this field, it remains a challenging task as a video
usually contains rich and diverse content, but only some information is relevant to caption (e.g., two or three out of
many objects are captured in a caption).
* Corresponding author.

Sentence
a man in blue shirt is talking about a roasted chicken

Action
Predicate
is talking about a roasted chicken

Principal object
Entity

man

shirt

chicken

Figure 1. To effectively bridge video content and linguistic caption, we propose to supervise video representation learning in a
three-level hierarchical structure, i.e., the entity level, the predicate level, and the sentence level.

Existing methods aim to learn effective video representations to generate captions via recurrent decoders, which
can be broadly categorized into two lines of work. The first
one focuses on designing complex video encoders to learn
better video representations [1,5,6,26,44,50,51]. For example, STG-KD [26] and ORG-TRL [51] build object relation
graphs to reason the spatial and temporal relations between
video objects. While GRU-EVE [1] applies Short Fourier
Transform [25] to embed temporal dynamics in visual features, POS+CG [44] develops a cross gating block to fuse
appearance and motion features and make a comprehensive representation. However, the optimization objectives
of these methods are computed word-by-word as captions
generating, disregarding the relevance between video representations and their linguistic counterpart. The other one
focuses on narrowing the semantic gap between video representation and linguistic captions ahead of generating captions [28, 35, 52]. For example, Pan et al. [28] learn to align

17939

