DeepFace-EMD: Re-ranking Using Patch-wise Earth Mover’s Distance
Improves Out-Of-Distribution Face Identification
Hai Phan1,2

Anh Nguyen1

pthai1204@gmail.com

anh.ng8@gmail.com

1

Auburn University

(a) LFW

Stage 1

Flow

2

Carnegie Mellon University

(b) Masked (LFW)

Stage 2

Stage 1

Flow

Stage 2

(c) Sunglasses (LFW)

Stage 1

Flow

Stage 2

(d) Profile (CFP)

Stage 1

Flow

Stage 2

Figure 1. Traditional face identification ranks gallery images based on their cosine distance with the query (top row) at the image-level
embedding, which yields large errors upon out-of-distribution changes in the input (e.g. masks or sunglasses; b–d). We find that re-ranking
the top-k shortlisted faces from Stage 1 (leftmost column) using their patch-wise EMD similarity w.r.t. the query substantially improves
the precision (Stage 2) on challenging cases (b–d). The “Flow” visualization intuitively shows the patch-wise reconstruction of the query
face using the most similar patches (i.e. highest flow) from the retrieved face. See Fig. S4 for a full figure with the top-5 candidates.

Abstract

Face identification (FI) is ubiquitous and drives many
high-stake decisions made by the law enforcement. A common FI approach compares two images by taking the cosine similarity between their image embeddings. Yet, such
approach suffers from poor out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization to new types of images (e.g., when a query face
is masked, cropped or rotated) not included in the training
set or the gallery. Here, we propose a re-ranking approach
that compares two faces using the Earth Mover’s Distance
on the deep, spatial features of image patches. Our extra comparison stage explicitly examines image similarity
at a fine-grained level (e.g., eyes to eyes) and is more robust to OOD perturbations and occlusions than traditional
FI. Interestingly, without finetuning feature extractors, our
method consistently improves the accuracy on all tested
OOD queries: masked, cropped, rotated, and adversarial

while obtaining similar results on in-distribution images.

1. Introduction
Who shoplifted from the Shinola luxury store in Detroit [4]? Who are you to receive unemployment benefits [5]
or board an airplane [1]? Face identification (FI) today
is behind the answers to such life-critical questions. Yet,
the technology can make errors, leading to severe consequences, e.g. people wrongly denied of unemployment benefits [5] or falsely arrested [2–4,7]. Identifying the person in
a single photo remains challenging because, in many cases,
the problem is a zero-shot and ill-posed image retrieval task.
First, a deep feature extractor may not have seen a normal,
non-celebrity person before during training. Second, there
may be too few photos of a person in the database for FI
systems to make reliable decisions. Third, it is harder to
identify when a face in the wild (e.g. from surveillance cameras) is occluded [44, 54] (e.g. wearing masks), distant or

20259

