Structured Local Radiance Fields for Human Avatar Modeling
Zerong Zheng1 , Han Huang2 , Tao Yu1 , Hongwen Zhang1 , Yandong Guo2 , Yebin Liu1
1

Department of Automation, Tsinghua University

2

OPPO Research Institute

Abstract
It is extremely challenging to create an animatable
clothed human avatar from RGB videos, especially for loose
clothes due to the difficulties in motion modeling. To address this problem, we introduce a novel representation on
the basis of recent neural scene rendering techniques. The
core of our representation is a set of structured local radiance fields, which are anchored to the pre-defined nodes
sampled on a statistical human body template. These local
radiance fields not only leverage the flexibility of implicit
representation in shape and appearance modeling, but also
factorize cloth deformations into skeleton motions, node
residual translations and the dynamic detail variations inside each individual radiance field. To learn our representation from RGB data and facilitate pose generalization, we
propose to learn the node translations and the detail variations in a conditional generative latent space. Overall, our
method enables automatic construction of animatable human avatars for various types of clothes without the need
for scanning subject-specific templates, and can generate
realistic images with dynamic details for novel poses. Experiment show that our method outperforms state-of-the-art
methods both qualitatively and quantitatively.

1. Introduction
Animatable human avatar modeling is of great importance in many applications such as content creation and entertainment, and virtual characters have become ubiquitous
in our lives with the rise of computer graphics in movies and
games. Traditional methods for high-quality human avatar
reconstruction are often costly and tedious, due to the difficulties in modeling the complex dynamics of clothes. Besides, they typically presume the availability of a subjectspecific template [22] and its accurate registration to the input frames [6, 78], which are difficult to acquire in practice.
With the rapid development in computer vision in the
past ten years, researchers have started to explore the possibility of automatic human avatar reconstruction without
pre-scanning efforts. Pioneer studies deformed a statisti-

Driving Video

Animation Results

Figure 1. Example results produced by our method. Our
method can learn animatable human avatars with various cloth
topologies and realistic dynamic details. Top row: driving video,
from which the animation poses are extracted. Bottom two rows:
animation results rendered from the front and the back view.

cal human body template (e.g., SMPL [40]) to model the
clothed human geometry and appearance [2–4]. Neural texture maps and image-to-image networks are later adopted to
achieve photo-realistic rendering [36, 37, 58, 65]. Recently,
neural radiance representations, which implicitly encode
shape and appearance using neural networks, are also applied in pursuit of higher-fidelity results [35, 49, 54]. These
methods typically define the radiance field in a canonical
pose, and warp it to live poses using linear blending skinning (LBS) under the guidance of the SMPL surface.
Despite the differences in the representations inside the
aforementioned approaches, we find that there is one thing
in common: they all heavily rely on the skeleton or the
surface of SMPL model for cloth motion modeling. This
is apparent in methods based on the SMPL topology, either using traditional texture maps [2–4] or neural textures
[36, 37, 58, 65]. Even in state-of-the-art methods based on

15893

