Robust Federated Learning with Noisy and Heterogeneous Clients
Xiuwen Fang1 , Mang Ye1,2 *
1
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering,
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
2
Hubei Luojia Laboratory, Wuhan, China
https://github.com/FangXiuwen/Robust_FL

Abstract
Model heterogeneous federated learning is a challenging task since each client independently designs its own
model. Due to the annotation difficulty and free-riding participant issue, the local client usually contains unavoidable
and varying noises, which cannot be effectively addressed
by existing algorithms. This paper starts the first attempt
to study a new and challenging robust federated learning
problem with noisy and heterogeneous clients. We present
a novel solution RHFL (Robust Heterogeneous Federated
Learning), which simultaneously handles the label noise
and performs federated learning in a single framework. It
is featured in three aspects: (1) For the communication between heterogeneous models, we directly align the models
feedback by utilizing public data, which does not require
additional shared global models for collaboration. (2) For
internal label noise, we apply a robust noise-tolerant loss
function to reduce the negative effects. (3) For challenging
noisy feedback from other participants, we design a novel
client confidence re-weighting scheme, which adaptively assigns corresponding weights to each client in the collaborative learning stage. Extensive experiments validate the
effectiveness of our approach in reducing the negative effects of different noise rates/types under both model homogeneous and heterogeneous federated learning settings,
consistently outperforming existing methods.

1. Introduction
Local clients such as mobile devices or whole organizations generally have limited private data and limited generalizability. Therefore, using all clients’ private data to
centralized learn a public model will greatly improve performance. However, due to the existence of data silos and
data privacy, we cannot use traditional centralized learning
* Corresponding Author: Mang Ye (yemang@whu.edu.cn)

horse
Public
dataset

dog
Knowledge distribution
&
Weight

Public data

Clinical
Laboratory Center

cat

Server

General
Hospital

Community
Health Center
Local
heterogeneous
model

Noisy dataset

Noise

Client 1

Client 2

Client k

Figure 1. Illustration of federated learning with noisy and heterogeneous clients, where clients possess heterogeneous local models
and noisy datasets with different noise rates.

in practical applications [19]. To address these challenges,
Federated Learning (FL) has been proposed by McMahan
et al. [33]. Federated learning is a distributed machine
learning framework that enables multiple clients to collaboratively train models with decentralized data. The clients
never share private data with server ensuring basic privacy.
Recently, the widely used federated learning algorithms,
e.g., FedAvg [33] and FedProx [29], are based on averaging
the model parameters of the participating clients. Most of
these federated learning methods [44, 27, 40, 32, 8, 14] are
developed based on the assumption that participating client
models have the same neural architecture.
In real-world scenarios, due to the differences in the personalized requirements [28], each client might expect to design its own model independently [17, 38, 41, 26, 13, 3, 9],
resulting in the model heterogeneous federated learning
problem. For example, when many healthcare organizations
engage in collaborative learning without sharing private

10072

