Learning to Zoom Inside Camera Imaging Pipeline
Chengzhou Tang1∗†

Yuqiang Yang2 * Bing Zeng2
Ping Tan1
Shuaicheng Liu2†
1
Simon Fraser University
2
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China

Abstract
Existing single image super-resolution methods are either designed for synthetic data, or for real data but in the
RGB-to-RGB or the RAW-to-RGB domain. This paper proposes to zoom an image from RAW to RAW inside the camera
imaging pipeline. The RAW-to-RAW domain closes the gap
between the ideal and the real degradation models. It also
excludes the image signal processing pipeline, which refocuses the model learning onto the super-resolution. To these
ends, we design a method that receives a low-resolution
RAW as the input and estimates the desired higher-resolution
RAW jointly with the degradation model. In our method,
two convolutional neural networks are learned to constrain
the high-resolution image and the degradation model in
lower-dimensional subspaces. This subspace constraint converts the ill-posed SISR problem to a well-posed one. To
demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method and the
RAW-to-RAW domain, we conduct evaluations on the RealSR
and the SR-RAW datasets. The results show that our method
performs superiorly over the state-of-the-arts both qualitatively and quantitatively, and it also generalizes well and
enables zero-shot transfer across different sensors.

1. Introduction
Digital zoom is necessary for devices with limited optical zoom capability such as smart phones or consumer
level cameras. The digital zoom can be implemented either
as built-in functionality in the camera preview, where selected distant image areas are enlarged in real-time, or as
post-processing in the editing software, where a single input
image is up-sampled into higher-resolution for more details.
In the past few decades, numerous works [3, 8, 12, 18, 24,
33, 37, 38, 43, 52] have been done on single image superresolution (SISR) because it is less demanding on the input.
Some of these works, especially the learning based ones [39],
assume the degradation kernel follows a manually deﬁned
formulation such as a Gaussian distribution or a Bicubic
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

interpolation, and synthesize paired low-resolution (LR) and
high-resolution (HR) image pairs to design and evaluate the
methods. However, the degradation model on real data is
more complicated than the made assumptions. This domain
gap limits the performances of these methods on real data.
Recently, some works start to explore the SISR problem
on real data and have pushed this ﬁeld forward by several
progresses. Real datasets such as RealSR [5], SR-RAW [51]
and ImagePairs [19], have been proposed, where a LR-HR
pair is captured towards the same scene either with varying
camera focal lengths or with a beam splitter. These datasets
bridge the domain gap and enable to train a model on real
RGB pairs [5, 40, 46]. X. Zhang et al. [51] and Z. Zhang et
al. [53] even take a step further by designing models that
output a higher-resolution RGB image but receive a RAW
image as the input. These models not only zoom an input
image into higher resolution but also serve as implicit image
signal processing (ISP) pipelines to convert a RAW image
to RGB, which could complicate the learning by involving
ISP units and bias the learned model to speciﬁc cameras.
In this paper, we also work on SISR for real data but
in the RAW-to-RAW domain. We design a digital Zoom
component that can be built Into a Camera imaging pipeline,
namely ZIC. ZIC excludes the ISP and only focuses on zooming an image with increased details from RAW to RAW. The
superiority of working in RAW-to-RAW domain is threefold.
First, the degradation kernels from RAW-HR to RAW-LR
images are closer to ideal distributions, which potentially
contributes to better results. Second, RAW images are independent of the ISP, so the model trained focuses on the
resolution enhancement and is less biased to speciﬁc cameras.
Third, RAW images are more ﬂexible during post-processing,
because they contain the original information from sensors.
To the best of our knowledge, ZIC is the ﬁrst SISR method
in the RAW-to-RAW domain for real data. To that end, ZIC
solves the following minimization problem:
min ky − (k ⊗ x) ↓ k, s.t. x ∈ X and k ∈ K,
x,k

(1)

where y is the input RAW image, x is the desired higherresolution output along with a pixel-adaptive degradation
kernel map k, ⊗ denotes the convolution operator, and ↓

17552

