InstaFormer: Instance-Aware Image-to-Image Translation with Transformer
Soohyun Kim

Jongbeom Baek Jihye Park Gyeongnyeon Kim
Korea University, Seoul, Korea

Seungryong Kim*

{shkim1211,baem0911,ghp1112,kkn9975,seungryong kim}@korea.ac.kr
Input image (sunny)

Translated image (rainy)

Abstract
We present a novel Transformer-based network architecture for instance-aware image-to-image translation, dubbed
InstaFormer, to effectively integrate global- and instancelevel information. By considering extracted content features from an image as tokens, our networks discover global
consensus of content features by considering context information through a self-attention module in Transformers.
By augmenting such tokens with an instance-level feature
extracted from the content feature with respect to bounding box information, our framework is capable of learning an interaction between object instances and the global
image, thus boosting the instance-awareness. We replace
layer normalization (LayerNorm) in standard Transformers
with adaptive instance normalization (AdaIN) to enable a
multi-modal translation with style codes. In addition, to
improve the instance-awareness and translation quality at
object regions, we present an instance-level content contrastive loss defined between input and translated image.
We conduct experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of
our InstaFormer over the latest methods and provide extensive ablation studies.

1. Introduction
For a decade, image-to-image translation (I2I), aiming at
translating an image in one domain (i.e., source) to another
domain (i.e., target), has been popularly studied, to the point
of being deployed in numerous applications, such as style
transfer [14, 21], super-resolution [11, 30], inpainting [24,
44], or colorization [62, 63].
In particular, most recent works have focused on designing better disentangled representation to learn a multimodal translation from unpaired training data [22, 33, 43].
While they have demonstrated promising results, most of
these methods only consider the translation on an whole image, and do not account for the fact that an image often contain many object instances of various sizes, thus showing
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Results of InstaFormer for instance-aware image-toimage translation. Our InstaFormer effectively considers globaland instance-level information with Transformers, which enables
high quality instance-level translation.

the limited performance at content-rich scene translation,
e.g., driving scene, which is critical for some downstream
tasks, such as domain adaptive object detection [3], that require well-translated object instances.
To address the aforementioned issues, some methods [3,
27, 49] seek to explicitly consider an object instance in an
image within deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs).
This trend was initiated by instance-aware I2I (INIT) [49],
which treats the object instance and global image separately. Following this [49], some variants were proposed,
e.g., jointly learning translation networks and object detection networks, called detection-based unsupervised I2I
(DUNIT) [3], or using an external memory module, called
memory-guided unsupervised I2I (MGUIT) [27]. While
these methods improve an instance-awareness to some extent, they inherit limitation of CNN-based architectures [3,
27,49], e.g., local receptive fields or limited encoding of relationships or interactions between pixels or patches within
an image which are critical in differentiating an object instance from an whole image and boosting its translation.
To tackle these limitations, for the first time, we present
to utilize Transformer [53] architecture within I2I networks
that effectively integrates global- and instance-level information present in an image, dubbed InstaFormer. We follow
common disentangled representation approaches [22, 33]
to extract both content and style vectors. By considering extracted content features from an image as tokens,

18321

