Cluster-guided Image Synthesis with Unconditional Models
Markos Georgopoulos
Imperial College London

James Oldfield
Queen Mary University of London

m.georgopoulos@imperial.ac.uk

j.a.oldfield@qmul.ac.uk

Grigorios G Chrysos
EPFL

Yannis Panagakis
University of Athens

grigorios.chrysos@epfl.ch

yannisp@di.uoa.gr

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are the driving force behind the state-of-the-art in image generation.
Despite their ability to synthesize high-resolution photorealistic images, generating content with on-demand conditioning of different granularity remains a challenge. This
challenge is usually tackled by annotating massive datasets
with the attributes of interest, a laborious task that is not
always a viable option. Therefore, it is vital to introduce
control into the generation process of unsupervised generative models. In this work, we focus on controllable image
generation by leveraging GANs that are well-trained in an
unsupervised fashion. To this end, we discover that the representation space of intermediate layers of the generator
forms a number of clusters that separate the data according to semantically meaningful attributes (e.g., hair color
and pose). By conditioning on the cluster assignments, the
proposed method is able to control the semantic class of
the generated image. Our approach enables sampling from
each cluster by Implicit Maximum Likelihood Estimation
(IMLE). We showcase the efficacy of our approach on faces
(CelebA-HQ and FFHQ), animals (Imagenet) and objects
(LSUN) using different pre-trained generative models. The
results highlight the ability of our approach to condition
image generation on attributes like gender, pose and hair
style on faces, as well as a variety of features on different
object classes.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Nets (GANs) [8] have demonstrated photo-realistic generation quality by utilizing the rich
corpus of available image datasets. Despite their success,
the value they can add as data generation tools is currently
limited by the lack of control in the synthesized content. In
the typical GAN setting an image is synthesized by sampling

a vector from a latent distribution and performing a forward
pass through a generator network. However, random sampling from the latent distribution provides no control over
semantic attributes in the image space. Such control over the
generated characteristics is vital for tasks like autonomous
driving [39] or (inverse) reinforcement learning [12].

A common solution to the problem of controllable generation is to introduce supervision in the form of class labels [1, 5, 28]. This process requires the annotation of the
training set, which can be a resource-intensive task, in addition to being impractical for a continually-growing number
of attributes of interest. Additionally, even with a rich and
diverse annotated dataset, training a conditional generative
model that can balance control and photo-realism is a nontrivial task that requires tailored engineering tricks (e.g.,
truncation trick [1]).

In this work, we introduce a method that can be implemented on top of any pretrained GAN to introduce control
without the need for labels and supervision. The method
relies on the clusters that are formed in the intermediate
representation space of a generator. We posit that the representational capacity of the network allows for semantic
attributes, like hair color and pose, to be disentangled in this
representation space. Hence, each of the formed clusters corresponds to a different semantic attribute. This assumption
enables us to control image generation by conditioning on
the cluster assignment. Latent sampling from these clusters
is achieved via Implicit Maximum Likelihood Estimation
(IMLE). The proposed framework is summarized in Figure
1. We benchmark the method against GANs that learn clustering in the latent space as well as methods for interpretable
directions in pretrained GANs. The results highlight the
efficacy of our method in consistently generating images of
desired attributes.

11543

