Highly-efficient Incomplete Large-scale Multi-view Clustering with Consensus
Bipartite Graph
Siwei Wang1 , Xinwang Liu1 *, Li Liu2 , Wenxuan Tu1 , Xinzhong Zhu4 ,
Jiyuan Liu1 , Sihang Zhou3 and En Zhu1
1
College of Computer, National University of Defense Technology,
2
College of System Engineering, National University of Defense Technology,
3
College of Intelligence Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology,
4
Zhejiang Normal University.
{wangsiwei13,xinwangliu,twx,liujiyuan13,enzhu}@nudt.edu.cn,Li.Liu@oulu.fi

Abstract
Multi-view clustering has received increasing attention
due to its effectiveness in fusing complementary information without manual annotations. Most previous methods
hold the assumption that each instance appears in all views.
However, it is not uncommon to see that some views may
contain some missing instances, which gives rise to incomplete multi-view clustering (IMVC) in literature. Although many IMVC methods have been recently proposed,
they always encounter high complexity and expensive time
expenditure from being applied into large-scale tasks. In
this paper, we present a flexible highly-efficient incomplete
large-scale multi-view clustering approach based on bipartite graph framework to solve these issues. Specifically, we
formalize multi-view anchor learning and incomplete bipartite graph into a unified framework, which coordinates with
each other to boost cluster performance. By introducing the
flexible bipartite graph framework to handle IMVC for the
first practice, our proposed method enjoys linear complexity
respecting to instance numbers, which is more applicable
for large-scale IMVC tasks. Comprehensive experimental
results on various benchmark datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our proposed algorithm against
other IMVC competitors. The code is available at 1 .

1. Introduction
Multi-view clustering (MVC) comprehensively integrates diverse source information to divide data samples
with similar structures or patterns into the same cluster
without stressful label annotations [4, 10, 12, 14, 17, 19, 20,
24, 30, 44, 46, 48]. In recent years, numerous multi-view
* Corresponding author
1 https://github.com/wangsiwei2010/CVPR22-IMVC-CBG

clustering algorithms have been proposed in computer vision and machine learning communities, which can basically be categorized into the following four categories:
co-training style, multiple kernel clustering (MKC), nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) and graph clustering.
The co-training strategy for MVC proposes to alternately
combine multiple clustering results which provide predictions for the unlabeled data of other views [8]. By this way,
besides extracting the specific information from the corresponding view, the clustering labels can reach an agreement on various views. By following the multiple kernel learning framework, MKC methods unitize kernel matrix from a group of pre-defined kernel matrices in Hilbert
space [4, 17, 19, 21, 33, 42, 43]. Besides, the NMF applies
matrix factorization into multi-view clustering with unified
latent space and graph clustering approaches optimize a
unified graph structure from multi-view data representation
[2, 3, 25, 27, 28, 50]. In addition, deep multi-view clustering
(DMVC) has also been intensively studied [13, 31, 38, 40].
Although existing MVC algorithms have been proposed
to improve performances in various application tasks, most
of them hold a common assumption: all of the views are
complete. Unfortunately, it is not uncommon to see that
some instances may be inaccessible from some views. For
example, for web-page analysis, some have text, audio, and
picture features while others may contain only one or two
kinds [45]. Besides, patients may fail to do all kinds of
medical testing due to financial inconvenience which leads
to sample incompleteness in corresponding views. The incompleteness causes heavy performance degeneration or
even execution failure for existing MVC algorithms, which
makes incomplete multi-view clustering (IMVC) a challenging problem.
To deal with IMVC problem, a series of pioneer work
have been proposed in literature. Existing incomplete multi-

9776

