SimAN: Exploring Self-Supervised Representation Learning of Scene Text
via Similarity-Aware Normalization

1

Canjie Luo1 , Lianwen Jin1,2, * , Jingdong Chen3
South China University of Technology, 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, 3 Ant Group
{canjie.luo, lianwen.jin}@gmail.com, jingdongchen.cjd@antgroup.com

Abstract
Recently self-supervised representation learning has
drawn considerable attention from the scene text recognition community. Different from previous studies using contrastive learning, we tackle the issue from an alternative
perspective, i.e., by formulating the representation learning
scheme in a generative manner. Typically, the neighboring image patches among one text line tend to have similar styles, including the strokes, textures, colors, etc. Motivated by this common sense, we augment one image patch
and use its neighboring patch as guidance to recover itself.
Specifically, we propose a Similarity-Aware Normalization
(SimAN) module to identify the different patterns and align
the corresponding styles from the guiding patch. In this
way, the network gains representation capability for distinguishing complex patterns such as messy strokes and cluttered backgrounds. Experiments show that the proposed
SimAN significantly improves the representation quality and
achieves promising performance. Moreover, we surprisingly find that our self-supervised generative network has
impressive potential for data synthesis, text image editing,
and font interpolation, which suggests that the proposed
SimAN has a wide range of practical applications.

1. Introduction
The computer vision community has witnessed the great
success of supervised learning over the last decade. However, the supervised learning methods heavily rely on
labor-intensive and expensive annotations. Otherwise, they
might suffer from generalization problems. Recently selfsupervised representation learning has become a promising
alternative and is thus attracting growing interest [24,34]. It
has been shown that the self-supervised representations can
benefit subsequent supervised tasks [6–10, 18].
Despite the fast-paced improvements of representation
learning on single object recognition/classification tasks,
* Corresponding author.

f(·)
SeqCLR
Augmentation

f(·)

Projection
Head

Representation
Space

f(·)
(a) Contrastive representation learning
Style

f(·)

Style-Aligned
Content
SimilarityAware Norm.

Content
Representation
Space

Decoder

Augmentation

f(·)

Content
Recovered Image

(b) Generative representation learning (ours)

Figure 1. Scene text representation learning in (a) the contrastive
and (b) the generative manner (ours). We estimate the similarity
of the content representations between the augmented patch and
its neighboring patch, and align the corresponding styles to reconstruct the augmented patch. Only high-quality representations are
distinguishable so that a precise reconstruction can be achieved.

the field of scene text recognition is meeting extra challenges. For instance, multiple characters in one image cannot be regarded as one entity [38, 61]. Directly adopting current non-sequential contrastive learning schemes for
sequence-like characters [44] usually leads to performance
deterioration [1]. This suggests the gap between the nonsequential and sequential schemes. Therefore, it is desirable to design a specific representation learning scheme for
scene text recognition.
As a scene text image containing dense characters is
significantly different from a natural image, SeqCLR [1]

1039

