MAD: A Scalable Dataset for Language Grounding in Videos
from Movie Audio Descriptions
Mattia Soldan1 ,
1

Alejandro Pardo1 , Juan León Alcázar1 , Fabian Caba Heilbron2 ,
Chen Zhao1 , Silvio Giancola1 , Bernard Ghanem1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)

2

Adobe Research

{mattia.soldan, alejandro.pardo, juancarlo.alcazar, chen.zhao,
silvio.giancola, bernard.ghanem}@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
30

CharadesSTA

ActivityNet
Captions

25

Coverage (%)

The recent and increasing interest in video-language research has driven the development of large-scale datasets
that enable data-intensive machine learning techniques. In
comparison, limited effort has been made at assessing the
fitness of these datasets for the video-language grounding task. Recent works have begun to discover significant limitations in these datasets, suggesting that state-ofthe-art techniques commonly overfit to hidden dataset biases. In this work, we present MAD (Movie Audio Descriptions), a novel benchmark that departs from the paradigm
of augmenting existing video datasets with text annotations and focuses on crawling and aligning available audio descriptions of mainstream movies. MAD contains
over 384, 000 natural language sentences grounded in over
1, 200 hours of videos and exhibits a significant reduction in
the currently diagnosed biases for video-language grounding datasets. MAD’s collection strategy enables a novel
and more challenging version of video-language grounding, where short temporal moments (typically seconds long)
must be accurately grounded in diverse long-form videos
that can last up to three hours. We have released MAD’s
data and baselines code at https://github.com/
Soldelli/MAD.

caba@adobe.com

20

DiDeMo

15

TACoS

10

MAD
(ours)

5
0
1

10

Average Duration per Video (min)

100

Figure 1. Comparison of video-language grounding datasets.
The circle size measures the language vocabulary diversity. The
videos in MAD are orders of magnitude longer in duration than
previous datasets (∼110min), annotated with natural, highly descriptive, language grounding (>60K unique words) with very low
coverage in video (∼4.1s). Coverage is defined as the average %
duration of moments with respect to the total video duration.

1. Introduction

tients with memory dysfunction [2, 31]. The importance of
solving this task has resulted in novel approaches and largescale deep-learning architectures that steadily push state-ofthe-art performance.

Imagine you want to find the moment in time, in a movie,
when your favorite actress is eating a Gumbo dish in a New
Orleans restaurant. You could do so by manually scrubbing
the film to ground the moment. However, such a process is
tedious and labor-intensive. This task is known as natural
language grounding [1, 4], and has gained significant momentum in the computer vision community. Beyond smart
browsing of movies, the interest in this task stems from
multiple real-world applications ranging from smart video
search [26, 27], video editing [18, 19, 32], and helping pa-

Despite those advances, recent works [17,34,37] have diagnosed hidden biases in the most common video-language
grounding datasets. Otani et al. [17] have highlighted
that several grounding methods only learn location priors, to the point of disregarding the visual information
and only using language cues for predictions. While recent methods [34, 37] have tried to circumvent these limitations by either proposing new metrics [35] or debiasing strategies [37, 41], it is still unclear if existing grounding datasets [1, 4, 7, 21] provide the right setup to evalu-

5026

