RM-Depth: Unsupervised Learning of Recurrent Monocular Depth
in Dynamic Scenes*
Tak-Wai Hui
H-1 Research
eetwhui@gmail.com

Abstract
Unsupervised methods have showed promising results on
monocular depth estimation. However, the training data
must be captured in scenes without moving objects. To push
the envelope of accuracy, recent methods tend to increase
their model parameters. In this paper, an unsupervised
learning framework is proposed to jointly predict monocular depth and complete 3D motion including the motions of
moving objects and camera. (1) Recurrent modulation units
are used to adaptively and iteratively fuse encoder and decoder features. This improves the single-image depth inference without overspending model parameters. (2) Instead
of using a single set of filters for upsampling, multiple sets
of filters are devised for the residual upsampling. This facilitates the learning of edge-preserving filters and leads to
the improved performance. (3) A warping-based network
is used to estimate a motion field of moving objects without
using semantic priors. This breaks down the requirement
of scene rigidity and allows to use general videos for the
unsupervised learning. The motion field is further regularized by an outlier-aware training loss. Despite the depth
model just uses a single image in test time and 2.97M parameters, it achieves state-of-the-art results on the KITTI
and Cityscapes benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Visual perception is an important ability for human to
understand and perceive the world. As a consequence, research work on scene geometry has attracted a lot of attention over several decades. This promotes the deployment of
technology to numerous applications such as autonomous
vehicle, interactive robot, virtual and augmented reality, and
more. The problem of scene geometry generally involves
estimating depth, camera motion1 , and optical flow from an

image sequence. The above computer vision tasks are often
recovered together since they are coupled through geometric constraints [34, 44].
Unlike depth from triangulation, single-image depth estimation is inherently ill-posed because there are multiple
possible 3D points along each light ray towards the camera
center. Convolutional neural networks have demonstrated
the ability to exploit the relationship between a captured
image and the corresponding scene depth [9, 25]. Recently,
unsupervised methods [13, 14, 34, 44, 47] have achieved appealing performance than the early supervised counterparts.
Their successes primarily rely on the use of structure from
motion. Given at least two images, a novel view generated from an image will be consistent with another image
in the pair if depth and camera motion are correctly estimated. This strictly requires the training data to be captured
in static scenes without moving objects, i.e. scene rigidity.
To get rid of this requirement, stereo image sequences [13]
and masking out dynamic objects [34, 47] are commonly
adopted. Recent works tend to devise a multi-image approach [42], a large amount of model parameters [16], and
semantic priors [39] for improving the depth accuracy.
In this paper, an unsupervised learning framework of recurrent monocular depth, dubbed RM-Depth, is proposed
to jointly predict depth, camera motion, and motion field of
moving objects without requiring static scenes. RM-Depth
requires neither a large number of parameters nor semantic
prior. Particularly, image pairs are used in training while
only a single image is used for depth inference at test time.
The contributions of this work are summarized as follows:
1. Recurrent modulation unit – Fusion of feature maps
across encoder and decoder often appears in top-down
approach [14, 35]. I propose to iteratively refine the
fusion by adaptive modulating of the encoder features
using the hidden state of the decoder. This in turn improves the single-image depth inference.

* This research work is not for commercial use unless a prior arrangement has been made with the author.
1 The words, ego-motion, camera motion and pose, are interchangeably
used throughout the paper.

2. Residual upsampling – Conventionally, feature maps
are upsampled using a single set of filters [37, 45]. I
propose to use multiple sets of filters such that each

1675

