DiffPoseNet: Direct Differentiable Camera Pose Estimation
Chethan M. Parameshwara, Gokul Hari, Cornelia Fermüller, Nitin J. Sanket, Yiannis Aloimonos
University of Maryland, College Park
College Park, MD
{cmparam9,hgokul,fermulcm,nitinsan,jyaloimo}@umd.edu

Abstract
Current deep neural network approaches for camera
pose estimation rely on scene structure for 3D motion estimation, but this decreases the robustness and thereby makes
cross-dataset generalization difficult. In contrast, classical
approaches to structure from motion estimate 3D motion
utilizing optical flow and then compute depth. Their accuracy, however, depends strongly on the quality of the optical flow. To avoid this issue, direct methods have been
proposed, which separate 3D motion from depth estimation, but compute 3D motion using only image gradients
in the form of normal flow. In this paper, we introduce
a network NFlowNet, for normal flow estimation which is
used to enforce robust and direct constraints. In particular,
normal flow is used to estimate relative camera pose based
on the cheirality (depth positivity) constraint. We achieve
this by formulating the optimization problem as a differentiable cheirality layer, which allows for end-to-end learning
of camera pose. We perform extensive qualitative and quantitative evaluation of the proposed DiffPoseNet’s sensitivity
to noise and its generalization across datasets. We compare
our approach to existing state-of-the-art methods on KITTI,
TartanAir, and TUM-RGBD datasets.

1. Introduction
The ability to localize is imperative for applications in
mobile robotics, and solutions based on vision are often
the preferred choice because of size, weight, power constraints and the availability of robust localization methods. Many mathematical frameworks and deep learning approaches have been developed for the problem of visual localization [12, 38] under the umbrella of Visual Odometry
(VO) or Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM).
However, their performance is subpar for commonly encountered challenging conditions in-the-wild that involve
changing lighting, scenes with textureless regions, and dynamic objects.
Classical approaches [5, 8, 9, 24] for localization rely ei-

ther on sparse feature correspondences between images or
on the computation of dense motion fields (optical flow).
One of the difficulties in optical flow estimation is bias due
to noise [15, 16]. For example, if in a patch there are more
gradients in one direction than another, their estimated optical flow will be biased towards the dominant direction.
Even though over the past decade many learning-based approaches have proposed to improve optical flow estimation,
this behavior still persists in optical flow approaches. This is
demonstrated in Fig. 1, which shows the errors produced by
the normal flow algorithm presented in this paper in comparison to three optical flow algorithms from the literature.
As can be seen, all flow algorithms have large errors in regions of non-uniform gradient distributions.
To this end, the pioneers of the field remarked on the observation that the projection of optical flow on the image
gradient direction is resilient to the bias and can be computed robustly. This projection is called the normal flow.
Over the past few decades, a number of methods have been
proposed that use the spatial gradient directly for 3D motion recovery. These methods are commonly called direct
methods. In principle, such methods are robust and computationally cheaper than flow-based feature based approaches
as they use the image brightness directly. However, despite
the advantages of the normal flow formulation, the computational methods to estimate normal flow have not been robust enough to allow deployment in the wild. Thus, optical
flow has been the go-to representation for ego-motion estimation, supported in recent years by the high accuracy and
speed of deep learning algorithms [22, 26, 35]. To improve
the robustness of camera pose estimation (ego-motion), we
propose the first normal flow network NFlowNet.
Further, to estimate pose independent of scene structure
from normal flow, direct approaches utilize minimal constraints. When optical flow or correspondence are available,
pose is estimated using the depth-independent epipolar constraint. However different from these 2D measurements,
normal flow is 1D and thus depth cannot be eliminated from
the equations relating it to scene geometry and 3D motion.
Not making assumptions about the scene structure, the only

6845

