SketchEdit: Mask-Free Local Image Manipulation with Partial Sketches
Yu Zeng
Johns Hopkins University

Zhe Lin
Adobe Research

Vishal M. Patel
Johns Hopkins University

yzeng22@jhu.edu

zlin@adobe.com

vpatel36@jhu.edu

16066 20748

Images

Sketches

Results

Images

Sketches

Results

Figure 1. Our system allows users to interactively manipulate an image by sketching desired contours directly on top of the image.

Abstract
Sketch-based image manipulation is an interactive image
editing task to modify an image based on input sketches from
users. Existing methods typically formulate this task as a
conditional inpainting problem, which requires users to draw
an extra mask indicating the region to modify in addition to
sketches. The masked regions are regarded as holes and filled
by an inpainting model conditioned on the sketch. With this
formulation, paired training data can be easily obtained by
randomly creating masks and extracting edges or contours.
Although this setup simplifies data preparation and model
design, it complicates user interaction and discards useful
information in masked regions. To this end, we investigate a
new paradigm of sketch-based image manipulation: maskfree local image manipulation, which only requires sketch inputs from users and utilizes the entire original image. Given
an image and sketch, our model automatically predicts the
target modification region and encodes it into a structure
agnostic style vector. A generator then synthesizes the new
image content based on the style vector and sketch. The
manipulated image is finally produced by blending the generator output into the modification region of the original image.
Our model can be trained in a self-supervised fashion by

learning the reconstruction of an image region from the style
vector and sketch. The proposed method offers simpler and
more intuitive user workflows for sketch-based image manipulation and provides better results than previous approaches.
More results, code and interactive demo will be available at
https://zengxianyu.github.io/sketchedit.

1. Introduction
Recently there have been increasing efforts and demand
for building interactive photo editing tools on devices with
touch interfaces. Being expressive and easily editable,
sketching is one of the most straightforward ways that
people illustrate their creative ideas and interact with the
apps [2, 10, 25, 44]. Sketch-based image editing is an emerging research topic where the goal is to build models which
can manipulate holistic or local structures of an image according to the user-drawn sketches. It has made a significant
progress in the last few years with advancements in deep
learning and generative models, e.g., GANs [11].
There are two challenges in sketch-based image manipulation: (1) The input sketch roughly indicates where to
modify, but the precise modification region is unknown, and

5951

