Unsupervised Hierarchical Semantic Segmentation with
Multiview Cosegmentation and Clustering Transformers
Tsung-Wei Ke

Jyh-Jing Hwang
Yunhui Guo
UC Berkeley / ICSI

Xudong Wang

Stella X. Yu

Abstract
Unsupervised semantic segmentation aims to discover
groupings within and across images that capture objectand view-invariance of a category without external supervision. Grouping naturally has levels of granularity, creating
ambiguity in unsupervised segmentation. Existing methods
avoid this ambiguity and treat it as a factor outside modeling, whereas we embrace it and desire hierarchical grouping consistency for unsupervised segmentation.
We approach unsupervised segmentation as a pixel-wise
feature learning problem. Our idea is that a good representation shall reveal not just a particular level of grouping, but
any level of grouping in a consistent and predictable manner. We enforce spatial consistency of grouping and bootstrap feature learning with co-segmentation among multiple
views of the same image, and enforce semantic consistency
across the grouping hierarchy with clustering transformers
between coarse- and fine-grained features.
We deliver the first data-driven unsupervised hierarchical semantic segmentation method called Hierarchical Segment Grouping (HSG). Capturing visual similarity and statistical co-occurrences, HSG also outperforms existing unsupervised segmentation methods by a large margin on five
major object- and scene-centric benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation requires figuring out the semantic category for each pixel in an image. Learning such a segmenter from unlabeled data is particularly challenging, as
neither pixel groupings nor semantic categories are known.
If pixel groupings are known, semantic segmentation is
reduced to an unsupervised image (segment) recognition
problem, to which contrast learning methods [9, 20, 59, 62]
could apply, on computed segments instead of images.
If semantic categories are known, semantic segmentation
is reduced to a weakly supervised segmentation problem
with coarse annotations of image-level tags; pixel labeling
can be predicted from image classifiers [32, 34].

image

Revisit [56]

SegSort [26]

Our HSG

Figure 1. We develop an unsupervised semantic segmentation
method by embracing the ambiguity of grouping granularity and
desiring hierarchical grouping consistency for unsupervised segmentation. Top: We formulate it as a pixel-wise feature learning
problem, such that a good feature must be able to best reveal any
level of grouping in a consistent and predictable manner. We bootstrap feature learning from multiview cosegmentation and enforce
grouping consistency with clustering transformers. Bottom: Our
method can not only deliver hierarchical semantic segmentation,
but also outperform the state-of-the-art unsupervised segmentation
methods by a large margin. Shown are sample Cityscapes results.

The fundamental task of unsupervised semantic segmentation is grouping, not semantics in terms of naming, which
is unimportant other than the convenience of tagging segments in the same or different groups. The challenge of
unsupervised semantic segmentation is to discover groupings within and across images that capture object- and viewinvariance of a category without external supervision, so
that (Fig. 1): 1) A baby’s face and body are parts of a whole

2571

