Learning Deep Implicit Functions for 3D Shapes with Dynamic Code Clouds
Tianyang Li1 , Xin Wen1,2 , Yu-Shen Liu1 ,* Hua Su3 , Zhizhong Han4
1
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
JD Logistics, Beijing, China
3
Kuaishou Technology, Beijing, China
4
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, USA
lity20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn wenxin16@jd.com liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn
shlw@kuaishou.com h312h@wayne.edu

Abstract
Deep Implicit Function (DIF) has gained popularity as
an efficient 3D shape representation. To capture geometry details, current methods usually learn DIF using local latent codes, which discretize the space into a regular 3D grid (or octree) and store local codes in grid
points (or octree nodes). Given a query point, the local
feature is computed by interpolating its neighboring local codes with their positions. However, the local codes
are constrained at discrete and regular positions like grid
points, which makes the code positions difficult to be optimized and limits their representation ability. To solve
this problem, we propose to learn DIF with Dynamic Code
Cloud, named DCC-DIF. Our method explicitly associates
local codes with learnable position vectors, and the position vectors are continuous and can be dynamically optimized, which improves the representation ability. In addition, we propose a novel code position loss to optimize
the code positions, which heuristically guides more local
codes to be distributed around complex geometric details.
In contrast to previous methods, our DCC-DIF represents
3D shapes more efficiently with a small amount of local
codes, and improves the reconstruction quality. Experiments demonstrate that DCC-DIF achieves better performance over previous methods. Code and data are available
at https://github.com/lity20/DCCDIF.

1. Introduction
Learning 3D shape representation is important for many
downstream applications in 3D computer vision [3, 14–19].
* The corresponding author is Yu-Shen Liu. This work was supported by National Key R&D Program of China (2018YFB0505400,
2020YFF0304100), the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(62072268), and in part by Tsinghua-Kuaishou Institute of Future Media
Data.

high

low

(a) ConvONet

(b) NGLOD

(c) Ours

(d) Reference

Figure 1. Illustration comparison between our method and other
methods. In (a), we select the grid-based DIF (ConvONet [34]).
In (b), we show the octree-based DIF (NGLOD [38]). (c) is our
DCC-DIF. (d) is Reference. The first row shows the code positions
of different methods, where the warmer color indicates the local
codes are closer to the surface. Compared with other methods,
in which code positions are discrete and regular, our code positions are continuous and more flexible. The second row shows the
reconstruction results, where our method can reconstruct highly
detailed geometry of complex shapes, like teeth.

Explicit 3D representations such as meshes, voxels and
point clouds have been widely used in various tasks [22,
30, 35, 36, 42–47]. Recently, deep implicit function (DIF)
[4, 26–28, 31, 33, 48] has received more popularity as an efficient 3D shape representation, which learns latent codes of
3D shapes by predicting a signed distance or inside/outside
for each query point. Different from explicit 3D representations, DIF can be stored compactly and learn shape priors
by the network. Besides, it is simple and natural to use DIF
in learning-based tasks because of its differentiable ability.
Previous DIF approaches [4, 31, 33] encode the entire
3D shape into a single global latent code through the autoencoder or auto-decoder [39] framework, which leads to

12840

