A Versatile Multi-View Framework for LiDAR-based 3D Object Detection with
Guidance from Panoptic Segmentation
Hamidreza Fazlali

Update
YixuanWeekly
Xu
Yuan Ren

Bingbing Liu∗

• Visualizations to display on front page of paper (71)

Abstract

Prediction
Target

3D object detection using LiDAR data is an indispensable component for autonomous driving systems. Yet, only
a few LiDAR-based 3D object detection methods leverage
segmentation information to further guide the detection process. In this paper, we propose a novel multi-task framework that jointly performs 3D object detection and panoptic segmentation. In our method, the 3D object detection
backbone in Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV) plane is augmented by
the injection of Range-View (RV) feature maps from the 3D
panoptic segmentation backbone. This enables the detection backbone to leverage multi-view information to address
the shortcomings of each projection view. Furthermore,
foreground semantic information is incorporated to ease the
detection task by highlighting the locations of each object
class in the feature maps. Finally, a new center density
heatmap generated based on the instance-level information
further guides the detection backbone by suggesting possible box center locations for objects. Our method works with
any BEV-based 3D object detection method and, based on
experiments on the nuScenes dataset, it provides significant
performance gains. Notably, the proposed method based
on a single-stage CenterPoint 3D object detection network
achieve state-of-the-art performance on nuScenes 3D Detection Benchmark with 67.3 NDS.

1. Introduction
Over the past few years, there has been remarkable
progress in autonomous vehicles (AVs) vision systems for
understanding complex 3D environments [8, 9, 31]. 3D object detection is one of the core computer vision tasks that
empowers AVs for robust decision-making. In this task,
each foreground object, such as a car, a pedestrian, etc.,
needs to be accurately classified and localized by a 3D
bounding box with 7 degrees of freedom (DOF), including
the 3D box center location (x, y, z), size (l, w, h), and yaw
angle (α).
∗ All authors are with Huawei Noah's Ark Lab, Canada at
the time of writing.
{hamidreza.fazlali1, richard.xu2, yuan.ren3,
liu.bingbing}@huawei.com

Figure 1. The proposed center density heatmap (colored in green)
guides the detection head toward possible box center regions on
the BEV plane. The blue and red boxes represent predictions and
ground truth, respectively. Best viewed in color.

LiDAR-based 3D object detection methods rely on different strategies for 3D point cloud data representation.
Some of these detection methods [13,17,28] are categorized
as point-based methods. These methods directly process
the raw point cloud to extract useful information. While
they usually achieve high accuracy, their computational cost
is significant. The other subset of LiDAR-based 3D object detection methods are known as grid-based methods
[9,18,26,31]. These methods transform the unordered point
cloud into regular 3D volumetric grids, i.e., voxels or pillars, and extract discriminative features from the points inside each gird cell. The extracted features are further processed by 2D or 3D Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN).
Although point sub-sampling helps grid-based methods to
be computationally efficient, some information is lost during projection and discretization [27].
Many of the points in each LiDAR scan represent the
background region, including drivable surface, sidewalk,
vegetation, etc. Feeding all this information to a 3D object
detection algorithm without providing extra clues, e.g., semantic information, makes the recognition and localization
process challenging. Several works [17, 22, 28] have exploited a binary or semantic segmentation model for filtering background points or providing extra semantic features
that can guide the proposal generation or detection process.
Inspired by this notion of providing guidance, we leverage 3D panoptic segmentation as an auxiliary task for guiding and further improving the performance of Bird’s-EyeView (BEV) based 3D object detection algorithms. A 3D
panoptic segmentation method predicts the semantic class

17192

