GaTector: A Unified Framework for Gaze Object Prediction

1. Introduction
Gaze estimation (GE) aims at determining the direction
and point that a person is staring at [30]. As gaze behavior
is an essential aspect of human social behavior [7, 19], we
can infer potential information based on the staring object.
For example, in front of the bus station, a person looking at
his watch may indicate that he has something urgent to do.
Customers staring at the product may want to purchase it in
the shopping mall. The stared object can generally reveal
our state, e.g. what they are doing, or what they plan to do.
* Corresponding author.

Scene Image

Head
Backbone

Prediction

Scene
Backbone

Point:
(172, 204)

Gaze Point

Head Image
Point:
(172, 204)

Scene Image

Head Image

Shared
Backbone

Prediction

Gaze object prediction is a newly proposed task that aims
to discover the objects being stared at by humans. It is of
great application significance but still lacks a unified solution framework. An intuitive solution is to incorporate
an object detection branch into an existing gaze prediction
method. However, previous gaze prediction methods usually
use two different networks to extract features from scene image and head image, which would lead to heavy network architecture and prevent each branch from joint optimization.
In this paper, we build a novel framework named GaTector to tackle the gaze object prediction problem in a unified
way. Particularly, a specific-general-specific (SGS) feature
extractor is firstly proposed to utilize a shared backbone to
extract general features for both scene and head images. To
better consider the specificity of inputs and tasks, SGS introduces two input-specific blocks before the shared backbone
and three task-specific blocks after the shared backbone.
Specifically, a novel Defocus layer is designed to generate
object-specific features for the object detection task without
losing information or requiring extra computations. Moreover, the energy aggregation loss is introduced to guide the
gaze heatmap to concentrate on the stared box. In the end,
we propose a novel wUoC metric that can reveal the difference between boxes even when they share no overlapping
area. Extensive experiments on the GOO dataset verify the
superiority of our method in all three tracks, i.e. object detection, gaze estimation, and gaze object prediction.

(b) Scene-Head Unified

Abstract

(a) Scene-Head Separated

Binglu Wang,* Tao Hu, Baoshan Li, Xiaojuan Chen, Zhijie Zhang
Xi’an University of Architecture and Technology, China

Gaze Point

Gaze Object

Box:
(163,175, 182, 233 )
Category:
Locally Mango

Figure 1. Illustration of the gaze object prediction approaches. (a)
Previous gaze prediction methods use two separate backbones to
tackle scene image and head image, respectively. (b) The proposed
SGS feature extractor can produce features from scene image and
head image in a unified manner.

In the gaze estimation community, researchers usually
employ two separated backbones to process the entire scene
image and the head image. This scene-head separated structure was first proposed by Recasens et al. [30], where one
backbone captures holistic cues from the entire scene image, and the other backbone analyzes the details from the
head image. Later, Lian et al. [21] proposed the multi-scale
gaze direction fields to analyze the head image precisely.
Recently, Chong et al. [4] elaborately designed interactions
between the head branch and the scene branch and utilized
deconvolutional layers to produce a fine-grained heatmap.
In general, the gaze estimation performance has kept improving in recent years while the network architecture gradually gets complex. Existing models only predict the gaze
area that people may stare at rather than precisely predicting the location of the object been be stared at. Tomas et
al. [38] recently pointed out that it has significant practical
usage to identify the stared thing. As shown in Fig. 1, from
the bounding box of the stared item, we can infer that the
person is likely to buy the Locally Mango product, which is
beyond the scope of the traditional gaze estimation task.
However, performing gaze object prediction is nontrivial and faces the following challenges, i.e. heavy network architecture, inconsistent requirements about image

19588

