Do learned representations respect causal relationships?
Lan Wang and Vishnu Naresh Boddeti
Michigan State University
wanglan3,vishnu@msu.edu

Abstract

smiling

Gender

Data often has many semantic attributes that are
causally associated with each other. But do attributespecific learned representations of data also respect the
same causal relations? We answer this question in three
steps. First, we introduce NCINet, an approach for observational causal discovery from high-dimensional data. It
is trained purely on synthetically generated representations
and can be applied to real representations, and is specifically designed to mitigate the domain gap between the
two. Second, we apply NCINet to identify the causal relations between image representations of different pairs of attributes with known and unknown causal relations between
the labels. For this purpose, we consider image representations learned for predicting attributes on the 3D Shapes,
CelebA, and the CASIA-WebFace datasets, which we annotate with multiple multi-class attributes. Third, we analyze the effect on the underlying causal relation between
learned representations induced by various design choices
in representation learning. Our experiments indicate that
(1) NCINet significantly outperforms existing observational
causal discovery approaches for estimating the causal relation between pairs of random samples, both in the presence
and absence of an unobserved confounder, (2) under controlled scenarios, learned representations can indeed satisfy the underlying causal relations between their respective
labels, and (3) the causal relations are positively correlated
with the predictive capability of the representations. Code
and annotations are available at: https://github.
com / human - analysis / causal - relations between-representations.

1. Introduction
Consider the face image in Fig. 1a. Automated face
analysis systems typically involve extracting semantic attributes from the face. These attributes are often related
through an underlying causal mechanism governing the relations between them. Modern computer vision systems excel at predicting such attributes by learning from large-scale

Facial hair

no glasses

blonde hair

no beard

Smiling

female

Mouth
Eyewear

mouth open

Eyes

eyes visible

Attribute Labels

Causal Relations from Attribute Labels

(a) Illustration of causal relations between attribute labels
Gender:

Gender
Facial hair

Facial hair:
Hair color:
Smiling:
Mouth:

?
Smiling

Eyes:
Eyewear:
Attribute-Specific Representations

Mouth
Eyewear

Eyes
Causal Relations from Representations

(b) Causal relations between attribute-specific learned representations

Figure 1. Visual data may have multiple causally associated attributes. The goal of this paper is to determine whether attributespecific learned representations respect the underlying causal relationships between the attributes? And if so, to what extent?

annotated datasets. This is achieved by learning compact
attribute-specific representations of the image from which
the attribute prediction is made. This setting naturally raises
the following questions (Fig. 1b): (1) Can we estimate the
causal relations between high-dimensional representations
purely from observational data with high accuracy?, (2)
Do the learned attribute-specific representations also satisfy the same underlying causal relations, and if so to what
extent?, and finally (3) How are the causal relations affected
by factors such as the extent of training, overfitting, network
architecture, etc. Answering these questions is the primary
goal of this paper.
Our work is motivated by the empirical observation that
modern representation learning algorithms are inclined to
uncontrollably absorb all correlations in the data [50]. Consequently, while such systems have exhibited significantly
improved empirical performance across many applications,
it has also led to unintended consequences, ranging from
bias against demographic groups [4] to loss of privacy by
extracting and leaking sensitive information [49]. Identifying the causal relations between representations can help

264

