Unsupervised Learning of Accurate Siamese Tracking
†

Qiuhong Shen1, , Lei Qiao2 , Jinyang Guo 3 , Peixia Li 3 , Xin Li 4 ,
Bo Li 2 , Weitao Feng 3 , Weihao Gan 2,5 , Wei Wu 2,5 , Wanli Ouyang 3,5
1
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen) 2 SenseTime Research
3
The University of Sydney 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory 5 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{shenqiuhong0905,xinlihitsz}@gmail.com, {qiaolei,libo,ganweihao,wuwei}@sensetime.com,
{jinyang.guo,peixia.li,weitao.feng,wanli.ouyang}@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Unsupervised learning has been popular in various computer vision tasks, including visual object tracking. However, prior unsupervised tracking approaches rely heavily
on spatial supervision from template-search pairs and are
still unable to track objects with strong variation over a long
time span. As unlimited self-supervision signals can be obtained by tracking a video along a cycle in time, we investigate evolving a Siamese tracker by tracking videos forwardbackward. We present a novel unsupervised tracking framework, in which we can learn temporal correspondence both
on the classification branch and regression branch. Specifically, to propagate reliable template feature in the forward
propagation process so that the tracker can be trained in
the cycle, we first propose a consistency propagation transformation. We then identify an ill-posed penalty problem in
conventional cycle training in backward propagation process. Thus, a differentiable region mask is proposed to select features as well as to implicitly penalize tracking errors
on intermediate frames. Moreover, since noisy labels may
degrade training, we propose a mask-guided loss reweighting strategy to assign dynamic weights based on the quality of pseudo labels. In extensive experiments, our tracker
outperforms preceding unsupervised methods by a substantial margin, performing on par with supervised methods on
large-scale datasets such as TrackingNet and LaSOT. Code
is available at https://github.com/FlorinShum/ULAST.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking has become an integral part of various
video applications such as autonomous driving and video
recognition. In the mainstream of visual object tracking,
deep learning-based trackers are dominant [28], requiring
† Work performed when Qiuhong Shen is an intern at SenseTime.

a large number of labeled videos. Since the labeled data
occupy a relatively small portion of practical scenes, the
trained tracker cannot reliably track previously unseen objects. Thus, learning from unlabeled videos becomes a
promising approach. Prior works on unsupervised tracking
fall into two categories: exploiting self-supervision signals
in videos from either the spatial or temporal dimensions.
For the first category [24, 33], the focus is on how to construct a template-search pair using a still frame. Since these
methods are limited by the inability to learn temporal correspondence over long periods of time, trained trackers can
no longer track objects with strong variation. To cope with
the appearance variations that occur during online tracking,
we center our attention on methods in the latter category,
exploiting the temporal self-supervision signal in videos.
In supervised tracking methods, box-regression branch
has been demonstrated to be effective to capture the objects
with large scale variation along temporal dimension [4, 22].
However, in existing unsupervised methods, this branch is
always absent [33, 34, 38]. Recently, USOT [47] introduced
a box-regression head, but the tracker is initially trained
with template-search pairs from single frames, followed by
cycle memory training to enhance the robustness of classification branch, whereas the box-regression branch is trained
with spatial supervision alone. In this paper, we aim to train
a better tracker by learning temporal correspondence both
on the classification branch and on the regression branch.
However, we identify there are three critical challenges.
First, despite unlimited self-supervision can be obtained
by tracking a video along a cycle in time, how to explore the
self-supervision signal in temporal dimension of videos for
training a tracker equipped with a box-estimation branch is
not well explored in existing methods. In cycle training, as
illustrated in Fig. 1, a tracker is assumed to be capable of
tracking back to the initial location. The tracker is evolved
in the cycle by utilizing the inconsistency between start and
end location in initial frames. However, when training from

8101

