ProposalCLIP: Unsupervised Open-Category Object Proposal Generation
via Exploiting CLIP Cues
Hengcan Shi, Munawar Hayat, Yicheng Wu, Jianfei Cai
Department of Data Science and AI, Monash University, Australia
{hengcan.shi, munawar.hayat, yicheng.wu, jianfei.cai}@monash.edu

Abstract
Object proposal generation is an important and fundamental task in computer vision. In this paper, we propose ProposalCLIP, a method towards unsupervised opencategory object proposal generation. Unlike previous works
which require a large number of bounding box annotations and/or can only generate proposals for limited object categories, our ProposalCLIP is able to predict proposals for a large variety of object categories without annotations, by exploiting CLIP (contrastive language-image
pre-training) cues. Firstly, we analyze CLIP for unsupervised open-category proposal generation and design an objectness score based on our empirical analysis on proposal
selection. Secondly, a graph-based merging module is proposed to solve the limitations of CLIP cues and merge fragmented proposals. Finally, we present a proposal regression module that extracts pseudo labels based on CLIP cues
and trains a lightweight network to further refine proposals.
Extensive experiments on PASCAL VOC, COCO and Visual Genome datasets show that our ProposalCLIP can better generate proposals than previous state-of-the-art methods. Our ProposalCLIP also shows benefits for downstream
tasks, such as unsupervised object detection.

1. Introduction
Object proposal generation aims to predict a number of
category-agnostic bounding box proposals for all objects
in an image. It serves as a fundamental and crucial step
towards many higher-level tasks, such as object detection
[11, 23], object segmentation [12, 34–36] and image captioning [19, 24]. How to effectively generate as few as possible proposals to cover all objects is the key challenge in
object proposal generation.
Traditional proposal generation methods [1, 6, 41, 47, 50]
often utilizes low-level cues (e.g., color, texture, gradient
and/or edge) to select proposals from sliding window boxes.
In recent years, deep-learning-based methods [18,22,31,50]

a photo of a bear
a photo of a teddy bear
a photo of a dog
a photo of a person
a photo of a cow
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

Top-5 similarity
a photo of a hair drier
a photo of a remote
a photo of a cell phone
a photo of a laptop
a photo of a tv
0.0

0.1 0.2 0.3

0.4

Top-5 similarity

Figure 1. Examples of CLIP [28] image-text matching results.
This pre-trained model well recognizes objects of open categories.
However, it can only highlight a single object in an image. For
example, the “chair” and “laptop” are not recognized in the bottom
image.

take high-level semantics from CNNs or Transformers as
cues to select or regress proposals. Although these deeplearning-based methods significantly improve the proposal
generation performance, they require a huge number of
bounding box annotations for training, which is very laborintensive, especially for large-scale datasets. Meanwhile,
due to the significant annotation effort required, only objects of a limited number of categories can be labeled. Thus,
these supervised methods can only generate proposals for
limited object categories. However, real-world applications
such as object retrieval [2, 13], image captioning [19, 24]
and referring grounding [27, 45] usually require object proposals of diverse categories.
Some recent efforts [16, 37, 42, 46] aim to address these
challenges. ORE [16] and OVR-CNN [46] leverage incremental learning and image caption supervisions to rec-

9611

