Multi-Level Representation Learning with Semantic Alignment for Referring
Video Object Segmentation

1

Dongming Wu1,2∗‡ , Xingping Dong2∗ , Ling Shao3 , Jianbing Shen4†
Beijing Institute of Technology, 2 Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
3
Terminus Group, China, 4 SKL-IOTSC, University of Macau

wudongming@bit.edu.cn, {xingping.dong, shenjiangbingcg}@gmail.com, ling.shao@ieee.org

∗Equal contribution. †Corresponding author: Jianbing Shen. ‡Work
was done while Dongming Wu was an intern at IIAI.

(b)



(c)



(d)

✓

Query: A lion is walking
towards right side

Frame-level
Modeling
Query: A lion lying on a
high rock

Object-level
Modeling

⋯

Given a natural language expression, referring video object segmentation (RVOS) aims to predict the most relevant
visual target from a video. It has wide applications, including video editing, virtual reality and human-robot interaction [49]. Different from the regular unsupervised or semisupervised video object segmentation (VOS) [12, 21, 33, 53,
54], which localizes objects with salience or annotations of
key frames, RVOS requires cross-modal understanding be-

✓

⋯

1. Introduction

(a)

⋯

Referring video object segmentation (RVOS) is a challenging language-guided video grounding task, which requires
comprehensively understanding the semantic information
of both video content and language queries for object
prediction. However, existing methods adopt multi-modal
fusion at a frame-based spatial granularity. The limitation
of visual representation is prone to causing vision-language
mismatching and producing poor segmentation results. To
address this, we propose a novel multi-level representation
learning approach, which explores the inherent structure
of the video content to provide a set of discriminative
visual embedding, enabling more effective vision-language
semantic alignment. Specifically, we embed different visual
cues in terms of visual granularity, including multi-frame
long-temporal information at video level, intra-frame spatial semantics at frame level, and enhanced object-aware
feature prior at object level. With the powerful multi-level
visual embedding and carefully-designed dynamic alignment, our model can generate a robust representation for
accurate video object segmentation. Extensive experiments
on Refer-DAVIS17 and Refer-YouTube-VOS demonstrate
that our model achieves superior performance both in
segmentation accuracy and inference speed.

Video-level
Modeling

⋯

Abstract

Figure 1. Visual comparison among the different-level modelings. The simple frame-level modeling has difficulty in recognizing (b) the moving object or (c) the occluded and small object. In
contrast, our multi-level modeling offers a joint way to leverage
the long-temporal and spatial salient cues for cross-modal alignment, thus providing more accurate results (a) (d).

tween the language query and video content.
As a human recognizes a referent object with the guidance of language, it is natural to rely on three steps: 1) observe its appearance (i.e., frame-based), 2) check its movement based on multiple frames (i.e., video-based), 3) shift
more attention to the occluded or small objects (i.e., objectbased). Most current approaches [1, 25, 43] simply leverage
successful referring image comprehension methods to the
cross-model understanding. They either use referring image
grounding [24, 31, 58, 60] to generate target object bounding boxes as proposals, or utilize referring image segmentation directly [6, 10, 18, 22, 27, 56]. However, these solutions build on the simple frame-level visual representation
to perform frame-sentence interaction. These frame-level
modeling methods suffer from two limitations compared to
the human recognition system: ignoring long-temporal information and lacking attention to salient spatial objects.
The limitation of visual representations causes the mis-

4996

