Surpassing the Human Accuracy:
Detecting Gallbladder Cancer from USG Images with Curriculum Learning
Soumen Basu1 , Mayank Gupta1 , Pratyaksha Rana2 , Pankaj Gupta2 , Chetan Arora1
1
Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi, India
2
Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, India

Abstract
We explore the potential of CNN-based models for gallbladder cancer (GBC) detection from ultrasound (USG) images as no prior study is known. USG is the most common
diagnostic modality for GB diseases due to its low cost and
accessibility. However, USG images are challenging to analyze due to low image quality, noise, and varying viewpoints
due to the handheld nature of the sensor. Our exhaustive
study of state-of-the-art (SOTA) image classification techniques for the problem reveals that they often fail to learn
the salient GB region due to the presence of shadows in the
USG images. SOTA object detection techniques also achieve
low accuracy because of spurious textures due to noise or
adjacent organs. We propose GBCNet to tackle the challenges in our problem. GBCNet first extracts the regions
of interest (ROIs) by detecting the GB (and not the cancer), and then uses a new multi-scale, second-order pooling
architecture specializing in classifying GBC. To effectively
handle spurious textures, we propose a curriculum inspired
by human visual acuity, which reduces the texture biases
in GBCNet. Experimental results demonstrate that GBCNet significantly outperforms SOTA CNN models, as well
as the expert radiologists. Our technical innovations are
generic to other USG image analysis tasks as well. Hence,
as a validation, we also show the efficacy of GBCNet in
detecting breast cancer from USG images. Project page
with source code, trained models, and data is available at
https://gbc-iitd.github.io/gbcnet.

1. Introduction
According to GLOBOCAN 2018 [10], worldwide about
165,000 people die of GBC annually. For most patients, GBC
is detected at an advanced stage, with a mean survival rate
for patients with advanced GBC of six months and a 5-year
survival rate of 5% [28,41]. Detecting GBC at an early stage
could ameliorate the bleak survival rate.
Lately, machine learning models based on convolutional

Figure 1. (a), (b), and (c) Normal, benign, and malignant GB sample in USG images, respectively. While normal or benign GB have
regular anatomy, clear boundary is absent in malignant GB. (d) A
malignant (biopsy-proven) GB sample. (e) Shadows having visual
traits of a GB leads to localization error in ResNet50. (f) GBCNet
tackles shadow artifacts well. (g) Another sample of malignant
GB . (h) The radiologist incorrectly diagnosed the GB as benign
based on the stone and wall thickening. (i) GBCNet helps the radiologist to identify the salient region with liver infiltration by the
GB , a critical feature of GBC , and correct the prediction.

neural network (CNN) architectures have made transformational progress in radiology, and medical diagnosis for diseases such as breast cancer, lung cancer, pancreatic cancer,
and melanoma [3,5,16,17,29]. However, their usage is conspicuously absent for the GBC detection. Although there has
been prior work involving segmentation and detection of the
GB abnormalities such as stones and polyps [14, 31, 35],
detection of GBC is missing from the list. A search on
Google Scholar with keywords “artificial intelligence” and
“gallbladder cancer” returned 204 articles between 2015-

20886

