GeoNeRF: Generalizing NeRF with Geometry Priors
Mohammad Mahdi Johari
Idiap Research Institute, EPFL

Yann Lepoittevin
ams OSRAM

François Fleuret
University of Geneva, EPFL

mohammad.johari@idiap.ch

yann.lepoittevin@ams.com

francois.fleuret@unige.ch

Figure 1. Our generalizable GeoNeRF model infers complex geometries of objects in a novel scene without per-scene optimization and
synthesizes novel images of higher quality than the existing works: IBRNet [54] and MVSNeRF [6].

Abstract
We present GeoNeRF, a generalizable photorealistic
novel view synthesis method based on neural radiance
fields. Our approach consists of two main stages: a geometry reasoner and a renderer. To render a novel view, the
geometry reasoner first constructs cascaded cost volumes
for each nearby source view. Then, using a Transformerbased attention mechanism and the cascaded cost volumes,
the renderer infers geometry and appearance, and renders detailed images via classical volume rendering techniques. This architecture, in particular, allows sophisticated occlusion reasoning, gathering information from
consistent source views. Moreover, our method can easily be fine-tuned on a single scene, and renders competitive results with per-scene optimized neural rendering methods with a fraction of computational cost. Experiments show that GeoNeRF outperforms state-of-theart generalizable neural rendering models on various synthetic and real datasets. Lastly, with a slight modification to the geometry reasoner, we also propose an alternative model that adapts to RGBD images. This model directly exploits the depth information often available thanks
to depth sensors. The implementation code is available at
https://www.idiap.ch/paper/geonerf.

(NeRF) [37] made a significant impact on this research area
by implicitly representing the 3D structure of the scene and
rendering high-quality novel images. Our work addresses
the main drawback of NeRF, which is the requirement to
train from scratch for every scene separately. The per-scene
optimization of NeRF is lengthy and requires densely captured images from each scene.
Approaches like pixelNeRF [61], GRF [51], MINE [29],
SRF [8], IBRNet [54], MVSNeRF [6], and recently introduced NeRFormer [43] address this issue and generalize
NeRF rendering technique to unseen scenes. The common
motivation behind such methods is to condition the NeRF
renderer with features extracted from source images from
a set of nearby views. Despite the generalizability of these
models to new scenes, their understanding of the scene geometry and occlusions is limited, resulting in undesired artifacts in the rendered outputs. MVSNeRF [6] constructs a
low-resolution 3D cost volume inspired by MVSNet [58],
which is widely used in the Multi-View Stereo research, to
condition and generalize the NeRF renderer. However, it
has difficulty rendering detailed images and does not deal
with occlusions in a scene. In this work, we take MVSNeRF
as a baseline and propose the following improvements.

1. Introduction

• We introduce a geometry reasoner in the form of cascaded cost volumes (Section 3.1) and train it in a semisupervised fashion (Section 3.4) to obtain fine and
high-resolution priors for conditioning the renderer.

Novel view synthesis is a long-standing task in computer vision and computer graphics. Neural Radiance Fields

• We combine an attention-based model which deals
with information coming from different source views

18365

