Neural Compression-Based Feature Learning for Video Restoration
Jiahao Li 2
Bin Li2
Dong Liu1
Yan Lu2
Cong Huang1 *
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Microsoft Research Asia
hcy96@mail.ustc.edu.cn, dongeliu@ustc.edu.cn, {li.jiahao, libin, yanlu}@microsoft.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Video restoration aims to recover the high-quality video
from the degraded input. Typical degradation includes various noises, rain, haze, etc. It has a wide range of applications, but this problem is still under-explored. Different
from image restoration that focuses on the intrinsic proprieties in single image [44], video restoration relies more on
extracting and utilizing temporal features for better quality.
Recent video restoration methods mainly focus on network structure design for better extracting temporal features. For example, RViDeNet [43] and EDVR [36] use
deformable convolution to align the features of neighboring
frames. BasicVSR [7] designs a bi-directional feature propagation network. BasicVSR++ [8] introduces the secondorder grid propagation network structure and flow-guided
* This work was done when Cong Huang was an intern at Microsoft
Research Asia.

Restoration

Noisy temporal
features 𝒄𝒕
Noise frame 𝑥𝑡

(a) Previous video restoration framework
Prior
Model

Noise-robust
temporal features ෤𝒄𝒕

Feature
Feature
Encoder Adaptive Decoder
quantization
Noisy temporal
features 𝒄𝒕

Neural compression-based
feature learning

Restoration

Noise frame 𝑥𝑡

(b) Our video restoration framework
𝒄𝒕
𝒄෤ 𝒕
𝒈𝒕
𝒄𝒕

Ours

BasicVSR++
EDVR

PSNR (dB)

How to efficiently utilize the temporal features is crucial,
yet challenging, for video restoration. The temporal features usually contain various noisy and uncorrelated information, and they may interfere with the restoration of the
current frame. This paper proposes learning noise-robust
feature representations to help video restoration. We are inspired by that the neural codec is a natural denoiser. In
neural codec, the noisy and uncorrelated contents which
are hard to predict but cost lots of bits are more inclined
to be discarded for bitrate saving. Therefore, we design
a neural compression module to filter the noise and keep
the most useful information in features for video restoration. To achieve robustness to noise, our compression module adopts a spatial-channel-wise quantization mechanism
to adaptively determine the quantization step size for each
position in the latent. Experiments show that our method
can significantly boost the performance on video denoising,
where we obtain 0.13 dB improvement over BasicVSR++
with only 0.23x FLOPs. Meanwhile, our method also obtains SOTA results on video deraining and dehazing.

Direct fusion without any refinement

𝑐𝑡

BasicVSR
FastDVDNet
EMVD-L

Runtime (ms)
𝒈𝒕

(c) t-SNE visualization of 𝒄𝒕 , 𝒄෤ 𝒕 , and 𝒄𝒕

(d) PSNR-Runtime comparison

Figure 1. (a) Previous framework without temporal feature refinement. (b) Our framework via neural compression-based feature
learning. (c) t-SNE [35] visualization. cgt
t are sampled from clean
video (hypersmooth, Set8 [34]). For ct and c̃t , we add different additive white Gaussian noises (same noise σ but different noise random seeds) to the same input video to sample these feature points.
It shows that c̃t are more robust to noise and get closer to cgt
t . (d)
Performance comparison on video denoising (Set8, noise σ = 50).

deformable alignment network. However, these methods
directly use the extracted temporal features without any refinement. The temporal features usually contain lots of
noisy and irrelevant information, which interferes with the
restoration of the current frame. In this paper, we take video
denoising as a case study and explore how to utilize the extracted temporal features efficiently.
We propose a novel neural compression-based solution
to refine the features and learn noise-robust feature repre-

5872

