Expressive Talking Head Generation with Granular Audio-Visual Control
Borong Liang1 * Yan Pan2,3 * Zhizhi Guo1† Hang Zhou1† Zhibin Hong1
Xiaoguang Han2,3 Junyu Han1 Jingtuo Liu1 Errui Ding1 Jingdong Wang1
1
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc.,
2
SSE, CUHK-Shenzhen, 3 FNii, CUHK-Shenzhen
{liangborong,zhouhang09,guozhizhi,hongzhibin,hanjunyu,liujingtuo,dingerrui,wangjingdong}@baidu.com,
{yanpan@link.,hanxiaoguang@}cuhk.edu.cn.

Synced
Video
Identity
Reference

Pose
Source

Expression
Source

Figure 1. Example animations generated by our Granularly Controlled Audio-Visual Talking Heads (GC-AVT). Given a reference
identity frame, GC-AVT generates audio-visual driven talking head video with other emotional expression source and pose source video
frames independently. The mouth shapes of driven results are matched with the synced video (on top row), and the expressions of driven
results are matched with the expression source (on bottom row) while the poses are matched with the pose source (left column).

Abstract
Generating expressive talking heads is essential for creating virtual humans. However, existing one- or few-shot
methods focus on lip-sync and head motion, ignoring the
emotional expressions that make talking faces realistic. In
this paper, we propose the Granularly Controlled AudioVisual Talking Heads (GC-AVT), which controls lip movements, head poses, and facial expressions of a talking head
in a granular manner. Our insight is to decouple the audiovisual driving sources through prior-based pre-processing
designs. Detailedly, we disassemble the driving image into
three complementary parts including: 1) a cropped mouth
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

that facilitates lip-sync; 2) a masked head that implicitly
learns pose; and 3) the upper face which works corporately and complementarily with a time-shifted mouth to
contribute the expression. Interestingly, the encoded features from the three sources are integrally balanced through
reconstruction training. Extensive experiments show that
our method generates expressive faces with not only synced
mouth shapes, controllable poses, but precisely animated
emotional expressions as well.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of automatic video generation technology, the task of audio-driven talking head gen-

3387

