XYDeblur: Divide and Conquer for Single Image Deblurring
Seo-Won Ji* , 1
Jeongmin Lee*, 1
Seung-Wook Kim*, 2
Jun-Pyo Hong1
Seung-Jin Baek1
Seung-Won Jung† , 1
Sung-Jea Ko1
1
2
Korea University, Pukyong National University

Abstract
Many convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for single
image deblurring employ a U-Net structure to estimate latent sharp images. Having long been proven to be effective in image restoration tasks, a single lane of encoderdecoder architecture overlooks the characteristic of deblurring, where a blurry image is generated from complicated
blur kernels caused by tangled motions. Toward an effective network architecture for single image deblurring,
we present complemental sub-solution learning with a oneencoder-two-decoder architecture. Observing that multiple decoders successfully learn to decompose encoded feature information into directional components, we further
improve both the network efficiency and the deblurring performance by rotating and sharing kernels exploited in the
decoders, which prevents the decoders from separating unnecessary components such as color shift. As a result, our
proposed network shows superior results compared to UNet while preserving the network parameters, and using the
proposed network as the base network can improve the performance of existing state-of-the-art deblurring networks.

1. Introduction
Image deblurring is a fundamental image restoration
problem in image processing and computer vision, which
aims to recover a sharp image from a blurry image caused
by a camera or objects in motion. Blurry images affect not
only the perceptual image quality but also the performance
of various applications such as object detection, image segmentation, and visual odometry. Therefore, despite it being
a classical restoration task, image deblurring is still being
actively researched.
In general, the degradation model is formulated as follows:
 \label {eq:blur_model} \mathbf {x}=\mathbf {y}*\mathbf {k}+\mathbf {n}, 
(1)
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author: Seung-Won Jung (swjung83@korea.ac.kr)

where x, y, k, n, and ∗ denote the blurry image (observation), sharp image (latent image), blur kernel, additive random noise, and 2D convolution operation, respectively. Since only the blurry image x is given and the
other terms unknown, solving Eq. (1) is considered to be
ill-posed, having multiple solutions to a problem. In traditional studies, researchers employed blur kernel estimation followed by deconvolution or regularization using natural image priors in attempts to handle the ill-posedness of
the deblurring problem [8, 18, 28, 30, 32]. Thanks to the
tremendous advances in deep learning and large-scale data
accessibility, numerous methods using convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have recently been proposed and have
achieved great success [2, 9, 10, 16, 27, 29, 31, 33, 34]. Many
deblurring methods adopt U-Net [25] as their base architecture, which has achieved state-of-the-art performance.
U-Net consists of a common CNN-based encoder, successively decreasing the feature resolution to extract high-level
image context, and a symmetrically structured decoder, increasing the feature resolution back to the input resolution
to generate a restored image. Since the local information at
each feature resolution in the encoder is transferred to the
one at the corresponding resolution in the decoder via skip
connection, U-Net can effectively handle multi-scale degradation of images.
Motion blur is originated from multiple tangled motions
of moving objects in the scene and/or camera shakes. We
claim that the common standard of using the unitary lane of
U-Net is insufficient for handling the complicated nature of
image blurs. We thus propose a simple but effective solution
to this problem by dividing the original problem into multiple sub-problems [21]. In terms of network design objective, splitting a decoder can divide the deblurring problem
into sub-problems; in other words, the solution space required for deblurring can be decomposed by explicitly separated decoder networks. The proposed network consists
of a single encoder and two decoders as shown in Fig. 1,
which induces two decoders to separately solve two subproblems of deblurring. One decoder implicitly generates a
principal residual in the given 2D scene, and the other one
generates the complement residual of its separated decoder.

17421

