Self-Supervised Material and Texture Representation Learning for Remote Sensing Tasks
Peri Akiva
Rutgers University

Matthew Purri
Rutgers University

Matthew Leotta
Kitware Inc

peri.akiva@rutgers.edu

matthew.purri@rutgers.edu

matt.leotta@kitware.com

Abstract
Self-supervised learning aims to learn image feature representations without the usage of manually annotated labels. It is often used as a precursor step to obtain useful initial network weights which contribute to faster convergence
and superior performance of downstream tasks. While selfsupervision allows one to reduce the domain gap between
supervised and unsupervised learning without the usage of
labels, the self-supervised objective still requires a strong
inductive bias to downstream tasks for effective transfer
learning. In this work, we present our material and texture
based self-supervision method named MATTER (MATerial
and TExture Representation Learning), which is inspired
by classical material and texture methods. Material and
texture can effectively describe any surface, including its
tactile properties, color, and specularity. By extension, effective representation of material and texture can describe
other semantic classes strongly associated with said material and texture. MATTER leverages multi-temporal, spatially aligned remote sensing imagery over unchanged regions to learn invariance to illumination and viewing angle
as a mechanism to achieve consistency of material and texture representation. We show that our self-supervision pretraining method allows for up to 24.22% and 6.33% performance increase in unsupervised and fine-tuned setups,
and up to 76% faster convergence on change detection, land
cover classification, and semantic segmentation tasks. Code
and dataset: https://github.com/periakiva/
MATTER.

1. Introduction
Automated understanding of remote sensing imagery has
been a long standing goal of the computer vision community. Its broad applicability has driven research and development in construction phase detection [23], infrastructure mapping [36, 55, 71, 100], land use monitoring [41],
post natural disaster damage assessment [42, 89, 97], urban
3D reconstruction [39, 57], population migration prediction [19], and climate change tracking [79]. Most of those
methods require some degree of annotation effort, which is
often expensive and/or time consuming. Satellite imagery

is increasingly plentiful and accessible, with hundreds of
satellites collecting images on a daily basis [1, 35, 81, 94].
However, annotating land cover, change, or similar labels
often requires domain knowledge and/or extreme attention
to detail, as labels in remote sensing imagery cover more
numerous and smaller objects seen from unfamiliar view
points. As a result, annotators require more domain expertise compared to standard benchmark datasets such as Pascal VOC [38], COCO [61], or similar.
Recent work in self-supervised learning aims to alleviate the requirement of labeled data by either detecting selfapplied transformations, such as color or rotation change,
or implicit metadata information, such as temporal order or
geographical location. Those objectives are often achieved
using contrastive learning methods [17, 45, 53], in which
the distance between feature representations of original and
transformed images is minimized. More advanced contrastive methods use triplet loss [10, 84] or quadruplet loss
[18] which also include negative examples with which the
distance between feature representations is maximized. Despite filling a significant need in the remote sensing domain, these approaches have been yet to be thoroughly
investigated. Even methods that utilize contrastive approaches, such as SeCo [68] and the work of Ayush et al.
[4], which learn seasonal change invariance or geographiclocation consistency, still show weaker transfer-ability to
downstream task learning, as demonstrated by inferior performance and convergence speeds shown in Tab. 1, 3.
Instead, we hypothesize that material and texture have
a strong inductive bias to most downstream remote sensing
tasks, with pre-training of surface representation to improve
performance and convergence speeds (measured in epochs)
for those tasks. Consider the task of change detection in remote sensing imagery: when semantic class changes (i.e.,
soil to building, or forest to soil), change can also be expected in materials and texture, demonstrating the high correlation between material and texture and the change detection task. We show the effectiveness of our self-supervised
pre-trained features in both raw and fine-tuned forms, obtaining state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance in change detection (unsupervised and fine-tuned), land cover segmentation (fine-tuned), and land cover classification (fine-tuned).

8203

