360MonoDepth: High-Resolution 360° Monocular Depth Estimation
Manuel Rey-Area*

Mingze Yuan*
Christian Richardt
University of Bath

Figure 1. We present a flexible framework for estimating high-resolution disparity maps from a single 360° input image by decomposing it
into perspective tangent images, which are used for monocular depth estimation. We then globally align all disparity maps using multi-scale
alignment fields, and blend them in the gradient domain to produce a detailed, consistent and high-resolution 360° spherical disparity map.

Abstract
360° cameras can capture complete environments in a single
shot, which makes 360° imagery alluring in many computer
vision tasks. However, monocular depth estimation remains
a challenge for 360° data, particularly for high resolutions
like 2K (2048×1024) and beyond that are important for
novel-view synthesis and virtual reality applications. Current
CNN-based methods do not support such high resolutions
due to limited GPU memory. In this work, we propose a flexible framework for monocular depth estimation from highresolution 360° images using tangent images. We project the
360° input image onto a set of tangent planes that produce
perspective views, which are suitable for the latest, most accurate state-of-the-art perspective monocular depth estimators. To achieve globally consistent disparity estimates, we
recombine the individual depth estimates using deformable
multi-scale alignment followed by gradient-domain blending.
The result is a dense, high-resolution 360° depth map with
a high level of detail, also for outdoor scenes which are not
supported by existing methods. Our source code and data
are available at https://manurare.github.io/360monodepth/.

1. Introduction
Monocular depth estimation has recently seen a significant
boost thanks to convolutional neural networks. CNNs have
demonstrated an unprecedented expressive power to learn
intricate geometric relationships from data, resembling the
capability of humans to exploit visual cues to perceive depth.
Monocular depth estimates have enabled impressive new
approaches for 3D photography [33, 61] and novel-view synthesis of dynamic scenes [20, 43]. However, most approaches
for monocular depth estimation are limited to low-resolution1
perspective images, with a limited field-of-view.
Nevertheless, 360° cameras are becoming increasingly
popular and widespread in the computer vision community.
The omnidirectional 360° field-of-view captured by these
devices is appealing for tasks such as robust, omnidirectional
SLAM [66, 77], scene understanding and layout estimation
[31, 67, 75, 81], or VR photography and video [5, 59]. State* These authors contributed equally to this work.
1 For example, 384×384≈0.15 megapixels for MiDaS [55, 56].

3762

