Two Coupled Rejection Metrics Can Tell Adversarial Examples Apart
Tianyu Pang1 , Huishuai Zhang2 , Di He2 , Yinpeng Dong1 , Hang Su1 , Wei Chen3 , Jun Zhu1∗ , Tie-Yan Liu2
1

Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., Institute for AI, BNRist Center, THBI Lab, Tsinghua University 2 MSRA 3 ICT, CAS

{pty17, dyp17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {suhangss, dcszj}@tsinghua.edu.cn, {huishuai.zhang, dihe, wche, tyliu}@microsoft.com

Correctly classifying adversarial examples is an essential
but challenging requirement for safely deploying machine
learning models. As reported in RobustBench, even the stateof-the-art adversarially trained models struggle to exceed
67% robust test accuracy on CIFAR-10, which is far from
practical. A complementary way towards robustness is to
introduce a rejection option, allowing the model to not return predictions on uncertain inputs, where confidence is a
commonly used certainty proxy. Along with this routine, we
find that confidence and a rectified confidence (R-Con) can
form two coupled rejection metrics, which could provably
distinguish wrongly classified inputs from correctly classified
ones. This intriguing property sheds light on using coupling
strategies to better detect and reject adversarial examples.
We evaluate our rectified rejection (RR) module on CIFAR-10,
CIFAR-10-C, and CIFAR-100 under several attacks including adaptive ones, and demonstrate that the RR module is
compatible with different adversarial training frameworks
on improving robustness, with little extra computation.

1. Introduction
The adversarial vulnerability of machine learning models
has been widely studied because of its counter-intuitive behavior and the potential effect on safety-critical tasks [2, 17,
43]. Towards this end, many defenses have been proposed,
but most of them can be evaded by adaptive attacks [1, 45].
Among the previous defenses, adversarial training (AT)
is recognized as an effective defending approach [30, 53].
Nonetheless, as reported in RobustBench [10], the stateof-the-art AT methods still struggle to exceed 67% robust
test accuracy on CIFAR-10, even after exploiting extra
data [18, 35, 39, 47], which is far from practical.
An improvement can be achieved by incorporating a rejection or detection module along with the adversarially trained
classifier, which enables the model to refuse to make predictions for abnormal inputs [7, 23, 25, 42]. Although previous
rejectors trained via margin-based objectives or confidence
calibration can capture some aspects of prediction certainty,
∗ Corresponding author.

R-Con

Abstract

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

Correctly classified
Wrongly classified

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

-error
Figure 1. PGD-10 examples crafted against an adversarially trained
ResNet-18 on the CIFAR-10 test set. As described in Theorem 1,
these adversarial examples are first filtered by the confidence value
1
at 2−ξ
for each ξ. Namely, they pass if the predicted confidence
1
is larger than 2−ξ
; otherwise rejected. Then among the remaining
examples, the R-Con metric can provably separate correctly and
wrongly classified inputs. In Fig. 3 we show that tuning the logits
temperature τ can increase the number of remaining examples.

they may overestimate the certainty, especially on wrongly
classified samples. Furthermore, [44] argues that learning a
robust rejector could suffer from a similar accuracy bottleneck as learning robust classifiers, which may be caused by
data insufficiency [38] or poor generalization [49].
To solve these problems, we first observe that the true
cross-entropy loss − log fθ (x)[y] reflects how well the classifier fθ (x) is generalized on the input x [16], assuming that
we can access its true label y. Thus, we propose to treat true
confidence (T-Con) fθ (x)[y], i.e., the predicted probability
on the true label as a certainty oracle. Note that T-Con is
different from the commonly used confidence, which is obtained by taking the maximum as maxl fθ (x)[l]. As we shall
see in Table 1, executing the rejection based on T-Con can
largely increase the test accuracy under a given true positive
rate for both standardly and adversarially trained models.
An instructive fact about T-Con is that if we first threshold confidence by 12 , then T-Con can provably distinguish
wrongly classified inputs from correctly classified ones, as
stated in Lemma 1. This inspires us to couple two connected
metrics like confidence and T-Con to execute rejection options, instead of employing a single metric.

15223

