Towards Robust and Adaptive Motion Forecasting:
A Causal Representation Perspective
Yuejiang Liu Riccardo Cadei* Jonas Schweizer* Sherwin Bahmani Alexandre Alahi
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
{firstname.lastname}@epfl.ch

Abstract
Learning behavioral patterns from observational data
has been a de-facto approach to motion forecasting. Yet,
the current paradigm suffers from two shortcomings: brittle
under distribution shifts and inefficient for knowledge transfer. In this work, we propose to address these challenges
from a causal representation perspective. We first introduce
a causal formalism of motion forecasting, which casts the
problem as a dynamic process with three groups of latent
variables, namely invariant variables, style confounders,
and spurious features. We then introduce a learning framework that treats each group separately: (i) unlike the common practice mixing datasets collected from different locations, we exploit their subtle distinctions by means of an
invariance loss encouraging the model to suppress spurious correlations; (ii) we devise a modular architecture that
factorizes the representations of invariant mechanisms and
style confounders to approximate a sparse causal graph;
(iii) we introduce a style contrastive loss that not only enforces the structure of style representations but also serves
as a self-supervisory signal for test-time refinement on the
fly. Experiments on synthetic and real datasets show that
our proposed method improves the robustness and reusability of learned motion representations, significantly outperforming prior state-of-the-art motion forecasting models for
out-of-distribution generalization and low-shot transfer.

1. Introduction
Motion forecasting is essential for autonomous systems
running in dynamic environments. Yet, it is a challenging task due to strong spatial-temporal interactions, which
arise from two major sources: (i) physical laws (e.g., inertia, goal-directed behaviors) that govern general dynamics; (ii) social norms (e.g., separation distance, left or righthand traffic) that influence motion styles. Classical models attempt to describe these interactions based on domain
knowledge but often fall short of social awareness in complex scenes [16, 31, 76]. As an alternative, learning motion
representations from observational data has become a de* Riccardo and Jonas contributed similarly to this work

spurious
shift

style
shift

training environment

test environment

Figure 1. Illustration of motion forecasting under environment
changes. We introduce a framework that enables deep motion representations to robustly generalize to non-causal shifts of spurious
features, e.g., agent density, and efficiently adapt to new motion
styles, e.g., from right to left-hand traffic.

facto approach [2,49,65]. In light of rapid progress over the
past few years, solving motion forecasting is seemingly just
around the corner by pursuing this fashion at larger scales.
However, the promise of the current learning paradigm
for motion forecasting is shadowed by two shortcomings:
• struggle to discover physical laws from data, e.g., output
inadmissible solutions under spurious shifts [63];
• inefficient for knowledge transfer, e.g., require a large
number of observations to adapt from one environment
to another even if the underlying change is sparse [18].
These issues do not become any less severe with larger models [64]. Instead, they are profoundly rooted in the principle of statistical learning that only seeks correlations for the
prediction task at hand, regardless of their robustness and
reusability under distribution shifts that may occur in practice (illustrated in Figure 1)
In this work, we aim to tackle these challenges from a
causal representation perspective. Incorporating causal relations into statistical modeling has garnered growing interest lately, as it not only offers a mathematical language to
articulate distribution changes [56, 59] but also brings critical insights to representation learning [21, 68, 81]. Studies
in cognitive science have also revealed its paramount importance in the motion context: few-month-old infants are
already able to reason sensibly about physical and social
causalities [67]; they can even learn that by sorely observing
adult behaviors, without any hands-on experience of their
own [79]. How can we build learning algorithms capable of
acquiring such causal knowledge in the same way?

17081

