BppAttack: Stealthy and Efficient Trojan Attacks against Deep Neural Networks
via Image Quantization and Contrastive Adversarial Learning
Zhenting Wang, Juan Zhai, Shiqing Ma
Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University
{zhenting.wang, juan.zhai, sm2283}@rutgers.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks are vulnerable to Trojan attacks.
Existing attacks use visible patterns (e.g., a patch or image transformations) as triggers, which are vulnerable to
human inspection. In this paper, we propose stealthy and
efficient Trojan attacks, B PPATTACK. Based on existing biology literature on human visual systems, we propose to
use image quantization and dithering as the Trojan trigger, making imperceptible changes. It is a stealthy and
efficient attack without training auxiliary models. Due to
the small changes made to images, it is hard to inject such
triggers during training. To alleviate this problem, we propose a contrastive learning based approach that leverages
adversarial attacks to generate negative sample pairs so
that the learned trigger is precise and accurate. The proposed method achieves high attack success rates on four
benchmark datasets, including MNIST, CIFAR-10, GTSRB,
and CelebA. It also effectively bypasses existing Trojan defenses and human inspection. Our code can be found in
https://github.com/RU- System- Softwareand-Security/BppAttack.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved superior
performance in many computer vision tasks [8, 21, 52]. Recent studies show that DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial
attacks such as adversarial examples [17, 45], membership
inference attacks [54, 58], model stealing [50, 62], etc. In
this paper, we focus on Trojan attacks [10, 13, 18, 35, 38,
41, 53]. The adversary injects a secret Trojan behavior during training, which can be activated at runtime by stamping
a Trojan trigger to the image. Such triggers can be image
patches [18], watermarks [41], image filters [1,40] and even
learned image transformation models [10, 13, 37].
Trojan attacks [18] are severe threats to the trustworthiness of DNN models. Liu et al. [41] demonstrates the possibility of attacking face recognition, speech recognition,

and autonomous driving systems. Such attacks are generally feasible in most training scenarios, including federated
learning, unsupervised learning, and so on [4, 29, 68]. With
the deployment of DNN based computer vision models, it
is a critical challenge in our community.
Existing Work: Most existing Trojan attacks leverage input patterns as triggers. For example, BadNets [18] uses a
yellow pad as its trigger. Recent works [40] try to leverage image filters as triggers, which are input dependent and
dynamic, making them hard to detect. To further improve
the quality of Trojan triggers, Doan et al. [13] train an auxiliary image transformation model and use the transformation
function as its trigger. Other works have adopted similar
ideas [10, 37].
One problem of existing attacks is that they are vulnerable to human inspections. Once a set of attack inputs are
found, it is not difficult to identify the trigger or train a
model to simulate the trigger. There are also online detection methods to identify such attack samples, such as
STRIP [16]. Even for trained transformations as triggers,
it is hard for them to guarantee that the generated images
have imperceptible changes. This is because it is hard to
formulate human visual systems as a mathematical function, which makes it hard to optimize. Due to the relatively
large changes in inputs and limitations of existing poisoning
methods, it is also possible for reverse engineering based
defense methods [7,40,66] to recover part of the trigger and
identify if a model has a Trojan. Moreover, recent works on
generating high-quality triggers typically leverage trained
auxiliary models, which is time-consuming and inefficient.
Our Work: In this paper, we propose one new attack,
B PPATTACK. Based on existing literature on human visual
systems, we identify that humans inspectors are insensitive
to small changes of color depth. In this attack, we try to
exploit vulnerabilities in human visual systems. Thus, we
propose to reduce the bit-per-pixel (BPP) to conduct an imperceptible attack, which can also bypass existing defenses
mainly because of the small changes made to the input domain. We achieve our goal by performing a deterministic
yet input-dependent image transformation, i.e., image quan-

15074

