Label, Verify, Correct: A Simple Few Shot Object Detection Method
Prannay Kaul1
Weidi Xie1,2
1
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford

Andrew Zisserman1
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

http://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/˜vgg/research/lvc/

1. Candidate Sourcing
Unlabelled Images

Candidate Detections

2. Label Veri cation

3. Box Correction

Novel Classes (Few-shot Annotations)

Baseline FSOD Detector

Veried
Candidates

Candidates
w/ score > 0.8

Veried Candidates

Veried & Corrected
Candidates

Box Corrector

kNN
Classi er

Figure 1. Label, Verify, Correct: Object detectors naı̈vely trained with K-shot annotations perform poorly on novel classes (bottom left).
We propose to expand the novel class annotation set and re-train end-to-end. 1. Given a baseline few-shot object detector, noisy candidate
detections are sourced from unlabelled images (left). 2. Labels for each candidate detection are verified by a kNN classifier, constructed
from a self-supervised model using the same few-shot annotations, removing large numbers of false positives (centre). 3. A specialised
box corrector, drastically improves the remaining bounding boxes, yielding high-quality pseudo-annotations (right). Re-training end-to-end
with our pseudo-labelling method yields a large performance boost on novel class detection, improving precision and recall (bottom right).

Abstract
The objective of this paper is few-shot object detection
(FSOD) – the task of expanding an object detector for a
new category given only a few instances for training. We
introduce a simple pseudo-labelling method to source highquality pseudo-annotations from the training set, for each
new category, vastly increasing the number of training instances and reducing class imbalance; our method finds
previously unlabelled instances.
Naı̈vely training with model predictions yields suboptimal performance; we present two novel methods to improve the precision of the pseudo-labelling process: first,
we introduce a verification technique to remove candidate
detections with incorrect class labels; second, we train a
specialised model to correct poor quality bounding boxes.
After these two novel steps, we obtain a large set of highquality pseudo-annotations that allow our final detector to
be trained end-to-end. Additionally, we demonstrate our
method maintains base class performance, and the utility
of simple augmentations in FSOD. While benchmarking on
PASCAL VOC and MS-COCO, our method achieves state-

of-the-art or second-best performance compared to existing
approaches across all number of shots.

1. Introduction
Object detection refers to the task of determining if an
image contains objects of a particular category, and if so,
then localising them. In recent years, the community has
seen tremendous successes in object detection by training computational models for a set of pre-defined object
classes [8, 16, 32, 36, 40, 46, 55], with large numbers of
human annotated labels, e.g. MS-COCO [30], and PASCAL VOC [11]. However, such training paradigms have
limited the model to only perform well on a closed, small
set of categories for which large training data is available.
In contrast, humans can continuously expand their vocabularies, learning to detect a much larger set of categories, even with access to only a few examples [43]. This
is also a desirable ability for modern computer vision systems and is studied in the task of few-shot object detection (FSOD) [13, 21, 45, 51, 56]. The goal of our work
is FSOD: given an existing object detector that has been

14237

