Efficient Two-Stage Detection of Human–Object Interactions
with a Novel Unary–Pairwise Transformer
Frederic Z. Zhang1,3 Dylan Campbell2,3 Stephen Gould1,3
1
The Australian National University 2 University of Oxford
3
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision
https://fredzzhang.com/unary-pairwise-transformers

Abstract
Recent developments in transformer models for visual
data have led to significant improvements in recognition
and detection tasks. In particular, using learnable queries
in place of region proposals has given rise to a new class
of one-stage detection models, spearheaded by the Detection Transformer (DETR). Variations on this one-stage
approach have since dominated human–object interaction
(HOI) detection. However, the success of such one-stage
HOI detectors can largely be attributed to the representation power of transformers. We discovered that when
equipped with the same transformer, their two-stage counterparts can be more performant and memory-efficient,
while taking a fraction of the time to train. In this work, we
propose the Unary–Pairwise Transformer, a two-stage detector that exploits unary and pairwise representations for
HOIs. We observe that the unary and pairwise parts of our
transformer network specialise, with the former preferentially increasing the scores of positive examples and the latter decreasing the scores of negative examples. We evaluate
our method on the HICO-DET and V-COCO datasets, and
significantly outperform state-of-the-art approaches. At inference time, our model with ResNet50 approaches realtime performance on a single GPU.

1. Introduction
Human–object interaction (HOI) detectors localise interactive human–object pairs in an image and classify the actions. They can be categorised as one- or two-stage, mirroring the grouping of object detectors. Exemplified by Faster
R-CNN [24], two-stage object detectors typically include
a region proposal network, which explicitly encodes potential regions of interest in the form of bounding boxes.
These bounding boxes can then be classified and further refined via regression in a downstream network. In contrast,
one-stage detectors, such as RetinaNet [18], retain the ab-

(a) Image with human and object detections.
Unary Tokens
2
1

3

Pairwise Tokens
1
1
6
7

0.0006

0.0003

5

4

1
8

6

1

0.8303

8

7

2

9

0.0001

6

0.8038

…

9

5
9

0.6818

(b) Unary and pairwise tokens with predicted scores (riding a motorcycle).

Figure 1. Our Unary–Pairwise Transformer encodes human and
object instances individually and in pairs, allowing it to reason
about the data in complementary ways. In this example, our network correctly identifies the interactive pairs for the action riding a
motorcycle, while suppressing the visually-similar non-interactive
pairs and those with different associated actions.

stract feature representations of objects throughout the network, and decode them into bounding boxes and classification scores at the end of the pipeline.
In addition to the same categorisation convention, HOI
detectors need to localise two bounding boxes per instance
instead of one. Early works [2, 8, 16, 23] employ a pretrained object detector to obtain a set of human and object
boxes, which are paired up exhaustively and processed by
a downstream network for interaction classification. This
methodology coincides with that of two-stage detectors and
quickly became the mainstream approach due to the accessibility of high-quality pre-trained object detectors. The
first instance of one-stage HOI detectors was introduced by

20104

