RGB-Depth Fusion GAN for Indoor Depth Completion
Haowen Wang 1 , Mingyuan Wang 1 , Zhengping Che 2 , Zhiyuan Xu 2 ,
Xiuquan Qiao 1∗, Mengshi Qi 3 , Feifei Feng 2 , Jian Tang 2∗
1
State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology, Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications
2
AI Innovation Center, Midea Group
3
School of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{hw.wang,wmingyuan,qiaoxq,qms}@bupt.edu.cn {chezp,xuzy70,feifei.feng,tangjian22}@midea.com

Abstract
Sensors

The raw depth image captured by the indoor depth sensor usually has an extensive range of missing depth values
due to inherent limitations such as the inability to perceive
transparent objects and limited distance range. The incomplete depth map burdens many downstream vision tasks,
and a rising number of depth completion methods have been
proposed to alleviate this issue. While most existing methods can generate accurate dense depth maps from sparse
and uniformly sampled depth maps, they are not suitable
for complementing the large contiguous regions of missing
depth values, which is common and critical. In this paper,
we design a novel two-branch end-to-end fusion network,
which takes a pair of RGB and incomplete depth images as
input to predict a dense and completed depth map. The first
branch employs an encoder-decoder structure to regress the
local dense depth values from the raw depth map, with the
help of local guidance information extracted from the RGB
image. In the other branch, we propose an RGB-depth fusion GAN to transfer the RGB image to the fine-grained textured depth map. We adopt adaptive fusion modules named
W-AdaIN to propagate the features across the two branches,
and we append a confidence fusion head to fuse the two outputs of the branches for the final depth map. Extensive experiments on NYU-Depth V2 and SUN RGB-D demonstrate
that our proposed method clearly improves the depth completion performance, especially in a more realistic setting
of indoor environments with the help of the pseudo depth
map.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, depth sensors have been widely used to provide reliable 3D spatial information in a variety of ap∗ Corresponding authors.

Ours
Kinect v1

Kinect v2

Xtion

RealSense

Figure 1. Showcases of the raw depth maps (top) collected by
sensors from the SUN RGB-D dataset [36] and the corresponding
depth completion results (bottom) of our method.

plications, such as augmented reality, indoor navigation,
and 3D reconstruction tasks [8, 20, 42]. However, most
existing commercial depth sensors (e.g., Kinect [26], RealSense [16], and Xtion [2]) for indoor spatial perception
are not powerful enough to generate a precise and lossless
depth map, as shown in the top row of Fig. 1. These sensors
often produce many hole regions with invalid depth pixels
due to transparent, shining, and dark surfaces as well as too
close or too far edges, and these holes significantly affect
the performance of downstream tasks on the depth maps
(a.k.a., depth images). To address the issue from imperfect
depth maps, there have been a lot of approaches to reconstruct the whole depth map from the raw depth map, called
depth completion. As RGB images provide rich color and
texture information compared with depth maps, the aligned
RGB image is commonly used to guide the depth completion of a depth map. To be more specific, the depth completion task is usually conducted as using a pair of raw depth
and RGB images captured by one depth sensor to complete
and refine the depth values.
Recent studies have produced significant progress in
depth completion tasks with convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [3, 12, 17, 23, 29, 32]. Ma and Karaman [23]
introduced an encoder-decoder network to directly regress

6209

