Wavelet Knowledge Distillation: Towards Efficient Image-to-Image Translation
Linfeng Zhang1 Xin Chen2 Xiaobing Tu3 Pengfei Wan3 Ning Xu3 Kaisheng Ma1 *
Tsinghua Univeristy1 Intel Corporation2 Kuaishou Technology3†
zhang-lf19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,xin.chen@intel.com,{tuxiaobing,wanpengfei}@kuaishou.com
ningxu01@gmail.com, kaisheng@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Tremendous progress has been achieved with Generative
adversarial networks (GANs) in generating high-fidelity,
high-resolution, and photo-realistic images and videos with
both paired and unpaired datasets [4,13,17,18,25,41,43,59].
The excellent performance of GANs has promoted its application in various image-to-image translation tasks, such
as image style transfer [20, 21] and super-resolution [22].
Compared with other tasks such as image classification and
object detection, image-to-image generation is more complex since it has a much larger output space. As a con* Corresponding author. † This project is funded by Kuaishou Research
Program. This work was done during internship of Linfeng Zhang and Xin
Chen with Y-tech Kuaishou Technology. Codes are relased on Github.

Normalized L1 Distance

Remarkable achievements have been attained with Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) in image-to-image
translation. However, due to a tremendous amount of parameters, state-of-the-art GANs usually suffer from low efficiency and bulky memory usage. To tackle this challenge,
firstly, this paper investigates GANs performance from a frequency perspective. The results show that GANs, especially
small GANs lack the ability to generate high-quality high
frequency information. To address this problem, we propose a novel knowledge distillation method referred to as
wavelet knowledge distillation. Instead of directly distilling
the generated images of teachers, wavelet knowledge distillation first decomposes the images into different frequency
bands with discrete wavelet transformation and then only
distills the high frequency bands. As a result, the student
GAN can pay more attention to its learning on high frequency bands. Experiments demonstrate that our method
leads to 7.08× compression and 6.80× acceleration on CycleGAN with almost no performance drop. Additionally, we
have studied the relation between discriminators and generators which shows that the compression of discriminators
can promote the performance of compressed generators.

1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

Higher
Highest
Low
Low
High
Higher
Highest
High
Frequency Frequency
Frequency Frequency
Frequency Frequency
Frequency
Frequency

6.06G
FLOPs
Large
GAN
6.06G FLOPs

1.56G FLOPs
Middle
GAN
1.56G FLOPs

Tiny GAN
0.41G FLOPs

Figure 1. Normalized L1 distance between the images generated by GANs and the ground truth images on different frequency
bands. Different colors indicate GANs with different FLOPs. Results are averaged over 8 trials on Edge→Shoe dataset.

sequence, existing GANs always have high computational
demands and a huge amount of parameters, which lead to
inefficient inference and intolerant memory footprint, and
limit their usage in resource-constrained platforms.
Knowledge distillation (KD) has been an effective tool
for improving the performance of small models [5, 14]. By
imitating the prediction results and the intermediate features
from a cumbersome teacher model, the performance of a
lightweight student model can be improved significantly.
Following previous knowledge distillation methods on classification [44], object detection [53], semantic segmentation [31] and action recognition [28], some recent research
has tried to directly apply knowledge distillation to GANs.
Unfortunately, most of them obtain very limited and even
negative effects [23, 26].
Why does KD not work well on GAN? In this paper,
we first study this question from a frequency perspective
with the following experiment. Firstly, discrete wavelet

12464

