Improving Robustness Against Stealthy Weight Bit-Flip Attacks by
Output Code Matching
Ozan Özdenizci1,2 and Robert Legenstein1
Institute of Theoretical Computer Science, Graz University of Technology, Graz, Austria
2
TU Graz - SAL Dependable Embedded Systems Lab, Silicon Austria Labs, Graz, Austria
1

{ozan.ozdenizci,robert.legenstein}@igi.tugraz.at

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been shown to
be vulnerable against adversarial weight bit-ﬂip attacks
through hardware-induced fault-injection methods on the
memory systems where network parameters are stored. Recent attacks pose the further concerning threat of ﬁnding
minimal targeted and stealthy weight bit-ﬂips that preserve
expected behavior for untargeted test samples. This renders
the attack undetectable from a DNN operation perspective.
We propose a DNN defense mechanism to improve robustness in such realistic stealthy weight bit-ﬂip attack scenarios. Our output code matching networks use an output coding scheme where the usual one-hot encoding of classes is
replaced by partially overlapping bit strings. We show that
this encoding signiﬁcantly reduces attack stealthiness. Importantly, our approach is compatible with existing defenses
and DNN architectures. It can be efﬁciently implemented on
pre-trained models by simply re-deﬁning the output classiﬁcation layer and ﬁnetuning. Experimental benchmark evaluations show that output code matching is superior to existing regularized weight quantization based defenses, and an
effective defense against stealthy weight bit-ﬂip attacks.

1. Introduction
While deep neural networks (DNNs) are becoming ubiquitous in artiﬁcial intelligence applications, they also have
been proven to be highly vulnerable to a variety of malicious attack paradigms. One of the most widely studied aspect is the adversarial input attack, where hardlyperceptible and intentionally crafted input perturbations can
lead to conﬁdent incorrect decisions for DNNs [13, 33]. A
recently emerged category of attacks exposes the parameter space vulnerability of DNNs by negatively inﬂuencing
the inference process at the deployment stage. It has been
shown that information stored in the form of bits on dynamic random-access memory (DRAM) chips can be sim-

ply manipulated by ﬂipping any bit precisely as desired via
fault-injection techniques (e.g., row-hammer attacks [19]).
As the weight parameters of widely deployed DNNs are
generally stored on the DRAM due to their high memory demand, such hardware-induced attacks open malicious
pathways to jeopardize DNN predictions by changing vulnerable parameters [7, 17, 22, 41].
There has been growing interest in developing adversarial weight bit-ﬂip attack algorithms to identify vulnerable
quantized DNN bits in simulations (cf. Section 2.1), in order to provide practical guidance for fault-injection attacks
towards reaching malicious goals against expected DNN
behavior. As physical bit-ﬂipping may become time consuming and lead to abnormal background processes [14,36],
constraining the number of malicious bit-ﬂips for efﬁcient
attacks is essential for the adversary. Going forward, recently proposed algorithms also consider ﬁnding minimal
bits for targeted and stealthy weight bit-ﬂip attacks, i.e.,
having a targeted negative impact on an attacked source (a
single input sample [3] or samples belonging to a class [26])
while having almost no change in performance for the remaining test samples. From a DNN operation perspective,
such a scenario is far more concerning as it becomes impossible to suspect any unusual activity if the network shows
expected behavior for untargeted test samples.
To date, relatively little guidance is available for how
to improve network robustness against adversarial weight
bit-ﬂip attacks (cf. Section 2.2). Our goal in this study
is to improve robustness from a DNN architecture perspective, which would also be naturally compatible to potential hardware-driven solutions against fault-injection attacks. We particularly focus on more realistic, targeted attack scenarios, where the existence of the attack also can
not be easily detected via the usual DNN behavior, i.e., targeted bit-ﬂip attack algorithms with stealthiness [3, 26]. We
approach this problem using an alternative output coding
scheme for multi-class classiﬁcation with DNNs, in comparison to the usual one-hot encoded output representations.
The proposed output code matching networks predict class-

13388

