Estimating Egocentric 3D Human Pose in the Wild with External Weak
Supervision
Jian Wang1,2

Lingjie Liu1,2
Weipeng Xu3
Kripasindhu Sarkar1,2
1,2
Diogo Luvizon
Christian Theobalt1,2
1
MPI Informatics 2 Saarland Informatics Campus 3 Facebook Reality Labs
{jianwang,lliu,ksarkar,theobalt}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

xuweipeng@fb.com

Abstract
Egocentric 3D human pose estimation with a single fisheye camera has drawn a significant amount of attention recently. However, existing methods struggle with pose estimation from in-the-wild images, because they can only be
trained on synthetic data due to the unavailability of largescale in-the-wild egocentric datasets. Furthermore, these
methods easily fail when the body parts are occluded by
or interacting with the surrounding scene. To address the
shortage of in-the-wild data, we collect a large-scale in-thewild egocentric dataset called Egocentric Poses in the Wild
(EgoPW). This dataset is captured by a head-mounted fisheye camera and an auxiliary external camera, which provides an additional observation of the human body from a
third-person perspective during training. We present a new
egocentric pose estimation method, which can be trained
on the new dataset with weak external supervision. Specifically, we first generate pseudo labels for the EgoPW dataset
with a spatio-temporal optimization method by incorporating the external-view supervision. The pseudo labels are
then used to train an egocentric pose estimation network.
To facilitate the network training, we propose a novel learning strategy to supervise the egocentric features with the
high-quality features extracted by a pretrained externalview pose estimation model. The experiments show that
our method predicts accurate 3D poses from a single in-thewild egocentric image and outperforms the state-of-the-art
methods both quantitatively and qualitatively.

1. Introduction
Egocentric motion capture using head- or body-mounted
cameras has recently become popular because traditional
motion capture systems with outside-in cameras have limitations when the person is moving around in a large space
and thus restrict the scope of applications. Different from
traditional systems, the egocentric motion capture system

Input Image

Mo2Cap2

Ours

External Reference

Figure 1. Compared with Mo2 Cap2 , our method gets a more accurate egocentric pose from a single in-the-wild image, especially
when the body parts are occluded. Note that the external images
are only used for visualization, not the inputs to our method.

is mobile, flexible, and has no requirements on recording
space, which enables capturing a wide range of human activities for many applications, such as wearable medical
monitoring, sports analysis, and xR.
In this work, we focus on estimating the full 3D body
pose from a single head-mounted fisheye camera. The
most related works are Mo2 Cap2 [44] and xR-egopose [35].
While these methods have produced compelling results,
they are only trained on synthetic images as limited real data
exists and, therefore, suffer from significant performance
drop on real-world scenarios. Furthermore, these methods
often struggle with the cases when parts of the human body
are occluded by or interacting with the surrounding scene
(see the Mo2 Cap2 results in Fig. 1). This is due to the domain gap between synthetic and real data, but also due to
their limited capability of handling occlusions.
To address the issue of the limited real egocentric data,

13157

