DArch: Dental Arch Prior-assisted 3D Tooth Instance Segmentation
with Weak Annotations
Liangdong Qiu1,3 * Chongjie Ye1 * Pei Chen1 Yunbi Liu1,3 Xiaoguang Han1,2† Shuguang Cui1,2,3
1
SSE, CUHK-Shenzhen 2 FNii, CUHK-Shenzhen 3 Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
{liangdongqiu, chongjieye, peichen}@link.cuhk.edu.cn, ybliu1994@gmail.com,
{hanxiaoguang, shuguangcui}@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
Automatic tooth instance segmentation on 3D dental
models is a fundamental task for computer-aided orthodontic treatments. Existing learning-based methods rely heavily on expensive point-wise annotations. To alleviate this
problem, we are the first to explore a low-cost annotation
way for 3D tooth instance segmentation, i.e., labeling all
tooth centroids and only a few teeth for each dental model.
Regarding the challenge when only weak annotation is provided, we present a dental arch prior-assisted 3D tooth segmentation method, namely DArch. Our DArch consists of
two stages, including tooth centroid detection and tooth instance segmentation. Accurately detecting the tooth centroids can help locate the individual tooth, thus benefiting
the segmentation. Thus, our DArch proposes to leverage
the dental arch prior to assist the detection. Specifically,
we firstly propose a coarse-to-fine method to estimate the
dental arch, in which the dental arch is initially generated
by Bezier curve regression, and then a graph-based convolutional network (GCN) is trained to refine it. With the
estimated dental arch, we then propose a novel Arch-aware
Point Sampling (APS) method to assist the tooth centroid
proposal generation. Meantime, a segmentor is independently trained using a patch-based training strategy, aiming to segment a tooth instance from a 3D patch centered
at the tooth centroid. Experimental results on 4, 773 dental
models have shown our DArch can accurately segment each
tooth of a dental model, and its performance is superior to
the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Dental models, obtained by direct intraoral scanning of
the dentition, are commonly used in computer-aided dentistry. Computer-aided dentistry requires dental models
* L. Qiu and C. Ye contribute equally.
† Corresponding author

Training data with weak
annotations

Our segmentation result

Figure 1. An example of our segmentation result when using training data with weak annotations for training models. Left: dental
model with weak annotations, i.e., labelling all tooth centroids and
only a few teeth. Right: our segmentation result.

as input to assist dentists to analyze and evaluate patientspecific dental health and dental arrangement for the following treatments. Automatic tooth instance segmentation on
dental models is an essential prerequisite step for computeraided orthodontic treatments.
Although recent learning-based methods have achieved
impressive performance on 3D tooth instance segmentation [28, 29, 39], they rely heavily on a large number of data
with dense manual annotations, such as labeling all points
of every individual tooth from a dental model. Since annotating such training data is particularly time-consuming,
it is hard to collect a large enough dataset to cover complex dental models in real-world, thus largely limiting the
generalization of those learning-based segmentation methods [30,36,38]. One of the main challenges in automatic 3D
tooth instance segmentation is locating each tooth object on
a variety of dental models, some of which have missing,
crowding, or misaligned teeth. Cui et al. [3] found that in
the tooth detection stage, the tooth centroid is a more reliable signal than the bounding box that is used to crop the
detected tooth objects in the traditional approaches. Tooth
detection thus can be converted to tooth centroids detection. Motivated by their work, we propose a feasible and
low-cost annotation way as shown in the right of the Fig. 1,
that is, specifying 3D centroids for all tooth instances

20752

