Occluded Human Mesh Recovery
Rawal Khirodkar1
Shashank Tripathi2
Kris Kitani1
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
https://rawalkhirodkar.github.io/ochmr

Image

Center Map (Ours)

OCHMR (Ours)

ROMP

Figure 1. To handle severe person-person occlusion, our proposed method OCHMR conditions the deep network on image spatial context
using predicted body centermaps. OCHMR is trained using multi-person mesh interpenetration and depth ordering losses. In comparison to
bottom-up ROMP [58], top-down OCHMR outputs pixel aligned mesh estimates for each individual under occlusion.

Abstract
Top-down methods for monocular human mesh recovery
have two stages: (1) detect human bounding boxes; (2) treat
each bounding box as an independent single-human mesh
recovery task. Unfortunately, the single-human assumption
does not hold in images with multi-human occlusion and
crowding. Consequently, top-down methods have difficulties in recovering accurate 3D human meshes under severe
person-person occlusion. To address this, we present Occluded Human Mesh Recovery (OCHMR) - a novel top-down
mesh recovery approach that incorporates image spatial
context to overcome the limitations of the single-human assumption. The approach is conceptually simple and can
be applied to any existing top-down architecture. Along
with the input image, we condition the top-down model on
spatial context from the image in the form of body-center
heatmaps. To reason from the predicted body centermaps,
we introduce Contextual Normalization (CoNorm) blocks to
adaptively modulate intermediate features of the top-down
model. The contextual conditioning helps our model disambiguate between two severely overlapping human boundingboxes, making it robust to multi-person occlusion. Compared
with state-of-the-art methods, OCHMR achieves superior
performance on challenging multi-person benchmarks like
3DPW, CrowdPose and OCHuman. Specifically, our proposed contextual reasoning architecture applied to the SPIN
model with ResNet-50 backbone results in 75.2 PMPJPE on

3DPW-PC, 23.6 AP on CrowdPose and 37.7 AP on OCHuman datasets, a significant improvement of 6.9 mm, 6.4 AP
and 20.8 AP respectively over the baseline.

1. Introduction
Estimating accurate 3D human meshes from single images has diverse applications in modeling human-scene interactions, understanding human behaviour, AR/VR and
robotics. While recent approaches [4, 11, 25, 32, 43, 48, 50,
66] perform particularly well in images containing a single
person, human mesh recovery for complex real-world scenes
with multiple occluded people remains a challenging task.
This can be attributed in part to simplifying assumptions
made by existing methods. For instance, most top-down
approaches expect a single subject in the input image, which
affects robustness under in-the-wild scenarios containing
severe person-person occlusion, such as crowding. In this
paper, we address human mesh recovery in multi-person
scenarios by mitigating the limitations of the single-person
assumption of top-down approaches.
Current human mesh recovery methods can be categorized into top-down and bottom-up methods. Top-down
methods [7, 10, 12, 24, 31, 35–37, 67] reduce the problem
to a simpler task of single human mesh recovery by relying on a person detector to detect individual bounding box
for each person in the image. Since each bounding box is
scaled to the same size, top-down methods are less sensitive

1715

