Frame Averaging for Equivariant Shape Space Learning
Matan Atzmon1,2 *
1

NVIDIA

2

Koki Nagano1

Sanja Fidler1,3,4
3

Weizmann Institute of Science

Abstract
The task of shape space learning involves mapping a
train set of shapes to and from a latent representation space
with good generalization properties. Often, real-world collections of shapes have symmetries, which can be defined
as transformations that do not change the essence of the
shape. A natural way to incorporate symmetries in shape
space learning is to ask that the mapping to the shape space
(encoder) and mapping from the shape space (decoder) are
equivariant to the relevant symmetries. In this paper, we
present a framework for incorporating equivariance in encoders and decoders by introducing two contributions: (i)
adapting the recent Frame Averaging (FA) framework for
building generic, efficient, and maximally expressive Equivariant autoencoders; and (ii) constructing autoencoders
equivariant to piecewise Euclidean motions applied to different parts of the shape. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first fully piecewise Euclidean equivariant autoencoder construction. Training our framework is simple:
it uses standard reconstruction losses, and does not require
the introduction of new losses. Our architectures are built
of standard (backbone) architectures with the appropriate
frame averaging to make them equivariant. Testing our
framework on both rigid shapes dataset using implicit neural representations, and articulated shape datasets using
mesh-based neural networks show state of the art generalization to unseen test shapes, improving relevant baselines
by a large margin. In particular, our method demonstrates
significant improvement in generalizing to unseen articulated poses.

1. Introduction
Learning a shape space is the task of finding a latent
representation to a collection of input training shapes that
generalizes well to unseen, test shapes. This is often done
within an autoencoder framework, namely an encoder Φ :
X → Z, mapping an input shape in X (in some 3D representation) to the latent space Z, and a decoder Ψ : Z → Y ,
* Work done during an internship at NVIDIA.

Sameh Khamis1

University of Toronto

Yaron Lipman2
4

Vector Institute

mapping latent representations in Z back to shapes Y (possibly in other 3D representation than X).
Many shape collections exhibit symmetries. That is,
transformations that do not change the essence of the shape.
For example, applying an Euclidean motion (rotation, reflection, and/or translation) to a rigid object such as a piece
of furniture will produce an equivalent version of the object.
Similarly, the same articulated body, such as an animal or a
human, can assume different poses in space.
A natural way to incorporate symmetries in shape space
learning is to require the mapping to the latent space, i.e.,
the encoder, and mapping from the latent space, i.e., the decoder, to be equivariant to the relevant symmetries. That is,
applying the symmetry to an input shape and then encoding
it would result in the same symmetry applied to the latent
code of the original shape. Similarly, reconstructing a shape
from a transformed latent code will result in a transformed
shape.
The main benefit in imposing equivariance in shape
space learning is achieving a very useful inductive bias: If
the model have learned a single shape, it can already generalize perfectly to all its symmetric versions! Unfortunately,
even in the presumably simpler setting of a global Euclidean motion, building an equivariant neural network that
is both expressive and efficient remains a challenge. The
only architectures that were known to be universal for Euclidean motion equivariant functions are Tensor Field Networks [17, 49] and group averaging [8, 57] both are computationally and memory intensive. Other architectures, e.g.,
Vector Neurons [15] are efficient computationally but are
not known to be universal.
In this paper, we present a novel framework for building
equivariant encoders and decoders for shape space learning
that are flexible, efficient and maximally expressive (i.e.,
universal). In particular, we introduce two contributions: (i)
we adapt the recent Frame Averaging (FA) framework [39]
to shape space learning, showing how to efficiently build
powerful shape autoencoders. The method is general, easily
adapted to different architectures and tasks, and its training
only uses standard autoencoder reconstruction losses without requiring the introduction of new losses. (ii) We con-

631

