BatchFormer: Learning to Explore Sample Relationships for Robust
Representation Learning

1

Zhi Hou1 , Baosheng Yu1 , Dacheng Tao2,1
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney, Australia
2
JD Explore Academy, China
zhou9878@uni.sydney.edu.au, baosheng.yu@sydney.edu.au, dacheng.tao@gmail.com

Abstract
Despite the success of deep neural networks, there are
still many challenges in deep representation learning due
to the data scarcity issues such as data imbalance, unseen distribution, and domain shift. To address the abovementioned issues, a variety of methods have been devised to
explore the sample relationships in a vanilla way (i.e., from
the perspectives of either the input or the loss function), failing to explore the internal structure of deep neural networks
for learning with sample relationships. Inspired by this, we
propose to enable deep neural networks themselves with the
ability to learn the sample relationships from each minibatch. Specifically, we introduce a batch transformer module or BatchFormer, which is then applied into the batch
dimension of each mini-batch to implicitly explore sample
relationships during training. By doing this, the proposed
method enables the collaboration of different samples, e.g.,
the head-class samples can also contribute to the learning
of the tail classes for long-tailed recognition. Furthermore,
to mitigate the gap between training and testing, we share
the classifier between with or without the BatchFormer during training, which can thus be removed during testing. We
perform extensive experiments on over ten datasets and the
proposed method achieves significant improvements on different data scarcity applications without any bells and whistles, including the tasks of long-tailed recognition, compositional zero-shot learning, domain generalization, and
contrastive learning. Code is made publicly available at
https://github.com/zhihou7/BatchFormer.

Different Classes
Shared Knowledge Transferring

Long-Tailed Recognition
Zero-Shot Learning

BatchFormer
Domain Generalization
Contrastive Learning

Same Class
Invariant Feature Learning

Figure 1. An illustration of the relationships between different images. Specifically, similar classes tend to share similar parts (e.g.,
cock, robin, vulture share body shape and claw shape) and transferable augmentation (e.g., angles). Therefore, transferring shared
knowledge from head/seen classes to tail/unseen classes can facilitate long-tailed/zero-shot learning. In addition, exploring the
invariant features between images belonging to the same class is
also helpful for robust representation learning with a few samples.

1. Introduction

scarcity by exploring the sample relationships has received
a lot of attention from the community, especially for the
tasks without good training data to guarantee the generalization, such as long-tailed recognition [65], zero-shot learning [46], and domain generalization [8]. However, it still
remains a great challenge to find a unified, flexible, and
powerful way to explore the sample relationships for robust
representation learning. An intuitive example revealing the
effectiveness of sample relationships is shown in Figure 1.

Despite the great success of deep neural networks for
representation learning [23, 24], it heavily relies on collecting large-scale training data samples, which turns out to
be non-trivial in real-world applications. Therefore, how
to form robust deep representation learning under the data

Among recent data scarcity learning methods, sample
relationships have been intensively explored using an explicit scheme from either regularization [18, 40, 54, 70]
or knowledge transfer [63, 66, 78]. Specifically, a simple yet very effective way is to directly generate new data

7256

