UBnormal: New Benchmark for Supervised Open-Set Video Anomaly Detection
Andra Acsintoae1,∗ , Andrei Florescu1,∗ , Mariana-Iuliana Georgescu1,2,3,∗ , Tudor Mare3,∗,
Paul Sumedrea1,∗ , Radu Tudor Ionescu1,3, , Fahad Shahbaz Khan2,4 , Mubarak Shah5
1
University of Bucharest, Romania, 2 MBZ University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
3
SecurifAI, Romania, 4 Linköping University, Sweden, 5 University of Central Florida, US
Abstract
Detecting abnormal events in video is commonly framed
as a one-class classification task, where training videos
contain only normal events, while test videos encompass
both normal and abnormal events. In this scenario,
anomaly detection is an open-set problem. However, some
studies assimilate anomaly detection to action recognition.
This is a closed-set scenario that fails to test the capability of systems at detecting new anomaly types. To this end,
we propose UBnormal, a new supervised open-set benchmark composed of multiple virtual scenes for video anomaly
detection. Unlike existing data sets, we introduce abnormal events annotated at the pixel level at training time,
for the first time enabling the use of fully-supervised learning methods for abnormal event detection. To preserve the
typical open-set formulation, we make sure to include disjoint sets of anomaly types in our training and test collections of videos. To our knowledge, UBnormal is the first
video anomaly detection benchmark to allow a fair headto-head comparison between one-class open-set models and
supervised closed-set models, as shown in our experiments.
Moreover, we provide empirical evidence showing that UBnormal can enhance the performance of a state-of-theart anomaly detection framework on two prominent data
sets, Avenue and ShanghaiTech. Our benchmark is freely
available at https://github.com/lilygeorgescu/
UBnormal.

1. Introduction
In spite of the growing interest in video anomaly detection [11, 12, 17–19, 22–24, 27, 32, 34, 39–41, 43, 46, 52, 54,
60, 61, 64, 66], which generated significant advances leading to impressive performance levels [17, 18, 21, 27, 32, 56,
59, 60, 64, 66, 67], the task remains very challenging. The
difficulty of the task stems from two interdependent aspects:
(i) the reliance on context of anomalies, and (ii) the lack of
abnormal training data. The former issue can be explained
through a simple comparative example considering a truck
∗ equal contribution

 corresponding author

driven on a street, which is normal, versus a truck driven in a
pedestrian area, which is abnormal. The reliance on context
essentially generates an unbounded set of possible anomaly
types. Coupled with the difficulty of collecting sufficient
data for certain anomaly types (it is not ethical to fight or
hurt people just to obtain video examples), the reliance on
context makes it nearly impossible to gather abnormal training data.
In the recent literature, we identified two distinct formulations to deal with the difficulty of the video anomaly detection task. On the one hand, we have the mainstream formulation, adopted in works such as [2, 9–11, 14, 20, 23, 25,
27, 29, 30, 33, 35, 37, 38, 41, 43, 44, 47, 48, 50, 51, 56, 61, 62,
68–70], treating anomaly detection as a one-class classification (or outlier detection) task. In this formulation, training
videos contain only normal events, while test videos encompass both normal and abnormal events. Under this scenario,
methods learn a model of normality from familiar events,
labeling unfamiliar events as abnormal at inference time.
While framing anomaly detection as an outlier detection
task preserves the open-set characteristic of anomaly types,
the models proposed under this formulation usually obtain
lower performance rates, as they lack knowledge of abnormal examples. On the other hand, we have the alternative
formulation, considered in works such as [15,42,57,67,71],
treating anomaly detection as a weakly-supervised action
recognition task, where training videos contain both normal
and abnormal events, but the annotation is provided at the
video level. This formulation corresponds to a closed-set
evaluation scenario where training and test anomalies belong to the same action categories, failing to test the capability of systems at detecting unseen anomaly types.
To this end, we propose a novel formulation that frames
video anomaly detection as a supervised open-set classification problem. In our formulation, both normal and abnormal events are available at training time, but the anomalies that occur at inference time belong to a distinct set of
anomaly types (categories). The main advantages of posing
anomaly detection as a supervised open-set problem are: (i)
enabling the use of fully-supervised models due to the availability of anomalies at training time, (ii) enabling the eval-

20143

