Constrained Few-shot Class-incremental Learning
Michael Hersche1,2

Geethan Karunaratne1,2

Giovanni Cherubini1

her@zurich.ibm.com

kar@zurich.ibm.com

cbi@zurich.ibm.com

Luca Benini2

Abu Sebastian1

Abbas Rahimi1

lbenini@iis.ee.ethz.com

ase@zurich.ibm.com

abr@zurich.ibm.com

1

IBM Research-Zurich, 2 ETH Zurich
Input images

Abstract

EM
prototypes

Conv
Retraining

∼90◦

...

Conv

Conv

Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
achieved remarkable success in various computer vision
tasks, such as image classification [15,24,26,47], stemming
from the availability of large curated datasets as well as
huge computational and memory resources. This, however,
poses significant challenges for their applicability to smart

Conv

1. Introduction

...

FCL
(retrainable)

Time

Continually learning new classes from fresh data without forgetting previous knowledge of old classes is a very
challenging research problem. Moreover, it is imperative
that such learning must respect certain memory and computational constraints such as (i) training samples are limited to only a few per class, (ii) the computational cost
of learning a novel class remains constant, and (iii) the
memory footprint of the model grows at most linearly with
the number of classes observed. To meet the above constraints, we propose C-FSCIL, which is architecturally composed of a frozen meta-learned feature extractor, a trainable
fixed-size fully connected layer, and a rewritable dynamically growing memory that stores as many vectors as the
number of encountered classes. C-FSCIL provides three
update modes that offer a trade-off between accuracy and
compute-memory cost of learning novel classes. C-FSCIL
exploits hyperdimensional embedding that allows to continually express many more classes than the fixed dimensions
in the vector space, with minimal interference. The quality of class vector representations is further improved by
aligning them quasi-orthogonally to each other by means of
novel loss functions. Experiments on the CIFAR100, miniImageNet, and Omniglot datasets show that C-FSCIL outperforms the baselines with remarkable accuracy and compression. It also scales up to the largest problem size ever
tried in this few-shot setting by learning 423 novel classes
on top of 1200 base classes with less than 1.6% accuracy
drop. Our code is available at https://github.com/
IBM/constrained-FSCIL.

Feature extraction
(frozen)

Retraining
∼90◦

∼90◦
∼90◦

Figure 1. Overview of C-FSCIL which maps input images to
quasi-orthogonal prototypes such that the prototypes of different
classes encounter small interference.

agents deployed in new and dynamic environments, where
there is a need to continually learn about novel classes from
very few training samples, and under resource constraints.
We consider the challenging scenario of learning from an
online stream of data, including never-seen-before-classes,
where we impose constraints on the sample size, computational cost, and memory size.
Let us first focus on the sampling constraint of training
data. Inspired by human-like sequential learning, classical connectionist networks can be naively trained sequentially, e.g., first on a set of old classes, and then on a set
of novel classes, whereby the training dataset of old classes
is no longer available. As a result, the new learning may
interfere catastrophically with the old learning by overwriting weights involved in representing the old learning (and
thereby forgetting) [33]. This effect is known as catastrophic interference, or catastrophic forgetting, and causes
the classification accuracy to deteriorate [12,33]. To address
the catastrophic forgetting problem, research efforts have

9057

