Dynamic Prototype Convolution Network for Few-Shot Semantic Segmentation
Jie Liu1 *, Yanqi Bao2∗ , Guo-Sen Xie3,4†, Huan Xiong4 , Jan-Jakob Sonke5 , Efstratios Gavves1
1

University of Amsterdam, Netherlands 2 Northeastern University, China 5 The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Netherlands
3
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China 4 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE

Abstract
The key challenge for few-shot semantic segmentation
(FSS) is how to tailor a desirable interaction among support and query features and/or their prototypes, under the
episodic training scenario. Most existing FSS methods implement such support/query interactions by solely leveraging plain operations – e.g., cosine similarity and feature
concatenation – for segmenting the query objects. However, these interaction approaches usually cannot well capture the intrinsic object details in the query images that are
widely encountered in FSS, e.g., if the query object to be
segmented has holes and slots, inaccurate segmentation almost always happens. To this end, we propose a dynamic
prototype convolution network (DPCN) to fully capture the
aforementioned intrinsic details for accurate FSS. Specifically, in DPCN, a dynamic convolution module (DCM) is
firstly proposed to generate dynamic kernels from support
foreground, then information interaction is achieved by convolution operations over query features using these kernels.
Moreover, we equip DPCN with a support activation module (SAM) and a feature filtering module (FFM) to generate
pseudo mask and filter out background information for the
query images, respectively. SAM and FFM together can
mine enriched context information from the query features.
Our DPCN is also flexible and efficient under the k-shot FSS
setting. Extensive experiments on PASCAL-5i and COCO20i show that DPCN yields superior performances under
both 1-shot and 5-shot settings.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation has achieved tremendous success
due to the advancement of deep convolutional neural networks [9, 10, 22]. Nevertheless, most leading image semantic segmentation models rely on large amounts of training images with pixel-wise annotations, which require huge
human efforts. Semi- and weakly-supervised segmentation
methods [15, 24, 28] are proposed to alleviate such expen* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Support Image

Pool
/Cluster

…

Foreground / Background
Prototypes

Similarity/Sum
/Concatenate
Query Image

(a) Existing prototype-based methods
Support Image

Dynamic Kernels

Kernels
Generation

Feature Filtering

Dynamic
Convolution

Query Image

(b) Our DPCN

Figure 1. Comparison between (a) existing prototype-based
methods and (b) proposed DPCN. (a) Existing methods usually
adopt mask average pooling or clustering on support foreground
to get multiple foreground/background prototypes. Then the information interaction between support and query can be plain operations, e.g., cosine similarity, element-wise sum, and channelwise concatenation. However, this paradigm fails to segment the
intrinsic details of plants, because this insufficient interaction cannot well address the appearance and shape variations (e.g., holes
and slots in the plants) in FSS. (b) Our DPCN can well segment
plants and capture the intrinsic subtle details. This benefits from
dynamic convolution on query features with dynamic kernels generated from the support foreground features.

sive annotation cost. However, both semi- and weaklysupervised methods have to face a significant performance
drop when only a few annotated samples for a novel object
are available. In such a case, few-shot semantic segmentation (FSS) [20] is introduced to allow for dense pixel-wise
prediction on novel object categories given only a few annotated samples.
Typically, most FSS methods adopt an episode-based
meta-learning strategy [30], and each episode is composed
of the support set and the query set, which share the same
object class. The support set contains a few support images with pixel-wise annotation. FSS models are expected
to learn to predict the segmentation mask for images in the
query set with the guidance of the support set. Learning is
based on episodes available with annotations during training. At test time, the model is expected to segment a query

11553

