Stochastic Trajectory Prediction via Motion Indeterminacy Diffusion
Tianpei Gu*,1,5 , Guangyi Chen∗,2,3 , Junlong Li4 , Chunze Lin5 , Yongming Rao4 , Jie Zhou4 , Jiwen Lu†,4
1
University of California, Los Angeles, 2 MBZUAI, 3 Carnegie Mellon University,
4
Tsinghua University, 5 SenseTime Research

Abstract
Human behavior has the nature of indeterminacy, which
requires the pedestrian trajectory prediction system to
model the multi-modality of future motion states. Unlike existing stochastic trajectory prediction methods which usually use a latent variable to represent multi-modality, we
explicitly simulate the process of human motion variation
from indeterminate to determinate. In this paper, we present
a new framework to formulate the trajectory prediction
task as a reverse process of motion indeterminacy diffusion (MID), in which we progressively discard indeterminacy from all the walkable areas until reaching the desired
trajectory. This process is learned with a parameterized
Markov chain conditioned by the observed trajectories. We
can adjust the length of the chain to control the degree of indeterminacy and balance the diversity and determinacy of
the predictions. Specifically, we encode the history behavior information and the social interactions as a state embedding and devise a Transformer-based diffusion model to
capture the temporal dependencies of trajectories. Extensive experiments on the human trajectory prediction benchmarks including the Stanford Drone and ETH/UCY datasets
demonstrate the superiority of our method. Code is available at https://github.com/gutianpei/MID.

1. Introduction
Human trajectory prediction plays a crucial role in
human-robot interaction systems such as self-driving vehicles and social robots, since human is omnipresent in their
environments. Although significant progresses have been
achieved over past few years [6,28,29,32,38,45,49,53], predicting the future trajectories of pedestrians remains challenging due to the multi-modality of human motion.
The future trajectories of pedestrians are full of indeterminacy, because human can change future motion according to their will or adjust their movement direction based
on the surroundings. Given a history of observed trajecto* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

Observed Trajectory
Future Trajectory

f

!&

…
…

diversity

!'

!! "%#$|"% , &
' "% |"%#$

!'#$

…

!%

…

determinacy

Figure 1. Illustration of the reverse diffusion process for human motion indeterminacy variation. Under high indeterminacy,
the trajectory distribution can be regarded as a noise Gaussian
distribution which denotes ambiguous walkable areas. With the
decreasing of indeterminacy, this distribution gradually approximates the real data distribution to generate desired trajectory. This
process from high indeterminacy to low indeterminacy is defined
as a reverse diffusion process, in which we learn a Markov chain to
progressively discard the indeterminacy. By adjusting the length
of the chain, we can make a trade-off between diversity and determinacy, where the longer chain leads to lower diversity and higher
determinacy. Best viewed in color.

ries, there exist many plausible paths that pedestrians could
move in the future. Facing this challenge, most of prior
researches apply the generative model to represent multimodality by a latent variable. For instance, some methods [6,9,12,19,37,43,54] utilize generative adversarial networks (GANs) to spread the distribution over all possible
future trajectories, while other methods [3,16,20,25,38,46]
exploit conditional variational auto-encoder (CVAE) to encode the multi-modal distribution of future trajectories. Despite the remarkable progress, these methods still face inherent limitations, e.g., training process could be unstable
for GANs due to adversarial learning, and CVAE tends to
produce unnatural trajectories.
In this paper, we propose a new trajectory prediction
framework, called motion indeterminacy diffusion (MID),
to model the indeterminacy of human behavior. Inspired by

17113

