HeadNeRF: A Real-time NeRF-based Parametric Head Model
Yang Hong

Bo Peng

Haiyao Xiao

Ligang Liu

Juyong Zhang*

University of Science and Technology of China
{hymath@mail., pb15881461858@mail., xhy1999512@mail., lgliu@, juyong@}ustc.edu.cn

Identity

Expression

Albedo

~

Appearance

Pose

HeadNeRF

Identity

Expression

Illumination

Figure 1. HeadNeRF, a NeRF-based parametric head model, is able to render high fidelity head images in real-time, and supports directly
controlling the generated images’ rendering pose, and various semantic attributes. The images in the black area are generated by exploring
the latent space of HeadNeRF.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose HeadNeRF, a novel NeRFbased parametric head model that integrates the neural
radiance field to the parametric representation of the human head. It can render high fidelity head images in realtime on modern GPUs, and supports directly controlling the
generated images’ rendering pose and various semantic attributes. Different from existing related parametric models,
we use the neural radiance fields as a novel 3D proxy instead of the traditional 3D textured mesh, which makes that
HeadNeRF is able to generate high fidelity images. However, the computationally expensive rendering process of the
original NeRF hinders the construction of the parametric
NeRF model. To address this issue, we adopt the strategy
of integrating 2D neural rendering to the rendering process of NeRF and design novel loss terms. As a result, the
rendering speed of HeadNeRF can be significantly accelerated, and the rendering time of one frame is reduced from
5s to 25ms. The well designed loss terms also improve the
rendering accuracy, and the fine-level details of the human
head, such as the gaps between teeth, wrinkles, and beards,
* Corresponding Author

can be represented and synthesized by HeadNeRF. Extensive experimental results and several applications demonstrate its effectiveness. The trained parametric model is
available at https://github.com/CrisHY1995/headnerf.

1. Introduction
The parametric face/head model, which encodes the
human face/head in low-dimensional space, is a hot research topic in computer vision and computer graphics
and widely used in many applications like identity recognition [34, 52], face analysis [11, 64] and film/game production [47], etc. Early works of the parametric face/head
model [3, 6, 11, 30, 41, 57] mainly model 3D faces with the
topologically uniformed face template mesh and usually ignore to represent the non-face parts, such as hair and teeth.
With the development of deep learning, 2D generative adversarial networks (GAN) [21,22] are able to directly render
photo-realistic face images without the help of 3D modeling. Some methods [5,9,14,26,36] further introduce semantically disentangled constraints to render the face images in
a user-controlled way. However, their rendered results from
different views often tend to be inconsistent as they do not

20374

