vCLIMB: A Novel Video Class Incremental Learning Benchmark
Andrés Villa1,2∗ , Kumail Alhamoud2 , Victor Escorcia3 , Fabian Caba Heilbron4 ,
Juan León Alcázar2 , Bernard Ghanem2
1

Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, 2 King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST),
3

Samsung AI Center Cambridge, 4 Adobe Research

afvilla@uc.cl, kumail.hamoud@kaust.edu.sa, v.castillo@samsung.com
caba@adobe.com, {juancarlo.alcazar, bernard.ghanem}@kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
Continual learning (CL) is under-explored in the video
domain. The few existing works contain splits with imbalanced class distributions over the tasks, or study the problem in unsuitable datasets. We introduce vCLIMB, a novel
video continual learning benchmark. vCLIMB is a standardized test-bed to analyze catastrophic forgetting of deep
models in video continual learning. In contrast to previous work, we focus on class incremental continual learning with models trained on a sequence of disjoint tasks,
and distribute the number of classes uniformly across the
tasks. We perform in-depth evaluations of existing CL methods in vCLIMB, and observe two unique challenges in video
data. The selection of instances to store in episodic memory is performed at the frame level. Second, untrimmed
training data influences the effectiveness of frame sampling
strategies. We address these two challenges by proposing
a temporal consistency regularization that can be applied
on top of memory-based continual learning methods. Our
approach significantly improves the baseline, by up to 24%
on the untrimmed continual learning task. The code of our
benchmark can be found at: https://vclimb.netlify.app/.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks rely on large-scale datasets to
achieve state-of-the-art performance on modern computer
vision tasks [6, 10, 18, 20]. A significant result of such pretraining is enabling feature reuse [12, 41], by means of finetuning the learned weights for smaller downstream tasks
[3,22,28]. Due to legal or technical constraints, and the fact
that labeling data is expensive and time-consuming [34],
real-world deep-learning pipelines would rarely involve a
single fine-tuning stage. Instead, these pipelines could require the sequential fine-tuning of large models in a set
∗ Work done during an internship at KAUST.

of independent tasks that are learned sequentially. Under
these conditions, deep neural networks suffer from what is
known as catastrophic forgetting [13], where the fine-tuning
on novel tasks significantly reduces the performance of the
model in a previously learned task, and drift [29], where unseen training data does not fit the previously estimated class
distribution. Continual learning [11] directly models such a
scenario, by adapting a neural network model into a sequential series of tasks. We focus on a special case of CL: class
incremental learning (CIL), where the labels and data are
mutually exclusive between tasks, training data is available
only for the current task, and there are no tasks ids.
With 500 hours of video from diverse categories uploaded to YouTube every minute and a billion people actively using TikTok every month [4, 36], video content of
varying quality is available at an unprecedented scale. With
such large volumes of data, it is important to develop models that can effectively learn from continuous streams of
untrimmed video data. Remarkably, few research efforts
have addressed continual learning with video [24, 26, 44].
Despite these current works, video continual learning methods still show a large variability in their experimental protocols, making direct comparisons hard to establish. These
protocols present the following limitations. (1) They are not
publicly available. (2) They do not explore a realistic setup
with untrimmed videos. (3) Most of them leverage a large
pretraining step, which warms up the model by learning a
sample of classes from the same distribution and is not always available in a real continual learning scenario.
We directly address these limitations and propose
vCLIMB (video CLass IncreMental Learning Benchmark),
a novel benchmark devised for the evaluation of continual
learning in video. Our test-bed defines a fixed task split
on the original training and validation sets of three well
known video datasets: UCF101 [33], ActivityNet [5] and
Kinetics [6]. vCLIMB follows the standard class incremental continual learning scenario, but includes some modifications to better fit the nature of video data in human ac-

19035

