Video Frame Interpolation Transformer
Zhihao Shi∗1
1

Xiangyu Xu∗†2

Xiaohong Liu3

Jun Chen1

Ming-Hsuan Yang4,5,6

2
3
McMaster Univeristy
Nanyang Technological University
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
5
6
University of California, Merced
Yonsei University
Google Research

Abstract

1. Introduction
Video frame interpolation aims to temporally upsample
an input video by synthesizing new frames between existing
ones. It is a fundamental problem in computer vision that
involves the understanding of motions, structures, and natural image distributions, which facilitates numerous downstream applications, such as image restoration [5, 52], virtual reality [1], and medical imaging [22].
Most of the state-of-the-art video frame interpolation
methods are based on deep convolution neural networks
(CNNs) [3, 20, 25, 29, 30, 32, 37, 53]. While achieving
the state-of-the-art performance, these CNN-based architectures usually suffer from two major drawbacks. First,
* These authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.

37

VFIT-B
VFIT-S
FLAVR

36
SoftSplat
PSNR (dB)

Existing methods for video interpolation heavily rely on
deep convolution neural networks, and thus suffer from
their intrinsic limitations, such as content-agnostic kernel
weights and restricted receptive field. To address these
issues, we propose a Transformer-based video interpolation framework that allows content-aware aggregation
weights and considers long-range dependencies with the
self-attention operations. To avoid the high computational
cost of global self-attention, we introduce the concept of
local attention into video interpolation and extend it to
the spatial-temporal domain. Furthermore, we propose
a space-time separation strategy to save memory usage,
which also improves performance. In addition, we develop
a multi-scale frame synthesis scheme to fully realize the potential of Transformers. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the proposed model performs favorably against the stateof-the-art methods both quantitatively and qualitatively on
a variety of benchmark datasets. The code and models
are released at https://github.com/zhshi0816/
Video-Frame-Interpolation-Transformer.

AdaCoF
QVI

35
BMBC

CAIN

34
SepConv
DAIN
Super SloMo

33
10

15

20
25
30
Number of parameters (M)

35

40

Figure 1. Comparison of performance and model size using the
Vimeo-90K dataset [54]. VFIT outperforms the state-of-the-art
methods with fewer parameters. VFIT-S and VFIT-B denote the
proposed small and base models.

the convolution layer is content-agnostic, where the same
kernels are used to convolve with different locations of
different inputs. While this design can serve as a desirable inductive bias for image recognition models to acquire translational equivalence [24], it is not always suitable
for video interpolation which involves a complex motioncompensation process that is spatially-variant and contentdependent. Thus, adopting CNN backbones may restrict the
ability of adaptive motion modeling and potentially limits
further development of video interpolation models.
Second, capturing long-range dependencies is of central
importance in video interpolation for which large motion
fields pose the most prominent challenges. However, most
CNNs [25, 53] usually employ small convolution kernels
(typically 3×3 as suggested by VGG [39]), which is inefficient in exploiting long-range information and thus less
effective in synthesizing high-quality video frames. While
it seems an easy fix to use larger kernels in the convolution layer, it significantly increases the number of model
parameters and computational cost, thereby leading to poor
local minimums in training without proper regularizations.

17482

