Neural Window Fully-connected CRFs for Monocular Depth Estimation
Weihao Yuan

Xiaodong Gu Zuozhuo Dai
Alibaba Group

Siyu Zhu

Ping Tan

Abstract
Estimating the accurate depth from a single image is
challenging since it is inherently ambiguous and ill-posed.
While recent works design increasingly complicated and
powerful networks to directly regress the depth map, we take
the path of CRFs optimization. Due to the expensive computation, CRFs are usually performed between neighborhoods rather than the whole graph. To leverage the potential of fully-connected CRFs, we split the input into windows
and perform the FC-CRFs optimization within each window, which reduces the computation complexity and makes
FC-CRFs feasible. To better capture the relationships between nodes in the graph, we exploit the multi-head attention mechanism to compute a multi-head potential function,
which is fed to the networks to output an optimized depth
map. Then we build a bottom-up-top-down structure, where
this neural window FC-CRFs module serves as the decoder,
and a vision transformer serves as the encoder. The experiments demonstrate that our method significantly improves the performance across all metrics on both the KITTI
and NYUv2 datasets, compared to previous methods. Furthermore, the proposed method can be directly applied to
panorama images and outperforms all previous panorama
methods on the MatterPort3D dataset. 1

1. Introduction
Depth prediction is a classical task in computer vision
and is essential for numerous applications such as 3D reconstruction, autonomous driving, and robotics [8, 13, 41, 42].
Such a vision task aims to estimate the depth map from
a single color image, which is an ill-posed and inherently
ambiguous problem since infinitely many 3D scenes can be
projected to the same 2D scene. Therefore, this task is challenging for traditional methods [22, 23, 30], which are usually limited to low-dimension and sparse distances [22], or
known and fixed objects [23].
Recently, many works have employed the deep networks
to directly regress the depth maps and achieved good performances [1, 2, 6, 7, 17, 18]. Nevertheless, since there are
no geometric constraints of multi-view [9,40,43] to exploit,
1 Project page: https://weihaosky.github.io/newcrfs

Figure 1. The neural window fully-connected CRFs take image
feature F and upper-level prediction X as input, and compute the
fully-connected energy E in each window, which is then fed to the
networks to output an optimized depth map.

the focus of most works is designing more powerful and
more complicated networks. This renders this task a difficult fitting problem without the help of other guidance.
In traditional monocular depth estimation, some methods build the energy function from Markov Random Fields
(MRFs) or Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) [30, 31, 37].
They exploit the observation cues, such as the texture and
position information, along with the last prediction to build
the energy function, and then optimize this energy to obtain a depth prediction. This approach is demonstrated to
be effective in guiding the estimation of the depth, and is
also introduced in some deep methods [11,20,29,38]. However, they are all limited in neighbor CRFs rather than fullyconnected CRFs (FC-CRFs) due to the expensive computation, while the fully-connected CRFs capture the relationship between any node in a graph and are much stronger.
To address the above challenge, in this work we segment the input to multiple windows, and build the fullyconnected CRFs energy within each window, in which way
the computation complexity is reduced considerably and the
fully-connected CRFs becomes feasible. To capture more
relationships between the nodes in the graph, we exploit the
multi-head attention mechanism [35] to compute the pairwise potential of the CRFs, and build a new neural CRFs
module, as is shown in Figure 1. By employing this neural
window FC-CRFs module as decoder, and a vision transformer as encoder, we build a straightforward bottom-uptop-down network to estimate the depth. To make up for

3916

