Disentangled3D: Learning a 3D Generative Model with Disentangled Geometry
and Appearance from Monocular Images
Ayush Tewari1,2 Mallikarjun B R1 Xingang Pan1 Ohad Fried3
Maneesh Agrawala4 Christian Theobalt1
1

Max Planck Insitute for Informatics

2

MIT

3

Interdisciplinary Center, Herzliya

4

Stanford University

Figure 1. Our model can disentangle geometry, appearance, and pose in synthesized images. This figure visualizes results on FFHQ [15]
(first 5 columns) and Cats [42] (last 5 columns). Each row shows images rendered with the same pose and geometry, but with different
appearances. Each column shows images rendered with different poses and geometry, but with the same appearance.

Abstract
Learning 3D generative models from a dataset of monocular images enables self-supervised 3D reasoning and controllable synthesis. State-of-the-art 3D generative models
are GANs that use neural 3D volumetric representations for
synthesis. Images are synthesized by rendering the volumes
from a given camera. These models can disentangle the 3D
scene from the camera viewpoint in any generated image.
However, most models do not disentangle other factors of
image formation, such as geometry and appearance. In this
paper, we design a 3D GAN which can learn a disentangled model of objects, just from monocular observations.
Our model can disentangle the geometry and appearance
variations in the scene, i.e., we can independently sample
from the geometry and appearance spaces of the generative model. This is achieved using a novel non-rigid deformable scene formulation. A 3D volume that represents
an object instance is computed as a non-rigidly deformed
canonical 3D volume. Our method learns the canonical
volume, as well as its deformations, jointly during training. This formulation also helps us improve the disentanglement between the 3D scene and the camera viewpoints

using a novel pose regularization loss defined on the 3D deformation field. In addition, we model the inverse deformations, enabling the computation of dense correspondences
between images generated by our model. Finally, we design
an approach to embed real images into the latent space of
our model, enabling editing of real images.

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art generative models directly operate in the
image space using 2D CNNs. These models, such as StyleGAN and its variants [14–16] have achieved a high level
of photorealism. However, image-based models do not offer direct control over the underlying 3D scene parameters, such as camera and geometry. While some methods
add camera viewpoint control over pretrained image-based
GAN models [1, 5, 17, 34], the results are limited by the
quality of 3D consistency of the pretrained models.
In contrast to the image-based methods, recent approaches learn GAN models directly in the 3D space [2,
8, 24, 26, 31]. In this case, the generator network synthesizes a 3D representation of the scene as output, which can

1516

