Super-Fibonacci Spirals: Fast, Low-Discrepancy Sampling of SO(3)
Marc Alexa
TU Berlin
marc.alexa@tu-berlin.de

Abstract
Super-Fibonacci spirals are an extension of Fibonacci
spirals, enabling fast generation of an arbitrary but fixed
number of 3D orientations. The algorithm is simple and
fast. A comprehensive evaluation comparing to other methods shows that the generated sets of orientations have low
discrepancy, minimal spurious components in the power
spectrum, and almost identical Voronoi volumes. This
makes them useful for a variety of applications, in particular Monte Carlo sampling.

1. Introduction
Methods for the generation of orientation or rotation
samples are a fundamental building block in science and
engineering. They are used in such diverse fields as
protein docking [27], crystallography [31], electron cryomicroscopy [8, 48] or additive manufacturing [39], to name
but a few. In vision, robotics, and learning they have been
used, among others, in path planning [24, 46]. This work
has been prompted in particular by the use of orientation
samples for estimating pose or establishing rotation equivariance in machine learning methods. For example, convolutional neural networks are linear and have been found
to work well with discretized rotations (CNN) [32, 53].
A recent trend in pose estimation is to learn pose distributions, requiring a sample set of orientations [38, 41].
More broadly, Markov-chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods work well in a variety of estimation and optimization
tasks and are now used heavily in learning. They also apply to problems involving orientations [5] and would profit
from using low discrepancy sample sets for driving the
Monte Carlo sampler [43].
Computing with orientations requires a representation.
In this work, we use the unit 3-sphere S3 ⊂ R4 , which
is a double cover of SO(3). Every unit quaternion q ∈
R4 , ∥q∥ = 1 identifies an orientation, and −q represents the
same orientation. Sampling orientations in this representation means creating pairs of points in R4 with unit distance
to the origin.

Rather than focusing on a particular application, we try
to evaluate the quality of the set using geometric measures on S3 . There are various ways to measure ’welldistribution’ on spheres and sets that are near-optimal in one
sense may be far from optimal in another. Classical quality
criteria for generating ‘optimal’ packings on the sphere [9]
or spherical designs/codes [52] are based on local measures,
i.e. the closest distance between any two orientations or the
radius of empty disks – the so-called dispersion. Distributions that are optimal in the sense of such local measures
often exhibit regularity that leads to aliasing in sampling applications. In Section 4 we discuss several measures that are
better suited to measure the quality of an orientation sample
and explain how to compute them. In particular, the discrepancy of a set is directly related to the error in quasi-Monte
Carlo integration by the Koksma–Hlawka inequality [40].
Another classical tool for the analysis of sample sets is the
power spectrum, describing the spectral properties of the set
and revealing unwanted modes in the distribution. We also
introduce the idea to project S3 onto the Clifford torus for
visualizing aliasing artifacts.
Using these methods we compare existing approaches
for the task of quickly generating well-distributed orientation samples (reviewed in Section 2) to sampling based on
Super-Fibonacci Spirals – a new method based on the idea
of Fibonacci sampling. We provide background and develop and describe the details of this method in Section 3.
The resulting implementation is extremely simple, it supports sample refinement, it is faster than all existing methods, and the resulting orientation sets are well suited for
sampling.
To summarize, we consider generating sample sets on
SO(3) a fundamental building block in vision, robotics,
learning, and more generally science and engineering, to
which we contribute in the following ways:
• We provide a suite of tools for analyzing the properties of
sets of orientations for their use in sampling applications.
• We introduce Super-Fibonacci sampling, a method for
generating an arbitrary number of samples on S3 . It is
simple and very fast and generates high quality orientation samples represented as quaternions.

8291

