A Structured Dictionary Perspective on Implicit Neural Representations
Gizem Yüce*
ETH Zurich

Guillermo Ortiz-Jiménez*
Beril Besbinar
Pascal Frossard
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)

gyuece@ethz.ch

{name.surname}@epfl.ch

Abstract
Implicit neural representations (INRs) have recently
emerged as a promising alternative to classical discretized
representations of signals. Nevertheless, despite their practical success, we still do not understand how INRs represent
signals. We propose a novel unified perspective to theoretically analyse INRs. Leveraging results from harmonic analysis and deep learning theory, we show that most INR families are analogous to structured signal dictionaries whose
atoms are integer harmonics of the set of initial mapping
frequencies. This structure allows INRs to express signals
with an exponentially increasing frequency support using a
number of parameters that only grows linearly with depth.
We also explore the inductive bias of INRs exploiting recent
results about the empirical neural tangent kernel (NTK).
Specifically, we show that the eigenfunctions of the NTK
can be seen as dictionary atoms whose inner product with
the target signal determines the final performance of their
reconstruction. In this regard, we reveal that meta-learning
has a reshaping effect on the NTK analogous to dictionary
learning, building dictionary atoms as a combination of the
examples seen during meta-training. Our results permit to
design and tune novel INR architectures, but can also be of
interest for the wider deep learning theory community.

1. Introduction
Implicit neural representations (INRs) have recently
emerged as a powerful alternative to classical, discretized,
representations of multimedia signals [9, 13, 30, 31, 39, 47,
48,52,53]. In contrast to traditional methods, INRs parameterize the continuous mapping between coordinates and signal values using neural networks. This allows for an efficient and compact representation of signals that can be easily integrated into modern differentiable learning pipelines.
The recent success of INRs in many applications, such
as surface representation [47], volume rendering [27,31,40,
* The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

Implicit Neural Representations

Input
coordinates

NTK eigenfunctions
Signal Dictionary

Figure 1. Conceptual illustration of our main theoretical contributions: i) Each layer of an INR increases the frequency support of
the representation by splitting a signal into higher order harmonics. ii) INRs can be interpreted as signal dictionaries whose atoms
are the eigenfunctions of their NTK at initialization.

50] or generative modelling [7, 14] can be largely attributed
to the development of new periodic representations that can
circumvent the spectral bias of standard neural networks.
Indeed, there is ample evidence that the use of periodic representations [22,31,48,52] can mitigate the bias of standard
architectures towards low frequency [43].
Nevertheless, even if INRs have become widely adopted
in practice, the theoretical understanding of their principles
and properties is rather limited. For example, there is no
clear criterion to select between different INR families, their
parameters are mostly based on heuristics, and their limitations are not well understood. These shortcomings are slowing down further research developments. In this work, we
therefore take a step back and focus on understanding the
mechanisms behind the success of modern INRs, but also
their failure modes, in order to develop more informed design strategies. We provide a unified perspective with the
aim to answer the following important questions:
1. What is the expressive power of INRs?

19228

