RePaint: Inpainting using Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models
Andreas Lugmayr Martin Danelljan Andres Romero Fisher Yu Radu Timofte Luc Van Gool
Computer Vision Lab
ETH Zürich, Switzerland

Input

Denoising 0%

Denoising 60%

Denoising 75%

Sample 1

Sample 2

Sample 3

Sample 4

Sample 5

Figure 1. We use Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPM) for inpainting. The process is conditioned on the masked input
(left). It starts from a random Gaussian noise sample that is iteratively denoised until it produces a high-quality output. Since this process
is stochastic, we can sample multiple diverse outputs. The DDPM prior forces a harmonized image, is able to reproduce texture from other
regions, and inpaint semantically meaningful content.

Abstract
Free-form inpainting is the task of adding new content
to an image in the regions specified by an arbitrary binary mask. Most existing approaches train for a certain
distribution of masks, which limits their generalization capabilities to unseen mask types. Furthermore, training with
pixel-wise and perceptual losses often leads to simple textural extensions towards the missing areas instead of semantically meaningful generation. In this work, we propose RePaint: A Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model
(DDPM) based inpainting approach that is applicable to
even extreme masks. We employ a pretrained unconditional
DDPM as the generative prior. To condition the generation process, we only alter the reverse diffusion iterations by

sampling the unmasked regions using the given image information. Since this technique does not modify or condition
the original DDPM network itself, the model produces highquality and diverse output images for any inpainting form.
We validate our method for both faces and general-purpose
image inpainting using standard and extreme masks. RePaint outperforms state-of-the-art Autoregressive, and GAN
approaches for at least five out of six mask distributions.
Github Repository: git.io/RePaint

1. Introduction
Image Inpainting, also known as Image Completion,
aims at filling missing regions within an image. Such inpainted regions need to harmonize with the rest of the im-

11461

