Forward Propagation, Backward Regression, and Pose Association
for Hand Tracking in the Wild
Mingzhen Huang1,2 , Supreeth Narasimhaswamy1 , Saif Vazir1,3 , Haibin Ling1 , Minh Hoai1,4
1
Stony Brook University, 2 University at Buffalo, 3 Tulip Interfaces, 4 VinAI Research
(ii) Our proposed Handler

(i) Current multi-object tracker

t-1

t

Abstract

0.3

Occluded
hands

0.8

0.9
0.2

We propose HandLer, a novel convolutional architecture that can jointly detect and track hands online in unconstrained videos. HandLer is based on Cascade-RCNN
with additional three novel stages. The first stage is Forward Propagation, where the features from frame t-1 are
propagated to frame t based on previously detected hands
and their estimated motion. The second stage is the Detection and Backward Regression, which uses outputs from the
forward propagation to detect hands for frame t and their
relative offset in frame t-1. The third stage uses an offthe-shelf human pose method to link any fragmented hand
tracklets. We train the forward propagation and backward
regression and detection stages end-to-end together with the
other Cascade-RCNN components.
To train and evaluate HandLer, we also contribute
YouTube-Hand, the first challenging large-scale dataset of
unconstrained videos annotated with hand locations and
their trajectories. Experiments on this dataset and other
benchmarks show that HandLer outperforms the existing state-of-the-art tracking algorithms by a large margin.
Code and data are available at https://vision.cs.
stonybrook.edu/˜mingzhen/handler/.

1. Introduction
Hand tracking is an important problem in various application scenarios, from gesture and activity recognition
to contact tracing and skill evaluation. One approach for
tracking hands is to consider them as parts of a human body
and then perform hand tracking based on the tracked human
pose. But pose detection and tracking can be unreliable by
itself, especially for people that are partially occluded or
outside the field of view of the camera. Another approach
for hand tracking is to use off-the-shelf tracking methods.
Unfortunately, single-object trackers are not appropriate
for tracking multiple hands, while existing multiple-object
trackers do not work well for hands even though they have
shown impressive performance for tracking pedestrians and
vehicles [2, 5, 19, 47, 49, 50, 62]. Hand tracking is difficult
because hands are not ordinary objects, given the extreme

t
0.2
0.8

0.2
0.3

0.1

0.8

0.2

Association

0.1
0.3

0.9

1.0

missed

0.8

0.1

Proposals and
objectness scores

0.2

0.3
0.1

0.1

Dropped detection

0.6

Association
Pose

detected

0.9

0.8

Detected hands and
confidence scores

Tracking offsets

Flow maps

Figure 1. We develop an advanced detection and association algorithm for tracking multiple hands. Different with previous methods that estimate probability of a detected hand on the objectness
scores at current frame only, we estimate the probability based
on both the objectness scores at frames t and t-1, and associate
hands across frame via both pose and tracking offsets.

articulation of hands and the frequent interaction of hands
with other objects. In a short period of a few frames, the
size, shape, location, and visibility of a hand can change
dramatically and frequently. Many existing multiple-object
trackers use the detection and assoication paradigm. However, hand detection would fail in the presence of motion
blur and occlusion, while hand linking across time is difficult as the size, location, pose, and appearance of a hand
can change drastically. Simultaneously, two different hand
instances might look alike, so distinguishing them would
be difficult even for a sophisticated re-identification module
that has been trained specifically for hands.
In this work, we develop a novel convolutional architecture that can detect and track hands in unconstrained videos.
We name the proposed architecture HandLer, which stands
for Hand Linker. HandLer takes as input two consecutive
video frames at times t-1 and t, and output the detected
hands in frame t as well as their corresponding locations
in frame t-1. The processing pipeline consists of three
stages. The first stage is the Forward Propagation, which
propagates features from frame t-1 to frame t based on
the locations of previously detected hands and their estimated movements. The second stage is the Detection and

6406

