A Conservative Approach for Unbiased Learning on Unknown Biases
Myeongho Jeon1 , Daekyung Kim2 , Woochul Lee1 , Myungjoo Kang1 , Joonseok Lee1
1
Seoul National University, 2 Monitor Corporation
{andyjeon, sunnmoon137, woochulee, mkang, joonseok}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Although convolutional neural networks (CNNs) achieve
state-of-the-art in image classification, recent works address their unreliable predictions due to their excessive dependence on biased training data. Existing unbiased modeling postulates that the bias in the dataset is obvious to
know, but it is actually unsuited for image datasets including countless sensory attributes. To mitigate this issue, we
present a new scenario that does not necessitate a predefined bias. Under the observation that CNNs do have
multi-variant and unbiased representations in the model,
we propose a conservative framework that employs this internal information for unbiased learning. Specifically, this
mechanism is implemented via hierarchical features captured along the multiple layers and orthogonal regularization. Extensive evaluations on public benchmarks demonstrate our method is effective for unbiased learning.1

Figure 1. Categorization of Data Bias Problems with an example of gender prediction biased in hair length. The most limited
case, unknown bias, is what we address in this paper.

1. Introduction
Recently, machine learning models (e.g., convolutional
neural networks) achieve state-of-the-art performance on
image classification. However, the model could be often
biased, as it is trained overly dependent on the distribution of the training dataset [17, 20, 21]. The biased model
is vulnerable to unreliable generalization to unseen data.
For instance, suppose we classify the gender of a person
in an image. A naturally collected image dataset often contains significantly more examples with (female, long hair)
and (male, short hair) than the other combinations, as seen
in Fig. 1. Although the hair length is not biologically correlated to gender, the model is subject to be confused as if it
is, due to the high correlation observed in the data. In this
case, we call that this gender classification dataset is highly
biased in hair length.
For better generalization, it would be important to train
the classifier unbiased, and a line of recent works is dedicated to this problem. The easiest problem setting is the
labeled bias, where we know what the bias is and each
1 Source code: https://github.com/aandyjeon/UBNet

training example is annotated not only with the actual label but also with the bias. For example, we know the gender classification dataset is biased in hair length and each
image is annotated with the hair length as well as the gender, corresponding to the row Labeled Bias in Fig. 1. As
the bias can be easily quantified, several supervised learning approaches [1, 2, 6, 8, 12] were proposed to unlearn the
bias.
However, not all classification datasets provide annotations for the bias variable even if we know what it is. For
instance, it is more common that we know the gender classification dataset may be biased in hair length, but each individual is annotated only with the gender, not with the hair
length. We call this known bias as in Fig. 1. It is more challenging than labeled bias, since it is hard to unlearn the bias
by training a supervised model directly taking advantage
of the annotations. A style-transferred image dataset [7]
and an adversarial training against structurally limited network [3] were proposed to address known bias in texture.
A traditional image processing algorithm was employed as
bias-robust filtering in the deep neural network [22].

16752

