What Makes Transfer Learning Work for Medical Images:
Feature Reuse & Other Factors
Christos Matsoukas1,2,3 *, Johan Fredin Haslum 1,2,3 , Moein Sorkhei 1,2 , Magnus Söderberg 3 , Kevin Smith 1,2
1

KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
2
Science for Life Laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden
3
AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, Sweden

Abstract
Transfer learning is a standard technique to transfer
knowledge from one domain to another. For applications in
medical imaging, transfer from ImageNet has become the
de-facto approach, despite differences in the tasks and image characteristics between the domains. However, it is unclear what factors determine whether – and to what extent –
transfer learning to the medical domain is useful. The longstanding assumption that features from the source domain
get reused has recently been called into question. Through
a series of experiments on several medical image benchmark datasets, we explore the relationship between transfer
learning, data size, the capacity and inductive bias of the
model, as well as the distance between the source and target domain. Our findings suggest that transfer learning is
beneficial in most cases, and we characterize the important
role feature reuse plays in its success.

1. Introduction
The goal of transfer learning is to reuse knowledge
gained in one domain, the source domain, to improve performance in another, the target domain. Transfer learning
is often used when data from the target domain is limited.
Such is the case for medical imaging, where the expense
of acquisition, the rareness of the disease, as well as legal
and ethical issues limit data size. The lack of large public datasets has led to the widespread adoption of transfer
learning from I MAGE N ET [10] to improve performance on
medical tasks [27, 28, 39].
Despite its pervasive use, we do not yet fully understand
what makes transfer learning from the natural to the medical domain work. In this paper, we endeavor to paint a
more complete picture of which factors enable a successful
transfer. Through a series of comprehensive experiments,
we study the effectiveness of transfer learning as a function
* Corresponding author: Christos Matsoukas <matsou@kth.se>

APTOS 2019

CBIS-DDSM

ISIC 2019

CheXpert

PatchCamelyon

Figure 1. Factors affecting the utility of transfer learning from
ImageNet to medical domains. The size of each dot represents relT
ative increase in performance ( W
) achieved transferring weights
RI
from I MAGE N ET (WT) compared to random initialization (RI).
The color of the dot indicates how much of the gain can be attributed to feature reuse (relative gains W TW TST from Table 1,
normalized between the minimum and the maximum value for all
settings, see Section 2 for details). Each panel shows the gains observed by a different model over five runs, in order of increasing
inductive biases: D EI T-S, SWIN, I NCEPTION and R ES N ET 50.
The benefits from transfer learning increase with (1) reduced data
size, (2) smaller distances between the source and target domain,
and (3) less inductive bias. Moreover, feature reuse correlates
strongly with observed gains from transfer learning, suggesting
that feature reuse plays an essential role – especially for ViTs
which lack the inductive biases of CNNs. (*) indicates cases where
feature reuse is less important, uncovered in [30, 36].

9225

