TransGeo: Transformer Is All You Need for Cross-view Image Geo-localization
Sijie Zhu, Mubarak Shah, Chen Chen
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida
sizhu@knights.ucf.edu, shah@crcv.ucf.edu, chen.chen@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
The dominant CNN-based methods for cross-view image
geo-localization rely on polar transform and fail to model
global correlation. We propose a pure transformer-based
approach (TransGeo) to address these limitations from a
different perspective. TransGeo takes full advantage of the
strengths of transformer related to global information modeling and explicit position information encoding. We further
leverage the flexibility of transformer input and propose an
attention-guided non-uniform cropping method, so that uninformative image patches are removed with negligible drop
on performance to reduce computation cost. The saved
computation can be reallocated to increase resolution only
for informative patches, resulting in performance improvement with no additional computation cost. This “attend and
zoom-in” strategy is highly similar to human behavior when
observing images. Remarkably, TransGeo achieves stateof-the-art results on both urban and rural datasets, with
significantly less computation cost than CNN-based methods. It does not rely on polar transform and infers faster
than CNN-based methods. Code is available at https:
//github.com/Jeff-Zilence/TransGeo2022.

1. Introduction
Image-based geo-localization aims to determine the location of a query street-view image by retrieving the most
similar images in a GPS-tagged reference database. It has a
great potential for noisy GPS correction [2, 33] and navigation [12, 17] in crowed cities. Due to the complete coverage
and easy access of aerial images from Google Map API [1],
a thread of works [10, 14, 19, 21–23, 25, 29, 35] focus on
cross-view geo-localization, where the satellite/aerial images are collected as reference images for both rural [14,34]
and urban areas [29, 36]. They generally train a two-stream
CNN (Convolutional Neural Network) framework employing metric learning loss [10, 35]. However, such cross-view
retrieval systems suffer from the great domain gap between
street and aerial views, as CNNs do not explicitly encode
the position information of each view.

To bridge the domain gap, recent works apply a predefined polar transform [21, 22, 26] on the aerial-view images. The transformed aerial images have a similar geometric layout as the street-view query images, which results in
significant boost in the retrieval performance. However, the
polar transform relies on the prior knowledge of the geometry corresponding to the two views, and may fail when the
street query is not spatially aligned at the center of aerial
images [36] (this point is further demonstrated in Sec. 4.5).
Recently, vision transformer [7] has achieved significant performance on various vision tasks due to its powerful global modeling ability and self-attention mechanism.
Although CNN-based methods are still predominant for
cross-view geo-localization, we argue vision transformer is
more suitable for this task due to three advantages: 1) Vision transformer explicitly encodes the position information, thus can directly learn the geometric correspondence
between two views with the learnable position embedding.
2) The multi-head attention [28] module can model global
long-range correlation between all patches starting from the
first layer, while CNNs have limited receptive field [7] and
only learn global information in top layers. Such strong
global modeling ability can help learn the correspondence,
when two objects are close in one view while far from each
other in the other view. 3) Since each patch has an explicit
position embedding, it is possible to apply non-uniform
cropping, which removes arbitrary patches without changing the input of other patches, while CNNs can only apply
uniform cropping (i.e. cropping a rectangle area). Such flexibility of patch selection is beneficial for geo-localization.
Since some objects in aerial-view may not appear in street
view due to occlusion, they can be removed with nonuniform cropping to reduce computation and GPU memory
footprint, while keeping the position information of other
patches.
However, vanilla vision transformer [7] (ViT) has some
limitation on training data size and memory consumption, which must be addressed when applied to cross-view
geo-localization. The original ViT [7] requires extremely
large training datasets to achieve state-of-the-art, e.g. JFT300M [7] or ImageNet-21k [5] (a super set of the origi-

1162

