FreeSOLO: Learning to Segment Objects without Annotations*
Xinlong Wang1 , Zhiding Yu2 , Shalini De Mello2 , Jan Kautz2 ,
Anima Anandkumar2,3 , Chunhua Shen4 , Jose M. Alvarez2
1

The University of Adelaide

2

3

NVIDIA

Caltech

4

Zhejiang University

Figure 1. Qualitative results of FreeSOLO for the task of class-agnostic instance segmentation. The model is trained without any kind
of manual annotations and can infer at 16 FPS on a V100 GPU. Best viewed on screen.

Abstract
Instance segmentation is a fundamental vision task that
aims to recognize and segment each object in an image.
However, it requires costly annotations such as bounding boxes and segmentation masks for learning. In this
work, we propose a fully unsupervised learning method
that learns class-agnostic instance segmentation without
any annotations. We present FreeSOLO, a self-supervised
instance segmentation framework built on top of the simple instance segmentation method SOLO. Our method also
presents a novel localization-aware pre-training framework, where objects can be discovered from complicated
scenes in an unsupervised manner. FreeSOLO achieves
9.8% AP50 on the challenging COCO dataset, which
even outperforms several segmentation proposal methods
that use manual annotations. For the first time, we
demonstrate unsupervised class-agnostic instance segmentation successfully. FreeSOLO’s box localization significantly outperforms state-of-the-art unsupervised object detection/discovery methods, with about 100% relative im* Part of this work was done when XW was an intern at NVIDIA, and
CS was with The Univerity of Adelaide. CS is the corresponding author.

provements in COCO AP. FreeSOLO further demonstrates
superiority as a strong pre-training method, outperforming state-of-the-art self-supervised pre-training methods by
+9.8% AP when fine-tuning instance segmentation with
only 5% COCO masks.
Code is available at: github.com/NVlabs/FreeSOLO

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation is a fundamental computer vision
task that requires recognizing the objects in an image and
segmenting each of them at the pixel level. Instance segmentation subsumes object detection, as bounding box can
be thought of as a coarse parametric representation of a segmentation mask. Therefore, it is a more demanding and
challenging task than object detection by requiring both
instance-level and pixel-level predictions. Recently, significant progress [1–7] has been made to address the instance segmentation task. However, the dense prediction
nature of the task requires rich and expensive annotations
during training. Weakly-supervised instance segmentation
methods are thus proposed to relax the annotation requirements [8–13]. Latest methods such as BoxInst [11] and Dis-

14176

