Fire Together Wire Together:
A Dynamic Pruning Approach with Self-Supervised Mask Prediction
Sara Elkerdawy1

Mostafa Elhoushi2
Hong Zhang1
1
Nilanjan Ray
1
2
University of Alberta, Toronto Heterogeneous Compilers Lab, Huawei
{elkerdaw, hzhang, nray1}@ualberta.ca

Abstract

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) showed unprecedented growth over the past decade which represented
the state-of-the-art in many fields. However, CNNs require
substantially large computation and memory consumption
which limits deployment on edge and embedded platforms.
There are many advances in model compression research

3.5
3.0

Accuracy drop (%)

Dynamic model pruning is a recent direction that allows for the inference of a different sub-network for each
input sample during deployment. However, current dynamic methods rely on learning a continuous channel gating through regularization by inducing sparsity loss. This
formulation introduces complexity in balancing different
losses (e.g task loss, regularization loss). In addition, regularization based methods lack transparent tradeoff hyperparameter selection to realize a computational budget. Our
contribution is two-fold: 1) decoupled task and pruning
losses. 2) Simple hyperparameter selection that enables
FLOPs reduction estimation before training. Inspired by
the Hebbian theory in Neuroscience: “neurons that fire together wire together”, we propose to predict a mask to process k filters in a layer based on the activation of its previous layer. We pose the problem as a self-supervised binary classification problem. Each mask predictor module
is trained to predict if the log-likelihood for each filter in
the current layer belongs to the top-k activated filters. The
value k is dynamically estimated for each input based on a
novel criterion using the mass of heatmaps. We show experiments on several neural architectures, such as VGG,
ResNet and MobileNet on CIFAR and ImageNet datasets.
On CIFAR, we reach similar accuracy to SOTA methods
with 15% and 24% higher FLOPs reduction. Similarly in
ImageNet, we achieve lower drop in accuracy with up to
13% improvement in FLOPs reduction.

2.5

FTWT (ours)
Taylor
LCCL
SFP
FPGM
ResNet18

2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

25

30

35

40

FLOPs Reduction (%)

45

50

Figure 1. FLOPs reduction vs accuracy drop from baselines for
various dynamic and static models on ResNet34 ImageNet.

including manually designed lightweight models [16, 17],
low-bit precision [23, 47], architecture search [4, 39], and
model pruning [9,21,29,34]. Most of the compression techniques are agnostic to the input data and optimize for a static
efficient model. Recent efforts in pruning literature propose
to keep the backbone for the baseline model as a whole and
do inference using different sub-networks conditioned on
the input. This is known as dynamic pruning, where different routes are activated based on the input which allows
higher degree of freedom and more flexibility in comparison to static pruning.
Current dynamic pruning approaches typically introduce
a regularization term to induce sparsity over a continuous
parameter for channel gating/masking [6, 10, 40]. Others
adopt policy gradient introduced in reinforcement learning [42] to learn different routes. These methods require
careful tuning in training to tackle issues such as training
stability with schedule annealing [40], biased training handling [18], or predefined pruning ratio per layer [10, 25].
Also, as noted in [6], additional sparsity loss degrades task
loss as it is difficult to balance the task loss and the pruning

12454

