Few-Shot Object Detection with Fully Cross-Transformer
Guangxing Han, Jiawei Ma, Shiyuan Huang, Long Chen, Shih-Fu Chang
Columbia University
{gh2561,jiawei.m,sh3813,cl3695,sc250}@columbia.edu

Abstract
Few-shot object detection (FSOD), with the aim to detect
novel objects using very few training examples, has recently
attracted great research interest in the community. Metriclearning based methods have been demonstrated to be effective for this task using a two-branch based siamese network,
and calculate the similarity between image regions and fewshot examples for detection. However, in previous works, the
interaction between the two branches is only restricted in
the detection head, while leaving the remaining hundreds of
layers for separate feature extraction. Inspired by the recent
work on vision transformers and vision-language transformers, we propose a novel Fully Cross-Transformer based
model (FCT) for FSOD by incorporating cross-transformer
into both the feature backbone and detection head. The
asymmetric-batched cross-attention is proposed to aggregate the key information from the two branches with different
batch sizes. Our model can improve the few-shot similarity
learning between the two branches by introducing the multilevel interactions. Comprehensive experiments on both PASCAL VOC and MSCOCO FSOD benchmarks demonstrate
the effectiveness of our model.

1. Introduction
Few-shot object detection (FSOD) aims to detect objects
from the query image using a few training examples. This is
motivated by human visual system which can quickly learn
novel concepts from very few instructions. The key point
is how to quickly learn object detection models with strong
generalization ability using a small number of training data,
such that the learned model can detect objects in unseen
images. This is very challenging, especially for the current
state-of-the-art deep-learning based methods [1, 28, 32, 33],
which usually need thousands of training examples and are
prone to overfitting under this data-scarce scenario.
Current methods for this task mainly follow a twostage learning paradigm [45] to transfer the knowledge
learned from the data-abundant base classes to assist in
object detection for few-shot novel classes. The detailed

Figure 1. Comparison of the single-branch, two-branch based
FSOD models and our proposed model.

model architectures vary in different works, which can be
roughly divided into two categories, single-branch based
methods [36, 45, 47, 51, 52] and two-branch based methods [8, 12, 13, 20, 23, 49]. (1) Single-branch based methods employ a typical object detection model, e.g., Faster
R-CNN [33], and build a multi-class classifier for detection.
It is prone to overfitting to the small training data, especially when we only have 1-shot training data per novel class.
(2) Two-branch based methods apply the metric-learning
idea [34, 37, 41] to FSOD and build a siamese network to
process the query image and the few-shot support image in
parallel. After extracting deep visual features from the two
branches, previous works propose various methods (e.g., feature fusion [8,48,49], feature alignment [13], GCN [12], and
non-local attention/transformer [2, 3, 6, 20, 44]) to calculate
the similarity of the two branches. The two-branch based
methods do not learn the multi-class classifier over novel
classes, and usually have stronger generalization ability by
learning to compare the query regions with few-shot classes.
Previous two-branch based methods have explored various interactions (e.g., alignment) between the query and

5321

