Multi-modal Alignment using Representation Codebook
Jiali Duan1∗ Liqun Chen1 * Son Tran1 Jinyu Yang2
Yi Xu1 Belinda Zeng1 Trishul Chilimbi1
1
Amazon 2 University of Texas at Arlington
{duajiali,liquchen,sontran,yxaamzn,zengb,trishulc}@amazon.com

Abstract
Aligning signals from different modalities is an important
step in vision-language representation learning as it affects
the performance of later stages such as cross-modality fusion.
Since image and text typically reside in different regions of
the feature space, directly aligning them at instance level is
challenging especially when features are still evolving during training. In this paper, we propose to align at a higher
and more stable level using cluster representation. Specifically, we treat image and text as two “views” of the same
entity, and encode them into a joint vision-language coding
space spanned by a dictionary of cluster centers (codebook).
We contrast positive and negative samples via their cluster
assignments while simultaneously optimizing the cluster centers. To further smooth out the learning process, we adopt
a teacher-student distillation paradigm, where the momentum teacher of one view guides the student learning of the
other. We evaluated our approach on common vision language benchmarks and obtain new SoTA on zero-shot cross
modality retrieval while being competitive on various other
transfer tasks.

1. Introduction
Vision language (V&L) representation learning is the
problem of learning a unified feature embedding using both
image and text signals. Pretrained V&L models have a great
diversity of applications in various downstream tasks across
different settings, e.g. via transfer learning [8, 28, 49]. The
main tasks in V&L pretraining include aligning the feature
spaces of different modalities (multi-modal alignment [8,
25, 28, 31]) and capturing the interaction across modalities
(cross-modal fusion, [12, 44]). Late fusion approaches such
as CLIP [37] and ALIGN [21] focused on the first task, while
early fusion approaches such as OSCAR [28], VinVL [49]
and VilLT [22] focused on the second one. In this work,
we adopt a hybrid approach similar to ALBEF [25], where
features from image and text modalities were first aligned
* The first two authors contributed equally.

{jinyu.yang}@mavs.uta.edu

Image feature
space

Cross-modal
feature align

Prior
Work:
A cat wearing a mask

Text feature
space

Image feature
space

Cross-modal
feature align

Ours:
A cat wearing a mask

feature/prototype align
Common
code space

Text feature
space

Figure 1. We propose to use a learnable codebook to better align
the image and text modalities. The codebook serves as a “bridge”
between the image and text features. Each codeword can be interpreted as a prototype, which enables contrasting image and text at
the cluster level. We then solve an optimal transport [1] problem
to optimize the distance between each modality to the prototypes,
which in turn optimizes the alignment between the two modalities.
Prototype vectors are learned along with the feature encoders in
our V&L framework.

and then fused using a transformer encoder. The main focus
of our work is on the feature alignment stage, which is
challenging due to the fact that image and text inputs have
very different characteristics. Existing approaches such as
CLIP [37] and ALIGN [21] have to rely on large training
resources and on massive amount of data to obtain good
alignments (400M and 1.8B image-text pairs respectively).
In this work, we propose a more efficient alignment strategy by using a codebook that quantizes the common textimage feature space into codewords. These codewords or
cluster centers provide a more stable means for contrastive
reasoning compared to individual text or visual features. We
took the inspiration from SwAV [4], which was developed
for self-supervised visual representation learning. In [4], two
augmented versions (views) of the same input image were
passed through a deep network for feature extraction. Visual
embedding was learned by optimizing an objective function
that enforces the consistency between the feature from one

15651

