Towards Driving-Oriented Metric for Lane Detection Models
Takami Sato
University of California, Irvine

Qi Alfred Chen
University of California, Irvine

takamis@uci.edu

alfchen@uci.edu

1. Introduction
Lane detection is one of the key technologies today for
realizing autonomous driving. For lane detection, camera
is the most frequently used sensor because it is a natural
choice as lane lines are visual patterns [26]. Like most
other computer vision areas, lane detection has been significantly benefited from the recent advances of deep neural
networks (DNNs). In the 2017 TuSimple Lane Detection
Challenge [8], DNN-based lane detection shows substantial performance as all top 3 teams opt for DNN-based lane
detection. After this competition, its dataset and evaluation

UltraFast

PolyLaneNet

LaneATT

Accuracy: 100%

Accuracy: 100%

Accuracy: 84%

Accuracy: 100%

Accuracy: 79%

Accuracy: 27%

Accuracy: 76%

Accuracy: 34%

Accuracy: 63%

Accuracy: 45%

Accuracy: 51%

Accuracy: 31%

Attack
to Left
Attack
to Right

After the 2017 TuSimple Lane Detection Challenge, its
dataset and evaluation based on accuracy and F1 score
have become the de facto standard to measure the performance of lane detection methods. While they have played a
major role in improving the performance of lane detection
methods, the validity of this evaluation method in downstream tasks has not been adequately researched. In this
study, we design 2 new driving-oriented metrics for lane
detection: End-to-End Lateral Deviation metric (E2E-LD)
is directly formulated based on the requirements of autonomous driving, a core downstream task of lane detection; Per-frame Simulated Lateral Deviation metric (PSLD)
is a lightweight surrogate metric of E2E-LD. To evaluate the validity of the metrics, we conduct a large-scale
empirical study with 4 major types of lane detection approaches on the TuSimple dataset and our newly constructed dataset Comma2k19-LD. Our results show that the
conventional metrics have strongly negative correlations
(≤-0.55) with E2E-LD, meaning that some recent improvements purely targeting the conventional metrics may not
have led to meaningful improvements in autonomous driving, but rather may actually have made it worse by overfitting to the conventional metrics. As autonomous driving
is a security/safety-critical system, the underestimation of
robustness hinders the sound development of practical lane
detection models. We hope that our study will help the community achieve more downstream task-aware evaluations
for lane detection.

SCNN
Benign

Abstract

Figure 1. Examples of lane detection results and the accuracy metric in benign and adversarial attack scenarios on TuSimple Challenge dataset [8]. As shown, the conventional accuracy metric
does not necessarily indicate drivability if used in autonomous
driving, the core downsteam task. For example, SCNN always
has higher accuracy than PolyLaneNet, but its detection results are
making it much harder to achieve lane centering (detailed in §4.2).

method based on accuracy and F1 score became the de facto
standard in lane detection evaluation. These metrics are inherited by the subsequent datasets [13, 37].
However, the validity of this evaluation method in practical contexts, i.e., whether this is representative of practicality in real-world downstream applications, has not been
adequately researched. Specifically, the main real-world
applications of lane detection are for autonomous driving
(AD), e.g., online detection for automated lane centering
(for lower-level AD such as in Telsa AutoPilot [6]), and
offline detection for high-definition map creation (for both
low-level [5] and high-level AD [50]). With such an application domain as its main target, the robustness of lane
detection is highly critical as errors from it could be fatal.
Unfortunately, we find that the conventional evaluation metrics (i.e., accuracy and F1 score) have limitations in correctly reflecting the performance of lane detection models
in such main downstream application domain, especially in
more challenging scenarios (e.g., when under adversarial
attacks). Fig. 1 shows a few such examples that motivate
this study. In the adversarial attack settings, the lane lines
detected by SCNN [37] are largely disrupted, but their performance measured by the conventional accuracy metric is

17153

