GEN-VLKT: Simplify Association and Enhance Interaction Understanding
for HOI Detection
Yue Liao1,3 * Aixi Zhang2 * Miao Lu2 Yongliang Wang2 Xiaobo Li2 Si Liu1,3†
1
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University 2 Alibaba Group
3
Hangzhou Innovation Institute, Beihang University

Abstract
The task of Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection
could be divided into two core problems, i.e., human-object
association and interaction understanding. In this paper,
we reveal and address the disadvantages of the conventional
query-driven HOI detectors from the two aspects. For the
association, previous two-branch methods suffer from complex and costly post-matching, while single-branch methods
ignore the features distinction in different tasks. We propose Guided-Embedding Network (GEN) to attain a twobranch pipeline without post-matching. In GEN, we design an instance decoder to detect humans and objects with
two independent query sets and a position Guided Embedding (p-GE) to mark the human and object in the same
position as a pair. Besides, we design an interaction decoder to classify interactions, where the interaction queries
are made of instance Guided Embeddings (i-GE) generated from the outputs of each instance decoder layer. For
the interaction understanding, previous methods suffer from
long-tailed distribution and zero-shot discovery. This paper proposes Visual-Linguistic Knowledge Transfer (VLKT)
training strategy to enhance interaction understanding by
transferring knowledge from a visual-linguistic pre-trained
model CLIP. In specific, we extract text embeddings for all
labels with CLIP to initialize the classifier and adopt a
mimic loss to minimize the visual feature distance between
GEN and CLIP. As a result, GEN-VLKT outperforms the
state of the art by large margins on multiple datasets, e.g.,
+5.05 mAP on HICO-Det. The source codes are available
at https://github.com/YueLiao/gen-vlkt.

1. Introduction
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection is a significant task to make a machine understand human activities in
a static image at a fine-grained level. In this task, human activities are represented as a series of HOI triplets <Human,
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author (liusi@buaa.edu.cn)

Human
Queries

--."#$_$&'

Instance
Decoder
Object
Queries

--.&$(_)*"
--.&$(_$&'

i-GE
Init

p-GE

Interaction
Decoder
(a) Two-branch Decoders of GEN

Object Text
Embeddings

Init

HOI Text Object Text
Labels
Labels

CLIP Text
Encoder
HOI Text
Embeddings

--.+,-./_)*"

CLIP Image
Encoder

Mimic

Image

(b) VLKT

Figure 1. Our GEN-VLKT pipeline. We propose GEN, a querybased HOI detector with two-branch decoders, where we design
a guided embedding association mechanism to replace the traditional post-matching process for simplifying the association.
Moreover, we devise a training strategy VLKT, where we transfer
knowledge from the large-scale visual-linguistic pre-trained model
CLIP to enhance interaction understanding.

Object, Verb>, so an HOI detector is required to localize
human and object pairs and recognize their interactions.
The core problems of HOI detection are to explore how to
associate the interactive human and object pairs and understand their interactions. Thus, we consider improving the
HOI detector from the two aspects and design a unified and
superior HOI detection framework. We first revisit the efforts conducted by traditional methods in such two aspects.
For the association problem, it can be mainly divided
into two paradigms, i.e., bottom-up and top-down. Bottomup methods [6, 7, 21] detect humans and objects first
and then associate humans and objects through a classifier or a graph model. Top-down methods usually design an anchor to denote the interaction, e.g., interaction
point [23] and queries [4, 31, 46], and then find the corresponding human and object through pre-defined associative rules. Benefiting from the development of visual transformer, query-based methods are leading the performance
of HOI detection, which are mainly two streams, i.e., two-

20123

