OSSGAN: Open-Set Semi-Supervised Image Generation
Kai Katsumata
Duc Minh Vo
Hideki Nakayama
The University of Tokyo, Japan
{katsumata,vmduc,nakayama}@nlab.ci.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

(a) Conventional image generation

(b) (Closed-set) semi-supervised image generation

(c) Open-set semi-supervised image generation
(our task)

Figure 1. We explore the conditional image generation in which we relax the assumption about training data. (a) Conventional supervised
image generation [1, 12, 23] principally uses labeled data for training. (b) (Closed-set) semi-supervised image generation [10] generalizes
the supervised image generation, allowing the presence of unlabeled data with samples inside classes of interest, which are closed-set
samples. (c) Our task of open-set semi-supervised image generation further generalizes semi-supervised image generation. The unlabeled
data contain closed-set samples and open-set samples, which do not belong to any of the classes of interest.

Abstract
We introduce a challenging training scheme of conditional GANs, called open-set semi-supervised image generation, where the training dataset consists of two parts: (i)
labeled data and (ii) unlabeled data with samples belonging to one of the labeled data classes, namely, a closedset, and samples not belonging to any of the labeled data
classes, namely, an open-set. Unlike the existing semisupervised image generation task, where unlabeled data
only contain closed-set samples, our task is more general
and lowers the data collection cost in practice by allowing open-set samples to appear. Thanks to entropy regularization, the classifier that is trained on labeled data is
able to quantify sample-wise importance to the training of
cGAN as confidence, allowing us to use all samples in unlabeled data. We design OSSGAN, which provides decision
clues to the discriminator on the basis of whether an unlabeled image belongs to one or none of the classes of interest, smoothly integrating labeled and unlabeled data during
training. The results of experiments on Tiny ImageNet and
ImageNet show notable improvements over supervised BigGAN and semi-supervised methods. Our code is available

at https://github.com/raven38/OSSGAN .

1. Introduction
The outstanding performance of the SoTA conditional
generative adversarial networks (cGANs) [1,12,23] is heavily reliant on having access to a vast amount of labeled data
during training (Fig. 1a). This dependence necessitates significant efforts to label the data and limits the applications
of cGANs in real-world scenarios. Reducing the reliance on
labeled data in training cGANs is thus deemed necessary.
Semi-supervised image generation [4, 9, 10, 19, 20] allows the appearance of both labeled and unlabeled data during training, with the unlabeled data primarily containing
within classes of interest (closed-set samples) (Fig. 1b). Despite the advances, the unlabeled data assumption is at odds
with the fact that the majority of unlabeled data is outside of
classes of interest (open-set samples), and ensuring that unlabeled data do not contain open-set samples is often costly
and prone to error. In fact, in [4, 9, 10, 19, 20], even openset samples are classified into classes that appear in labeled
data, resulting in cGAN performance deterioration.
We go beyond semi-supervised image generation by al-

11185

