The Norm Must Go On: Dynamic Unsupervised Domain Adaptation by Normalization
M. Jehanzeb Mirza1,2
1

Jakub Micorek1

Horst Possegger1

Horst Bischof1,2

Institute of Computer Graphics and Vision, Graz University of Technology.
2
Christian Doppler Laboratory for Embedded Machine Learning.
{muhammad.mirza, jakub.micorek, possegger, bischof}@icg.tugraz.at

50

Abstract

1. Introduction
Present day Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) show
promising results when both training and testing data belong to the same distribution [16, 26, 68]. However, if there
is a domain shift, i.e. when the testing data comes from
a different domain, neural networks struggle to generalize [4, 10, 38]. In fact, even if there is only a slight distribution shift, the performance of neural networks is reported to
already degrade significantly [18, 47].
One way to overcome the performance drop during domain shifts is to obtain labeled data from the shifted domain

45

Top-1 Classification Error (%)

Domain adaptation is crucial to adapt a learned model
to new scenarios, such as domain shifts or changing data
distributions. Current approaches usually require a large
amount of labeled or unlabeled data from the shifted domain. This can be a hurdle in fields which require continuous dynamic adaptation or suffer from scarcity of data, e.g.
autonomous driving in challenging weather conditions. To
address this problem of continuous adaptation to distribution shifts, we propose Dynamic Unsupervised Adaptation
(DUA). By continuously adapting the statistics of the batch
normalization layers we modify the feature representations
of the model. We show that by sequentially adapting a
model with only a fraction of unlabeled data, a strong performance gain can be achieved. With even less than 1%
of unlabeled data from the target domain, DUA already
achieves competitive results to strong baselines. In addition, the computational overhead is minimal in contrast to
previous approaches. Our approach is simple, yet effective
and can be applied to any architecture which uses batch
normalization as one of its components. We show the utility
of DUA by evaluating it on a variety of domain adaptation
datasets and tasks including object recognition, digit recognition and object detection.

Source-only
NORM
TTT
Momentum ρ = 0.1
Momentum ρ = 0.05
Momentum ρ = 0.025
Momentum ρ = 0.01
DUA

40

35

30

0

100

200
300
Number of Samples for Adaptation

400

500

(a) CIFAR-10C results.

(b) Detections in foggy weather without (top) and with (bottom) DUA.
We overlay the detection results (blue) and the ground truth (orange).

Figure 1. Exemplary DUA results. a) Mean classification error
over 15 different corruption types (at the most severe level 5) on
CIFAR-10C [18]. We outperform the state-of-the-art NORM [42,
54] and TTT [60], while using less than 1% of unlabeled data from
the corrupted test set only. Our proposed adaptive momentum
scheme leads to both fast and stable improvements in contrast to
fixing the momentum parameter ρ. b) Qualitative results for object
detection in degrading weather conditions: our DUA (bottom) significantly improves the performance of a KITTI [11] pre-trained
YOLOv3 [48] on KITTI-Fog [14]. Best viewed in color.

and re-train the network. However, manual labeling of large
amounts of data imposes significant human and monetary
costs. These issues are addressed by Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation (UDA) approaches, e.g. [4, 10, 12, 17, 24, 33, 34,

14765

