HiVT: Hierarchical Vector Transformer for Multi-Agent Motion Prediction
Zikang Zhou1 Luyao Ye1 Jianping Wang1,2 Kui Wu3 Kejie Lu4
1
City University of Hong Kong 2 City University of Hong Kong Shenzhen Research Institute
3
University of Victoria 4 University of Puerto Rico at Mayagüez
{zikanzhou2-c,luyaoye2-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk
jianwang@cityu.edu.hk

wkui@uvic.ca

Abstract
Accurately predicting the future motions of surrounding
traffic agents is critical for the safety of autonomous vehicles. Recently, vectorized approaches have dominated
the motion prediction community due to their capability
of capturing complex interactions in traffic scenes. However, existing methods neglect the symmetries of the problem and suffer from the expensive computational cost, facing the challenge of making real-time multi-agent motion
prediction without sacrificing the prediction performance.
To tackle this challenge, we propose Hierarchical Vector
Transformer (HiVT) for fast and accurate multi-agent motion prediction. By decomposing the problem into local context extraction and global interaction modeling, our method
can effectively and efficiently model a large number of
agents in the scene. Meanwhile, we propose a translationinvariant scene representation and rotation-invariant spatial learning modules, which extract features robust to the
geometric transformations of the scene and enable the
model to make accurate predictions for multiple agents in a
single forward pass. Experiments show that HiVT achieves
the state-of-the-art performance on the Argoverse motion
forecasting benchmark with a small model size and can
make fast multi-agent motion prediction.

1. Introduction
Navigating through dynamic environments in a safe maneuver is a critical mission of autonomous vehicles. To
this end, autonomous vehicles need to understand the surroundings and anticipate the future on the road. However,
it is challenging to accurately predict the future motions of
nearby traffic agents, such as vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians, whose goals or intents may be unknown. In multiagent traffic scenarios, an agent’s behavior is shaped by
complex interactions with other agents. Such interactions
further intertwine with the map-dependent traffic regulations, making it extremely difficult to understand the diverse

kejie.lu@upr.edu

behavior of multiple agents in the scene.
Recently, learning-based methods have demonstrated
their effectiveness in the motion prediction task [9, 12, 31,
32, 36, 49]. Inspired by the progress in computer vision,
some works rasterize the scenes into bird’s eye view images and apply CNNs to make predictions [9, 12, 25]. Although these approaches are easy to implement with offthe-shelf image models, they are computationally expensive
and have limited receptive fields. Given these limitations,
recent works [17, 31, 49] employ a vectorized approach for
more compact scene representations, which extracts a set
of vectors or points from the trajectories and the map elements. The scenes are then processed by graph neural networks [6, 20, 29], Transformers [46], or point cloud models [39, 40, 47] to learn the relationships among vectorized
entities such as trajectory waypoints and lane segments.
Existing vectorized approaches, however, are challenged
by the need to make real-time motion predictions in rapidly
changing traffic conditions. Since vectorized methods are
generally not robust to translation and rotation of the reference frame, to mitigate this problem, recent research normalizes the scene to be centered at the target agent and
to be aligned with the target agent’s heading [17, 31, 49].
This remedy becomes problematic when a large number of
agents in the scene need to be predicted, owing to the expensive cost of re-normalizing the scene and re-computing the
scene features for each target agent. Further, existing works
model all-to-all relationships in the space and the time dimensions to capture fine-grained interactions among the
vectorized entities [38, 51], which inevitably leads to prohibitive computation with the increase of entities. As making accurate predictions in real time is critical for the safety
of autonomous driving, we are thus motivated to push the
state-of-the-art by developing a new framework to achieve
faster and more accurate multi-agent motion prediction.
In a nutshell, our approach exploits the symmetries and
the hierarchical structure in the problem of multi-agent motion prediction. We frame the motion prediction task in
multiple stages and hierarchically model the relationships

8823

