Multi-Scale High-Resolution Vision Transformer for Semantic Segmentation
Jiaqi Gu1 ,* Hyoukjun Kwon2 , Dilin Wang2 , Wei Ye2 , Meng Li2 , Yu-Hsin Chen2 ,
Liangzhen Lai2 , Vikas Chandra2 , David Z. Pan1
1
University of Texas at Austin, 2 Meta Platforms Inc.
jqgu@utexas.edu, dpan@ece.utexas.edu
{hyoukjun, wdilin, weiye, meng.li, yhchen, liangzhen, vchandra}@fb.com

Abstract
Vision Transformers (ViTs) have emerged with superior
performance on computer vision tasks compared to the convolutional neural network (CNN)-based models. However,
ViTs mainly designed for image classification will generate
single-scale low-resolution representations, which makes
dense prediction tasks such as semantic segmentation challenging for ViTs. Therefore, we propose HRViT, which enhances ViTs to learn semantically-rich and spatially-precise
multi-scale representations by integrating high-resolution
multi-branch architectures with ViTs. We balance the model
performance and efficiency of HRViT by various branchblock co-optimization techniques. Specifically, we explore
heterogeneous branch designs, reduce the redundancy in
linear layers, and augment the attention block with enhanced expressiveness. Those approaches enabled HRViT
to push the Pareto frontier of performance and efficiency
on semantic segmentation to a new level, as our evaluation results on ADE20K and Cityscapes show. HRViT
achieves 50.20% mIoU on ADE20K and 83.16% mIoU
on Cityscapes, surpassing state-of-the-art MiT and CSWin
backbones with an average of +1.78 mIoU improvement,
28% parameter saving, and 21% FLOPs reduction, demonstrating the potential of HRViT as a strong vision backbone
for semantic segmentation. Our code is publicly available 1 .

1. Introduction
Dense prediction tasks such as semantic segmentation
are important computer vision workloads on emerging intelligent computing platforms, e.g., AR/VR devices. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have rapidly evolved
with significant performance improvement in semantic segmentation [1, 4, 19, 21, 25, 29]. Beyond classical CNNs,
vision Transformers (ViTs) have emerged with competitive performance in computer vision tasks [2, 3, 6, 12, 13,
* Work done during an internship at Meta Platforms Inc.
1 https://github.com/facebookresearch/HRViT

18, 20, 28, 31, 32, 35, 36, 39, 43]. Benefiting from the selfattention operations, ViTs embrace strong expressivity with
long-distance information interaction and dynamic feature
aggregation. However, ViT [13] produces single-scale and
low-resolution representations, which are not friendly to semantic segmentation that requires high position sensitivity
and fine-grained image details.
To cope with the challenge, various ViT backbones that
yield multi-scale representations were proposed for semantic segmentation [6, 12, 20, 30, 31, 35, 38]. However, they
still follow a classification-like network topology with a sequential or series architecture. Based on complexity consideration, they gradually downsample the feature maps to
extract higher-level low-resolution (LR) representations and
directly feed each stage’s output to the downstream segmentation head. Such sequential structures lack enough crossscale interaction thus cannot produce high-quality highresolution (HR) representations.
HRNet [29] was proposed to solve the problem outside
of ViT context, which enhances the cross-resolution interaction with a multi-branch architecture maintaining all resolutions throughout the network. HRNet extracts multiresolution features in parallel and fuses them repeatedly to
generate high-quality HR representations with rich semantic information. Such a design concept has achieved great
success in various dense prediction tasks. Nevertheless, its
expressivity is limited by small receptive fields and strong
inductive bias from cascaded convolution operations. To
deal with the challenge, some HRNet variants such as LiteHRNet [37] and HR-NAS [11] are proposed. However,
those improved HRNet designs are still mainly based on the
convolutional building blocks, and their demonstrated performance on semantic segmentation is still far behind the
state-of-the-art (SoTA) scores of ViT counterparts.
Therefore, synergistically integrating HRNet with ViTs
is an approach to be explored for further performance improvement. By combining those two approaches, ViTs can
obtain rich multi-scale representability from the HR architecture, while HRNet can gain a larger receptive field

12094

