Meta Agent Teaming Active Learning for Pose Estimation
Jia Gong1 Zhipeng Fan2 Qiuhong Ke3 Hossein Rahmani4 Jun Liu1∗
1
Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore; 2 New York University, United States
3
The University of Melbourne, Australia; 4 Lancaster University, United Kingdom
jia gong@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, zf606@nyu.edu, qiuhong.ke@unimelb.edu.au
h.rahmani@lancaster.ac.uk, jun liu@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
The existing pose estimation approaches often require a
large number of annotated images to attain good estimation
performance, which are laborious to acquire. To reduce
the human efforts on pose annotations, we propose a novel
Meta Agent Teaming Active Learning (MATAL) framework
to actively select and label informative images for effective
learning. Our MATAL formulates the image selection procedure as a Markov Decision Process and learns an optimal
sampling policy that directly maximizes the performance of
the pose estimator based on the reward. Our framework
consists of a novel state-action representation as well as
a multi-agent team to enable batch sampling in the active
learning procedure. The framework could be effectively optimized via Meta-Optimization to accelerate the adaptation
to the gradually expanded labeled data during deployment.
Finally, we show experimental results on both human hand
and body pose estimation benchmark datasets and demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms all baselines continuously under the same amount of annotation
budget. Moreover, to obtain similar pose estimation accuracy, our MATAL framework can save around 40% labeling
efforts on average compared to state-of-the-art active learning frameworks.

1. Introduction
Human hand (or body) pose estimation, aiming to localize the positions of specific key points in images, is an
important task that has a wide range of applications such
as augmented reality [11], sign language translation [21],
and human-robot interaction [40]. Despite the great success of existing deep learning based pose estimation methods [63, 2, 15, 59, 19, 10, 56], they are notoriously datahungry. Furthermore, acquiring pose annotation is often
* Corresponding Author

very expensive and time-consuming, e.g., annotating a single image in MPII dataset [1] takes around 40 seconds,
which limits the development of large-scale datasets. Accordingly, with the limited scale of the dataset, it is essential
to develop algorithms to use data more efficiently.
Active learning (AL), which proactively selects the most
informative unlabeled images to annotate, is one promising
solution to this problem. Recent active learning-based pose
estimation frameworks [38, 58, 4, 5, 22] can be categorized
into uncertainty-based or distribution-based methods. The
uncertainty-based methods [22, 58, 38] query annotations
for the samples with the lowest confidence scores. However, as shown in [24], neural networks tend to be overconfident with unfamiliar samples, leading to overestimated
model performance and therefore lowering the labeling efficiency. Meanwhile, the distribution-based methods [35, 4]
aim to query annotations for representative images from the
unlabeled dataset. However, the most representative images
w.r.t. the unlabeled set may not always be the most informative ones to the pose estimator, as the estimator may have
already learned similar knowledge from earlier samples. As
the result, for both types of methods, their image selection
strategy does not directly relate to the improvements of the
pose estimator, leading to suboptimal performance.
Moreover, these methods suffer in the batch setting,
where the active learning algorithm selects multiple images
for annotation in one turn. Existing traditional methods
[22, 58] rely on selecting the most informative or representative images to construct a batch, disregarding the redundancies in the formed batch. Recently, several works [4, 35]
explore the usage of distance-based clustering to identify
unique images yet maintain good coverage of the dataset.
However, the adopted clustering algorithms tend to be less
effective in the high-dimensional space, leading to less
effective sample selection processes during AL iterations
[34]. Therefore, it is important to construct a batch of samples for annotation in an intelligent way, taking care of both
the informativeness of each individual image and the overall
diversity of the batch.

11079

