Autofocus for Event Cameras
Shijie Lin1 , Yinqiang Zhang1 , Lei Yu2 , Bin Zhou3 , Xiaowei Luo4 , Jia Pan1 *
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 Wuhan University 3 Beihang University 4 City University of Hong Kong
Project page: https://eleboss.github.io/eaf_webpage/

Abstract
Focus control (FC) is crucial for cameras to capture
sharp images in challenging real-world scenarios. The autofocus (AF) facilitates the FC by automatically adjusting
the focus settings. However, due to the lack of effective
AF methods for the recently introduced event cameras, their
FC still relies on naive AF like manual focus adjustments,
leading to poor adaptation in challenging real-world conditions. In particular, the inherent differences between event
and frame data in terms of sensing modality, noise, temporal resolutions, etc., bring many challenges in designing an effective AF method for event cameras. To address
these challenges, we develop a novel event-based autofocus framework consisting of an event-specific focus measure
called event rate (ER) and a robust search strategy called
event-based golden search (EGS). To verify the performance of our method, we have collected an event-based autofocus dataset (EAD) containing well-synchronized frames,
events, and focal positions in a wide variety of challenging
scenes with severe lighting and motion conditions. The experiments on this dataset and additional real-world scenarios demonstrated the superiority of our method over stateof-the-art approaches in terms of efficiency and accuracy.

1. Introduction
Recently, a novel neuromorphic vision sensor called
event camera [3, 24] has gained growing attention with
its significant advantages like high dynamic range (HDR,
>130 dB [3]) and low latency (1 us [11]). Thus far, event
cameras have been widely adopted in various applications,
including robotics and computer vision [9], where the focus control (FC) is essential for reliable perception. Simi* J. Pan is the corresponding author. This project is supported by
HKSAR RGC GRF 11202119, 11207818, T42-717/20-R, HKSAR
Technology Commission under the InnoHK initiative, National Natural
Science Foundation of China, Grant 61871297, and the Natural Science
Foundation of Hubei Province, China, Grant 2021CFB467. 1 {lsj2048,
2 ly.wd@whu.edu.cn,
zyq507, panj}@connect.hku.hk,
3 zhoubin@buaa.edu.cn, 4 xiaowluo@cityu.edu.hk.

在此处键入公式。

Figure 1. Our event-based autofocus system consists of an event
camera and a motorized varifocal lens. It leverages the proposed
event-based focus measure and search method to focus the camera
to the optimal focal position. When appropriately focused, the
event camera’s imaging result (b) is sharper and more informative
than (a), (c) where it is defocused.

lar to conventional frame-based cameras, the focused events
(Fig. 1b) exhibit sharper textures and convey more information than the defocused ones (Fig. 1a and Fig. 1c). Thus,
an effective autofocus (AF) method for event cameras is in
demand, especially for challenging real-world scenarios.
Conventional AF methods facilitate FC by leveraging
the inherent properties of image frames like image gradient [6, 8, 12], image frequency [17, 44], and image statistics [6]. However, events have fundamental differences with
frames in terms of modality, noise, temporal resolutions,
etc., which make conventional frame-based AF methods not
applicable. When developing AF methods specific for event
cameras, four particular challenges are:
• Focus measure function: Focus measure is a critical
function measuring the degree of defocus, but existing
frame-based focus measures are designed for 2D image frames but not for the asynchronous event data.

16344

