Interactive Image Synthesis with Panoptic Layout Generation
Bo Wang

Tao Wu

Minfeng Zhu

Peng Du*

Huawei Technologies
{wangbo341, zhuminfeng, dupeng25}@hisilicon.com, taowu1@huawei.com

1. Introduction
Tremendous progress has been made on conditional image synthesis for creative design. Among different formats of conditional inputs are categories [2, 14, 25–27, 41],
source images [15,22,44], text description [31,38,42], scene
graphs [1, 12, 40] and semantic layouts [28, 36, 45]. To date,
interactive image synthesis via conditional generative models remains a contemporary challenge. Text-to-image mod* Corresponding author.

Object Input

Instance Layout Generated Image

PLGAN

Interactive image synthesis from user-guided input is a
challenging task when users wish to control the scene structure of a generated image with ease. Although remarkable
progress has been made on layout-based image synthesis
approaches, existing methods require high-precision inputs
such as accurately placed bounding boxes, which might be
constantly violated in an interactive setting. When placement of bounding boxes is subject to perturbation, layoutbased models suffer from “missing regions” in the constructed semantic layouts and hence undesirable artifacts
in the generated images. In this work, we propose Panoptic Layout Generative Adversarial Network (PLGAN) to address this challenge. The PLGAN employs panoptic theory which distinguishes object categories between “stuff”
with amorphous boundaries and “things” with well-defined
shapes, such that stuff and instance layouts are constructed
through separate branches and later fused into panoptic
layouts. In particular, the stuff layouts can take amorphous
shapes and fill up the missing regions left out by the instance layouts. We experimentally compare our PLGAN
with state-of-the-art layout-based models on the COCOStuff, Visual Genome, and Landscape datasets. The advantages of PLGAN are not only visually demonstrated but
quantitatively verified in terms of inception score, Fréchet
inception distance, classification accuracy score, and coverage. The code is available at https://github.com/wbfinalking/PLGAN.

Grid2Im

Abstract

Instance/Stuff Input Panoptic Layout Generated Image
Figure 1. Scene-to-image synthesis by Grid2Im [1] vs. PLGAN.
Unlike the instance layout utilized by Grid2Im that treats all objects as instances (things), the panoptic layout by PLGAN distinguishes objects between instances and stuff, thus eliminating artifacts in the missing regions (marked black in the layout).

els usually suffers from reasoning object locations and relations [42]. Image synthesis from semantic layouts provides
an alternative way for computer-human interaction [9, 21]
and yields aesthetically pleasing results [28, 36, 45]. However, high-quality semantic layouts demand professional
skills in free-hand drawing from scratch by users, which
prevent them from being used as a drag-and-drop GUI for
novice users. In this respect, scene graph has attracted much
attention in recent years [1, 12], as it requires only multiple
object placements on the artboard and allows user-friendly
manipulation with individual objects.
A milestone in scene-graph-to-image synthesis is made
by Grid2Im [1], which roughly consists of two stages: layout construction and image generation. First, the input conditions are passed to construct an instance layout with perobject masks and bounding boxes. Secondly, conditioned
on the instance layout a photo-realistic image is sythesized as the outcome of the image generation stage. Whilst
Grid2Im [1] requires ground truth segmentation maps as su-

7783

