Cross-Model Pseudo-Labeling for Semi-Supervised Action Recognition
Yinghao Xu1 Fangyun Wei3 Xiao Sun3 Ceyuan Yang1
Yujun Shen1 Bo Dai2 Bolei Zhou1 Stephen Lin3
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 3 Microsoft Research Asia
{xy119,yc019,sy116,bzhou}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

bo.dai@ntu.edu.sg

{fawe,xias,stevelin}@microsoft.com

Abstract

0.4

Performance Gap:
Acc𝑠 − 𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑙

Semi-supervised action recognition is a challenging but
important task due to the high cost of data annotation. A
common approach to this problem is to assign unlabeled
data with pseudo-labels, which are then used as additional
supervision in training. Typically in recent work, the
pseudo-labels are obtained by training a model on the
labeled data, and then using confident predictions from the
model to teach itself. In this work, we propose a more effective pseudo-labeling scheme, called Cross-Model PseudoLabeling (CMPL). Concretely, we introduce a lightweight
auxiliary network in addition to the primary backbone,
and ask them to predict pseudo-labels for each other. We
observe that, due to their different structural biases, these
two models tend to learn complementary representations
from the same video clips. Each model can thus benefit
from its counterpart by utilizing cross-model predictions
as supervision. Experiments on different data partition
protocols demonstrate the significant improvement of our
framework over existing alternatives. For example, CMPL
achieves 17.6% and 25.1% Top-1 accuracy on Kinetics-400
and UCF-101 using only the RGB modality and 1% labeled
data, outperforming our baseline model, FixMatch [17], by
9.0% and 10.3%, respectively. 1

-0.6

Swinging Legs

Testifying

0

Category (Sorted by 𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑙 )

399

Figure 1. Category-wise performance gap between small and
large networks under the supervised training setting given 1%
labeled videos in Kinetics-400 [2]. Accs and Accl denote the
accuracy of the small (3D-ResNet50×1/4) and the large (3DResNet50) network, respectively. For categories on which the
large network performs poorly (i.e., the left half of the figure),
the small network behaves better even with much lower model
capacity. Concretely, the small network tends to perform well on
classes with stronger temporal dynamics, i.e., “Swinging Legs”,
while the large network better recognizes actions mainly characterized by spatial information, i.e., “Testifying”. See Sec. 4.4 for
further discussion.

1. Introduction
The rapid development of deep learning has led to great
success in action recognition. In the standard supervised
learning protocol, a considerable number of annotated
videos is needed but difficult to acquire in practice. On
the other hand, about 500 hours of video is uploaded to
YouTube every minute worldwide, providing a tremendous
amount of unlabeled data. Leveraging such unlabeled
videos for semi-supervised learning could thus be of great
benefit for action recognition.
1 Project page is at https : / / justimyhxu . github . io /
projects/cmpl/.

To gain supervision from unlabeled data, a common
practice is to assign pseudo-labels to these data and treat
them as “ground-truth” for training [11, 17, 19, 26]. Specifically, existing approaches train a model on labeled data and
then use it to predict the unlabeled videos. If the confidence
in a prediction is high enough, the prediction will be taken
as the pseudo-label of the video, to be used in network training henceforth. The quantity and quality of pseudo-labels
therefore has a significant impact in the current learning
scheme. However, the limited discriminative power derived
from a small amount of labeled data leads to inadequate
pseudo-labels and limits the gain from unlabeled data.

2959

