Noisy Boundaries: Lemon or Lemonade for Semi-supervised
Instance Segmentation?
Zhenyu Wang
Yali Li *
Shengjin Wang
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist)
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
wangzy20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {liyali13, wgsgj}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Current instance segmentation methods rely heavily on
pixel-level annotated images. The huge cost to obtain such
fully-annotated images restricts the dataset scale and limits
the performance. In this paper, we formally address semisupervised instance segmentation, where unlabeled images
are employed to boost the performance. We construct a
framework for semi-supervised instance segmentation by
assigning pixel-level pseudo labels. Under this framework,
we point out that noisy boundaries associated with pseudo
labels are double-edged. We propose to exploit and resist them in a unified manner simultaneously: 1) To combat the negative effects of noisy boundaries, we propose a
noise-tolerant mask head by leveraging low-resolution features. 2) To enhance the positive impacts, we introduce
a boundary-preserving map for learning detailed information within boundary-relevant regions. We evaluate our approach by extensive experiments. It behaves extraordinarily, outperforming the supervised baseline by a large margin, more than 6% on Cityscapes, 7% on COCO and 4.5%
on BDD100k. On Cityscapes, our method achieves comparable performance by utilizing only 30% labeled images.

1. Introduction
“When life gives you lemons, make lemonade.”
– Elbert Hubbard
The performance of instance segmentation has been improved significantly with the development of deep learning
[19, 24, 5, 50, 52]. However, current instance segmentation methods require pixel-level labeled images for fullysupervised training, which are prohibitively expensive to
annotate. Statistically, segmenting one object instance requires 79s on average [36]. In some cases, annotating a single image with high quality even costs more than 1.5h [16].
* Corresponding author

Codes are available at https://github.com/zhenyuw16/noisyboundaries.

Figure 1: Semi-supervised instance segmentation (on the
COCO dataset), which explores to utilize unlabeled images,
is a novel problem that has not been formally defined and
addressed so far. Compared with weakly-supervised and
fully-supervised methods, it excavates existing data sufficiently and seeks to use a large number of unlabeled resources, making instance segmentation more practical.
This severely restricts the scale of datasets and further limits the performance of models. Researches in cognition science [18, 31] have demonstrated that human concept learning involves large amounts of unlabeled experience without feedback. Works in object detection [47, 25, 38] or
semantic segmentation [41, 39, 21] have seeked for semisupervised learning to alleviate the huge expense of human
labeling. However, utilizing nearly labor-free unlabeled images is still unexplored for instance segmentation, partially
because of its intrinsic difficulty. These motivate us to use
unlabeled images to break through the upper bound of fullysupervised instance segmentation. We call this task semisupervised instance segmentation.
The difficulty to collect pixel-level annotated data in instance segmentation has been recognized by many works.
Most of them attempt to deal with this problem by weaklysupervised instance segmentation [22, 51, 45]. The main
benefit of semi-supervised instance segmentation, compared to fully-supervised and weakly-supervised ones, is

16826

