Self-Supervised Bulk Motion Artifact Removal in Optical Coherence
Tomography Angiography

1

Jiaxiang Ren1 Kicheon Park2 Yingtian Pan2 Haibin Ling1 *
Department of Computer Science 2 Department of Biomedical Engineering
Stony Brook University

{jiaxren,hling}@cs.stonybrook.edu {ki.park,yingtian.pan}@stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Optical coherence tomography angiography (OCTA) is
an important imaging modality in many bioengineering
tasks. The image quality of OCTA, however, is often degraded by Bulk Motion Artifacts (BMA), which are due
to micromotion of subjects and typically appear as bright
stripes surrounded by blurred areas. State-of-the-art methods usually treat BMA removal as a learning-based image
inpainting problem, but require numerous training samples
with nontrivial annotation. In addition, these methods discard the rich structural and appearance information carried in the BMA stripe region. To address these issues, in
this paper we propose a self-supervised content-aware BMA
removal model. First, the gradient-based structural information and appearance feature are extracted from the BMA
area and injected into the model to capture more connectivity. Second, with easily collected defective masks, the model
is trained in a self-supervised manner, in which only the
clear areas are used for training while the BMA areas for
inference. With the structural information and appearance
feature from noisy image as references, our model can remove larger BMA and produce better visualizing result. In
addition, only 2D images with defective masks are involved,
hence improving the efficiency of our method. Experiments
on OCTA of mouse cortex demonstrate that our model can
remove most BMA with extremely large sizes and inconsistent intensities while previous methods fail.

1. Introduction
As a fast and non-invasive optical imaging technology
with high spatiotemporal resolution, optical coherence tomography (OCT) is an emerging medical imaging modality not only for laboratory research but also for clinical
applications [8]. Optical coherence tomography angiography (OCTA) has been reported to effectively diagnose and
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Illustration of OCTA affected by Bulk Motion Artifacts
(BMA). Our work focuses on the BMA removal task in vessel
mask (blue rectangle in dashed line). The enhanced OCTA after
BMA removal has better visualization quality.

assess many retinal conditions, such as diabetic retinopathy [21], macular degeneration [23] and choroidal neovascular membrane [19]. Not only in ophthalmology, OCT
has also been employed to visualize the prognosis of tumor vasculature for a better understanding of microenvironment [22]. Benefitting from high spatiotemporal resolution
and non-invasive features, OCT has been utilized to study
neurovascular changes and brain function in vivo.
A typical OCTA image of mouse cortex is shown in
Fig. 1. Previous approach [15] employed image enhancement to remove background noises for better qualitative and
quantitative analysis. Specifically, a vessel mask was generated to highlight vasculature while suppressing the background noise. Unfortunately, this approach failed to remove
Bulk Motion Artifact (BMA), which was caused by micromotion of the object, as highlighted with double arrows in
Fig. 1.
BMA is one of the most frequent artifacts affecting many

20617

