Robust outlier detection by de-biasing VAE likelihoods
Kushal Chauhan 1 , Barath Mohan U 2 , Pradeep Shenoy 1 , Manish Gupta 1 , Devarajan Sridharan 2 *
1
Google Research
{kushalchauhan, shenoypradeep, manishgupt}@google.com
2
Center for Neuroscience, and Computer Science and Automation, Indian Institute of Science
{barathu, sridhar}@iisc.ac.in
Abstract
Deep networks often make confident, yet, incorrect, predictions when tested with outlier data that is far removed
from their training distributions. Likelihoods computed by
deep generative models (DGMs) are a candidate metric
for outlier detection with unlabeled data. Yet, previous
studies have shown that DGM likelihoods are unreliable
and can be easily biased by simple transformations to input data. Here, we examine outlier detection with variational autoencoders (VAEs), among the simplest of DGMs.
We propose novel analytical and algorithmic approaches
to ameliorate key biases with VAE likelihoods. Our bias
corrections are sample-specific, computationally inexpensive, and readily computed for various decoder visible distributions. Next, we show that a well-known image preprocessing technique – contrast stretching – extends the
effectiveness of bias correction to further improve outlier
detection. Our approach achieves state-of-the-art accuracies with nine grayscale and natural image datasets, and
demonstrates significant advantages – both with speed and
performance – over four recent, competing approaches.
In summary, lightweight remedies suffice to achieve robust
outlier detection with VAEs.1

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are increasingly deployed in realworld computer vision applications. A key issue with such
deployments is over-confident predictions: the tendency of
these networks to make confident, yet incorrect, predictions
when tested with images whose statistics are far removed
from the training data distribution [21]. Developing robust methods for outlier detection is, therefore, an important
challenge with critical real-world implications.
A popular class of approaches for outlier detection, espe* Corresponding author
1 Code is available at

https : / / github . com / google research/google-research/tree/master/vae_ood.

Figure 1. Schematic of the proposed approach. Variational autoencoders (VAEs) are routinely employed for unsupervised outlier detection with real-world images. Yet, variations in low-level
image features, like overall intensity or contrast, can readily bias
VAE likelihoods (p(x)). We analyze these biases, and propose
lightweight analytical and algorithmic remedies (Bias Correction
and Contrast Stretching) for de-biasing VAE likelihoods (pc (x)),
to achieve robust outlier detection.

cially with label-free data, involves computing sample likelihoods with deep generative models like variational autoencoders (VAEs [8]) or flow-based models (e.g. Glow [7]).
Here, we explore outlier detection with VAEs, arguably
among the simplest of deep generative models. In VAEs,
both the generative model p✓ (x|z) and the inference model
q (z|x) are parameterized by deep neural networks with
parameters ✓ (decoder) and (encoder) respectively; the
stochastic latent representation z is typically of considerably lower dimensionality than the input data x. VAEs dif-

9881

