Few Could Be Better Than All:
Feature Sampling and Grouping for Scene Text Detection
Jingqun Tang1 , Wenqing Zhang2 , Hongye Liu1 , MingKun Yang2 ,
Bo Jiang1 , Guanglong Hu1 , Xiang Bai2 *
1
NetEase, 2 Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{jingquntang, liuhongye1998, bjiang002, guanglong.hu}@163.com,
{wenqingzhang, yangmingkun, xbai}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, transformer-based methods have achieved
promising progresses in object detection, as they can eliminate the post-processes like NMS and enrich the deep representations. However, these methods cannot well cope
with scene text due to its extreme variance of scales and
aspect ratios. In this paper, we present a simple yet effective transformer-based architecture for scene text detection. Different from previous approaches that learn robust
deep representations of scene text in a holistic manner, our
method performs scene text detection based on a few representative features, which avoids the disturbance by background and reduces the computational cost. Specifically,
we first select a few representative features at all scales
that are highly relevant to foreground text. Then, we adopt
a transformer for modeling the relationship of the sampled features, which effectively divides them into reasonable groups. As each feature group corresponds to a text instance, its bounding box can be easily obtained without any
post-processing operation. Using the basic feature pyramid network for feature extraction, our method consistently
achieves state-of-the-art results on several popular datasets
for scene text detection.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. The illustration of feature sampling and grouping. (a)
The confidence score map for text regions indicates the pixel importance for text detection. (b) The text features at red points containing geometric and context information of foreground text are
selected by scores. (c) The sampled features from the same text instance are implicitly grouped at the feature level by a transformer.
(d) The bounding boxes can be easily obtained from the grouped
features.

1. Introduction
Scene text detection has been an active research field
for a long time, because of its wide range of practical applications, such as scene understanding, automatic driving,
and photo translation. As a key prior component of scene
text reading, scene text detection aims to precisely locate
text in scene images. Despite the noticeable improvement
achieved by existing methods [10, 40, 41, 49], it is still a
challenging task due to the variety of scene text, e.g. different scales, complicated illumination, perspective distortion,
* Corresponding Author

multi-orientations, and complex shapes. Moreover, most
scene text detection methods depend on complicated processing to generate or refine the predicted results, such as
anchor generation, non-maximum suppression (NMS) [31],
binarization [17], or contour extraction [36].
Inspired by the advantages of the transformer [39] in natural language processing (NLP), lots of works [2, 5, 23, 28,
35, 53] introduce it into vision tasks to extract global-range
features and model long-distance dependencies in images,
while showing promising performance. Especially in object

4563

