Deep 3D-to-2D Watermarking: Embedding Messages in 3D Meshes and
Extracting Them from 2D Renderings
Innfarn Yoo1 Huiwen Chang1 Xiyang Luo1 Ondrej Stava2
Ce Liu1∗ Peyman Milanfar1 Feng Yang1
1
Google Research 2 Google LLC
{innfarn, huiwenchang, xyluo, ostava, milanfar, fengyang}@google.com

ce.liu@microsoft.com

Abstract
Digital watermarking is widely used for copyright protection. Traditional 3D watermarking approaches or commercial software are typically designed to embed messages
into 3D meshes, and later retrieve the messages directly
from distorted/undistorted watermarked 3D meshes. However, in many cases, users only have access to rendered
2D images instead of 3D meshes. Unfortunately, retrieving messages from 2D renderings of 3D meshes is still challenging and underexplored. We introduce a novel end-toend learning framework to solve this problem through: 1)
an encoder to covertly embed messages in both mesh geometry and textures; 2) a differentiable renderer to render
watermarked 3D objects from different camera angles and
under varied lighting conditions; 3) a decoder to recover
the messages from 2D rendered images. From our experiments, we show that our model can learn to embed information visually imperceptible to humans, and to retrieve the
embedded information from 2D renderings that undergo 3D
distortions. In addition, we demonstrate that our method
can also work with other renderers, such as ray tracers and
real-time renderers with and without fine-tuning.

1. Introduction
Digital watermarking is a key technology for copyright protection, source tracking, and authentication for digital content. The goal of digital watermarking is to embed messages in another media, e.g., image, video, or 3D, and be
able to decode the messages even after the watermarked
media is copied, edited or distorted. There are two types
of watermarking: invisible or visible. In this paper, we will
mainly focus on invisible watermarking which means the
watermarked media should be perceptually the same as the
original media.
3D models, due to their increasing ubiquity in a wide
∗ Currently affiliated with Microsoft Azure AI.

Message
Decoding

Message Encoding
CVPR
Decoding:
CVPR

CVPR

CVPR

CVPR

Figure 1. A chair mesh is watermarked with a message “CVPR”,
then rendered as images. The embedded message can be retrieved
from rendered images from different views and lighting conditions.

range of applications such as movie making, gaming, 3D
printing, augmented reality (AR), 3D mapping, etc., have
become an important subject of digital watermarking. The
classic problem of watermarking for 3D models has been
primarily formulated as embedding and retrieving messages, both in 3D space. While traditional 3D watermarking
methods [18,34] and commercial tools [27] are useful in 3D
manufacturing and printing industries, they are inapplicable
to mediums such as gaming, movie making and graphic design, where the messages need to be retrievable from 2D
renderings of the 3D models.
In this work, we study the problem of 3D-to-2D watermarking – how to embed messages invisibly in 3D meshes
and recover them robustly from 2D renderings. Recently, a
number of research works [1, 15, 42] shows that approaches
based on deep neural networks can achieve the state-of-theart performance on image watermarking. One possible so-

10031

