ConDor: Self-Supervised Canonicalization of 3D Pose for Partial Shapes
Rahul Sajnani1
1

Adrien Poulenard2
Leonidas J. Guibas2

RRC, IIIT-Hyderabad

2

Jivitesh Jain1
Radhika Dua3
Srinath Sridhar4

Stanford University

3

KAIST

4

Brown University

ivl.cs.brown.edu/ConDor

Figure 1. ConDor is a self-supervised method that learns to Canonicalize the 3D orientation and position (3D pose) for full and partial
shapes. (left) Our method takes un-canonicalized 3D point clouds (gray) from different categories as input and produces consistently
canonicalized outputs (colored). (right) Our method can also operate on partial point clouds (missing part of shape shown only for
visualization). In addition, ConDor can also learn consistent co-segmentation of shapes without supervision, visualized as colored parts.

Abstract
Progress in 3D object understanding has relied on manually “canonicalized” shape datasets that contain instances
with consistent position and orientation (3D pose). This
has made it hard to generalize these methods to in-the-wild
shapes, e.g., from internet model collections or depth sensors. ConDor is a self-supervised method that learns to
Canonicalize the 3D orientation and position for full and
partial 3D point clouds. We build on top of Tensor Field
Networks (TFNs), a class of permutation- and rotationequivariant, and translation-invariant 3D networks. During inference, our method takes an unseen full or partial
3D point cloud at an arbitrary pose and outputs an equivariant canonical pose. During training, this network uses
self-supervision losses to learn the canonical pose from
an un-canonicalized collection of full and partial 3D point
clouds. ConDor can also learn to consistently co-segment
object parts without any supervision. Extensive quantitative
results on four new metrics show that our approach outperforms existing methods while enabling new applications
such as operation on depth images and annotation transfer.

1. Introduction
Humans have the ability to recognize 3D objects in
a wide variety of positions and orientations (poses) [40],
even if objects are occluded. We also seem to prefer certain canonical views [10], with evidence indicating that an

object in a new pose is mentally rotated to a canonical
pose [47] to aid recognition. Inspired by this, we aim to
build scene understanding methods that reason about objects in different poses by learning to map them to a canonical pose without explicit supervision.
Given a 3D object shape, the goal of instance-level
canonicalization is to find an equivariant frame of reference that is consistent relative to the geometry of the shape
under different 3D poses. This problem can be solved if we
have shape correspondences and a way to find a distinctive
equivariant frame (e.g., PCA). However, it becomes significantly harder if we want to operate on different 3D poses
of different object instances that lack correspondences.
This category-level canonicalization problem has received
much less attention despite tremendous interest in categorylevel 3D object understanding [8, 11, 14, 25, 26, 31, 56].
Most methods rely on data augmentation [23], or manually annotated datasets [3, 56] containing instances that
are consistently positioned and oriented within each category [44, 48, 52]. This has prevented broader application of these methods to un-canonicalized data sources,
such as online model collections [1]. The problem is further exacerbated by the difficulty of canonicalizing partial
shape observations (e.g., from depth maps [36]), or symmetric objects that require an understanding of inter-instance
part relationships. Recent work addresses these limitations
using weakly-supervised [15, 38] or self-supervised learning [13, 29, 43, 46], but cannot handle partial 3D shapes, or
is limited to canonicalizing only orientation.

16969

