Recurrent Dynamic Embedding for Video Object Segmentation
Mingxing Li1∗ , Li Hu2∗ , Zhiwei Xiong1† , Bang Zhang2 , Pan Pan2 , Dong Liu1
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Alibaba DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
mxli@mail.ustc.edu.cn {zwxiong, dongeliu}@ustc.edu.cn
{hooks.hl, zhangbang.zb, panpan.pp}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Space-time memory (STM) based video object segmentation (VOS) networks usually keep increasing memory
bank every several frames, which shows excellent performance. However, 1) the hardware cannot withstand the
ever-increasing memory requirements as the video length
increases. 2) Storing lots of information inevitably introduces lots of noise, which is not conducive to reading the
most important information from the memory bank. In
this paper, we propose a Recurrent Dynamic Embedding
(RDE) to build a memory bank of constant size. Speciﬁcally, we explicitly generate and update RDE by the proposed Spatio-temporal Aggregation Module (SAM), which
exploits the cue of historical information. To avoid error
accumulation owing to the recurrent usage of SAM, we propose an unbiased guidance loss during the training stage,
which makes SAM more robust in long videos. Moreover,
the predicted masks in the memory bank are inaccurate due
to the inaccurate network inference, which affects the segmentation of the query frame. To address this problem, we
design a novel self-correction strategy so that the network
can repair the embeddings of masks with different qualities in the memory bank. Extensive experiments show our
method achieves the best tradeoff between performance and
speed. Code is available at https://github.com/
Limingxing00/RDE-VOS-CVPR2022.

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation (VOS) is a fundamental task
for video understanding, including lots of applications, such
as autonomous driving and video editing. This work focuses on semi-supervised VOS setting. In this setting, given
the instances annotation of the ﬁrst frame, the VOS algorithms segment the instances in other frames.
Matching based networks [5, 13, 18, 20, 23–25, 30, 31,
∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author. This work was done
during Mingxing Li’s internship at Alibaba.

Memory bank

݂‫ ܶ ݁݉ܽݎ‬െ ʹߠ

݂‫ ܶ ݁݉ܽݎ‬െ ߠ

݂‫ܶ ݁݉ܽݎ‬

(a) STM pattern memory bank
RDE
SAM

SAM

݂‫ ܶ ݁݉ܽݎ‬െ ʹߠ

݂‫ ܶ ݁݉ܽݎ‬െ ߠ

݂‫ܶ ݁݉ܽݎ‬

(b) Our SAM pattern memory bank
Figure 1. The inference pipelines of the segmentation of frame
T. 
c denotes concatenation. θ denotes the sampling interval
for the update of the memory bank. (a) shows the network read
the space-time memory (STM) pattern memory bank to segment
frame T . As the length of videos increases, the STM pattern memory bank has an ever-increasing size. In (b), we update a recurrent
dynamic embedding (RDE) to build a memory bank of the constant size, which is maintained by a spatio-temporal aggregation
module (SAM).

39, 44] are popular for semi-supervised VOS. These networks have a memory bank mechanism, which encodes
some frames into embeddings and stores those embeddings
in the memory bank to assist the segmentation of the query
frame. Some methods only use the embeddings of a limited number of frames, such as the ground-truth (GT) frame
[14], the latest frame (for brevity, the latest frame of the
query frame is abbreviated as the latest frame) [27] and
both of them [20, 24, 39]. These methods do not make full
use of historical frames in the video. STM based methods [5, 13, 18, 23, 25, 30, 31, 44] store the embeddings every

1332

