UMT: Unified Multi-modal Transformers for Joint Video Moment
Retrieval and Highlight Detection
Ye Liu 1

Siyuan Li 2 Yang Wu 2∗ Chang Wen Chen 1,4 Ying Shan 2 Xiaohu Qie 3
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
2
ARC Lab, Tencent PCG 3 Tencent PCG 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory
1

csyeliu@comp.polyu.edu.hk, changwen.chen@polyu.edu.hk
{siyuanli,dylanywu,yingsshan,tigerqie}@tencent.com

(No Query)

Video
(Input)

QUERY 1: A person cuts up photos

UMT

Audio
(Input)

QUERY 2: A white cat with spots is playing with a feathery toy

Figure 1. The proposed UMT is a unified and flexible framework which can handle different input modality combinations, and output
video moment retrieval and/or highlight detection results (marked by red rectangles and golden stars, respectively). Note that different text
queries lead to different outcomes from the same video. Arrows in different colors denote different input-output combinations.

Abstract
Finding relevant moments and highlights in videos according to natural language queries is a natural and highly
valuable common need in the current video content explosion era. Nevertheless, jointly conducting moment retrieval
and highlight detection is an emerging research topic, even
though its component problems and some related tasks have
already been studied for a while. In this paper, we present
the first unified framework, named Unified Multi-modal
Transformers (UMT), capable of realizing such joint optimization while can also be easily degenerated for solving
individual problems. As far as we are aware, this is the
first scheme to integrate multi-modal (visual-audio) learning for either joint optimization or the individual moment
retrieval task, and tackles moment retrieval as a keypoint
∗ Corresponding author.

detection problem using a novel query generator and query
decoder. Extensive comparisons with existing methods and
ablation studies on QVHighlights, Charades-STA, YouTube
Highlights, and TVSum datasets demonstrate the effectiveness, superiority, and flexibility of the proposed method under various settings. Source code and pre-trained models
are available at https://github.com/TencentARC/UMT.

1. Introduction
Video has already become the major media in content
production, distribution, and consumption in our daily lives.
It has the unique advantage of being able to include visual,
audio, and linguistic information in the same media, in line
with our natural experiences. Such an advantage on information richness, however, is also a challenging factor limiting its production and consumption, as it brings about very

3042

