Artistic Style Discovery with Independent Components
Xin Xie1 , Yi Li2,* , Huaibo Huang3 , Haiyan Fu1 , Wanwan Wang4 , Yanqing Guo1
1
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Dalian University of Technology, China
3
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, CASIA
4
InsightOne Tech Co., Ltd., Beijing, 100028, China
shelsin@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {liyi, fuhy, guoyq}@dlut.edu.cn
huaibo.huang@cripac.ia.ac.cn, wangwanwan@insightone.cn

Figure 1. Diverse restylized artworks from different backbones including AdaIN [14], Linear [20], SANet [26] and MST [41]. In the
first two rows, the first column is the source of the content image with the style image and the second column is the original artistic output,
the other columns are the output images with artistic styles discovered by our algorithm. In the last row, given a natural scene, our method
yields the other paintings.

Abstract
Style transfer has been well studied in recent years with
excellent performance processed. While existing methods
usually choose CNNs as the powerful tool to accomplish
superb stylization, less attention was paid to the latent style
space. Rare exploration of underlying dimensions results in
the poor style controllability and the limited practical application. In this work, we rethink the internal meaning of
style features, further proposing a novel unsupervised algorithm for style discovery and achieving personalized manip-

ulation. In particular, we take a closer look into the mechanism of style transfer and obtain different artistic style components from the latent space consisting of different style
features. Then fresh styles can be generated by linear combination according to various style components. Experimental results have shown that our approach is superb in 1)
restylizing the original output with the diverse artistic styles
discovered from the latent space while keeping the content
unchanged, and 2) being generic and compatible for various style transfer methods. Our code is available in this
page: https://github.com/Shelsin/ArtIns.

*Yi Li is the corresponding author.

19870

