End-to-End Semi-Supervised Learning for Video Action Detection
Akash Kumar
Yogesh Singh Rawat
Center for Research in Computer Vision
University of Central Florida
akash k@knights.ucf.edu yogesh@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
In this work, we focus on semi-supervised learning for
video action detection which utilizes both labeled as well
as unlabeled data. We propose a simple end-to-end consistency based approach which effectively utilizes the unlabeled data. Video action detection requires both, action
class prediction as well as a spatio-temporal localization
of actions. Therefore, we investigate two types of constraints, classification consistency, and spatio-temporal
consistency. The presence of predominant background
and static regions in a video makes it challenging to utilize spatio-temporal consistency for action detection. To
address this, we propose two novel regularization constraints for spatio-temporal consistency; 1) temporal coherency, and 2) gradient smoothness. Both these aspects exploit the temporal continuity of action in videos
and are found to be effective for utilizing unlabeled videos
for action detection. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
the proposed approach on two different action detection
benchmark datasets, UCF101-24 and JHMDB-21. In addition, we also show the effectiveness of the proposed approach for video object segmentation on the Youtube-VOS
which demonstrates its generalization capability The proposed approach achieves competitive performance by using merely 20% of annotations on UCF101-24 when compared with recent fully supervised methods. On UCF10124, it improves the score by +8.9% and +11% at 0.5 f-mAP
and v-mAP respectively, compared to supervised approach.
The code and models will be made publicly available
at: https://github.com/AKASH2907/End-toEnd-Semi-Supervised-Learning-for-VideoAction-Detection.

1. Introduction
We have seen a great progress in video action classification [4, 6, 9, 39, 42–44, 46], where the availability of
large-scale datasets is one of the enabling factor [18,20,38].
Video action detection on the other hand is much more chal-

Figure 1. A comparison of proposed semi-supervised method with
supervised baseline showing absolute gain in f-mAP and v-mAP
for varying number of labeled samples on UCF-101-24 dataset.
The proposed method outperforms supervised baseline and using
merely 20% of labeled samples, matches the performance of fully
supervised method trained on 100% labels. Sup is supervised and
Sup100 is supervised with with 100% labels.

lenging where spatio-temporal localization is performed on
the video. In addition, obtaining large-scale datasets for this
problem is even more challenging as annotating each frame
is a huge time and cost intensive task.
In this work, we focus on semi-supervised learning for
video action detection which makes use of a small set of annotated samples along with several unlabeled samples. For
annotated set, we have video-level class labels as well as
frame-level localizations. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first work which focuses on semi-supervised learning
for video action detection.
Semi-supervised learning has been successfully studied
for image classification [3,36,45] with some recent works in
object detection [10,16,17,41,47]. Pseudo-labeling [14,29]
and consistency regularization [36, 45, 47] are two main approaches used for semi-supervised learning. Where pseudolabeling rely on several iterations, consistency regularization relies on single-step training. Since, training a video
action detection model is already computationally expensive due to high-dimensional input, therefore we propose a
consistency-based approach for an efficient solution.
Video action detection requires a sample level class prediction as well as a spatio-temporal localization on each

14700

