Automatic Synthesis of Diverse Weak Supervision Sources for Behavior Analysis
Albert Tseng
Nuro∗,†

Jennifer J. Sun
Caltech

Yisong Yue
Caltech, Argo AI∗

Abstract
Obtaining annotations for large training sets is expensive, especially in settings where domain knowledge is required, such as behavior analysis. Weak supervision has
been studied to reduce annotation costs by using weak labels from task-specific labeling functions (LFs) to augment
ground truth labels. However, domain experts still need to
hand-craft different LFs for different tasks, limiting scalability. To reduce expert effort, we present AutoSWAP:
a framework for automatically synthesizing data-efficient
task-level LFs. The key to our approach is to efficiently
represent expert knowledge in a reusable domain-specific
language and more general domain-level LFs, with which
we use state-of-the-art program synthesis techniques and a
small labeled dataset to generate task-level LFs. Additionally, we propose a novel structural diversity cost that allows
for efficient synthesis of diverse sets of LFs, further improving AutoSWAP’s performance. We evaluate AutoSWAP in
three behavior analysis domains and demonstrate that AutoSWAP outperforms existing approaches using only a fraction of the data. Our results suggest that AutoSWAP is an
effective way to automatically generate LFs that can significantly reduce expert effort for behavior analysis.

1. Introduction
In recent years, machine learning has enabled the study
of large-scale datasets in many behavior analysis domains,
such as neuroscience [24, 27], sports analytics [30, 37], and
motion forecasting [7]. However, obtaining labeled data to
train models can be difficult and costly, especially when domain expertise is required for annotation, such as for many
behavior analysis tasks [24]. One way to reduce annotation
cost is through weak supervision, which uses noisy, tasklevel heuristic “labeling functions” (LFs) to weakly label
data. LFs for a specific task (task-level LFs) are supplied
by domain experts, and are applied to obtain a set of weak
labels. Weakly labeled data can then be used in downstream
settings, such as active learning [4] and self-training [17].
* Work done while author was affiliated with Caltech.
† Correspondence to atseng@caltech.edu.

Figure 1. We present AutoSWAP, a framework for automatically
synthesizing diverse sets of task-level labeling functions (LFs)
with a small labeled dataset and domain knowledge encoded in
domain-level LFs and a DSL. AutoSWAP significantly reduces labeler effort by automating LF generation.

While weak supervision has worked well in a wide range
of settings [4, 10, 23], it has not been well-explored for behavior analysis tasks. For one, the requirement that LFs
must provide labels and not, for example, features prevents
more general domain knowledge from being used [22] (e.g.
the behavioral features in [14, 24]). Furthermore, new LFs
must be hand-crafted by domain experts for new tasks (such
as new behaviors to study), limiting the scalability of manual weak supervision [33]. To address these challenges, we
study efficient domain knowledge representations and develop automated weak supervision methods towards reducing annotation bottlenecks in behavior analysis settings.
Our Approach. We propose AutoSWAP (Automatic
Synthesized WeAk SuPervision), a data-efficient framework for automatically generating task-level LFs using a
novel diverse program synthesis formulation. As depicted
in Figure 1, experts provide a domain-specific language
(DSL) and domain-level LFs (LFs specific to a domain of
tasks) for a given domain, such as mouse behaviors or vehicle motion planning. For each task to be studied in that
domain, experts provide a small labeled dataset to specify
the task, and AutoSWAP returns a set of structurally diverse task-level LFs that can be used in weakly supervised
frameworks. The domain-level LFs (Figure 2) provide fine-

2211

