Pseudo-Q: Generating Pseudo Language Queries for Visual Grounding
Haojun Jiang1 * Yuanze Lin3 *† Dongchen Han1 Shiji Song1 Gao Huang1,2‡
1
Tsinghua University, BNRist 2 BAAI 3 University of Washington
{jhj20, hdc19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, yuanze@uw.edu,
{shijis, gaohuang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Visual grounding, i.e., localizing objects in images according to natural language queries, is an important topic
in visual language understanding. The most effective approaches for this task are based on deep learning, which
generally require expensive manually labeled image-query
or patch-query pairs. To eliminate the heavy dependence on human annotations, we present a novel method,
named Pseudo-Q, to automatically generate pseudo language queries for supervised training. Our method leverages an off-the-shelf object detector to identify visual objects from unlabeled images, and then language queries
for these objects are obtained in an unsupervised fashion
with a pseudo-query generation module. Then, we design
a task-related query prompt module to specifically tailor
generated pseudo language queries for visual grounding
tasks. Further, in order to fully capture the contextual relationships between images and language queries, we develop a visual-language model equipped with multi-level
cross-modality attention mechanism. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that our method has two notable
benefits: (1) it can reduce human annotation costs significantly, e.g., 31% on RefCOCO [65] without degrading original model’s performance under the fully supervised setting, and (2) without bells and whistles, it achieves superior or comparable performance compared to state-of-theart weakly-supervised visual grounding methods on all the
five datasets we have experimented. Code is available at
https://github.com/LeapLabTHU/Pseudo-Q.

1. Introduction
Visual grounding (VG) task [13, 24, 40, 65] has achieved
great progress in recent years, with the advances in both
computer vision [16,20,21,25,26,46,56,57,59] and natural
language processing [4,14,41,50,53]. It aims to localize the
* Equal contribution.
† This work was done during an internship at Tsinghua.
‡ Corresponding author.

Image Region

Query: horse on the right

Query: horse on the right

(a) Fully-supervised VG

(b) Weakly-supervised VG
Image with Pseudo-label

Image Region

Image Region

Unlabeled Image
Query: black horse on the left

Object Detector

Horses

Query: right brown horse

Object Proposal

Pseduo-query

Figure 1. Comparison with fully and weakly-supervised visual grounding method. (a) Fully-supervised VG utilizes image
region-query pairs as supervision signals. (b) Weakly-supervised
VG adopts only language queries. (c) Our Pseudo-Q method is
free of any task-related annotations.

objects referred by natural language queries, which is essential for various vision-language tasks, e.g., visual question
answering [2] and visual commonsense reasoning [67].
Most existing visual grounding methods can be categorized into two types: fully-supervised [8, 13, 22, 23, 33, 35]
and weakly-supervised [6, 10, 19, 36, 38, 49, 55, 58]. Although these two lines of works have made remarkable successes, they rely heavily on manually annotated datasets.
However, obtaining a large quantity of manual annotations,
especially natural language queries, is expensive and timeconsuming. To annotate queries, humans need to firstly
recognize the visual objects and identify their attributes,
and then determine diverse relationships between them on
a case-by-case basis, such as spatial (e.g., left and right),
preposition (e.g., in and with), action (e.g., throwing some-

15513

