On Aliased Resizing and Surprising Subtleties in GAN Evaluation
Gaurav Parmar1
Richard Zhang2
Jun-Yan Zhu1
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
Adobe Research

Abstract
PIL

Metrics for evaluating generative models aim to measure
the discrepancy between real and generated images. The
often-used Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) metric, for example, extracts “high-level” features using a deep network
from the two sets. However, we find that the differences in
“low-level” preprocessing, specifically image resizing and
compression, can induce large variations and have unforeseen consequences. For instance, when resizing an image,
e.g., with a bilinear or bicubic kernel, signal processing
principles mandate adjusting prefilter width depending on
the downsampling factor, to antialias to the appropriate
bandwidth. However, commonly-used implementations use
a fixed-width prefilter, resulting in aliasing artifacts. Such
aliasing leads to corruptions in the feature extraction downstream. Next, lossy compression, such as JPEG, is commonly
used to reduce the file size of an image. Although designed
to minimally degrade the perceptual quality of an image, the
operation also produces variations downstream. Furthermore, we show that if compression is used on real training
images, FID can actually improve if the generated images
are also subsequently compressed. This paper shows that
choices in low-level image processing have been an underappreciated aspect of generative modeling. We identify and
characterize variations in generative modeling development
pipelines, provide recommendations based on signal processing principles, and release a reference implementation
to facilitate future comparisons.

1. Introduction
With the proliferation of generative modeling techniques,
such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [24], accurately discerning which methods are performing better
has become a critical aspect of the field. For visual data,
metrics such as Inception Score (IS) [59], Kernel Inception
Distance (KID) [4], and the ubiquitously-used Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) [26] have become standard practice
for developing and adopting models. Under the hood, these
methods evaluate the discrepancy between generated and
natural images, in a deep feature space, to capture relevant

Clean-FID

Input 128x128
OpenCV /
MXNet

not
implemented

PyTorch
PyTorch-FID

Naïve
Subsampling

TensorFlow
antialias
= False
(default)
TF-FID

Antialiased

TensorFlow
antialias
= True

Aliased

lanczos

bicubic

bilinear

Downsampled to 16x16

Figure 1. Downsampling a circle. We resize an input image (left)
by a factor of 8, using different image processing libraries. The
Lanczos, bicubic, and bilinear implementations by PIL (top row)
adjust the antialiasing filter width by the downsampling factor
(marked as ). Other implementations (including those used for
PyTorch-FID and TensorFlow-FID) use fixed filter widths, introducing aliasing artifacts (marked as ) and resemble naive nearest subsampling. Aliasing artifacts induce inconsistencies in the
calculation of downstream metrics such as Fréchet Inception Distance [26], KID [4], IS [59], and PPL [33]. Note that antialias
flag is available in TensorFlow 2, but is set to False (default value)
for the FID calculation.

features of the two distributions. After all, at its core, generative modeling involves learning and mimicking high-order,
complex statistics of visual data.
However, we find that low-level, seemingly innocuous
operations, can induce surprisingly large discrepancies in
high-level statistics. For example, consider Figure 1. Given
the same input image, different image processing libraries
produce drastically different results. Specifically, the implementations using OpenCV, TensorFlow and PyTorch libraries with default flags, contain severe aliasing artifacts.
Similarly, the simple act of saving images as JPEG with the

11410

