MHFormer: Multi-Hypothesis Transformer for 3D Human Pose Estimation
Wenhao Li1 Hong Liu1, * Hao Tang2 Pichao Wang3 Luc Van Gool2
1
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
2
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich 3 Alibaba Group
{wenhaoli,hongliu}@pku.edu.cn
{hao.tang,vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

pichao.wang@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Estimating 3D human poses from monocular videos is a
challenging task due to depth ambiguity and self-occlusion.
Most existing works attempt to solve both issues by exploiting
spatial and temporal relationships. However, those works
ignore the fact that it is an inverse problem where multiple feasible solutions (i.e., hypotheses) exist. To relieve
this limitation, we propose a Multi-Hypothesis Transformer
(MHFormer) that learns spatio-temporal representations of
multiple plausible pose hypotheses. In order to effectively
model multi-hypothesis dependencies and build strong relationships across hypothesis features, the task is decomposed
into three stages: (i) Generate multiple initial hypothesis
representations; (ii) Model self-hypothesis communication,
merge multiple hypotheses into a single converged representation and then partition it into several diverged hypotheses;
(iii) Learn cross-hypothesis communication and aggregate
the multi-hypothesis features to synthesize the final 3D pose.
Through the above processes, the final representation is enhanced and the synthesized pose is much more accurate.
Extensive experiments show that MHFormer achieves stateof-the-art results on two challenging datasets: Human3.6M
and MPI-INF-3DHP. Without bells and whistles, its performance surpasses the previous best result by a large margin
of 3% on Human3.6M. Code and models are available at
https://github.com/Vegetebird/MHFormer.

1. Introduction
3D human pose estimation (HPE) from monocular videos
is a fundamental vision task with a wide range of applications, such as action recognition [23, 24, 39], humancomputer interaction [7], and augmented/virtual reality [31].
This task is typically solved by dividing it into two decoupled
subtasks, i.e., 2D pose detection to localize the keypoints
* Corresponding author: hongliu@pku.edu.cn. This work is supported
by National Key R&D Program of China (No. 2020AAA0108904), Science
and Technology Plan of Shenzhen (No. JCYJ20200109140410340).

Input

Novel View

PoseFormer

MHFormer (Ours)

Figure 1. Given a frame with occluded body parts (right arm and
elbow), a recent state-of-the-art 3D HPE method, PoseFormer [46],
outputs a single solution that is inconsistent with the 2D input. In
contrast, our MHFormer generates multiple plausible hypotheses
(different colors) consistent with the 2D evidence and finally synthesizes a more accurate 3D pose (green). For easy comparison,
the input frame is shown at a novel viewpoint.

on the image plane, followed by 2D-to-3D lifting to infer
joint locations in the 3D space from 2D keypoints. Despite
their impressive performance [4, 9, 29, 34], it remains an
inherently ill-posed problem because of self-occlusion and
depth ambiguity in 2D representations.
To alleviate such issues, most methods [2, 11, 38, 46]
focus on exploring spatial and temporal relationships. They
either employ graph convolutional networks to estimate 3D
poses with a spatio-temporal graph representation of human
skeletons [2,11,38] or apply a pure Transformer-based model
to capture spatial and temporal information from 2D pose
sequences [46]. Yet, the 2D-to-3D lifting from monocular
videos is an inverse problem [1] where multiple feasible
solutions (i.e., hypotheses) exist due to its ill-posed nature
given the missing depth [17]. Those approaches ignore this
problem and only estimate a single solution, which often
leads to unsatisfactory results, especially when the person is
severely occluded (see Figure 1).
Recently, a couple of methods [14, 16, 35, 40] that generate multiple hypotheses have been proposed for the inverse
problem. They often rely on the one-to-many mapping by
adding multiple output heads to an existing architecture with
a shared feature extractor, while failing to build the relationships among the features of different hypotheses. That is an
important shortcoming, as such ability is vital to improve the

13147

