Sketch3T: Test-Time Training for Zero-Shot SBIR
Aneeshan Sain1,2

Ayan Kumar Bhunia1 Vaishnav Potlapalli* Pinaki Nath Chowdhury1,2
Tao Xiang1,2 Yi-Zhe Song1,2
1
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom.
2
iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence.

{a.sain, a.bhunia, p.chowdhury, t.xiang, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract

* Interned with SketchX

Meta-Learning
Primary Objective
(Triplet Loss)

Encoder

Encoder
Auxiliary
Reconstruction

Seen

1.
Query

Query
Trained
Encoder
Unseen

Retrieval

Trained
Encoder

2.
Query
Adapted
Encoder

Inference

Sketch-based image retrieval (SBIR) is by now a wellestablished topic in the vision community [14, 16]. Research efforts have mainly focused on addressing the
sketch-photo domain gap, incurred by abstraction [33],
drawing style [47] and stroke saliency [19]. Despite great
strides made, the field remains plagued by the data scarcity
problem – sketches are notoriously difficult to collect [4, 6].
Zero-shot SBIR (ZS-SBIR) in particular represents the
main body of work behind this push for addressing data
scarcity. It specifically examines the scarcity issue from
a category transfer perspective, and strives for utilising
sketch-photo pairs from seen categories to train a model that

Training

Training

1. Introduction

(b) Proposed Sketch3T

Reconstruction

Zero-shot sketch-based image retrieval typically asks for
a trained model to be applied as is to unseen categories. In
this paper, we question to argue that this setup by definition is not compatible with the inherent abstract and subjective nature of sketches – the model might transfer well to
new categories, but will not understand sketches existing in
different test-time distribution as a result. We thus extend
ZS-SBIR asking it to transfer to both categories and sketch
distributions. Our key contribution is a test-time training
paradigm that can adapt using just one sketch. Since there
is no paired photo, we make use of a sketch raster-vector
reconstruction module as a self-supervised auxiliary task.
To maintain the fidelity of the trained cross-modal joint embedding during test-time update, we design a novel metalearning based training paradigm to learn a separation between model updates incurred by this auxiliary task from
those off the primary objective of discriminative learning.
Extensive experiments show our model to outperform stateof-the-arts, thanks to the proposed test-time adaption that
not only transfers to new categories but also accommodates
to new sketching styles.

(a) Normal ZS-SBIR
Training

Retrieval

Figure 1. Normal ZS-SBIR methods obtain lower accuracies as
they retrieve from unseen data using model weights trained on seen
data. During inference, our model (Sketch3T) adapts to the test
distribution via an auxiliary task, before retrieval, scoring better.

could be directly applied on those unseen (see Fig. 1(a)).
In this paper, we question this otherwise commonly accepted setup at definition level. We importantly argue that
the very assumption of being able to apply a trained model
as is to unseen categories, is by definition incompatible with
the inherent subjective nature of sketch data. This largely
results in a model that might well understand the semantic category shift, but not acute to changes in sketching
style and abstraction level (both being prevalent problems in
sketch [47]). Alleviating this problem is particularly crucial
for the practical adaption of SBIR, as otherwise retrieval
performance will incur a significant drop – a system that
understands “my” sketches, might not understand “yours”.
This paper thus extends the conventional definition of
ZS-SBIR to embrace this new problem, i.e., a new ZS-SBIR
framework that (i) not only transfers knowledge on to unknown categories, (ii) but also adapts to the unique style of
new sketches. We implement this by adopting a test-timetraining framework that adapts to new categories and new
styles at inference time. That is, instead of anticipating the
distribution shifts via normal training, we intend to learn

7462

