Blind Face Restoration via Integrating Face Shape and Generative Priors
Feida Zhu

Junwei Zhu

Wenqing Chu

Xinyi Zhang Xiaozhong Ji
Youtu Lab, Tencent

Chengjie Wang∗

Ying Tai∗

{feidazhu,junweizhu,wenqingchu,savizhang,xiaozhongji,jasoncjwang,yingtai}@tencent.com
https://github.com/TencentYoutuResearch/BFR-SGPN

Input

PSFRGAN [2]

GPEN [52]

GFPGAN [44]

Ours

Figure 1. Comparison with state-of-the-art methods on the real-world low-quality images. Previous GAN-based methods may overemphasize generation and hallucinate a face with unnatural face shapes or non-realistic face components. The integration of shape and generative prior allows us to achieve realistic restoration results.

Abstract
Blind face restoration, which aims to reconstruct highquality images from low-quality inputs, can benefit many
applications. Although existing generative-based methods
achieve significant progress in producing high-quality images, they often fail to restore natural face shapes and highfidelity facial details from severely-degraded inputs. In this
work, we propose to integrate shape and generative priors to guide the challenging blind face restoration. Firstly,
we set up a shape restoration module to recover reasonable facial geometry with 3D reconstruction. Secondly, a
pretrained facial generator is adopted as decoder to generate photo-realistic high-resolution images. To ensure highfidelity, hierarchical spatial features extracted from the lowquality inputs and rendered 3D images are inserted into
the decoder with our proposed Adaptive Feature Fusion
Block (AFFB). Moreover, we introduce hybrid-level losses
* Chengjie Wang and Ying Tai are corresponding authors.

to jointly train the shape and generative priors together with
other network parts such that these two priors better adapt
to our blind face restoration task. The proposed Shape
and Generative Prior integrated Network (SGPN) can restore high-quality images with clear face shapes and realistic facial details. Experimental results on synthetic and
real-world datasets demonstrate SGPN performs favorably
against state-of-the-art blind face restoration methods.

1. Introduction
Real-world low-quality face images suffer from unknown degradations during acquisition and Internet transmission. Blind Face Restoration (BFR) has been attracting
considerable attention [2, 44, 52] due to its wide applications in real-world scenarios, such as restoring old images
and film footage. However, it is still challenging to restore
a high-fidelity image with natural facial geometry and realistic facial details from severely degraded face images.

7662

