When to Prune? A Policy towards Early Structural Pruning
Maying Shen, Pavlo Molchanov, Hongxu Yin, Jose M. Alvarez
NVIDIA
{mshen, pmolchanov, dannyy, josea}@nvidia.com

Abstract
Pruning enables appealing reductions in network memory footprint and time complexity. Conventional posttraining pruning techniques lean towards efficient inference
while overlooking the heavy computation for training. Recent exploration of pre-training pruning at initialization
hints on training cost reduction via pruning, but suffers
noticeable performance degradation. We attempt to combine the benefits of both directions and propose a policy
that prunes as early as possible during training without
hurting performance. Instead of pruning at initialization,
our method exploits initial dense training for few epochs
to quickly guide the architecture, while constantly evaluating dominant sub-networks via neuron importance ranking.
This unveils dominant sub-networks whose structures turn
stable, allowing conventional pruning to be pushed earlier
into the training. To do this early, we further introduce an
Early Pruning Indicator (EPI) that relies on sub-network
architectural similarity and quickly triggers pruning when
the sub-network’s architecture stabilizes. Through extensive experiments on ImageNet, we show that EPI empowers a quick tracking of early training epochs suitable for
pruning, offering same efficacy as an otherwise “oracle”
grid-search that scans through epochs and requires orders
of magnitude more compute. Our method yields 1.4% top-1
accuracy boost over state-of-the-art pruning counterparts,
cuts down training cost on GPU by 2.4×, hence offers a
new efficiency-accuracy boundary for network pruning during training.

1. Introduction
The success of convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
fuels the recent progress in computer vision, boosting up
performance for classification, detection, and segmentation
tasks [16, 35, 37]. While enjoying the accuracy benefits
CNNs bring, a simultaneous increase in network complexity imposes higher memory footprint and computing power
consumption, making deployment of CNNs on resourceconstrained devices a challenging task [7, 29, 30]. In lieu of

Figure 1. Pruning paradigm overview. Train-Prune-Finetune
prunes after training, effective but costs additional training time;
Prune-at-Initialization prunes right before training towards a
smaller network, cuts down on training time but suffers notable
performance degradation; Pruning-aware-Training (ours) prunes
during training aiming at benefits from two worlds. It governs on
post-pruning performance while aiming to minimize training time,
via a new policy around Early Pruning Indicator (EPI) that signals
an early optimal point to start pruning during training.

computation-intensive networks, recent work turn to compression techniques for efficient models leveraging pruning [3, 15, 25, 29], quantization [5, 43, 46], knowledge distillation [19, 31, 45], neural architecture search [38, 41, 44],
and architecture redesigns [21, 28, 39]. Among these, pruning demonstrates to be a widely adopted method that compresses pre-trained models before deployment. The primary
goal of pruning aims to remove insignificant network parameters without impacting accuracy. In particular, structural pruning removes entire filters (or neurons) as such
the resulting structural sparsity benefits legacy off-the-shelf
platforms, e.g., CPUs, DSPs, and GPUs.
In general, network pruning involves three key steps: (i)
original training of a dense model for high accuracy, (ii)
pruning away insignificant weights to remove redundancy,
and finally (iii) fine-tuning the pruned model to recover performance [15, 26, 30]. Despite remarkable compactness delivered by the last two steps, the original training of an overparameterized network remains mostly untouched. Such
approaches require a twice long time (resource) as an original training recipe given similar required computes for fine-

12247

