Correlation Verification for Image Retrieval
Seongwon Lee
Hongje Seong
Suhyeon Lee
Euntai Kim*
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea
{won4113, hjseong, hyeon93, etkim}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Geometric verification is considered a de facto solution
for the re-ranking task in image retrieval. In this study,
we propose a novel image retrieval re-ranking network
named Correlation Verification Networks (CVNet). Our
proposed network, comprising deeply stacked 4D convolutional layers, gradually compresses dense feature correlation into image similarity while learning diverse geometric matching patterns from various image pairs. To enable cross-scale matching, it builds feature pyramids and
constructs cross-scale feature correlations within a single
inference, replacing costly multi-scale inferences. In addition, we use curriculum learning with the hard negative
mining and Hide-and-Seek strategy to handle hard samples without losing generality. Our proposed re-ranking
network shows state-of-the-art performance on several retrieval benchmarks with a significant margin (+12.6% in
mAP on ROxford-Hard+1M set) over state-of-the-art methods. The source code and models are available online:
https://github.com/sungonce/CVNet.

1. Introduction
Image retrieval is a long-standing problem in computer
vision. This task aims to sort a database of images based
on their similarities to the given query image. For this task,
global retrieval through global descriptor matching and geometric verification after local feature matching are mainly
employed. These approaches typically comprise two primary components of the image retrieval framework that mutually complement one another. The global retrieval quickly
performs a coarse retrieval across the database, and geometric verification re-ranks the coarse results by performing
precise evaluation only on the potential candidates. Along
with deep learning, image retrieval has also advanced significantly. In particular, several studies [8, 30, 41, 45, 46, 53]
have been focused on extracting representative and distinctive features for global and local representations with deep
learning. However, geometric verification after local feature matching still plays an essential role in the re-ranking
* Corresponding author.

1st step:
Matching

2nd step:
Verification

Dense
Correlation

CVNet
Count # of inliers

Image Similarity

(a) Geometric Verification

(b) Correlation Verification (Ours)

Figure 1. Novel image retrieval re-ranking method named correlation verification that directly predicts image similarity by leveraging dense feature correlation in a convolutional manner.

task in image retrieval, despite its drawbacks. Owing to
its verify-after-matching structure, geometric verification is
performed based on only sparse and thresholded feature
correspondence. Moreover, it is neither learnable nor differentiable and requires iterative optimization even during
testing. In addition, geometric verification does not include
a component that can handle multi-scale operation. Thus,
several studies [8, 30, 32, 45] have attempted to solve the
scale problem by repeating inference with the image pyramid to extract multi-scale local features. However, this is
an extremely expensive process.
In this study, we propose an end-to-end learnable reranking network called Correlation Verification Networks
(CVNet) to replace the role of geometric verification in a
better way. The proposed network directly evaluates semantic and geometric relations by leveraging dense feature
correlations in a convolutional manner. Following the successful architectural design of representative 2D convolutional neural networks (CNN), we design a 4D CNN with a
pyramid structure of deeply stacked 4D convolution layers.
It compresses the correlation between semantic cues into
image similarity while learning diverse geometric matching patterns from a large number of image pairs. To ensure robustness even for large scale difference problems, it

5374

