Physically-guided Disentangled Implicit Rendering for 3D Face Modeling
Zhenyu Zhang1 , Yanhao Ge1 , Ying Tai1 , Weijian Cao1 , Renwang Chen1 , Kunlin Liu2 ,
Hao Tang3 , Xiaoming Huang1 , Chengjie Wang1∗, Zhifeng Xie4 , Dongjin Huang4∗
Tencent Youtu Lab, Shanghai, China1
University of Science and Technology of China2†
CVL, ETH Zurich, Switzerland3
Shanghai Film Academy of Shanghai University4
zhangjesse@foxmail.com

lkl6949@mail.ustc.edu.cn

hao.tang@vision.ee.ethz.ch

halege, yingtai, weijiancao, renwangchen, skyhuang, jasoncjwang@tencent.com
djhuang, zhifeng xie@shu.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper presents a novel Physically-guided Disentangled Implicit Rendering (PhyDIR) framework for highﬁdelity 3D face modeling. The motivation comes from two
observations: Widely-used graphics renderers yield excessive approximations against photo-realistic imaging, while
neural rendering methods produce superior appearances
but are highly entangled to perceive 3D-aware operations.
Hence, we learn to disentangle the implicit rendering via
explicit physical guidance, while guaranteeing the properties of: (1) 3D-aware comprehension and (2) high-reality
image formation. For the former one, PhyDIR explicitly
adopts 3D shading and rasterizing modules to control the
renderer, which disentangles the light, facial shape, and
viewpoint from neural reasoning. Speciﬁcally, PhyDIR proposes a novel multi-image shading strategy to compensate
for the monocular limitation, so that the lighting variations
are accessible to the neural renderer. For the latter, PhyDIR
learns the face-collection implicit texture to avoid ill-posed
intrinsic factorization, then leverages a series of consistency losses to constrain the rendering robustness. With the
disentangled method, we make 3D face modeling beneﬁt
from both kinds of rendering strategies. Extensive experiments on benchmarks show that PhyDIR obtains superior
performance than state-of-the-art explicit/implicit methods
on geometry/texture modeling.

1. Introduction
3D face reconstruction gets increasingly attraction with
applications such as digital human, games and mobile pho∗ Chengjie Wang and Dongjin Huang are corresponding authors

† CAS Key Laboratory of Electromagnetic Space Information of USTC.

20353

tography. The pioneering effort is 3DMM [6] which provides reliable facial priors. With this parametric model,
the reconstruction can be achieved by optimization and ﬁtting [47, 48, 79]. With the development of deep learning, recent methods [15, 18, 33, 45, 77] learn to regress
3DMM parameters from input images. Subsequent works are also proposed to contribute on non-linear modeling [17, 19, 56, 57, 59, 67, 76] and multi-view consistency [5, 9, 54, 64, 69]. Besides 3DMM based approaches, recent efforts [50, 65, 75] attempt to model 3D face without
shape assumptions. These non-parametric methods have
potential ability to improve the modeling quality over 3DMM limitations.
Actually, the aforementioned learning-based methods
need differentiable renderers including OpenDR [36], neural mesh renderer [29], SoftRas [34] and Ray-tracing [32]
for unsupervised learning. These renderers perform image
formation under graphics pipelines which are well explainable. With the explicit 3D operations, the ﬁne-grained 3D
controls are naturally achieved. However, these graphics
renderers yield hand-crafted approximation or ill-posed decomposition on reﬂectence, illumination or other 3D clues.
In Fig. 1-(a), we observe the graphics-renderer-based methods [13, 32, 75] struggle to produce photo-realistic texture,
which also limits their geometry reconstruction.
Against these limitations, another approach is employing a neural renderer such as StyleGAN [27, 28] to avoid
approximation or ill-posed decomposition. Existing methods [7, 12, 42, 43, 66] mainly learn to embed 3DMM coefﬁcients into StyleGAN’s manifold, and constrain the generative network with 3DMM consistency. In this way, 3D
controls are achieved implicitly by tuning the parameters.
With StyleGAN’s effectiveness, these methods show highreality texture modeling performance. However, in Fig. 1-

