Dataset Distillation by Matching Training Trajectories
George Cazenavette1

2

Carnegie Mellon University

Antonio Torralba2

Alexei A. Efros3

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

3

Jun-Yan Zhu1

UC Berkeley

CIFAR-100

1

Tongzhou Wang2

Camel

Clock

Fox

Kangaroo

Orange

Orchid

Pear

Pine Tree

Tulip

Guinea Pig

Goose

Guacamole

Hourglass

German Shepard

Red Panda

Potpie

Sewing Machine

Ladybug

Triumphal Arch

Banana

Church

Sheepdog

Flamingo

French Horn

Golden Retriever

King Penguin

Siamese Cat

Strawberry

Tiger

ImageNet

Tiny ImageNet

Apple

Figure 1. Example distilled images from 32x32 CIFAR-100 (top), 64x64 Tiny ImageNet (middle), and 128x128 ImageNet subsets (bottom).
Training a standard CNN using only such distilled images (as few as one per category) yields a trained model capable of test accuracy
significantly better than previous methods of dataset distillation. Please see more results at https://georgecazenavette.github.io/mtt-distillation/.

Abstract
Dataset distillation is the task of synthesizing a small
dataset such that a model trained on the synthetic set will
match the test accuracy of the model trained on the full
dataset. In this paper, we propose a new formulation that
optimizes our distilled data to guide networks to a similar
state as those trained on real data across many training
steps. Given a network, we train it for several iterations on
our distilled data and optimize the distilled data with respect
to the distance between the synthetically trained parameters
and the parameters trained on real data. To efficiently obtain
the initial and target network parameters for large-scale
datasets, we pre-compute and store training trajectories of
expert networks trained on the real dataset. Our method
handily outperforms existing methods and also allows us to
distill higher-resolution visual data.

1. Introduction
In the seminal 2015 paper, Hinton et al. [15] proposed
model distillation, which aims to distill the knowledge of
a complex model into a simpler one. Dataset distillation,

proposed by Wang et al. [44], is a related but orthogonal
task: rather than distilling the model, the idea is to distill
the dataset. As shown in Figure 2, the goal is to distill the
knowledge from a large training dataset into a very small
set of synthetic training images (as low as one image per
class) such that training a model on the distilled data would
give a similar test performance as training one on the original dataset. Dataset distillation has become a lively research
topic in machine learning [2, 25, 26, 38, 45, 46, 47] with
various applications, such as continual learning, neural architecture search, and privacy-preserving ML. Still, the problem has so far been of mainly theoretical interest, since most
prior methods focus on toy datasets, like MNIST and CIFAR,
while struggling on real, higher-resolution images. In this
work, we present a new approach to dataset distillation that
not only outperforms previous work in performance, but is
also applicable to large-scale datasets, as shown in Figure 1.
Unlike classical data compression, dataset distillation
aims for a small synthetic dataset that still retains adequate
task-related information so that models trained on it can generalize to unseen test data, as shown in Figure 2. Thus, the
distilling algorithm must strike a delicate balance by heavily
compressing information without completely obliterating

10718

