Animal Kingdom: A Large and Diverse Dataset for Animal Behavior
Understanding
Xun Long Ng‡

Kian Eng Ong‡

Qichen Zheng‡

Yun Ni‡

Si Yong Yeo

Jun Liu*

Information Systems Technology and Design, Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
{xunlong ng, kianeng ong}@mymail.sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Understanding animals’ behaviors is significant for a
wide range of applications. However, existing animal behavior datasets have limitations in multiple aspects, including limited numbers of animal classes, data samples
and provided tasks, and also limited variations in environmental conditions and viewpoints. To address these limitations, we create a large and diverse dataset, Animal
Kingdom, that provides multiple annotated tasks to enable
a more thorough understanding of natural animal behaviors. The wild animal footages used in our dataset record
different times of the day in extensive range of environments containing variations in backgrounds, viewpoints, illumination and weather conditions. More specifically, our
dataset contains 50 hours of annotated videos to localize
relevant animal behavior segments in long videos for the
video grounding task, 30K video sequences for the finegrained multi-label action recognition task, and 33K frames
for the pose estimation task, which correspond to a diverse
range of animals with 850 species across 6 major animal
classes. Such a challenging and comprehensive dataset
shall be able to facilitate the community to develop, adapt,
and evaluate various types of advanced methods for animal behavior analysis. Moreover, we propose a Collaborative Action Recognition (CARe) model that learns general and specific features for action recognition with unseen new animals. This method achieves promising performance in our experiments. Our dataset can be found at
https://sutdcv.github.io/Animal-Kingdom.

1. Introduction
A better understanding of how animals behave and move
in the wild is not only a cornerstone of behavioral sciences
[24] but also crucial for a wide range of applications. Animal behavioral analysis plays a pivotal role in conservation
efforts [17, 62] and wildlife management [49]. Each year,
the world spends at least $75 billion [43,68] in conservation
* Corresponding author.
‡

These authors contribute equally to this work.

{qichen zheng, ni yun, siyong yeo, jun liu}@sutd.edu.sg

efforts. Before researchers can better protect the wildlife,
they often need to first monitor the animals. Researchers
often monitor animals using video cameras, without having to attach physical markers that may alter their natural
behaviors [24]. By monitoring and analyzing the behaviors of the animals, they can gain deeper insights into their
health and needs [24], and even detect movement-related
injuries [24]. In addition, detecting and analyzing changes
in animal behaviors allow researchers to learn about new
behaviors [1, 72]. Besides, animal behavioral analysis has
also helped pharmaceutical scientists understand the effects
of experimental interventions on behaviors, and neuroscientists learn more about brain activity across different temporal scales [1, 24, 29, 42, 52]. These findings also help
researchers better understand human diseases and develop
drugs that are suitable for use in humans. Moreover, insights gained from analyzing animals’ behaviors have also
played an important role in aiding engineers in designing bio-inspired robots [46, 83] to efficiently perform specialised functions (e.g., lifesaving). Animators and game
developers can also make use of the insights to realistically
render animals in animations and games [8, 83]. In summary, the analysis of animal behaviors is not only significant for ecological protection, but also significant in a wide
range of applications, and thus has received more and more
research attention recently [8,17,34,35,38,39,46,53,77,79].
Animal action analysis is especially important in the understanding of the health and needs of animals. Given the
diversity of animals’ actions, and how actions can occur and
switch within split seconds, the use of video footages enables us to monitor multiple animals round the clock [1]. In
addition, by localizing keypoints and employing pose estimation, we can analyze and identify changes in the animal’s
pose to better interpret their actions and behaviors. Before
we analyze animal behaviors, we may need to first identify
the frames of interest, since oftentimes a large part of the
animal footages may not even contain any animal [12, 44].
However, the vast volume of wildlife animal footages inherently make it both labour and time-intensive to identify animals and actions. In view of this, employing video ground-

19023

