APES: Articulated Part Extraction from Sprite Sheets
Zhan Xu1,2 Matthew Fisher2 Yang Zhou2 Deepali Aneja2 Rushikesh Dudhat1 Li Yi3 Evangelos Kalogerakis1
1
University of Massachusetts Amherst 2 Adobe Research 3 Tsinghua University
Abstract
Rigged puppets are one of the most prevalent representations to create 2D character animations. Creating these
puppets requires partitioning characters into independently
moving parts. In this work, we present a method to automatically identify such articulated parts from a small set
of character poses shown in a sprite sheet, which is an illustration of the character that artists often draw before
puppet creation. Our method is trained to infer articulated parts, e.g. head, torso and limbs, that can be reassembled to best reconstruct the given poses. Our results demonstrate significantly better performance than alternatives qualitatively and quantitatively. Our project page
https://zhan- xu.github.io/parts/ includes
our code and data.

1. Introduction
Creating rich, animated characters has traditionally been
accomplished by independently drawing each frame of the
character. To accelerate this process, tools have been developed to allow precisely rigged 2D characters to be easily rendered in different poses by manipulating the rig. To
create these rigs, artists often start by drawing several different poses and configurations of the complete character in
a sprite sheet or turnaround sheet. They then manually segment out the common parts in these sheets and stitch them
together to create the final character rig, which can then
be articulated to reconstruct the original character drawings [23]. The obtained parts from different sprite sheets
can also be used as assets and assembled freely to create
new character rigs1 .
Significant expertise is required to create a well-rigged
2D character, and automatic rigging methods have several
unique challenges. Animated characters can have a wide
range of different limbs, accessories, and viewing angles,
which prevents a single template from working across all
characters. Furthermore, the amount of available examples for rigged, animated characters is relatively small when
compared against real datasets that can be acquired by motion capture or other techniques. This limited data is particularly challenging to work with because characters are
1 https://pages.adobe.com/character/en/puppet-maker

Figure 1. Given sprite sheets as input (a), APES produces articulated parts (b) that can best express poses in the sprite sheets. The
obtained parts can further be warped to generate new poses (c), or
manipulated freely to create new puppets.

often drawn and animated in different styles. Finally, poses
shown in sprite sheets have both articulated variation and
non-rigid deformation. Extracting articulated parts that express given poses requires effective analysis of the motion
demonstrated in sprite sheets.
We propose a method to automatically construct a 2D
character rig from a sprite sheet containing a few examples
of the character in different poses. Our rig is represented
as a set of deformable layers [50], each capturing an articulated part. We assume that all characters in the sprite sheet
can be reconstructed by applying a different deformation to
each puppet layer and then compositing the layers together.
We start by learning a deep network that computes correspondences between all pairs of sprites. We then use these
correspondences to compute possible segmentations of each
sprite. Finally, we attempt to reconstruct the other sprites
in the sprite sheet using the possible puppet segmentations,
choosing the set with minimal overall reconstruction error.
We evaluate our method on several test sprite sheets.
We show that our method can successfully produce articulated parts and significantly outperforms other representative appearance and motion-based co-part segmentation
works [16, 37]. Our contributions are the following:
• A method for analyzing a sprite sheet and creating a
corresponding articulated character that can be used as
a puppet for character animation.
• A neural architecture to predict pixel motions and clus-

11635

