Medial Spectral Coordinates for 3D Shape Analysis
Morteza Rezanejad1 , Mohammad Khodadad2 , Hamidreza Mahyar3 , Herve Lombaert4 ,
Michael Gruninger1 , Dirk Walther1 , Kaleem Siddiqi5
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada, 2 Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran, 3 McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada
4

ETS Montréal, Canada, 5 McGill University, Montréal, Canada

C(i, j) = Vol(

wij =

sk
ρ(psk
i ), ρ(pj )))

⋂(

{

1

A=

C(i, j)
ρ(psk
i )

w11 w12
w21 w22
⋮
⋮
wn1 wn2

…
…
⋱
…

w1n
w2n
⋮
wnn

W symEλi = λiD symEλi

(a)

(b)

(f)

(c)

(d)
MSC

DNN

Human?

MSC

DNN

Dog?

MSC

DNN

Horse?

(g)

(e)

(h)

Figure 1. An overview of our main results. First row: (a) We begin with a 3D object and compute its medial surface. (b) The radius
associated with the medial surface is mapped to its boundary. (c) Boundary points that are associated with the same medial surface point are
coupled and shown with the same color. (d) Entries of the adjacency matrix are computed using the intersection volume of the associated
medial spheres to drive adjacency weights, for subsequent spectral analysis (see Section 3 for a detailed explanation). (e) The first nontrivial eigenvector is mapped onto the original shape. Second row: The use of our medially driven spectral coordinates for segmentation
(f), object classification (g), and shape correspondence (h).

Abstract
In recent years there has been a resurgence of interest in
our community in the shape analysis of 3D objects represented by surface meshes, their voxelized interiors, or surface point clouds. In part, this interest has been stimulated
by the increased availability of RGBD cameras, and by applications of computer vision to autonomous driving, medical imaging, and robotics. In these settings, spectral coordinates have shown promise for shape representation due
to their ability to incorporate both local and global shape
properties in a manner that is qualitatively invariant to isometric transformations. Yet, surprisingly, such coordinates
have thus far typically considered only local surface positional or derivative information. In the present article, we
propose to equip spectral coordinates with medial (object
width) information, so as to enrich them. The key idea is

to couple surface points that share a medial ball, via the
weights of the adjacency matrix. We develop a spectral
feature using this idea, and the algorithms to compute it.
The incorporation of object width and medial coupling has
direct benefits, as illustrated by our experiments on object
classification, object part segmentation, and surface point
correspondence.

1. Introduction
Advances in manufacturing sensors that can perceive 3D
information, including RGBD cameras, are beginning to
revolutionize 3D perception using computer vision methods. In this context, 3D object shape analysis has received
much attention due to its relevance to a variety of applications in robotics, medical imaging, autonomous driving,
surveillance, and other domains. The technologies that are

2686

