UKPGAN: A General Self-Supervised Keypoint Detector
Yang You, Wenhai Liu, Yanjie Ze, Yong-Lu Li, Weiming Wang*, Cewu Lu*
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{qq456cvb, sjtu-wenhai, zeyanjie, yonglu_li, wangweiming, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Keypoint detection is an essential component for the object registration and alignment. In this work, we reckon
keypoint detection as information compression, and force
the model to distill out important points of an object. Based
on this, we propose UKPGAN, a general self-supervised
3D keypoint detector where keypoints are detected so that
they could reconstruct the original object shape. Two modules: GAN-based keypoint sparsity control and salient information distillation modules are proposed to locate those
important keypoints. Extensive experiments show that our
keypoints align well with human annotated keypoint labels,
and can be applied to SMPL human bodies under various
non-rigid deformations. Furthermore, our keypoint detector trained on clean object collections generalizes well to
real-world scenarios, thus further improves geometric registration when combined with off-the-shelf point descriptors.
Repeatability experiments show that our model is stable
under both rigid and non-rigid transformations, with local reference frame estimation. Our code is available on
https://github.com/qq456cvb/UKPGAN.

1. Introduction
Recently, 3D object analysis and scene understanding
receive more and more attentions. Though plenty of methods [7, 13, 19, 23] on object analysis have been proposed,
there is still a lack of capability of processing and understanding objects, especially under an unsupervised setting.
3D keypoints, unlike part annotations, provide a sparse
but meaningful representations of an object. They are widely
leveraged in many tasks such as object matching, object
tracking, shape retrieval and registration [4,22,34]. Keypoint
detections have its origin in 2D image processing [12,21,28].
In 3D domain, traditional methods like Harris-3D [29],
HKS [30], Salient Points [5], Mesh Saliency [18], ISS [41],
* Cewu Lu and Weiming Wang are the corresponding authors. Cewu Lu
is member of Qing Yuan Research Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China and
Shanghai Qi Zhi institute.

Sift-3D [27] and Scale Dependent Corners [24] propose to
detect keypoints based on geometric variations. However,
these hand-crafted detectors rely heavily on hard-coded parameters and their performance is not comparable to current
learning-based methods.

Figure 1. Our model outputs unsupervised keypoints and embeddings given a point cloud, in either rigid or non-rigid deformations.
Left are keypoint predictions on clean models (indicated by red) and
right are keypoint predictions on real scenes, best viewed in color.
These keypoints are consistent and could be used for registration.

Recently, some learning-based methods like USIP [20]
and D3Feat [2] have been proposed. USIP regresses keypoint
locations from pre-segmented local groups and then utilizes
a probabilistic chamfer loss. However, their method requires
the farthest point sampling and may output points that are
not on the input. D3Feat instead gives saliency scores and
descriptors densely for each point. Both USIP and D3Feat
predict 3D keypoints by solving the auxiliary task of correctly estimating rotations in a Siamese architecture. They
both require real-world point clouds during training, and do
not have much control on the output keypoints.
To solve these problems, we follow a totally different
route to obtain 3D keypoints, which is named Unsupervised
Key Point GANeration (UKPGAN). A keypoint saliency
distribution is given through a detector network, with a novel
adversarial GAN loss to control its sparsity. Then, to make
these keypoints informative, we leverage a salient information distillation process to reconstruct the original point
cloud from these sparse keypoints, forming an encoderdecoder architecture. Our model can be seen as an information compression scheme, keeping most information of

17042

