SwinTextSpotter: Scene Text Spotting via Better Synergy between Text Detection
and Text Recognition
Mingxin Huang1† Yuliang Liu2† Zhenghao Peng2 Chongyu Liu1 Dahua Lin2
Shenggao Zhu3 Nicholas Yuan3 Kai Ding4 Lianwen Jin1,5∗
1
South China University of Technology 2 Chinese University of Hong Kong 3 Huawei Cloud AI
4
IntSig Information Co., Ltd 5 Peng Cheng Laboratory
eelwjin@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
End-to-end scene text spotting has attracted great attention in recent years due to the success of excavating the intrinsic synergy of the scene text detection and
recognition. However, recent state-of-the-art methods usually incorporate detection and recognition simply by sharing the backbone, which does not directly take advantage of the feature interaction between the two tasks. In
this paper, we propose a new end-to-end scene text spotting framework termed SwinTextSpotter. Using a transformer encoder with dynamic head as the detector, we
unify the two tasks with a novel Recognition Conversion
mechanism to explicitly guide text localization through
recognition loss. The straightforward design results in
a concise framework that requires neither additional rectification module nor character-level annotation for the
arbitrarily-shaped text. Qualitative and quantitative experiments on multi-oriented datasets RoIC13 and ICDAR 2015,
arbitrarily-shaped datasets Total-Text and CTW1500, and
multi-lingual datasets ReCTS (Chinese) and VinText (Vietnamese) demonstrate SwinTextSpotter significantly outperforms existing methods. Code is available at https:
//github.com/mxin262/SwinTextSpotter.

1. Introduction
Scene text spotting, which aims to detect and recognize
the entire word or sentence in natural images, has raised a
lot of attention due to its wide range of applications in autonomous driving [64], intelligent navigation [42, 50], and
key entities recognition [51, 65], etc. Traditional scene text
spotting methods treat detection and recognition as two separate tasks and adopt a pipeline that first localizes and crops
the text regions on the input images and then predicts the
† Equal contribution.
∗ Corresponding author.

(a) Without Recognition Conversion

(b) With Recognition Conversion

(c) The recognition loss with and without Recognition Conversion.

Figure 1. Effectiveness of Recognition Conversion. The proposed
Recognition Conversion explicitly guides the detection, leading to
better text spotting performance.

text sequence by feeding the cropped regions into text recognizer [9, 14, 16, 23, 35]. Such a pipeline may have some
limitations, such as (1) error accumulation between these
two tasks, e.g., imprecise detection result may heavily hinder the performance of text recognition; (2) separate optimization of the two tasks might not maximize the final performance of text spotting; (3) intensive memory consumption and low inference efficiency.
Therefore, many methods [12,20,27,32] attempt to solve
text spotting in end-to-end systems, i.e., optimizing detection and recognition jointly in unified architectures. The
recognizer can improve the performance of the detector by
eliminating the false positive detection results [20, 21]. In
turn, even if the detection is not precise, the recognizer can
still correctly predict the text sequence by the large recep-

4593

