Object-aware Video-language Pre-training for Retrieval
Alex Jinpeng Wang1 Yixiao Ge2 Guanyu Cai1,5 Rui Yan1 Xudong Lin4
Ying Shan2 Xiaohu Qie3 Mike Zheng Shou1 *
1

Show Lab, National University of Singapore 2 ARC Lab,3 Tencent PCG
4
Columbia University 5 Tongji University

Abstract

Text: A little girl dancing to music and a teenage girl using a computer.
girl

Recently, by introducing large-scale dataset and strong
transformer network, video-language pre-training has
shown great success especially for retrieval. Yet, existing
video-language transformer models do not explicitly finegrained semantic align. In this work, we present Objectaware Transformers, an object-centric approach that extends video-language transformer to incorporate object
representations. The key idea is to leverage the bounding
boxes and object tags to guide the training process. We
evaluate our model on three standard sub-tasks of videotext matching on four widely used benchmarks. We also
provide deep analysis and detailed ablation about the proposed method. We show clear improvement in performance
across all tasks and datasets considered, demonstrating the
value of a model that incorporates object representations
into a video-language architecture. The code has been released in https://github.com/FingerRec/OATransformer.

1. Introduction
Learning scalable video-text representations for retrieval
requires the understanding of both visual and textual clues,
as well as the semantic alignment between these two modalities. Large-scale contrastive-based pre-training methods [4, 19] dominate the recent literature, where a “dualencoder” framework (a video encoder and a text encoder) is
trained in an end-to-end manner. Although these methods
have led to great performance advances, we figure out that
the lack of regularization on fine-grained semantic associations hinders their further improvements.
Thanks to the great progress of image-text pre-training
[9, 21, 22, 24, 35, 37, 44], a series of methods attempt to
leverage an off-the-shelf object detection model to generate richer information for cross-modality understanding, in* Corresponding Author.

woman

laptop

chair

laptop

bowl

table

hand
radio

(a). The text and video can still be matched with object-guided masking.

+4.8

+4.9

+4.5

+5.2

+4.1
+3.8
+3.2
+1.7

Fine-tune

+3.8 +3.7

+2.4
+1.5

Zero-shot

Linear Probe

(b). Performance gain for three downstream tasks over four benchmarks.

Figure 1. (a). Masking object-irrelevant region keep the semantic unchanged. From this example, we observe: 1. The object region is highly overlapped with visual salient region. 2. The
predicted Object Tags has semantic relation with caption. e.g.,
Music and Ratio. Laptop and Computer. (b). Our method vs.
SOTA on three downstream tasks. Motivated by (a), by incorporating the object into the learning of video-language pretraining
with simple Object-guided Masking, we show promising results
over multiple downstream video-language tasks.

cluding the visual objects and their tag concepts. The object information, together with the raw image and sentence,
are then fed into a joint encoder for cross-modality interaction, leading to better correlations between regions and
phrases. Given the success of object information in imagetext pre-training, it is intuitive to exploit the objects to improve video-text retrieval. However, there exist some main
challenges that prevent us from naı̈vely employing existing
object-based techniques on video-text pre-training.
Fig. 1(a) shows that object boxes and tags always focus
on the salient regions and semantics, which are considered

3313

