ArtiBoost: Boosting Articulated 3D Hand-Object Pose Estimation via
Online Exploration and Synthesis
1,2

Lixin Yang⋆ , 1 Kailin Li⋆ , 1 Xinyu Zhan, 1 Jun Lv, 1,2 Wenqiang Xu, 1 Jiefeng Li, 1,2 Cewu Lu†
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China 2 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute, China

{siriusyang, kailinli, kelvin34501, LyuJune SJTU, vinjohn, ljf likit, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn



Abstract
Estimating the articulated 3D hand-object pose from a
single RGB image is a highly ambiguous and challenging problem, requiring large-scale datasets that contain
diverse hand poses, object types, and camera viewpoints.
Most real-world datasets lack these diversities. In contrast, data synthesis can easily ensure those diversities
separately. However, constructing both valid and diverse
hand-object interactions and efficiently learning from the
vast synthetic data is still challenging. To address the
above issues, we propose ArtiBoost, a lightweight online
data enhancement method. ArtiBoost can cover diverse
hand-object poses and camera viewpoints through sampling in a Composited hand-object Configuration and Viewpoint space (CCV-space) and can adaptively enrich the
current hard-discernable items by loss-feedback and sample re-weighting. ArtiBoost alternatively performs data
exploration and synthesis within a learning pipeline, and
those synthetic data are blended into real-world source
data for training. We apply ArtiBoost on a simple learning baseline network and witness the performance boost
on several hand-object benchmarks. Our models and code
are available at https://github.com/lixiny/
ArtiBoost.

1. Introduction
Articulated bodies, such as the human hand, body, and
linkage mechanism, can be observed every day in our life.
Their joints, links, and movable parts depict the functionality of the articulation body. Extracting their transient configuration from image or video sequence, which is often referred to as Pose Estimation [8, 36, 37], can benefit many
downstream tasks in robotics and augment reality. Pose estimation for multi-body articulations is especially challenging as it suffers from severe self- or mutual occlusion. In
⋆ The first two authors contribute equally.
† Cewu Lu is the corresponding author. He is the member of Qing Yuan
Research Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, and Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute, China.

   

   

...

...

...

Figure 1. An intuitive illustration of the CCV-space.

this work, we paid attention to a certain type of multi-body
articulations – composited hand and object poses during
their interaction [5, 11, 18, 20, 23–25, 29, 31, 42, 68]. Hands
are the primary means by which humans manipulate objects in the real-world, and the hand-object pose estimation
(HOPE) task holds great potential for understanding human
behavior [13, 17, 35, 45, 60].
As the degrees of freedom (DoF) grows, the proper
amount of data to cover the pose distribution has grown exponentially. More than the most common articulation bodies, the human hand has 16 joints and approximately 21
DoF. Preparing such diverse training data for the HOPE task
can be very challenging. The real-world recording and annotation methods [3, 6, 13, 20] tend to hinder the pose diversity. For example, the multi-view-based approaches [3, 20]
require the subject to maintain a static grasping pose in a
video sequence. As a result, their recording process is inefficient, and their pose diversity is insufficient. In contrast, data synthesis is efficient and annotation-free, and
has been widely adopted in single-body N-D pose estimation [9, 14, 41, 62, 64, 70]. However, these methods are ineligible for multi-body articulation, in which the poses are
restricted by mutual contact and obstruction. Data synthesis
for HOPE tasks requires us to simulate virtual hand-object
interaction (grasp) that mimics the underlying pose distribution of their real-world counterparts. Conventional method
either manually articulated [10, 50, 51] the hand model for
grasp, or relegated [2, 25, 33] grasp synthesis to an off-the-

2750

