Topologically-Aware Deformation Fields for Single-View 3D Reconstruction
Shivam Duggal
Deepak Pathak
Carnegie Mellon University

Source Texture

Single-view 3D Reconstruction

Unsupervised Correspondence Estimation

Target Meshes

Unsupervised Texture Transfer

Figure 1. Given an unpaired image collection (with known camera poses) of an object category at training time, our approach learns to: (a)
reconstruct the underlying 3D given only a single image at test time, and (b) model dense 3D correspondences across category instances.
The learned correspondence field is articulation-aware, topologically-aware and inherently captures structural properties of the category,
enabling the task of unsupervised texture transfer. Videos and code at https://shivamduggal4.github.io/tars-3D/

Abstract
We present a new framework to learn dense 3D reconstruction and correspondence from a single 2D image.
The shape is represented implicitly as deformation over a
category-level occupancy field and learned in an unsupervised manner from an unaligned image collection without
using any 3D supervision. However, image collections usually contain large intra-category topological variation, e.g.
images of different chair instances, posing a major challenge.
Hence, prior methods are either restricted only to categories
with no topological variation for estimating shape and correspondence or focus only on learning shape independently for
each instance without any correspondence. To address this
issue, we propose a topologically-aware deformation field
that maps 3D points in object space to a higher-dimensional
canonical space. Given a single image, we first implicitly
deform a 3D point in the object space to a learned categoryspecific canonical space using the topologically-aware field
and then learn the 3D shape in the canonical space. Both
the canonical shape and deformation field are trained endto-end using differentiable rendering via learned recurrent
ray marcher. Our approach, dubbed TARS, achieves state-ofthe-art reconstruction fidelity on several datasets: ShapeNet,
Pascal3D+, CUB, and Pix3D chairs.

1. Introduction
Learning to understand the 3D geometric world underlying our 2D observation snapshots has been a longstanding problem in computer vision, yet the generalization is
nowhere close to that in learning to recognize 2D concepts [15, 22, 23]. The reason is rather unsurprising: the
lack of scalable ways to obtain 3D supervision in the wild,
be it multiple views of the same object or GT shape. Unlike
the current visual systems, humans can infer 3D structure
just from a single image (even under large occlusions). If
our (deep) learning models have to develop such a capability,
we must first figure out how to understand the 3D structures
from just an unaligned and diverse 2D image collection – the
kind of data available in abundance on the web. However,
any such approach must answer a fundamental question first
– how should one represent the 3D structure?
Looking at the research in recent years, there is an
overwhelming evidence in support of implicit representations credited to the advancement in neural implicit modeling [9, 36, 43, 44, 47, 53, 56]. While these implicit representations have attained the gold standards of high-fidelity
reconstruction, they still rely on either 3D GT shape or dense
multi-view supervision not only during training but sometimes also at inference [44], making them difficult to apply

1536

