DPICT: Deep Progressive Image Compression Using Trit-Planes
Jae-Han Lee1,2

Seungmin Jeon1
1
Korea University

Kwang Pyo Choi3
Youngo Park3
Chang-Su Kim1
2
Gauss Labs 3 Samsung Electronics

{jaehanlee, seungminjeon}@mcl.korea.ac.kr,
{kp5.choi, youngo.park}@samsung.com, changsukim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract

Bitstream
Encoding

We propose the deep progressive image compression
using trit-planes (DPICT) algorithm, which is the first
learning-based codec supporting fine granular scalability
(FGS). First, we transform an image into a latent tensor using an analysis network. Then, we represent the latent tensor in ternary digits (trits) and encode it into a compressed
bitstream trit-plane by trit-plane in the decreasing order of
significance. Moreover, within each trit-plane, we sort the
trits according to their rate-distortion priorities and transmit more important information first. Since the compression
network is less optimized for the cases of using fewer tritplanes, we develop a postprocessing network for refining reconstructed images at low rates. Experimental results show
that DPICT outperforms conventional progressive codecs
significantly, while enabling FGS transmission. Codes are
available at https://github.com/jaehanlee-mcl/DPICT.

1. Introduction
Image compression is a fundamental problem in image
processing and analysis. Classical image codecs, such as
JPEG [44], JPEG2000 [37], WebP [18], and BPG [8], have
been developed to achieve the goal of efficient data storage
and transmission. They contain several modules to process
hand-crafted features. For example, for transform coding,
JPEG uses discrete cosine transform, and JPEG2000 adopts
wavelet transform.
Recently, with the availability of substantial training data
and computing resources, deep learning has been adopted
for image compression, as well as other image and vision
problems. Some learning-based codecs are based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [5, 6, 26, 30], while others on recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [19, 24, 40, 41].
In terms of the rate-distortion (RD) performance, recent
learning-based codecs [11, 13, 47] are competitive with or
even superior to the classical codecs.
Progressive compression, or scalable coding [32], is a
crucial issue. A progressive codec encodes an image into

Decoding

Original image

Decoded images

0.026bpp

0.049bpp

0.094bpp

Figure 1. Illustration of progressive reconstruction of the proposed
DPICT algorithm.

a single bitstream that can decoded at various bit-rates, as
illustrated in Figure 1. There are various terminals from
small wearable devices to big TVs, requiring different image qualities at different bit-rates. It is inefficient to encode
multiple non-scalable bitstreams for these diverse devices.
In contrast, a scalable bitstream can be efficiently truncated
at multiple points to reconstruct the scene at different qualities. Moreover, when a network has a limited bandwidth,
the receiver of a scalable bitstream can first check a preview image by receiving a small portion of the bitstream,
and then reconstruct a higher quality image by decoding the
remaining bits.
There are several learning-based progressive codecs [10,
19,24,40,41], which, however, support coarse granular scalability only: a bitstream can be decoded at a limited number of rates. To the best of our knowledge, the proposed
algorithm is the first learning-based codec with fine granular scalability (FGS) [28, 36]: a single bitstream can be
truncated at any points to reconstruct the scene faithfully.
Furthermore, despite this additional functionality, the proposed algorithm provides better RD performance than the
conventional learning-based progressive codecs.
In this paper, we propose the deep progressive image
codec using trit-planes (DPICT) with FGS. First, we transform an image into a latent tensor, each element of which is

16113

