Remember Intentions: Retrospective-Memory-based Trajectory Prediction
†

Chenxin Xu1*, Weibo Mao1*, Wenjun Zhang1 , Siheng Chen1,2 ,
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{xcxwakaka,kirino.mao,zhangwenjun,sihengc}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
To realize trajectory prediction, most previous methods
adopt the parameter-based approach, which encodes all the
seen past-future instance pairs into model parameters. However, in this way, the model parameters come from all seen
instances, which means a huge amount of irrelevant seen
instances might also involve in predicting the current situation, disturbing the performance. To provide a more explicit
link between the current situation and the seen instances, we
imitate the mechanism of retrospective memory in neuropsychology and propose MemoNet, an instance-based approach
that predicts the movement intentions of agents by looking
for similar scenarios in the training data. In MemoNet,
we design a pair of memory banks to explicitly store representative instances in the training set, acting as prefrontal
cortex in the neural system, and a trainable memory addresser to adaptively search a current situation with similar
instances in the memory bank, acting like basal ganglia.
During prediction, MemoNet recalls previous memory by
using the memory addresser to index related instances in
the memory bank. We further propose a two-step trajectory
prediction system, where the first step is to leverage MemoNet to predict the destination and the second step is to fulfill
the whole trajectory according to the predicted destinations.
Experiments show that the proposed MemoNet improves the
FDE by 20.3%/10.2%/28.3% from the previous best method
on SDD/ETH-UCY/NBA datasets. Experiments also show
that our MemoNet has the ability to trace back to specific
instances during prediction, promoting more interpretability.

1. Introduction
Trajectory prediction aims to predict the future movements for one or multiple interacting agents given the past
trajectories. On the one hand, this task has broad practical
applications to autonomous driving [24], drones [6], surveillance systems [42] and interactive robotics [18]; on the other
hand, this is a fundamental scientific question about linking
† Corresponding author.
Code is available at: https://github.com/MediaBrainSJTU/MemoNet
* Equal contribution.

Neural system
Retrospective
Memory
Process
Past Situation

Basal Ganglia

I used the
ore
key before

Prefrontal Cortex

Future Decision

MemoNet
MemoNet
Process
Past Trajectory

Addresser

Future Intention
Memory Bank

Figure 1. MemoNet mimics retrospective memory process. We use
the memory bank to explicitly store representative instances, acting
like prefrontal cortex; and the memory addresser to search similar
memory instances with current situation, acting like basal ganglia.

the past to the future. The overall strategy is to summarize
useful experiences from a large amount of seen past-future
pairs and then leverage those experiences to predict possible
future intentions for the current situation.
To obtain useful experiences, previous works consider a
parameter-based approach, which uses training data to optimize model parameters. In this way, all the experiences
are implicitly summarized and stored in a model as a whole
during the optimization process. For example, [16, 35, 46]
use encoder-decoder architectures and [13, 15] consider
generator-discriminator architectures to regress future trajectory predictions. [17,23,32,38,47] use conditional variational
autoencoders to sample multiple future trajectory embedding
from latent distributions. [10,26] rely on a bivariate Gaussian
Mixture Model to output position distributions. However,
the parameter-based approach is not optimal for two reasons.
First, it lacks interpretability because all model parameters
do not have clear semantic meaning in the physical world.
This is critical in safety-sensitive applications, such as autonomous driving. Second, since the model parameters are
trained from all seen instances, a huge amount of irrelevant
seen past-future pairs might also involve in predicting the
current situation, disturbing the performance.
To promote more interpretability and provide a more
explicit link between the current situation and the seen instances, we propose MemoNet whose working mechanism is

6488

