Neural Architecture Search with Representation Mutual Information
Xiawu Zheng1,2†, Xiang Fei1†, Lei Zhang1†, Chenglin Wu3 , Fei Chao1 ,
Jianzhuang Liu4 , Wei Zeng2,5 , Yonghong Tian2,5 , Rongrong Ji1,2,6,7 *,
1
Media Analytics and Computing Lab, Department of Artificial Intelligence, School of Informatics,
Xiamen University. 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory. 3 DeepWisdom Inc. 4 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.
5
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Technology, School of Computer Science,
Peking University. 6 Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University. 7 Fujian Engineering
Research Center of Trusted Artificial Intelligence Analysis and Application, Xiamen University
{zhengxiawu, xiangf, leizhang}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, rrji@xmu.edu.cn
alexanderwu@fuzhi.ai, liu.jianzhuang@huawei.com, {weizeng, yhtian}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Performance evaluation strategy is one of the most important factors that determine the effectiveness and efficiency in Neural Architecture Search (NAS). Existing strategies, such as employing standard training or performance
predictor, often suffer from high computational complexity
and low generality. To address this issue, we propose to
rank architectures by Representation Mutual Information
(RMI). Specifically, given an arbitrary architecture that has
decent accuracy, architectures that have high RMI with it
always yield good accuracies. As an accurate performance
indicator to facilitate NAS, RMI not only generalizes well
to different search spaces, but is also efficient enough to
evaluate architectures using only one batch of data. Building upon RMI, we further propose a new search algorithm
termed RMI-NAS, facilitating with a theorem to guarantee
the global optimal of the searched architecture. In particular, RMI-NAS first randomly samples architectures from the
search space, which are then effectively classified as positive or negative samples by RMI. We then use these samples
to train a random forest to explore new regions, while keeping track of the distribution of positive architectures. When
the sample size is sufficient, the architecture with the largest
probability from the aforementioned distribution is selected,
which is theoretically proved to be the optimal solution. The
architectures searched by our method achieve remarkable
top-1 accuracies with the magnitude times faster search
process. Besides, RMI-NAS also generalizes to different
datasets and search spaces. Our code has been made available at https://git.openi.org.cn/PCL AutoML/XNAS.

* Corresponding author.
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

1. Introduction
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) is proposed to facilitate the design of deep neural networks, which is a challenging task and has demonstrated superior performance on
various computer vision tasks, including but not limited to
image classification [61, 67], object detection [10, 53] and
segmentation [7, 33]. As a widely accepted standpoint, a
conventional NAS algorithm is divided into three components [19]: search space, search algorithm and performance
estimation strategy. The search space defines the scope of
the search, the search strategy investigates how to explore
the search space and the performance estimation refers to
how to estimate the performance for the architectures.
Through extensive experiments, previous works [62, 64]
have demonstrated that performance estimation is the most
important component in NAS. In particular, an optimal estimation strategy is capable of improving both efficiency
and effectiveness simultaneously with different search algorithms in NAS, which is investigated in [62, 64]. According to the previous works [19, 31], performance estimation strategies include multiple-fidelity training methods* [20, 42, 57, 62, 67], accuracy predictor based methods [2, 37, 38, 49], one-shot methods [5, 35, 48, 51, 54, 56,
58–61, 65] and training-free based methods [8, 31, 39].
The key challenge of the performance estimation is the
trade-off among the accuracy, generalization and computation cost. Although multiple fidelity and accuracy predictor based methods are accurate and generalize to different
search spaces, such methods require a lot of computation resources which hinder the usage of NAS in practical applications. For example, AmoebaNet [42] costs more than 3, 150
* These methods use different training hyper-parameters for acceleration, including but not limited to fewer epochs, subset of data and downscaled models.

11912

