Faithful Extreme Rescaling via Generative Prior
Reciprocated Invertible Representations
Zhixuan Zhong1 Liangyu Chai1 Yang Zhou1 Bailin Deng2 Jia Pan3 Shengfeng He1 *
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
School of Computer Science and Informatics, Cardiff University
3
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong

(a) Input LR

(b) GPEN [30]

(c) GLEAN [3]

(d) IRN [28]

(e) Ours

(f) GT

Figure 1. We propose a faithful rescaling method that enables pixel-accurate upscaling with an extreme factor (64×). Previous generative
prior approaches (b) & (c), or invertible approach (d) suffer from the mapping ambiguity between the extreme low-resolution input and GT.
We embed high-resolution information both into the invertible low-resolution output as well as the generative prior, reciprocally enhancing
upscaling results.

Abstract
This paper presents a Generative prior ReciprocAted
Invertible rescaling Network (GRAIN) for generating faithful high-resolution (HR) images from low-resolution (LR)
invertible images with an extreme upscaling factor (64×).
Previous researches have leveraged the prior knowledge of
a pretrained GAN model to generate high-quality upscaling results. However, they fail to produce pixel-accurate
results due to the highly ambiguous extreme mapping process. We remedy this problem by introducing a reciprocated
invertible image rescaling process, in which high-resolution
information can be delicately embedded into an invertible
low-resolution image and generative prior for a faithful HR
reconstruction. In particular, the invertible LR features not
only carry significant HR semantics, but also are trained
to predict scale-specific latent codes, yielding a preferable
utilization of generative features. On the other hand, the
enhanced generative prior is re-injected to the rescaling pro* Corresponding author (hesfe@scut.edu.cn).

cess, compensating the lost details of the invertible rescaling. Our reciprocal mechanism perfectly integrates the advantages of invertible encoding and generative prior, leading to the first feasible extreme rescaling solution. Extensive experiments demonstrate superior performance against
state-of-the-art upscaling methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/cszzx/GRAIN .

1. Introduction
Due to the explosive growth of image data, image downscaling is a typical way for fast data processing and efficient storage. Therefore, the capability of rescaling a lowresolution image to a high-resolution one is of great importance for many multimedia applications. However, due to the
highly underspecified mapping process from low-resolution
(LR) to high-resolution (HR), different image priors have to
be introduced to reduce the learning ambiguity, especially
for an extreme upscaling setting (e.g., 64×).

5708

