Exploring Patch-wise Semantic Relation for Contrastive Learning in
Image-to-Image Translation Tasks
Chanyong Jung∗1
Gihyun Kwon∗1
Jong Chul Ye2,1
1
Department of Bio and Brain Engineering , Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI2 , KAIST
{jcy132, cyclomon , jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Recently, contrastive learning-based image translation
methods have been proposed, which contrasts different
spatial locations to enhance the spatial correspondence.
However, the methods often ignore the diverse semantic
relation within the images. To address this, here we propose
a novel semantic relation consistency (SRC) regularization
along with the decoupled contrastive learning, which utilize
the diverse semantics by focusing on the heterogeneous
semantics between the image patches of a single image.
To further improve the performance, we present a hard
negative mining by exploiting the semantic relation. We
verified our method for three tasks: single-modal and
multi-modal image translations, and GAN compression
task for image translation. Experimental results confirmed
the state-of-art performance of our method in all the three
tasks.

1. Introduction
One of the main objectives of image-to-image translation
tasks is to learn a mapping function from a source domain to
a target domain so that it preserves contents while converting the appearance similar to target domain. The cycle consistency loss, which enforces the consistency between the
input image and reconstructed image by an inverse mapping
of the converted image, is widely used in various frameworks [8, 14, 19, 36]. However, it requires an additional
generator and discriminator to learn the inverse mapping.
Also, [15, 20, 26] claimed that the cycle-consistency constraint may produce distortion due to its overly restrictive
constraint. Thus, one-sided image translation methods are
suggested to bypass the cycle-consistency constraint by enhancing the correspondence between the input and output
in various ways [1, 4, 9].
Recently, inspired by the success of contrastive learning,
CUT [20] firstly utilized the contrastive learning to maxi∗ Co-first authors.

Figure 1. Concept of the proposed method. Decoupled contrastive
learning forms the embedding. Consistency regularization of diverse semantic relation is imposed to enhance the correspondence
between the input and output.

mize the mutual information between the same location of
input and output images. The authors of NEGCUT [26]
proposed a contrastive learning method using hard negative
samples generated by the negative generator. However, the
method requires additional training procedure for the negative generator from random vectors, which may not guarantee to follow the real negative sample distribution and cause
the instability of training. F-LSeSim [34] utilized the patchwise similarity map for the contrastive learning, but they ignored the semantic relation between the patches, taking all
negative patches as equal negative.
In this paper, we propose a novel contrastive learning
method to utilize the heterogeneous semantics within an
image. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 1, the key idea is to
impose the consistency regularization on the similarity relation that preserves the spatial semantic relation during the

18260

