Salvage of Supervision in Weakly Supervised Object Detection
Lin Sui1
Chen-Lin Zhang1,2
Jianxin Wu1 *
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
4Paradigm Inc., Beijing, China
{suilin0432, zclnjucs, wujx2001}@gmail.com

Abstract
Weakly supervised object detection (WSOD) has recently
attracted much attention. However, the lack of boundingbox supervision makes its accuracy much lower than fully
supervised object detection (FSOD), and currently modern
FSOD techniques cannot be applied to WSOD. To bridge
the performance and technical gaps between WSOD and
FSOD, this paper proposes a new framework, Salvage of
Supervision (SoS), with the key idea being to harness every potentially useful supervisory signal in WSOD: the
weak image-level labels, the pseudo-labels, and the power
of semi-supervised object detection. This paper proposes
new approaches to utilize these weak and noisy signals
effectively, and shows that each type of supervisory signal brings in notable improvements, outperforms existing
WSOD methods (which mainly use only the weak labels)
by large margins. The proposed SoS-WSOD method also
has the ability to freely use modern FSOD techniques. SoSWSOD achieves 64.4 mAP50 on VOC2007, 61.9 mAP50 on
VOC2012 and 16.6 mAP50:95 on MS-COCO, and also has
fast inference speed. Ablations and visualization further
verify the effectiveness of SoS.

1. Introduction
Large-scale datasets with precise annotations are critical
in developing detection algorithms, but are expensive to obtain. Thus, weakly supervised object detection (WSOD),
which only needs image-level labels on training images,
is popular these days. WSOD has borrowed ideas from
fully supervised object detection (FSOD), such as object
proposals [2, 33] and the Fast-RCNN framework [10]. But
modern FSOD has discarded external object proposals and
has developed better techniques like Faster-RCNN [24] and
FPN [20]. Furthermore, current WSOD methods mostly use
VGG16 [28] as the backbone and Fast-RCNN [10] as the
* J. Wu is the corresponding author. This research was partly supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
61772256 and Grant 61921006.

detector, which confines both accuracy and speed. That is,
due to the lack of detailed box-level annotations, WSOD
cannot enjoy the progress from FSOD. In fact, it has been
shown that modern FSOD techniques such as ResNet backbones and RoIAlign will even deteriorate WSOD detectors [27]. The weak image-level label is often the only supervisory signal utilized for object detection in WSOD, by
resorting to a multi-instance recognition setup [4].
In this paper, we argue that WSOD must fight hard to
harness every potential source of supervisory signal, and
should find a way to utilize the progress in FSOD. The
proposed Salvage of Supervision (SoS) framework (SoSWSOD) is illustrated in Fig. 1, which has 3 stages. Stage 1
trains a detector with any WSOD method, and we propose
an improved OICR [32] as our stage 1. Stage 2 is pseudoFSOD, where the difficulty is to generate good pseudo boxlevel annotations in order to boost performance and adopt
newer FSOD techniques (e.g., ResNet [13], RoIAlign [12],
and FPN [20]), i.e., to salvage the supervision. This problem has been largely ignored in WSOD, for which we propose a simple but effective solution. Stage 3 is proposed
by us, named as SSOD, in which we split the whole dataset
into a “clean” and a “noisy” part, then treat the noisy part
as unlabeled. That is, we salvage additional useful supervisory signals by creating a semi-supervised object detection
(SSOD) problem. Hence, we have salvaged supervisory signals out of weak labels by designing novel algorithms to
generate high-quality pseudo box-level labels and by creating a semi-supervised learning problem, respectively.
Compared to existing WSOD methods, our SoS-WSOD
not only harnesses every potentially useful supervisory signal, but also enables WSOD to fully enjoy both accuracy
and speed benefits of modern FSOD methods. Although
pseudo FSOD has been tried [6,9,32,41], we will show that
SoS-WSOD salvages pseudo-supervision of much higher
quality. Hence, our contributions are:
• We propose SoS-WSOD, a new WSOD framework,
showing that we must harness all potential supervisory signals in WSOD: generate high-quality pseudoannotations for FSOD, and treat the generated pseudo-

14227

