FlexIT: Towards Flexible Semantic Image Translation
Guillaume Couairon
Meta AI, Sorbonne Université

Asya Grechka
Meero, Sorbonne Université

Jakob Verbeek
Meta AI

gcouairon@fb.com

asya.grechka@meero.com

jjverbeek@fb.com

Holger Schwenk
Meta AI

Matthieu Cord
Valeo, Sorbonne Université

schwenk@fb.com

matthieu.cord@lip6.fr

Tiger
→ White wolf

Black
→ Red

Glass
→ Water jug

Standard schnauzer
→ Yorkshire terrier

Plastic bag
→ Backpack

Sow’s ear
→ Silk purse

Figure 1. FlexIT transformation examples. From top to bottom: input image, transformed image, and text query.

Abstract
Deep generative models, like GANs, have considerably
improved the state of the art in image synthesis, and are
able to generate near photo-realistic images in structured
domains such as human faces. Based on this success, recent work on image editing proceeds by projecting images
to the GAN latent space and manipulating the latent vector.
However, these approaches are limited in that only images
from a narrow domain can be transformed, and with only a
limited number of editing operations. We propose FlexIT, a
novel method which can take any input image and a userdefined text instruction for editing. Our method achieves
flexible and natural editing, pushing the limits of semantic image translation. First, FlexIT combines the input image and text into a single target point in the CLIP multimodal embedding space. Via the latent space of an autoencoder, we iteratively transform the input image toward the
target point, ensuring coherence and quality with a variety
of novel regularization terms. We propose an evaluation
protocol for semantic image translation, and thoroughly
evaluate our method on ImageNet. Code will be available
at https://github.com/facebookresearch/
SemanticImageTranslation/.

1. Introduction
The old saying goes: “You can’t make a silk purse from
a sow’s ear.” Or can you? Truly flexible and powerful semantic image editing is elusive, and current work is limited
in terms of possible input images and edit operations. Research in deep generative image models has seen significant
progress in recent years, with GANs in particular generating
near photo-realistic samples in domains such as human and
animal faces [26] or object-centric images [4]. Moreover,
recent “style-based” GANs, like StyleGAN [27–29], have
an impressively disentangled latent space, where performing copy-pastes between two latent vectors transfers the corresponding styles in the image space.
Consequently, significant research efforts have been put
into using pre-trained GANs for semantic image edition.
Through specific latent-space manipulation, high-level attributes such as age or gender can be identified and edited
in a realistic manner [1,22, 41,57]. These approaches, however, present several caveats. First, contrary to generated
latents, inferred latent codes representing real images have
been shown to react poorly to latent editing operations [19].
Although recent methods [19, 45, 55] improve editability,
input images are still highly limited to the distribution of
the generative network. Moreover, edit operations are also
18270

