Pyramid Grafting Network for One-Stage High Resolution
Saliency Detection

1

Chenxi Xie1 , Changqun Xia*2 , Mingcan Ma1 , Zhirui Zhao1 , Xiaowu Chen1,2 , Jia Li1,2
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, SCSE, Beihang University
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{xiechenxi,mingcanma,zhiruizhao,chen,jiali}@buaa.edu.cn, xiachq@pcl.ac.cn

Abstract
Recent salient object detection (SOD) methods based
on deep neural network have achieved remarkable performance. However, most of existing SOD models designed for
low-resolution input perform poorly on high-resolution images due to the contradiction between the sampling depth
and the receptive ﬁeld size. Aiming at resolving this contradiction, we propose a novel one-stage framework called
Pyramid Grafting Network (PGNet), using transformer and
CNN backbone to extract features from different resolution images independently and then graft the features from
transformer branch to CNN branch. An attention-based
Cross-Model Grafting Module (CMGM) is proposed to enable CNN branch to combine broken detailed information
more holistically, guided by different source feature during decoding process. Moreover, we design an Attention
Guided Loss (AGL) to explicitly supervise the attention matrix generated by CMGM to help the network better interact with the attention from different models. We contribute
a new Ultra-High-Resolution Saliency Detection dataset
UHRSD, containing 5,920 images at 4K-8K resolutions. To
our knowledge, it is the largest dataset in both quantity and
resolution for high-resolution SOD task, which can be used
for training and testing in future research. Sufﬁcient experiments on UHRSD and widely-used SOD datasets demonstrate that our method achieves superior performance compared to the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Salient object detection (SOD) [1, 5] aims at identifying and segmenting the most attractive objects in a certain
scene. As a pre-processing step, it is widely applied in var* Correspondence should be addressed to Changqun Xia (Email: xiachq@pcl.ac.cn ). The code and dataset are available at https://
github.com/iCVTEAM/PGNet.

Figure 1. Comparison of the results of the different methods. (a)
Input image. (b) Ground truth mask. (c) Directly input to Resnet18 based FPN. (d) Downsample then input to Swin transformer
based FPN. (e) Ours.

ious computer vision tasks, such as light ﬁeld segmentation [21, 41], instance segmentation [47] and video object
segmentation [13, 42].
Recently, deep neural networks based salient object detection methods have made remarkable achievements [3, 9,
14, 19, 26, 29]. However, most of existing SOD methods
perform well within a speciﬁc input low-resolution range
(e.g., 224 × 224, 384 × 384 ). With the rapid development
of image capture devices (e.g., smartphone), the resolution
(e.g., 1080p, 2K and 4K) of the images accessible to people
has far exceeded the range to which existing saliency detection method can be adapted directly. As shown in Fig. 1
(c), we fed the high-resolution image directly into the commonly used network with Resnet-18 as the backbone, and
comparing ground truth Fig. 1 (b) shows that the segmentation result is incomplete and many detail regions are lost.
In order to reduce computational consumption and memory
usage, existing methods often downsample the input images

11717

