Class-Incremental Learning by Knowledge Distillation
with Adaptive Feature Consolidation
Minsoo Kang†

Jaeyoo Park†
ECE , ASRI† , & IPAI†,§
Seoul National University

Bohyung Han†,§

†

{kminsoo,bellos1203,bhhan}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We present a novel class incremental learning approach
based on deep neural networks, which continually learns
new tasks with limited memory for storing examples in the
previous tasks. Our algorithm is based on knowledge distillation and provides a principled way to maintain the representations of old models while adjusting to new tasks effectively. The proposed method estimates the relationship
between the representation changes and the resulting loss
increases incurred by model updates. It minimizes the upper bound of the loss increases using the representations,
which exploits the estimated importance of each feature
map within a backbone model. Based on the importance,
the model restricts updates of important features for robustness while allowing changes in less critical features for flexibility. This optimization strategy effectively alleviates the
notorious catastrophic forgetting problem despite the limited accessibility of data in the previous tasks. The experimental results show significant accuracy improvement of
the proposed algorithm over the existing methods on the
standard datasets. Code is available.1

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved outstanding results
in various applications including computer vision [13, 29,
31, 32, 38], natural language processing [45, 47], speech
recognition [5, 10], robotics [25], bioinformatics [6], and
many others. Despite their impressive performance on offline learning problems, it is still challenging to train models
for a sequence of tasks in an online manner, where only a
limited number of examples in the previous tasks are available due to memory constraints or privacy issues.
Although fine-tuning is a good strategy to learn a new
task given an old model, it is not effective for streaming
tasks due to the catastrophic forgetting problem [30]; the
1 https://github.com/kminsoo/AFC

Feature Extractor
(φt-1)

old
class

FC
(θt-1)

Mini-batch for
previous model Mt-1
Importance
(𝐼! )

Discrepancy
Loss
Feature Extractor
(φt)

old
class

FC
(θt)

Mini-batch for
current model Mt
Forward
Backward

new
class
Exemplar Set

Prediction

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed method. The current model
optimizes the task loss over a mini-batch sampled from the data of
the current task and exemplar sets for the previous tasks while it
aims to differently minimize the discrepancy in each feature map
over the previous model based on the corresponding importance.

model performs well on the current task while it often fails
to generalize on the previous ones. Therefore, incremental
learning, the framework capacitating online learning without forgetting, has been studied actively. To mitigate the
catastrophic forgetting problem, several branches of algorithms have been discussed. Architectural approaches employ network expansion schemes [27, 41, 49] instead of using static models. Rehearsal methods present the strategies to summarize the tasks in the past by storing exemplar sets [4, 37] or generate samples by estimating the data
distribution in the previous tasks [43]. On the other hand,
parameter regularization methods [3, 22, 51] prevent important weights from deviating the previously learned models.
Knowledge distillation approaches [21, 26] focus on minimizing the divergences from the representations of the previous models while effectively adapting to new tasks.
We present a knowledge distillation approach for class
incremental learning, where the model incrementally learns
new classes via knowledge distillation, with limited acces-

16071

