MLSLT: Towards Multilingual Sign Language Translation
Aoxiong Yin1 , Zhou Zhao1 *, Weike Jin1 , Meng Zhang2 , Xingshan Zeng2 , Xiaofei He1
1

Zhejiang University ,2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

{yinaoxiong,zhaozhou,weikejin}@zju.edu.cn
zhangmeng92@huawei.com, zxshamson@gmail.com, xiaofei h@qq.com

Abstract
Most of the research to date focuses on bilingual sign
language translation (BSLT). However, such models are inefficient in building multilingual sign language translation
systems. To solve this problem, we introduce the multilingual sign language translation (MSLT) task. It aims to use
a single model to complete the translation between multiple
sign languages and spoken languages. Then, we propose
MLSLT, the first MSLT model, which contains two novel dynamic routing mechanisms for controlling the degree of parameter sharing between different languages. Intra-layer
language-specific routing controls the proportion of data
flowing through shared parameters and language-specific
parameters from the token level through a soft gate within
the layer, and inter-layer language-specific routing controls
and learns the data flow path of different languages at the
language level through a soft gate between layers. In order
to evaluate the performance of MLSLT, we collect the first
publicly available multilingual sign language understanding dataset, Spreadthesign-Ten (SP-10), which contains up
to 100 language pairs, e.g., CSL→en, GSG→zh. Experimental results show that the average performance of MLSLT outperforms the baseline MSLT model and the combination of multiple BSLT models in many cases. In addition, we also explore zero-shot translation in sign language and find that our model can achieve comparable
performance to the supervised BSLT model on some language pairs. Dataset and more details are at https:
//mlslt.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Sign languages are the primary means of communication for an estimated 466 million deaf or hard-of-hearing
people worldwide [38]. However, the difference between
sign language and spoken language causes some communication barriers between them and hearing-unimpaired people, which brings inconvenience to their daily lives. This
* Corresponding author.

zh: 你好! ... en:Hello! ... de:Hallo!

zh: 你好! ... en:Hello! ... de:Hallo!

BSLT ... BSLT ... BSLT

...
CSL

MSLT

...
BFI

...

GSG

CSL

...
BFI

GSG

(a) MSLT system based on multi- (b) MSLT system based on single
models
model

Figure 1. An example to illustrate the advantages of the MSLT
model over the BSLT model in constructing a multilingual sign
language translation system.

motivates researchers to design more efficient and accurate
sign language translation systems [23, 24, 52, 56].
Due to the lack of data, almost all previous studies focus on building a bilingual sign language translation (BSLT)
model [2,3,27,37,53,57] (such as American Sign Language
to English or British Sign Language to English). However,
there are more than 300 sign languages in the world [34],
and there are 389 languages spoken by more than one million people worldwide [9, 40]. So if each model can only
handle one language pair, then in order to handle all situations, we need to create 116,700 models. Even if all sign
languages are translated into English and then translated
into other languages with the help of a machine translation
system, we still need to create 300 models, which is unacceptable for practical applications.
Therefore, we aim in this work to design a single model
to realize the translation between multiple sign languages
and spoken languages. Figure 1 shows the advantages of
the multilingual sign language translation (MSLT) model
compared to the BSLT model in constructing an MSLT
system. However, there are many challenges in building
such a MSLT model. First, we lack an MSLT corpus. Almost all public sign language translation datasets contain
only one sign language, and they are mainly concentrated

5109

