Learning to Refactor Action and Co-occurrence Features for
Temporal Action Localization

1

Kun Xia1 Le Wang1 * Sanping Zhou1 Nanning Zheng1 Wei Tang2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
University of Illinois at Chicago

xiakun@stu.xjtu.edu.cn; {lewang, spzhou, nnzheng}@xjtu.edu.cn; tangw@uic.edu

Abstract
The main challenge of Temporal Action Localization is
to retrieve subtle human actions from various co-occurring
ingredients, e.g., context and background, in an untrimmed
video. While prior approaches have achieved substantial
progress through devising advanced action detectors, they
still suffer from these co-occurring ingredients which often
dominate the actual action content in videos. In this paper,
we explore two orthogonal but complementary aspects of a
video snippet, i.e., the action features and the co-occurrence
features. Especially, we develop a novel auxiliary task by
decoupling these two types of features within a video snippet
and recombining them to generate a new feature representation with more salient action information for accurate action
localization. We term our method RefactorNet, which first
explicitly factorizes the action content and regularizes its
co-occurrence features, and then synthesizes a new actiondominated video representation. Extensive experimental
results and ablation studies on THUMOS14 and ActivityNet
v1.3 demonstrate that our new representation, combined
with a simple action detector, can significantly improve the
action localization performance.

1. Introduction
Temporal Action Localization (TAL) aims to locate the
start and end times of action instances from long untrimmed
videos as well as to classify their categories. As a fundamental task in video understanding, it has attracted great
attention in recent years and facilitated various applications
such as security surveillance [36,43,50] and human behavior
analysis [9, 39, 53].
A common first step of current TAL approaches [12, 33,
46,52] is to extract features from each video snippet via a pretrained two-stream network. They are then aggregated, e.g.,
via max pooling, to obtain the representation of a proposal
∗ Corresponding author.

Time

Untrimmed Video of High Jump

Action Frame

Action content of
High Jump

Co-occurrences of
High Jump

Non-action Frame

No action
of interest

Co-occurrences of
High Jump

Figure 1. Visualization of the action component and the cooccurrence component decoupled by our method from a snippet
representation. Co-occurrence components help reduce action ambiguity and uncertainty, but they often dominate the action components in a video, and thus adversely affect action detection. How
to balance these two components in a snippet representation is an
important yet under-explored problem.

or an anchor for action classification and temporal boundary
regression. These snippet-level features characterize two
aspects of a video snippet, and we term them the action
component and the co-occurrence component, respectively.
The action component refers to features characterizing the
action occurring in a snippet, including the motion pattern of
one or more persons and their interaction with objects. The
co-occurrence component refers to features not characterizing any actions but often co-occurring with them in a frame
or a snippet. This includes class-specific context, which
only co-occurs frequently with certain actions, e.g., a track
field, and class-agnostic background, whose occurrence is
less relevant to the action categories, e.g., the sky. Figure 1
illustrates that an untrimmed video of High Jump contains a

13884

