ZeroWaste Dataset:
Towards Deformable Object Segmentation in Cluttered Scenes
Dina Bashkirova1 *
Fadi Alladkani 3

Mohamed Abdelfattah2

Ping Hu 1

Vitaly Ablavsky 4

Ziliang Zhu 1
Berk Calli 3

James Akl3
Sarah Adel Bargal1

Kate Saenko1,5
1

Boston University 2 American University in Cairo 3 Worcester Polytechnic Institute
4
University of Washington 5 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Abstract
Less than 35% of recyclable waste is being actually recycled in the US [2], which leads to increased soil and
sea pollution and is one of the major concerns of environmental researchers as well as the common public. At
the heart of the problem are the inefficiencies of the waste
sorting process (separating paper, plastic, metal, glass,
etc.) due to the extremely complex and cluttered nature
of the waste stream. Recyclable waste detection poses a
unique computer vision challenge as it requires detection
of highly deformable and often translucent objects in cluttered scenes without the kind of context information usually
present in human-centric datasets. This challenging computer vision task currently lacks suitable datasets or methods in the available literature. In this paper, we take a
step towards computer-aided waste detection and present
the first in-the-wild industrial-grade waste detection and
segmentation dataset, ZeroWaste. We believe that ZeroWaste will catalyze research in object detection and
semantic segmentation in extreme clutter as well as applications in the recycling domain. Our project page can be
found at http://ai.bu.edu/zerowaste/

1. Introduction
As the world population grows and becomes increasingly urbanized, waste production is estimated to reach 2.6
billion tonnes a year in 2030, an increase from its current
level of around 2.1 billion tonnes [28]. Efficient recycling
* dbash@bu.edu

strategies are critical to reduce the devastating environmental effects of rising waste production. Materials Recovery
Facilities (MRFs) are at the center of the recycling process.
These facilities are where the collected recyclable waste is
sorted into separate bales of plastic, paper, metal and glass
(and other sub-categories). Even though the MRFs utilize a
large number of machines alongside manual labor [24], the
recycling rates as well as the profit margins stay at undesirably low levels (e.g. less than 35% of the recyclable waste
actually got recycled in the United States in 2018 [2]). Another crucial aspect of manual waste sorting is the safety
of the workers, who risk their health daily getting exposed
to dangerous and unsanitary objects (e.g. knifes, medical
needles). At the same time, the extremely cluttered nature
of the waste stream makes automated waste detection (i.e.
detection of waste objects that should be removed from the
conveyor belt) very challenging to achieve.
Recent advances in object classification and segmentation provide a great opportunity to make the recycling
process more efficient, more profitable and safer for the
workers. Unfortunately, the research community is lacking
the high-quality in-the-wild datasets to train and evaluate
the classification and segmentation algorithms for industrial
waste sorting. While several companies do development in
the automated waste sorting space (e.g. [49, 50, 57]), they
keep their data private, and the few existing open-source
datasets [38, 48, 54, 60] are very limited in the amount of
data and/or are generated in uncluttered environments, not
representing the complexity of the domain (see Figure 1).
In this paper, we propose the largest openly available
in-the-wild waste detection dataset ZeroWaste that is
specifically designed for evaluating label-efficient industrial

21147

