Transferability Estimation using Bhattacharyya Class Separability
Michal Pándy* Andrea Agostinelli

Jasper Uijlings

Vittorio Ferrari

Thomas Mensink

Google Research
{michalpandy, agostinelli, jrru, vittoferrari, mensink}@google.com

Abstract
Transfer learning has become a popular method for
leveraging pre-trained models in computer vision. However, without performing computationally expensive finetuning, it is difficult to quantify which pre-trained source
models are suitable for a specific target task, or, conversely,
to which tasks a pre-trained source model can be easily adapted to. In this work, we propose Gaussian Bhattacharyya Coefficient (GBC), a novel method for quantifying transferability between a source model and a target
dataset. In a first step we embed all target images in the
feature space defined by the source model, and represent
them with per-class Gaussians. Then, we estimate their
pairwise class separability using the Bhattacharyya coefficient, yielding a simple and effective measure of how well
the source model transfers to the target task. We evaluate GBC on image classification tasks in the context of
dataset and architecture selection. Further, we also perform experiments on the more complex semantic segmentation transferability estimation task. We demonstrate that
GBC outperforms state-of-the-art transferability metrics on
most evaluation criteria in the semantic segmentation settings, matches the performance of top methods for dataset
transferability in image classification, and performs best on
architecture selection problems for image classification.

1. Introduction
The goal of transfer learning is to reuse knowledge
learned on a source task to help train a model for a target
task. Currently, the most common form of transfer learning in computer vision is to pre-train a source model on the
ILSVRC’12 dataset [55] and then fine-tune it on the target
dataset [3, 14, 23, 24, 30, 35, 57, 75]. However, each target
task may benefit from a different source model architecture [12, 25, 45, 53] or different source dataset [42, 46, 71].
The challenge then becomes to determine which (pre* Currently at Waymo.

Source
models

Target
data

GBC overlap
ranking

Target data embedded in
source feature space

Figure 1. This figure illustrates the high-level overview of our
approach. On the left, we use the pre-trained source models to
embed data into the source models’ feature space. On the right,
we use GBC to rank these methods based on how much classes
overlap in corresponding embedding spaces.

trained) source model is most suitable for a particular target
task, or to which target task a specific model can be easily
adapted. Determining this by fine-tuning all combinations
of source models and target datasets is computationally prohibitive.
To address this problem, several recent works introduced
transferability metrics [4, 38, 47, 60, 61, 72], which aim at
predicting how well a source model transfers to a given target dataset. A good transferability metric is computationally efficient, and its predictions correlate well with the final performance of a model after fine-tuning on the target
dataset. Typically a transferability metric is estimated by
applying the source model to the target dataset to extract
embeddings or predictions, which are then combined with
the target ground-truth labels to measure transferability.
This paper proposes a novel transferability metric: the
Gaussian Bhattacharyya Coefficient (GBC). The main idea
is to measure the amount of overlap between target classes
in the feature space of the source model (Fig. 1). If this overlap is small, the target classes are easily separated which
means the knowledge in the source model is useful for the

9172

