HVH: Learning a Hybrid Neural Volumetric Representation for
Dynamic Hair Performance Capture
Ziyan Wang1,3
Giljoo Nam3
Tuur Stuyck3
3
3
Stephen Lombardi
Michael Zollhöfer
Jessica Hodgins1,2
Christoph Lassner3
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Meta AI 3 Reality Labs Research

Abstract
Capturing and rendering life-like hair is particularly
challenging due to its fine geometric structure, the complex
physical interaction and its non-trivial visual appearance.
Yet, hair is a critical component for believable avatars. In
this paper, we address the aforementioned problems: 1) we
use a novel, volumetric hair representation that is composed of thousands of primitives. Each primitive can be
rendered efficiently, yet realistically, by building on the latest advances in neural rendering. 2) To have a reliable control signal, we present a novel way of tracking hair on the
strand level. To keep the computational effort manageable,
we use guide hairs and classic techniques to expand those
into a dense hood of hair. 3) To better enforce temporal
consistency and generalization ability of our model, we further optimize the 3D scene flow of our representation with
multiview optical flow, using volumetric raymarching. Our
method can not only create realistic renders of recorded
multi-view sequences, but also create renderings for new
hair configurations by providing new control signals. We
compare our method with existing work on viewpoint synthesis and drivable animation and achieve state-of-the-art
results. https://ziyanw1.github.io/hvh/

1. Introduction
Although notable progress has been made towards the
realism of human avatars, cephalic hair is still one of the
hardest parts of the human body to capture and render: with
usually more than a hundred-thousand components, with
complex physical interaction among them and with complex interaction with light, which is extraordinarily hard to
model. However, it is an important part of our appearance
and identity: hair styles can convey everything from religious beliefs to mood or activity. Hence, hair is critically
important to make virtual avatars believable and universally
usable.
Previous work on mesh based representations [3, 20, 25,

52, 57, 58, 68] has shown promising results on modeling the
face and skin. However, they suffer when modeling hair, because meshes are not well suited for representing hair geometry. Recent volumetric representations [26, 35] have high
DoF which allows modeling of a changing geometric structure. They have achieved impressive results in 3D scene acquisition and rendering from multi-view photometric information. Compared to other geometric representations like
multi-plane images [2,5,34,56,76] or point-based representations [1,19,33,49,65], volumetric representations support
a larger range of camera motion for view extrapolation and
do not suffer from holes when rendering dynamic geometry like point-based representations. Furthermore, they can
be learned from multi-view RGB data using differentiable
volumetric ray marching, without additional MVS methods.
However, one major flaw of volumetric representations
is their cubic memory complexity. This problem is particularly significant for hair, where high resolution is a requirement. NeRF [35] circumvents the O(n3 ) memory complexity problem by parameterizing a volumetric radiance field
using an MLP. Given the implicit form, the MLP-based implicit function is not limited by spatial resolution. A hierarchical structure with a coarse and fine level radiance
function is used and an importance resampling based on the
coarse level radiance field is utilized for boosting sample
resolution. Although promising empirical results have been
shown, they come with at the advance of high rendering
time and the quality is still limited by the coarse level sampling resolution. Another limitation of NeRFs is that they
were initially designed for static scenes. There is some recent work [21, 22, 41, 42, 46, 59, 63, 67, 74] that extends the
original NeRF concept to modeling dynamic scenes. However, they are still limited to relatively small motions, do not
support drivable animation or are not efficient for rendering.
We present a hybrid representation: by using many volumetric primitives, we focus the resolution of the model
onto the relevant regions of the 3D space. For each of
the volumes, we construct a neural representation that captures the local appearance of the hair in great detail, similar
to [24, 27, 47, 63] . However, without explicitly modeling

6143

