Learning 3D Object Shape and Layout without 3D Supervision

1

Meta AI

Nikhila Ravi1
2

University of Michigan
Input Image

Abstract
A 3D scene consists of a set of objects, each with a shape
and a layout giving their position in space. Understanding
3D scenes from 2D images is an important goal, with applications in robotics and graphics. While there have been
recent advances in predicting 3D shape and layout from a
single image, most approaches rely on 3D ground truth for
training which is expensive to collect at scale. We overcome
these limitations and propose a method that learns to predict
3D shape and layout for objects without any ground truth
shape or layout information: instead we rely on multi-view
images with 2D supervision which can more easily be collected at scale. Through extensive experiments on ShapeNet,
Hypersim, and ScanNet we demonstrate that our approach
scales to large datasets of realistic images, and compares
favorably to methods relying on 3D ground truth. On Hypersim and ScanNet where reliable 3D ground truth is not
available, our approach outperforms supervised approaches
trained on smaller and less diverse datasets. 1

1. Introduction
A 3D scene consists of a set of objects, specified by a
3D shape for each object and the 3D layout of objects in
space. Understanding this 3D scene structure is critical for
navigating or interacting with the world. Unfortunately, directly measuring or perceiving 3D structure is often impractical. For this reason, inferring the shape and layout of 3D
scenes from 2D images has long been a fundamental problem in computer vision, with wide applications in robotics,
autonomous vehicles, graphics, AR/VR, and beyond.
The rise of deep learning has dramatically improved 3D
understanding from a single image. Methods have advanced
from estimating 3D shapes of isolated objects [6, 11, 51] to
predicting multiple shapes in complex scenes [14] and even
jointly predicting shape and layout [38, 50]. While impressive, these methods share a flaw: they use ground truth 3D
shape and layout for training. Creating large, varied training
sets with this data is impractical, limiting the scalability and
utility of methods relying on strong 3D supervision.
1 Project page https://gkioxari.github.io/usl/

Justin Johnson1,2

2D Object Detection

No 3D
Supervision
ℓ!" (

, GT!#)

ℓ!"
Rotate

↻

Georgia Gkioxari1

ℓ!"
2D Ground Truth

Render

Layout & Shape

Figure 1. We propose an end-to-end model which takes an input
image, detects all objects in 2D and predicts their 3D shapes and
layouts. We learn from multiple 2D scene views, e.g. frames of
videos, and without any 3D supervision.

Some recent approaches take an extreme position, and
train on collections of images without any 3D supervision
whatsoever [15,22,27,28,53]. While admirable, overcoming
the fundamental ambiguities of 3D from a single image
requires strong category-specific shape priors, making it
difficult to scale to the complexities of the real world.
Another natural way to predict 3D structure is to use multiple views. Multi-view images give weak 3D supervision
and can be captured at scale using videos or multi-camera
rigs. Classical techniques such as Structure from Motion
and Multi-View Stereo [18] reconstruct full 3D scenes without 3D supervision, but require many views, do not predict
semantics, and are not typically learned from data.
More recently, differentiable rendering has enabled a new
wave of methods that predict 3D shapes without strong 3D
supervision [5, 24, 34, 41]. During training a model inputs
a single image and outputs a 3D shape, which is rendered
from one or more auxiliary views; comparing the rendered
prediction with 2D silhouettes in auxiliary views provides a
training signal. This pipeline is promising since it requires
no ground truth 3D shapes, instead learning solely from
multi-view images and 2D image supervision which can

1695

