ADeLA: Automatic Dense Labeling with Attention for
Viewpoint Shift in Semantic Segmentation
Hanxiang Ren1 * Yanchao Yang2† * He Wang3‡ Bokui Shen2
Qingnan Fan4‡ Youyi Zheng1† C. Karen Liu2 Leonidas Guibas2
1
Zhejiang University 2 Stanford University 3 Peking University 4 Tencent AI Lab
{hanxiang.ren,youyizheng}@zju.edu.cn
hewang@pku.edu.cn

{yanchaoy,karenliu,guibas}@cs.stanford.edu

bshen88@stanford.edu

fqnchina@gmail.com

Abstract
We describe a method to deal with performance drop in
semantic segmentation caused by viewpoint changes within
multi-camera systems, where temporally paired images are
readily available, but the annotations may only be abundant for a few typical views. Existing methods alleviate
performance drop via domain alignment in a shared space
and assume that the mapping from the aligned space to
the output is transferable. However, the novel content induced by viewpoint changes may nullify such a space for
effective alignments, thus resulting in negative adaptation.
Our method works without aligning any statistics of the images between the two domains. Instead, it utilizes a novel
attention-based view transformation network trained only
on color images to hallucinate the semantic images for the
target. Despite the lack of supervision, the view transformation network can still generalize to semantic images thanks
to the induced “information transport” bias. Furthermore,
to resolve ambiguities in converting the semantic images to
semantic labels, we treat the view transformation network
as a functional representation of an unknown mapping implied by the color images and propose functional label hallucination to generate pseudo-labels with uncertainties in
the target domains. Our method surpasses baselines built
on state-of-the-art correspondence estimation and view synthesis methods. Moreover, it outperforms the state-of-theart unsupervised domain adaptation methods that utilize
self-training and adversarial domain alignments. Our code
and dataset will be made publicly available.

1. Introduction
Parsing the environment from multiple viewing angles
to arrive at a comprehensive understanding of the surroundings is critical for autonomous agents, assistive robots, and
* equal contribution. † corresponding author
‡ work done while at Stanford

(a) 1

(b)

Figure 1. (a): Multiple cameras towards different viewpoints can
help autonomous or assistive agents to better understand the scene.
However, the performance of the semantic segmentation network
trained on the forward view (typical view of existing datasets)
drops sharply when tested with viewpoint shifts (Tab. 5). (b):
Adaptation gain obtained by state-of-the-art methods across different viewpoints. Our method consistently shows positive gains
and works robustly towards substantial viewpoint change,

AR/VR equipment (Fig. 1a). These multi-camera systems
can capture temporally paired data in practice from different
viewpoints, and the need to train a scene parsing network
that performs well at multiple viewpoints is key to estimating traversable surfaces and preventing accidents. However, viewpoint changes across cameras induce significant
domain gaps – a scene parsing network trained with annotations in one view often encounters a large performance
drop on another (Tab. 5). We aim to reduce this performance drop by transporting semantic information from the
1 image credits: NASA, Boston Dynamics and HTC

8079

