Deformable ProtoPNet: An Interpretable Image Classifier Using Deformable
Prototypes
Jon Donnelly
University of Maine

Alina Jade Barnett
Duke University

Chaofan Chen
University of Maine

jonathan.donnelly@maine.edu

alina.barnett@duke.edu

chaofan.chen@maine.edu

Abstract
We present a deformable prototypical part network (Deformable ProtoPNet), an interpretable image classifier that
integrates the power of deep learning and the interpretability of case-based reasoning. This model classifies input
images by comparing them with prototypes learned during
training, yielding explanations in the form of “this looks
like that.” However, while previous methods use spatially
rigid prototypes, we address this shortcoming by proposing
spatially flexible prototypes. Each prototype is made up of
several prototypical parts that adaptively change their relative spatial positions depending on the input image. Consequently, a Deformable ProtoPNet can explicitly capture
pose variations and context, improving both model accuracy and the richness of explanations provided. Compared
to other case-based interpretable models using prototypes,
our approach achieves state-of-the-art accuracy and gives
an explanation with greater context. The code is available
at https://github.com/jdonnelly36/Deformable-ProtoPNet.

Prototype overlaid on
its source image

Input image

looks like

(a) An explanation using a regular (non-deformable) prototype

looks like

(b) An explanation using a deformable prototype

Figure 1. How an input image of a painted bunting is compared with (a) a regular (non-deformable) prototype and (b) a deformable prototype of the painted bunting class (overlaid on its
source image).

1. Introduction
Machine learning has been adopted in many domains, including high-stakes applications such as healthcare [2, 29],
finance [46], and criminal justice [3]. In these critical domains, interpretability is essential in determining whether
we can trust predictions made by machine learning models.
In computer vision, there is a growing stream of research
that aims to produce accurate yet interpretable image classifiers by integrating the power of deep learning and the interpretability of case-based reasoning [2, 4, 28, 45]. These
models learn a set of prototypes from training images, and
make predictions by comparing parts of the input image
with prototypes learned during training. This enables explanations of the form “this is an image of a painted bunting,
because this part of the image looks like that prototypical
part of a painted bunting,” as in Figure 1(a). However, existing prototype-based models for computer vision use spa-

tially rigid prototypes, which cannot explicitly account for
geometric transformations or pose variations of objects.
Inspired by recent work on modeling geometric transformations in convolutional neural networks [5, 16, 17, 53],
we propose a deformable prototypical part network (Deformable ProtoPNet), a case-based interpretable neural network that provides spatially flexible deformable prototypes.
In a Deformable ProtoPNet, each prototype is made up
of several prototypical parts that adaptively change their
relative spatial positions depending on the input image.
This enables each prototype to detect object features with
a higher tolerance to spatial transformations, as the parts
within a prototype are allowed to move. Figure 1(b) illustrates the idea of a deformable prototype; when an input
image is compared with a deformable prototype, the prototypical parts within the deformable prototype adaptively

10265

