Transformer-empowered Multi-scale Contextual Matching and Aggregation for
Multi-contrast MRI Super-resolution
Guangyuan Li1 , Jun Lv1∗ , Yapeng Tian2 , Qi Dou3 , Chengyan Wang4 , Chenliang Xu2 , Jing Qin5
1
School of Computer and Control Engineering, Yantai University, Yantai, China
2
University of Rochester
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
4
Human Phenome Institute, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
5
Centre for Smart Health, School of Nursing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
lgy1428275037@163.com, ljdream0710@pku.edu.cn, {yapengtian, chenliang.xu}@rochester.edu,
qidou@cuhk.edu.hk, wangcy@fudan.edu.cn, harry.qin@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can present multicontrast images of the same anatomical structures, enabling
multi-contrast super-resolution (SR) techniques. Compared with SR reconstruction using a single-contrast, multicontrast SR reconstruction is promising to yield SR images
with higher quality by leveraging diverse yet complementary information embedded in different imaging modalities. However, existing methods still have two shortcomings: (1) they neglect that the multi-contrast features at different scales contain different anatomical details and hence
lack effective mechanisms to match and fuse these features
for better reconstruction; and (2) they are still deficient in
capturing long-range dependencies, which are essential for
the regions with complicated anatomical structures. We
propose a novel network to comprehensively address these
problems by developing a set of innovative Transformerempowered multi-scale contextual matching and aggregation techniques; we call it McMRSR. Firstly, we tame transformers to model long-range dependencies in both reference and target images. Then, a new multi-scale contextual matching method is proposed to capture corresponding
contexts from reference features at different scales. Furthermore, we introduce a multi-scale aggregation mechanism to
gradually and interactively aggregate multi-scale matched
features for reconstructing the target SR MR image. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our network outperforms state-of-the-art approaches and has great potential
to be applied in clinical practice. Codes are available at
https://github.com/XAIMI-Lab/McMRSR.

*Corresponding author.

(a) Crop area

(b) Bicubic

(c) MCSR [20]

(d) MINet [8]

(e) McMRSR (Ours)

(f) HR

Figure 1. Compared with state-of-the-art multi-constrast MRI
SR reconstruction methods: MCSR and MINet; the reconstructed
MRI image by our McMRSR network contains sharper edges,
more visual details, and fewer blurring artifacts.

1. Introduction
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is an essential medical imaging technique in clinical application that provides
clear information on tissue structure and function without
causing ionizing radiation. However, due to the essential
drawbacks of imaging systems [27, 36] and crepitations in
some parts of the body, e.g., the abdomen, it is challenging
to acquire high-resolution (HR) MR images in clinics [9].
In addition, prolonged acquisition procedure may cause discomforts to patients, introduce motion artifacts, and hence
affect image quality [15]. Super-resolution (SR) reconstruction is a promising way to improve the quality of MR images without upgrading hardware facilities [11].
MRI can present multi-contrast images with the same

20636

