Privacy Preserving Partial Localization
Marcel Geppert1

Viktor Larsson2
1

ETH Zurich

Johannes L. Schönberger3
2

3

Lund University

Abstract
Recently proposed privacy preserving solutions for
cloud-based localization rely on lifting traditional pointbased maps to randomized 3D line clouds. While the lifted
representation is effective in concealing private information, there are two fundamental limitations. First, without
careful construction of the line clouds, the representation is
vulnerable to density-based inversion attacks. Secondly, after successful localization, the precise camera orientation
and position is revealed to the server. However, in many
scenarios, the pose itself might be sensitive information.
We propose a principled approach overcoming these limitations, based on two observations. First, a full 6 DoF pose
is not always necessary, and in combination with egomotion
tracking even a one dimensional localization can reduce uncertainty and correct drift. Secondly, by lifting to parallel
planes instead of lines, the map only provides partial constraints on the query pose, preventing the server from knowing the exact query location. If the client requires a full 6
DoF pose, it can be obtained by fusing the result from multiple queries, which can be temporally and spatially disjoint.
We demonstrate the practical feasibility of this approach
and show a small performance drop compared to both the
conventional and privacy preserving approaches.

1. Introduction
Over the last years, an increasing number of industrial solutions have emerged for cloud-based localization
and mapping in mixed reality and robotics (e.g., Microsoft
Azure Spatial Anchors [23], Facebook LiveMaps [1], or
Google VPS [35]). The need for cloud-based solutions is
primarily motivated by the requirement for scalability as
well as to enable shared experiences and crowd-sourced
mapping. This trend, however, raises a host of privacy concerns [25, 33, 36, 58], as localization and mapping systems
typically rely on camera images as the primary sensory information. The first works on tackling the privacy issues
are based on the principle of lifting traditional point-based
features to lines to conceal the appearance of images and
maps [12, 17, 50, 53, 54].

Marc Pollefeys1,3

Microsoft

2. Construct Partial Maps
z
y
x
3. PC Queries

1. Partition Map

4. Partial Localization

5. Fuse Partial Poses

Private Map

Figure 1. System architecture: We lift the original point cloud
map to privacy-preserving parallel plane maps to only allow constraints in a single direction. This can be duplicated with multiple
maps and localization services to accumulate different constraints
locally. The clients send their localization queries to each server,
which compute partial camera localization poses. Only the client
can assemble the full localization result from the partial answers.
Although we need three orthogonal maps for full 6 DoF pose estimation, additional constraints, such as localization in the ground
plane, can reduce this requirement.

As already mentioned in the first works by Speciale et
al. [53, 54], their proposed privacy-preserving representation of maps comes with two fundamental limitations. First,
without careful construction, their maps are easily attackable using a density analysis on the line or plane clouds, as
recently also studied in more detail by Chelani et al. [8].
Sparsifying the line cloud is one mitigation to this problem [8, 53] but comes with significant performance tradeoffs in terms of recall and accuracy of the localization results. Second, after successful server-side localization in
privacy preserving line cloud maps, the client reveals their
precise camera location in the scene. In many scenarios, the
user’s location itself is sensitive information that should be
protected [2, 4, 16, 55], especially when tracked over time.
The method presented in this paper is orthogonal to previous works in the sense that it explicitly ignores protection of
the scene appearance, but prevents leaking the user’s precise
location to the server. To this end, we accept the potential
privacy risks of sending a 3D query point cloud that were
previously discussed and tackled [34, 53].

17337

