Neural Global Shutter: Learn to Restore Video
from a Rolling Shutter Camera with Global Reset Feature
Zhixiang Wang1,2,3 Xiang Ji1 Jia-Bin Huang4 Shin’ichi Satoh3,1 Xiao Zhou5† Yinqiang Zheng1†
1
The University of Tokyo 2 RIISE 3 National Institute of Informatics
4
University of Maryland College Park 5 Hefei Normal University

Abstract
Most computer vision systems assume distortion-free images as inputs. The widely used rolling-shutter (RS) image
sensors, however, suffer from geometric distortion when
the camera and object undergo motion during capture. Extensive researches have been conducted on correcting RS
distortions. However, most of the existing work relies heavily
on the prior assumptions of scenes or motions. Besides, the
motion estimation steps are either oversimplified or computationally inefficient due to the heavy flow warping, limiting
their applicability. In this paper, we investigate using rolling
shutter with a global reset feature (RSGR) to restore clean
global shutter (GS) videos. This feature enables us to turn
the rectification problem into a deblur-like one, getting rid
of inaccurate and costly explicit motion estimation. First, we
build an optic system that captures paired RSGR/GS videos.
Second, we develop a novel algorithm incorporating spatial
and temporal designs to correct the spatial-varying RSGR
distortion. Third, we demonstrate that existing image-toimage translation algorithms can recover clean GS videos
from distorted RSGR inputs, yet our algorithm achieves the
best performance with the specific designs. Our rendered
results are not only visually appealing but also beneficial to
downstream tasks. Compared to the state-of-the-art RS solution, our RSGR solution is superior in both effectiveness and
efficiency. Considering it is easy to realize without changing
the hardware, we believe our RSGR solution can potentially
replace the RS solution in taking distortion-free videos with
low noise and low budget.

1. Introduction
Image sensor is the important component converting photons into digital signals, for machine to see [1, 27], to understand [5,38], and to recreate [10,19] the visual world. It comprises millions of spatially distributed photodiodes, namely
pixels, performing photoelectric conversion and charge ac† Corresponding authors

cumulation when photons arrive during exposure duration.
Readout circuits read these accumulations out and converting them into spatially distributed digital signal, i.e., image,
when pixels complete charging. Since simultaneously reading all pixels out requires millions of circuits, leading to
unaffordable costs, a key design of image sensors is scheduling the exposure time and readout time of different pixels to
reuse limited readout circuits. This function is based on the
on-chip electronic shutters dominated by two modes: global
shutter (GS) and rolling shutter (RS).
Image sensors with different on-chip electronic shutters
hold contrast characteristics. GS-based image sensors expose all pixels simultaneously and transfer accumulated
charges to a storage area before readout. In this way, they can
read out charges sequentially with a few readout circuits (Figure 1a). But the requirement for additional storage increases
their expense and power consumption and leads to more
noises. Differently, RS-based image sensors expose pixels
scanline by scanline with a time delay (Figure 1b). This delay enables RS sensors to overlap exposure and readout time,
leading to a higher frame rate. Besides, exemption from
additional storage area attributes to RS sensors lower cost
and fewer noises. Unfortunately, they bring distortions when
scenes or cameras undergo motion. The faster the movement, the larger the distortion. The distortion obstructs vision systems equipped with RS sensors to precision-sensitive
applications, e.g., localization [37], optical flow [34], and
reconstruction [14]. It naturally poses a research question: if
there exists a solution for taking distortion-free videos with
low noise and low budget.
We categorize existing solutions into two folds: hardwarebased and computational. Hardware-based solutions implement the GS function on RS sensors by placing additional
memory nodes to store pixels on the charge [35], the voltage [30], even the digital domain [28]. The disadvantages
in sensor size, cost and noise are obvious. Computational
methods operate directly on RS outputs by correcting the
RS distortions [12, 15, 16, 22, 25, 43, 45]. Though existing
methods are different in either the input forms: single-image
vs. multi-image, or the method types: classical vs. learning-

17794

