Robust and Accurate Superquadric Recovery: a Probabilistic Approach
Weixiao Liu1,2 Yuwei Wu1 Sipu Ruan1 Gregory S. Chirikjian1 *
1
National University of Singapore 2 Johns Hopkins University
{mpewxl, yw.wu, ruansp, mpegre}@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Interpreting objects with basic geometric primitives has
long been studied in computer vision. Among geometric
primitives, superquadrics are well known for their ability to represent a wide range of shapes with few parameters. However, as the first and foremost step, recovering
superquadrics accurately and robustly from 3D data still remains challenging. The existing methods are subject to local optima and sensitive to noise and outliers in real-world
scenarios, resulting in frequent failure in capturing geometric shapes. In this paper, we propose the first probabilistic
method to recover superquadrics from point clouds. Our
method builds a Gaussian-uniform mixture model (GUM)
on the parametric surface of a superquadric, which explicitly models the generation of outliers and noise. The superquadric recovery is formulated as a Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) problem. We propose an algorithm,
Expectation, Maximization, and Switching (EMS), to solve
this problem, where: (1) outliers are predicted from the posterior perspective; (2) the superquadric parameter is optimized by the trust-region reflective algorithm; and (3) local optima are avoided by globally searching and switching among parameters encoding similar superquadrics.
We show that our method can be extended to the multisuperquadrics recovery for complex objects. The proposed
method outperforms the state-of-the-art in terms of accuracy, efficiency, and robustness on both synthetic and realworld datasets. The code is at http://github.com/
bmlklwx/EMS-superquadric_fitting.git.

1. Introduction
Understanding 3D environments (and the objects
therein) has been a crucial task for computer vision and intelligent systems [24]. With the recent breakthroughs in 3D
vision and the advancement of computing power, modern
computer vision systems are able to reconstruct and reason
about scenes with low-level representations, such as point
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. (a) Shape vocabulary of convex superquadrics. We focus
on the interpretation of point clouds with convex superquadrics.
(b) Superquadric representations inferred by our method.

clouds [11, 25, 26], meshes [18] and voxels [9, 38]. In contrast, the human visual system favors abstracting scenes into
canonical parts for a better perceptual understanding [3,15].
Human vision seems to work well with basic geometric
structures of the scene, and not rely on detailed point-wise
models [24]. Therefore, understanding the geometric structure of visual inputs appears to be a promising approach
for intelligent systems to achieve high-level goals such as
physical reasoning, decision making, planning and interaction with the environment. Inspired by this idea, researchers
turned to exploring the possibility of using basic volumetric
primitives for object description, e.g., cuboids [20, 33, 39].
However, due to the limited expressiveness of cuboids, objects can only be describe in a highly abstracted way.
Superquadrics are a family of geometric primitives with
a rich shape vocabulary, including cuboids, cylinders, ellipsoids, octahedra and their intermediates (Fig. 1), but
only encoded by 5 parameters. In the recent few years, superquadrics have raised considerable attention in the community and are widely applied in robotics and computer vision tasks, e.g., object modeling [5, 22, 23], collision detection and motion planning [28, 29], pose estimation [4],
and grasping [27, 36, 37]. A single superquadric is already
expressive enough to reasonably model many everyday objects [14, 30]. The pioneering work on single superquadric
recovery includes [1, 12, 32], where the recovery is formulated as a Least-Square (LSQ) problem. In [6,16], the methods are extended to model complex objects with multiple
superquadrics. However, the existing methods are vulnera-

2676

