Alleviating Semantics Distortion in Unsupervised Low-Level Image-to-Image
Translation via Structure Consistency Constraint
Jiaxian Guo1
Jiachen Li2
Huan Fu1
3
4,6
Mingming Gong
Kun Zhang
Dacheng Tao1,5
1
2
3
The University of Sydney
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
The University of Melbourne
4
5
Carnegie Mellon University
JD Explore Academy
6
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
jguo5934@uni.sydney.edu.au

lijc0804@sjtu.edu.cn

mingming.gong@unimelb.edu.au

kunz1@cmu.edu

Abstract
Unsupervised image-to-image (I2I) translation aims to
learn a domain mapping function that can preserve the semantics of the input images without paired data. However,
because the underlying semantics distributions in the source
and target domains are often mismatched, current distribution matching-based methods may distort the semantics
when matching distributions, resulting in the inconsistency
between the input and translated images, which is known as
the semantics distortion problem. In this paper, we focus on
the low-level I2I translation, where the structure of images
is highly related to their semantics. To alleviate semantic
distortions in such translation tasks without paired supervision, we propose a novel I2I translation constraint, called
Structure Consistency Constraint (SCC), to promote the consistency of image structures by reducing the randomness of
color transformation in the translation process. To facilitate
estimation and maximization of SCC, we propose an approximate representation of mutual information called relative
Squared-loss Mutual Information (rSMI) that enjoys efficient
analytic solutions. Our SCC can be easily incorporated into
most existing translation models. Quantitative and qualitative comparisons on a range of low-level I2I translation
tasks show that translation models with SCC outperform the
original models by a significant margin with little additional
computational and memory costs.

1. Introduction
Image-to-image translation, or domain mapping, aims to
translate an image in the source domain X properly to the
target domain Y. It has been applied to various vision tasks
[13, 46, 49, 59, 65]. Early works [18, 34, 44] considered supervised image-to-image (I2I) translation on paired datasets,
and methods based on conditional generative adversarial

hufu6371@uni.sydney.edu.au
dacheng.tao@gmail.com

networks can generate high-quality translations [18, 44, 60].
However, since paired data are often unavailable or expensive to obtain, unsupervised I2I translation has attracted
intense attention in recent years [3, 17, 25, 26, 32, 43, 69, 73].
Semantics Distribution
0.5

GTA
Cityscapes

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

road

building

vegetation

sky

car

others

Figure 1. Class distributions in GTA and Cityscapes. We can see
that the ratio of the sky in GTA is significantly higher than it in
Cityscapes, and thus the distribution matching based method has to
translate the sky to vegetation/building to align the distributions.

Benefiting from generative adversarial networks (GANs)
[14], many works aim to perform unsupervised I2I translation by finding GXY such that the translated images
and target domain images have similar distributions, i.e.,
PGXY (X) ≈ PY . Due to an infinite number of functions
that can satisfy the adversarial loss, GAN alone could learn
a function far away from the true one. To remedy this issue, various constraints have been placed on the learned
mapping function. For instance, the well-known cycleconsistency [26, 69, 73] enforces the translation function
GXY to be bijective. DistanceGAN [3] preserves the pairwise distances in the source images. GcGAN [10] forces the
function to be smooth w.r.t. certain geometric transformations of input images. DRIT++ [32] and MUNIT [17] learn
disentangled representations by embedding images onto a
domain-invariant content space and a domain-specific attribute space and the mapping function can be then derived
from representation learning components.
The above methods perform well when the two domains

18249

