Towards Layer-wise Image Vectorization
Xu Ma1 , Yuqian Zhou2,3* , Xingqian Xu2* , Bin Sun1 ,
Valerii Filev4 , Nikita Orlov4 , Yun Fu1 , Humphrey Shi2,4
1

Northeastern University, 2 UIUC, 3 Adobe Research 4 Picsart AI Research (PAIR)

N=8

N=32

Raster Input

N=16

N=32

N=64

N=128

N=64

N=128

N=256

N=512

Layer-wise Image Vectorization (from left to right)

Figure 1. Examples of the learning course of our Layer-wise Image Vectorization. The proposed method can reconstruct the image in a
layer-wise coarse-to-fine manner with only few paths. “N” indicates the path number.

Abstract
Image rasterization is a mature technique in computer
graphics, while image vectorization, the reverse path of
rasterization, remains a major challenge. Recent advanced deep learning-based models achieve vectorization
and semantic interpolation of vector graphs and demonstrate a better topology of generating new figures. However, deep models cannot be easily generalized to out-ofdomain testing data. The generated SVGs also contain
complex and redundant shapes that are not quite convenient for further editing. Specifically, the crucial layerwise topology and fundamental semantics in images are still
not well understood and thus not fully explored. In this
work, we propose Layer-wise Image Vectorization, namely
LIVE, to convert raster images to SVGs and simultaneously maintain its image topology. LIVE can generate compact SVG forms with layer-wise structures that are semantically consistent with human perspective. We progressively
* Yuqian and Xingqian contributed equally.

add new bézier paths and optimize these paths with the
layer-wise framework, newly designed loss functions, and
component-wise path initialization technique. Our experiments demonstrate that LIVE presents more plausible vectorized forms than prior works and can be generalized to
new images. With the help of this newly learned topology, LIVE initiates human editable SVGs for both designers and other downstream applications. Codes are made
available at https://github.com/Picsart-AI-Research/LIVELayerwise-Image-Vectorization.

1. Introduction
Scalable Vector Graphics (SVGs) [23], which describe
images with a collection of parametric shape primitives,
have recently attracted increasing attention due to the high
practical value in computer graphics. Compared with raster
images that present the visual concepts using ordered pixels, vector images enjoy many advantages, like compact file
size and resolution-independency. Most importantly, vector
16314

