Multi-Robot Active Mapping via Neural Bipartite Graph Matching
Kai Ye1 * Siyan Dong2,1 * Qingnan Fan3† He Wang1 Li Yi4 Fei Xia5
Jue Wang3 Baoquan Chen1†
1
Peking University 2 Shandong University 3 Tencent AI Lab
4
Tsinghua University 5 Stanford University
{siyandong.3, fqnchina, ericyi0124, xf1280, arphid, baoquan.chen}@gmail.com
{ye_kai, hewang}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
We study the problem of multi-robot active mapping,
which aims for complete scene map construction in minimum time steps. The key to this problem lies in the goal
position estimation to enable more efficient robot movements.
Previous approaches either choose the frontier as the goal
position via a myopic solution that hinders the time efficiency, or maximize the long-term value via reinforcement
learning to directly regress the goal position, but does not
guarantee the complete map construction. In this paper,
we propose a novel algorithm, namely NeuralCoMapping,
which takes advantage of both approaches. We reduce the
problem to bipartite graph matching, which establishes the
node correspondences between two graphs, denoting robots
and frontiers. We introduce a multiplex graph neural network
(mGNN) that learns the neural distance to fill the affinity
matrix for more effective graph matching. We optimize the
mGNN with a differentiable linear assignment layer by maximizing the long-term values that favor time efficiency and
map completeness via reinforcement learning. We compare
our algorithm with several state-of-the-art multi-robot active
mapping approaches and adapted reinforcement-learning
baselines. Experimental results demonstrate the superior
performance and exceptional generalization ability of our
algorithm on various indoor scenes and unseen number of
robots, when only trained with 9 indoor scenes.

1. Introduction
Constructing the map of indoor environments is of great
importance to a wide range of applications in the computer
vision and robotics communities. With the fast development of range sensors (Kinect, RealSense), many scene
mapping approaches [23, 29, 11, 15] are developed to em* Joint first authors
† Corresponding authors

power scene traversal by human operators with handheld sensors, yet incomplete or unaligned scene meshes are common
flaws for inexperienced users due to the noisy and unstable
scanned trajectory. To alleviate the inconvenience of humanoperated traversal, there emerges autonomous map construction [46, 17, 24, 32] via active sensor movement, also known
as active mapping. Previous works in this field mainly focus
on using a single robot, which is time-consuming for largescale environments. In this paper, we study the problem of
multi-robot active mapping: coordinating multiple robots for
the autonomous reconstruction of unknown scenes.
The goal of active mapping is mainly twofold: time efficiency, and map completeness. The pioneering work for active mapping [46] introduces the concept of frontier: regions
on the boundary between open space and unexplored space.
By continuously moving the robot to new frontiers, the scene
map can be completely constructed when no frontier can be
found. Many follow-up approaches in the following decades
[6, 16, 31] aim to improve the time efficiency of the process.
However, the problem of active mapping is highly ambiguous, which makes a theoretically-optimal solution almost
impossible to be found in an unknown environment.
The key module of active mapping that influences time efficiency is the global planner that estimates the goal position
for path planning. The vast majority of literature for both
single robot [3, 37, 39, 1] and multiple robots [4, 30, 14, 16]
are frontier-based, which decides the goal position from a set
of frontiers. However, these approaches are mostly myopic
[6] and hence hinder the time efficiency, since they either
handcraft heuristics [46, 17, 21] to choose the frontier in the
shortest geodesic distance to the robot, or find the one that
maximizes the information gain over the next few actions
via information-theoretic optimization [37, 1]. The more recent approaches adopt the reinforcement learning strategies
[13, 8, 31] as a replacement of the traditional approaches
to decide the goal position for single robot. These policy
learning approaches have dominated the active mapping field
lately, thanks to their potential to achieve more efficient solu-

14839

