SemAffiNet: Semantic-Affine Transformation for Point Cloud Segmentation
Ziyi Wang1,2 , Yongming Rao1,2 , Xumin Yu1,2 , Jie Zhou1,2 , Jiwen Lu1,2 *
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
2
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology
wziyi20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; raoyongming95@gmail.com;
yuxm20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; {jzhou, lujiwen}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Conventional point cloud semantic segmentation methods usually employ an encoder-decoder architecture, where
mid-level features are locally aggregated to extract geometric information. However, the over-reliance on these classagnostic local geometric representations may raise confusion between local parts from different categories that are
similar in appearance or spatially adjacent. To address this
issue, we argue that mid-level features can be further enhanced with semantic information, and propose semanticaffine transformation that transforms features of mid-level
points belonging to different categories with class-specific
affine parameters. Based on this technique, we propose SemAffiNet for point cloud semantic segmentation, which utilizes the attention mechanism in the Transformer module
to implicitly and explicitly capture global structural knowledge within local parts for overall comprehension of each
category. We conduct extensive experiments on the ScanNetV2 and NYUv2 datasets, and evaluate semantic-affine
transformation on various 3D point cloud and 2D image
segmentation baselines, where both qualitative and quantitative results demonstrate the superiority and generalization ability of our proposed approach. Code is available at
https://github.com/wangzy22/SemAffiNet.

1. Introduction
Point cloud semantic segmentation is a fundamental task
for both structural representation learning [11, 45, 56] and
stereoscopic scene understanding [15, 27, 49] in computer
vision. It aims at partitioning the scene space into semanticmeaningful regions based on conformation and geometry
knowledge inherited in point cloud layouts. Its successful
applications in autonomous driving, robotic manipulation,
and virtual reality have been motivating researchers to develop more fine-grained and more accurate solutions.
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Illustration of Semantic-Affine Transformation. The left
figure is the input point cloud, with different colors referring to different categories. We select one local part (red circle) and extract
its mid-level features, resulting in the top-right figure. Some representations of the points from different categories are entangled
with each other in the embedding space, which may be caused
by the appearance similarities or spatial adjacency. We propose to
perform the semantic-affine transformation on these mid-level features, predicting particular affine parameters for each category respectively. Therefore, once obtaining classification predictions of
mid-level points, we can pull points from the same category closer
while pushing points from different categories apart via semanticaffine transformation, as is shown in the bottom-right figure.

Recent methods for point cloud segmentation usually
adopt an encoder-decoder architecture as image semantic
segmentation [4, 6, 7, 51, 69], ranging from voxel basedones [11, 20, 52, 67, 71] to point-based ones [34, 46, 54, 60].
Despite the popularity of the encoder-decoder architecture,
there still exists the local confusion problem as shown in
Figure 1. On the one hand, there are local parts from different categories but with similar shapes, such as the similar

11819

