Class-Balanced Pixel-Level Self-Labeling for
Domain Adaptive Semantic Segmentation
Ruihuang Li1 , Shuai Li1 , Chenhang He1 , Yabin Zhang1 , Xu Jia2 , Lei Zhang1 *
1
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 2 Dalian University of Technology
{csrhli, csshuaili, csche, csybzhang, cslzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk, xjia@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Domain adaptive semantic segmentation aims to learn
a model with the supervision of source domain data, and
produce satisfactory dense predictions on unlabeled target
domain. One popular solution to this challenging task is
self-training, which selects high-scoring predictions on target samples as pseudo labels for training. However, the
produced pseudo labels often contain much noise because
the model is biased to source domain as well as majority
categories. To address the above issues, we propose to directly explore the intrinsic pixel distributions of target domain data, instead of heavily relying on the source domain.
Specifically, we simultaneously cluster pixels and rectify
pseudo labels with the obtained cluster assignments. This
process is done in an online fashion so that pseudo labels
could co-evolve with the segmentation model without extra
training rounds. To overcome the class imbalance problem
on long-tailed categories, we employ a distribution alignment technique to enforce the marginal class distribution of
cluster assignments to be close to that of pseudo labels. The
proposed method, namely Class-balanced Pixel-level SelfLabeling (CPSL), improves the segmentation performance
on target domain over state-of-the-arts by a large margin,
especially on long-tailed categories. The source code is
available at https://github.com/lslrh/CPSL.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental computer vision
task, which aims to make dense semantic-level predictions
on images [8,27,28,43,53]. It is a key step in numerous applications, including autonomous driving, human-machine
interaction, and augmented reality, to name a few. In the
past few years, the rapid development of deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) has boosted semantic segmentation significantly in terms of accuracy and efficiency.
However, the performance of deep models trained in one
* Corresponding Author

domain often drops largely when they are applied to unseen domains. For example, in autonomous driving the segmentation model is confronted with great challenges when
weather conditions are changing constantly [56]. A natural
way to improve the generalization ability of segmentation
model is to collect data from as many scenarios as possible.
However, it is very costly to annotate pixel-wise labels for
a large amount of images [11]. More effective and practical approaches are required to address the domain shifts of
semantic segmentation.
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) provides an
important way to transfer the knowledge learned from one
labeled source domain to another unlabeled target domain.
For example, we can collect many synthetic data whose
dense annotations are easy to get by using game engines
such as GTA5 [36] and SYNTHIA [37]. Then the question turns to how to adapt the model trained from a labeled
synthetic domain to an unlabeled real image domain. Most
previous works of UDA bridge the domain gap by aligning data distributions at the image level [17, 25, 33], feature
level [7, 17, 18, 24] or output level [29, 32, 39], through adversarial training or auxiliary style transfer networks. However, these techniques will increase the model complexity
and make the training process unstable, which impedes their
reproducibility and robustness.
Another important approach is self-training [52, 56, 57],
which alternatively generates pseudo labels by selecting
high-scoring predictions on target domain and provides supervision for the next round of training. Though these
methods have produced promising performance, there are
still some major limitations. On one hand, the segmentation model tends to be biased to source domain so that the
pseudo labels produced on target domain are error-prone;
on the other hand, highly-confident predictions may only
provide very limited supervision information for the model
training. To solve these issues, some methods [50, 51] have
been proposed to produce more accurate and informative
pseudo labels. For example, instead of using the classifier trained on source domain to generate pseudo labels,
Zhang et al. [51] assigned pseudo labels to pixels based on

11593

