The Devil is in the Labels:
Noisy Label Correction for Robust Scene Graph Generation
Lin Li1 , Long Chen2† , Yifeng Huang1 , Zhimeng Zhang1 , Songyang Zhang3 , Jun Xiao1
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Columbia University, 3 University of Rochester
{mukti,yfhuang,zhimeng,junx}@zju.edu.cn

zjuchenlong@gmail.com

szhang83@ur.rochester.edu

(a)
on
riding

1
3

(b)
2

car

bike

near
parked on

1

man

2

woman

3

man

has
has
with

street

flag

on
pole
hanging from

woman

in
sitting on

chair

man

with
surfboard
carrying

jacket

head

under

man

person

pant

hand

shirt

(c)

shirt

of

arm
of

leg

of

shirt
original

new

ski

Figure 1: Illustration of three types of noisy annotations in SGG datasets (take VG as an example). (a) Common-prone: For some triplets,
the annotators tend to select less informative coarse-grained predicates (red) instead of ﬁne-grained ones (green). The subject and object
for each triplet are denoted by blue and pink boxes, respectively. (b) Synonym-random: For some triplets, annotators usually randomly
choose one predicate from the several synonyms (e.g., has and with are synonyms for man/woman-shirt). Original: The t-SNE
visualization of original triplets man-has/with-shirt features. For brevity, we randomly sample part of triplets for each type. New:
The t-SNE visualization of same triplets after NICE. (c) Negative: Some negative triplets may not be background (green dash arrows).

Abstract
Unbiased SGG has achieved signiﬁcant progress over
recent years. However, almost all existing SGG models have
overlooked the ground-truth annotation qualities of prevailing SGG datasets, i.e., they always assume: 1) all the manually annotated positive samples are equally correct; 2)
all the un-annotated negative samples are absolutely background. In this paper, we argue that both assumptions are
inapplicable to SGG: there are numerous “noisy” groundtruth predicate labels that break these two assumptions,
and these noisy samples actually harm the training of unbiased SGG models. To this end, we propose a novel modelagnostic NoIsy label CorrEction strategy for SGG: NICE.
NICE can not only detect noisy samples but also reassign
more high-quality predicate labels to them. After the NICE
training, we can obtain a cleaner version of SGG dataset for

model training. Speciﬁcally, NICE consists of three components: negative Noisy Sample Detection (Neg-NSD), positive NSD (Pos-NSD), and Noisy Sample Correction (NSC).
Firstly, in Neg-NSD, we formulate this task as an out-ofdistribution detection problem, and assign pseudo labels to
all detected noisy negative samples. Then, in Pos-NSD, we
use a clustering-based algorithm to divide all positive samples into multiple sets, and treat the samples in the noisiest
set as noisy positive samples. Lastly, in NSC, we use a simple but effective weighted KNN to reassign new predicate
labels to noisy positive samples. Extensive results on different backbones and tasks have attested to the effectiveness
and generalization abilities of each component of NICE.

1. Introduction
Scene Graph Generation (SGG), i.e., detecting all object
instances and their pairwise visual relations, is a crucial step

† Corresponding author. This work started when Long Chen at ZJU.

Codes available at: https://github.com/muktilin/NICE.

18869

