PNP: Robust Learning from Noisy Labels by Probabilistic Noise Prediction
Zeren Sun1 , Fumin Shen2 , Dan Huang3 , Qiong Wang1 , Xiangbo Shu1 , Yazhou Yao1 ,* Jinhui Tang1
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
3
China Research and Development Academy of Machinery Equipment, Beijing, China

Clean sample

Abstract
Noisy sample

Clean sample

OOD noisy sample

ID noisy sample

Label noise has been a practical challenge in deep learning due to the strong capability of deep neural networks in
fitting all training data. Prior literature primarily resorts to
sample selection methods for combating noisy labels. However, these approaches focus on dividing samples by order
sorting or threshold selection, inevitably introducing hyperparameters (e.g., selection ratio / threshold) that are hardto-tune and dataset-dependent. To this end, we propose
a simple yet effective approach named PNP (Probabilistic
Noise Prediction) to explicitly model label noise. Specifically, we simultaneously train two networks, in which one
predicts the category label and the other predicts the noise
type. By predicting label noise probabilistically, we identify noisy samples and adopt dedicated optimization objectives accordingly. Finally, we establish a joint loss for network update by unifying the classification loss, the auxiliary constraint loss, and the in-distribution consistency loss.
Comprehensive experimental results on synthetic and realworld datasets demonstrate the superiority of our proposed
method. The source code and models have been made available at https://github.com/NUST- MachineIntelligence-Laboratory/PNP.

Clean : 50%
ID : 30%
OOD : 20%

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Early sample selection methods (a) tend to divide samples into two subsets (i.e., clean and noisy), neglecting differences
between ID and OOD noisy samples. Some recent methods (b) endeavor to identify clean, ID noisy, and OOD noisy samples. However, these methods usually suffer from tuning dataset-dependent
threshold hyper-parameters (denoted as decision boundaries in (a)
and (b)). In contrast, our proposed approach (c) seeks to model
noisy labels in a probabilistic manner. PNP employs a dedicated
predictor to estimate the probability distribution of noise type.

45, 47–49, 53, 54]. However, noisy labels are inevitable in
web images [34]. It has been demonstrated that noisy labels
can impair the performance of deep networks since the overparameterization equips DNNs with not only large learning capacities but also strong memorization power [16, 52].
Consequently, it is of great significance to develop robust
models for learning from noisy labels.
Noisy labels in real-world datasets can be categorized
into two types: open-set and closed-set [48]. In the closedset scenario, the true label of a noisy sample comes from
a known label space Yknown present in the training data.
Conversely, in the open-set scenario, true labels of samples are outside Yknown . In other words, closed-set noisy
samples are in-distribution (ID) ones, while open-set noisy
samples are out-of-distribution (OOD) ones. A large body
of prior literature primarily focuses on closed-set scenarios,

1. Introduction
Although deep neural networks (DNNs) have attained
impressive achievements, surpassing traditional methods in
various vision tasks [3, 15, 28, 31, 38, 46], their requirement
for large-scale high-quality human-labeled training samples
(e.g., ImageNet [4] and COCO [21]) can often pose a bottleneck when applied to real-world scenarios. Precise annotation is always labor-expensive and time-consuming, especially when domain-specific expert knowledge is necessary
(e.g., fine-grained visual categorization [13, 24, 41]). To alleviate this issue, one promising alternative is to resort to
web images for training deep networks [19,22,34,35,39,43,
* Corresponding author.

5311

Noisy s

