ISNAS-DIP: Image-Specific Neural Architecture Search for Deep Image Prior
Metin Ersin Arican1 *, Ozgur Kara1 *, Gustav Bredell2 , Ender Konukoglu2
1
2

Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey

Department of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, ETH-Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
1
2

{metin.arican, ozgur.kara}@boun.edu.tr

{gustav.bredell, ender.konukoglu}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
Recent works show that convolutional neural network
(CNN) architectures have a spectral bias towards lower
frequencies, which has been leveraged for various image
restoration tasks in the Deep Image Prior (DIP) framework.
The benefit of the inductive bias the network imposes in the
DIP framework depends on the architecture. Therefore, researchers have studied how to automate the search to determine the best-performing model. However, common neural architecture search (NAS) techniques are resource and
time-intensive. Moreover, best-performing models are determined for a whole dataset of images instead of for each
image independently, which would be prohibitively expensive. In this work, we first show that optimal neural architectures in the DIP framework are image-dependent. Leveraging this insight, we then propose an image-specific NAS
strategy for the DIP framework that requires substantially
less training than typical NAS approaches, effectively enabling image-specific NAS. We justify the proposed strategy’s effectiveness by (1) demonstrating its performance
on a NAS Dataset for DIP that includes 522 models from
a particular search space (2) conducting extensive experiments on image denoising, inpainting, and super-resolution
tasks. Our experiments show that image-specific metrics
can reduce the search space to a small cohort of models, of
which the best model outperforms current NAS approaches
for image restoration. Codes and datasets are available at
https://github.com/ozgurkara99/ISNAS-DIP.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been ubiquitously utilized in almost every field of computer vision.
Particularly, researchers harness the power of CNNs in image restoration tasks [1, 2, 3, 4], which refers to the task of
recovering the original image from a corrupted version. The
* equal contribution

success of CNNs comes as a result of their ability to learn a
mapping from a corrupted image to its uncorrupted counterpart. However, the ground truth labels are not always available to learn such a mapping for a given domain, limiting
the use of approaches under supervised settings. To tackle
this problem, researchers orient their attention towards unsupervised approaches. Recent discoveries have shown that
the architecture of CNNs contains an intrinsic prior that can
be used in image restoration tasks [5, 6]. This insight led to
the Deep Image Prior (DIP) framework [5], which works
solely with the degraded image and can produce competitive results for image restoration tasks without a supervised
training phase. It offers an alternative solution to restoration problems by suggesting a new regularizer: the network
architecture itself. In addition to this empirical discovery,
Rahaman et al. [7] investigated the spectral bias of neural
networks towards low frequencies theoretically, which can
explain the impressive performance of the DIP framework.
Chakrabarty [8] further explored the underlying reason behind the success of DIP in denoising natural images. The
work demonstrates that the network tends to behave similarly to a low pass filter at the early stages of iterations. Finally, DeepRED [9] merged the concept of “Regularization
by Denoising” (RED) by adding explicit priors to enhance
DIP.
One problem faced in the DIP framework is that the
architectural design of the network has a substantial impact on the performance. Recent works attempted to automate the search process of network architecture for various
tasks, which is referred to as the Neural Architecture Search
(NAS). In the context of DIP, Chen et al. [10] applied NAS
to the DIP framework. However, current NAS approaches
come with substantial computational costs, as they require
optimizing a large number of architectures to determine the
optimum. Moreover, this cost prohibits determining the optimum architecture for every image; instead, existing NAS
approaches search for the best architecture for a dataset of
images.
Our work. In this paper, we propose novel image-

1960

