HODOR: High-level Object Descriptors for Object Re-segmentation
in Video Learned from Static Images
Ali Athar1
1

Jonathon Luiten1,2

Alexander Hermans1

RWTH Aachen University, Germany

2

Deva Ramanan2

Bastian Leibe1

Carnegie Mellon University, USA

{athar,luiten,hermans,leibe}@vision.rwth-aachen.de

deva@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Existing state-of-the-art methods for Video Object Segmentation (VOS) learn low-level pixel-to-pixel correspondences between frames to propagate object masks across
video. This requires a large amount of densely annotated
video data, which is costly to annotate, and largely redundant since frames within a video are highly correlated. In
light of this, we propose HODOR: a novel method that tackles VOS by effectively leveraging annotated static images
for understanding object appearance and scene context. We
encode object instances and scene information from an image frame into robust high-level descriptors which can then
be used to re-segment those objects in different frames. As
a result, HODOR achieves state-of-the-art performance on
the DAVIS and YouTube-VOS benchmarks compared to existing methods trained without video annotations. Without any architectural modification, HODOR can also learn
from video context around single annotated video frames
by utilizing cyclic consistency, whereas other methods rely
on dense, temporally consistent annotations. Source code:
https://github.com/Ali2500/HODOR

1. Introduction
Current state-of-the-art Video Object Segmentation
(VOS) methods learn ‘space-time correspondences’ (STC),
i.e. pixel-to-pixel correspondences, between the image
frames in a video. These methods [7,28,47] achieve impressive results, but require a large amount of temporally dense
annotated video for training. Such datasets require significant human effort, and the annotations are largely redundant
since image frames within a video are highly correlated.
The largest publicly available VOS dataset [46] contains
only a few thousand videos. Single image datasets [14, 20],
in contrast, exist with hundreds of thousands of annotated
images. In this work, we explore the following question:
can VOS be learned with only single-image annotations?
To this end, we propose HODOR: High-level Object

(a) Space-time correspondence [6, 7, 19, 23, 28, 32, 33, 36, 47, 48].

(b) High-level Object Descriptors for Object Re-segmentation (ours).

Figure 1. Previous methods (a) learn low-level pixel-pixel correspondence to propagate object masks. HODOR (b) learns highlevel object descriptors to re-segment objects in a different frame.

Descriptors for Object Re-segmentation, a novel VOS
framework which extracts a robust, high-level descriptor for
the given objects and background in an image. These descriptors are then used to find and segment those objects in
another video frame, i.e. re-segment them, even if the object
moves or changes appearance (Fig. 1b). This differs fundamentally from STC methods which learn low-level, pixelto-pixel correspondences (Fig. 1a). The underlying idea
is that high-level object descriptors can be learned without
sequential video data, as this only requires understanding
object appearance, and not reasoning about motion. Thus,
HODOR can be trained for VOS using only single images
without any video motion augmentation (Fig 2a), and still
be applied to video (Fig 2b). This is inherently not possible
with STC methods since learning correspondences requires
comparing multiple, different frames.
The key to our approach is that it forces object appearance information to pass through a concise descriptor, i.e. an
information bottleneck. This prevents the descriptor from
trivially summarizing the object mask shape and location.
The network thus learns to concisely encode object appearance, and also to match the descriptor to each pixel in order

3022

