Universal Photometric Stereo Network using Global Lighting Contexts
Satoshi Ikehata
National Institute of Informatics (NII)
sikehata@nii.ac.jp

coding

Gramophone (20 images)

Apple (21 images)

Can and Wood (18 images)

Owl (20 images)

Tengu (18 images)

Figure 1. Given images of an object under different lighting conditions, our method can recover the detailed surface normal map. Images
were captured by a smartphone camera with moving handheld lights under the indoor natural illumination. Please see details in Section 5.3.

Abstract
This paper tackles a new photometric stereo task, named
universal photometric stereo. Unlike existing tasks that assumed specific physical lighting models; hence, drastically
limited their usability, a solution algorithm of this task is
supposed to work for objects with diverse shapes and materials under arbitrary lighting variations without assuming any specific models. To solve this extremely challenging
task, we present a purely data-driven method, which eliminates the prior assumption of lighting by replacing the recovery of physical lighting parameters with the extraction
of the generic lighting representation, named global lighting contexts. We use them like lighting parameters in a calibrated photometric stereo network to recover surface normal vectors pixelwisely. To adapt our network to a wide
variety of shapes, materials and lightings, it is trained on
a new synthetic dataset which simulates the appearance of
objects in the wild. Our method is compared with other
state-of-the-art uncalibrated photometric stereo methods on
our test data to demonstrate the significance of our method.

1. Introduction
Photometric stereo is a problem of recovering the surface
normal map from appearances of an object under varying
lighting conditions. For decades, a broad spectrum of techniques have been proposed to expand the scope of target
geometry, material and acquisition setup [15, 23, 24, 42] in

the framework of the physics-based inverse rendering. Recently, advances in deep learning have been eliminating the
dependence on physics-based modeling from photometric
stereo methods, which contributes to handle complex optical phenomena which are hardly described in a mathematically tractable form [12, 21, 39, 44].
However, despite the long journey in this research field,
each photometric stereo algorithm is still limited to a specific physical lighting model, which severely compromises
its usability. In reality, most recent (semi-)calibrated [11,
21, 39, 40, 44] and uncalibrated [12, 27] photometric stereo
methods still assume the single lighting in a dark environment. Others address natural lighting conditions, however
both calibrated and uncalibrated methods still assume convex Lambertian surfaces and their lighting models are limited to spherical harmonics lighting [8, 17], dominant sun
lighting [6, 20] and equivalent directional lighting [16, 36]
which cannot represent the complex illumination.
To address this limitation, this paper proposes the “third”
task in photometric stereo problem following calibrated and
uncalibrated tasks. We name it universal photometric stereo
(UniPS) which denotes the setup without prior assumption
of physical lighting models; hence, arbitrary lighting conditions should be considered unlike calibrated and uncalibrated tasks that consider specific ones as in Table 1.1
1 It would be ideal if the task were universal on materials as well. However, since some objects such as mirrors and transparent objects must be
excluded, we consider only lighting conditions to be universal in this task.

12591

