Effective conditioned and composed image retrieval
combining CLIP-based features
Alberto Baldrati1,2

Marco Bertini1

Tiberio Uricchio1

Alberto Del Bimbo1
1

Università degli Studi di Firenze - MICC
2
Università di Pisa
Firenze, Italy - Pisa, Italy
[name.surname]@unifi.it

Abstract
Conditioned and composed image retrieval extend CBIR
systems by combining a query image with an additional text
that expresses the intent of the user, describing additional
requests w.r.t. the visual content of the query image. This
type of search is interesting for e-commerce applications,
e.g. to develop interactive multimodal searches and chatbots. In this demo, we present an interactive system based
on a combiner network, trained using contrastive learning,
that combines visual and textual features obtained from the
OpenAI CLIP network to address conditioned CBIR. The
system can be used to improve e-shop search engines. For
example, considering the fashion domain it lets users search
for dresses, shirts and toptees using a candidate start image
and expressing some visual differences w.r.t. its visual content, e.g. asking to change color, pattern or shape. The proposed network obtains state-of-the-art performance on the
FashionIQ dataset and on the more recent CIRR dataset,
showing its applicability to the fashion domain for conditioned retrieval, and to more generic content considering
the more general task of composed image retrieval.

1. Introduction
Content-Based Image Retrieval (CBIR) is a basic task
in computer vision and multimedia research and can be applied to general web images, as in Google Reverse Image
Search, or it can be specialized to a large number of domains like landmarks [18, 37], medical images [41], cultural heritage [12,31] and e-commerce, either for general eshopping [32,44,45] or in specific e-commerce domains like
fashion [13,22,23] or interior design [36]. These CBIR systems retrieve images from a database using an input image,

H

e

CIRR

Fa hi

IQ

Refe e ce I age

Rela i e ca i

Work hard
T-shirt
H

e

CIRR

Fa hi

Ha K

l g

i

12$
IQ

Refe
Buye ce I age

Search

Global Re

Rela i e ca i

l

What do you want
to change ?

Ha K

l g

i

Has Korn
logo on it

Global Re

l

Korn
T-shirt
15$
Buy

Search

Figure 1. Example of use of conditioned image in the fashion
domain for e-commerce application. The user can refine product
search providing details and constraints in natural language. The
system uses both visual and textual features to retrieve the desired
result.

computing a distance between the visual features extracted
from the query and the features stored in the database. Features must be discriminative enough to deal with different
images and must be robust to a number of transformations
to also retrieve variations of the same images. A main difficulty is to overcome the proverbial semantic gap between
the low-level visual features used and the high-level meaning of the images [34].
Several variations of the basic CBIR task have been proposed to narrow this gap, requesting that the user provides
some additional information regarding the intent or context

