Weakly-Supervised Online Action Segmentation in Multi-View
Instructional Videos
Reza Ghoddoosian1,2 *, Isht Dwivedi1 , Nakul Agarwal1 , Chiho Choi1 , and Behzad Dariush1
1
Honda Research Institute, USA
2
VLM Lab, University of Texas at Arlington
reza.ghoddoosian@mavs.uta.edu, {idwivedi,nagarwal,cchoi,bdariush}@honda-ri.com

Abstract
This paper addresses a new problem of weaklysupervised online action segmentation in instructional
videos. We present a framework to segment streaming
videos online at test time using Dynamic Programming
and show its advantages over greedy sliding window approach. We improve our framework by introducing the
Online-Offline Discrepancy Loss (OODL) to encourage the
segmentation results to have a higher temporal consistency. Furthermore, only during training, we exploit framewise correspondence between multiple views as supervision
for training weakly-labeled instructional videos. In particular, we investigate three different multi-view inference
techniques to generate more accurate frame-wise pseudo
ground-truth with no additional annotation cost. We present
results and ablation studies on two benchmark multi-view
datasets, Breakfast and IKEA ASM. Experimental results
show efficacy of the proposed methods both qualitatively
and quantitatively in two domains of cooking and assembly.

1. Introduction
Action understanding in untrimmed instructional videos
is important in many applications, where agents learn by observation of other agents performing complex tasks. Such
videos are characterized by composition of a sequence of
low-level atomic actions, e.g., crack eggs and whisk eggs,
that form a high-level task, e.g., making eggs. This contextual dependency between actions as well as other attributes
in instructional videos have inspired new research [5,19,33,
39, 48] that has advanced the field.
A fully-supervised training of these videos would require not only the labels for each action, but also their temporal assignment (start and end time) with ordering constraints. However, creating fully annotated clips with action
* Work done during Reza’s internship at Honda Research Institute, USA

Figure 1. Top: online segmentation, where the frame of interest
at time t is identified either greedily by the f function or through
DP-based online inference based on current and past predictions.
Bottom: Offline segmentation after observing the whole sequence.

assignments and labels on the temporal boundaries of individual actions is manually intensive and is therefore both
time consuming and expensive. This limits the scale and
practicality at which fully-supervised video datasets can be
created. Furthermore, the subjective nature of labeling the
start and end time of each action results in ambiguities and
inconsistencies. In weakly-supervised action segmentation
these limitations are addressed by using only the ordered sequence of action labels per video during training, and forgo
subjective labeling of start and end time of each action.
Another important consideration in action understanding relates to requirements for processing the videos online
versus offline, which is not addressed in existing weaklysupervised segmentation methods [6, 27, 47]. Online processing with low latency is an increasingly important part of
interactive applications where real-time, or near real-time
feedback is critical. For example, interactive applications
such as human-robot interaction, error correction in manufacturing assembly, and virtual rehabilitation require immediate feedback from the intelligent system as the video
streams arrive.
The work presented in this paper considers the two
aforementioned aspects in action segmentation: weak-

13780

