Differentially Private Federated Learning with Local Regularization and
Sparsification
Anda Cheng1,2
Peisong Wang1
Xi Sheryl Zhang1
Jian Cheng1,2 *
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
chenganda2017@ia.ac.cn

sheryl.zhangxi@gmail.com

Abstract
User-level differential privacy (DP) provides certifiable
privacy guarantees to the information that is specific to
any user’s data in federated learning. Existing methods
that ensure user-level DP come at the cost of severe accuracy decrease. In this paper, we study the cause of model
performance degradation in federated learning with userlevel DP guarantee. We find the key to solving this issue
is to naturally restrict the norm of local updates before executing operations that guarantee DP. To this end, we propose two techniques, Bounded Local Update Regularization
and Local Update Sparsification, to increase model quality
without sacrificing privacy. We provide theoretical analysis on the convergence of our framework and give rigorous
privacy guarantees. Extensive experiments show that our
framework significantly improves the privacy-utility tradeoff over the state-of-the-arts for federated learning with
user-level DP guarantee.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) [17] is a promising paradigm of
distributed machine learning with a wide range of applications [5, 13, 15]. FL enables distributed agents to collaboratively learn a centralized model under the orchestration of
the cloud without sharing their local data. By keeping data
usage local, FL sidesteps the ethical and legal concerns and
is advantageous in privacy compared with the traditional
centralized learning paradigm.
However, FL alone does not protect the agents or users
from inference attacks that use the output information. Extensive inference attacks demonstrate that it is feasible to
infer the subgroup of people with a specific property [19],
identify individuals [24], or even infer completion of social
security numbers [4], with high confidence from a trained
model.
* Corresponding Author.

{peisong.wang,jcheng}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

To solve these issues, differential privacy (DP) [6] has
been applied to FL in order to protect either each instance
in the dataset of any agent (instance-level DP) [11, 25, 26],
or the whole data of any agent (user-level DP) [7, 12, 18].
These two DP definitions on different levels are suitable for
different situations. For example, when several banks aim
to train a fraud detection model via FL, instance-level DP is
more suitable to protect any individual records of any bank
from being identified. In another situation, when a smartphone app attempts to learn a face recognition model from
users’ face images, it is more appropriate to apply user-level
DP to protect each user as a unit.
Existing methods that ensure user-level DP [7, 12, 18]
are predominantly built upon Gaussian mechanism which
is a Gaussian noise perturbation-based technique. Unfortunately, directly applying the Gaussian mechanism to ensure
strong user-level DP in FL drastically degrades the utility
of the resulted models. Specifically, the Gaussian mechanism requires to clip the l2 magnitude of local updates to
a sensitivity threshold S and adding noise proportional to
S to the high dimensional local updates. These two steps
lead to either large bias (when S is small) or large variance
(when S is large), which slows down the convergence and
damages the performance of the global model [30]. However, existing methods [7, 12, 18] do not explicitly involve
interaction between the operations for ensuring DP and the
learning process of FL, which makes the learning process
hard to adapt to the clipping and noise perturbation operations, thereby leading to utility degradation of the learned
models.
To address the above issues, in this paper, we propose
two techniques to improve the model utility in FL with userlevel DP guarantees. Our motivation is to naturally reduce
the l2 norm of local updates before clipping, thereby making the local updates more adaptive to the clipping operation. First, we propose Bounded Local Update Regularization (BLUR). It introduces a regularization term to the
agent’s local objective function and explicitly regularizes
the l2 norm of local updates to be bounded. As a result, the

10122

