Multidimensional Belief Quantification for Label-Efficient Meta-Learning
Deep Shankar Pandey Qi Yu
Rochester Institute of Technology
{dp7972,qi.yu}@rit.edu

Abstract
Optimization-based meta-learning offers a promising direction for few-shot learning that is essential for many
real-world computer vision applications. However, learning from few samples introduces uncertainty, and quantifying model confidence for few-shot predictions is essential for many critical domains. Furthermore, few-shot tasks
used in meta training are usually sampled randomly from a
task distribution for an iterative model update, leading to
high labeling costs and computational overhead in metatraining. We propose a novel uncertainty-aware task selection model for label efficient meta-learning. The proposed model formulates a multidimensional belief measure,
which can quantify the known uncertainty and lower bound
the unknown uncertainty of any given task. Our theoretical result establishes an important relationship between the
conflicting belief and the incorrect belief. The theoretical
result allows us to estimate the total uncertainty of a task,
which provides a principled criterion for task selection. A
novel multi-query task formulation is further developed to
improve both the computational and labeling efficiency of
meta-learning. Experiments conducted over multiple realworld few-shot image classification tasks demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed model.

1. Introduction
Deep learning (DL) models have achieved state-of-theart performance for many computer vision applications.
However, the effectiveness of DL models is challenged by
some specialized domains (e.g. medicine, biology, and security intelligence), in which labeled data for model training may be scarce. Unlike the DL models, human beings
can learn efficiently from limited training samples by using
the prior knowledge stored in their brains and applying it to
new tasks. For example, once a child learns how to distinguish between lions and tigers, s/he can quickly generalize
the concept to distinguish lions and cats with little or no additional training. Inspired by such human learning, various
few-shot learning techniques [6, 24, 37] have been devel-

oped, which provide a promising approach to address the
label scarcity problem for DL models.
In recent successful few-shot learning approaches, the
model is trained from multiple few-shot tasks comprised of
few labeled examples instead of one large dataset as in the
traditional setting. By learning from many similar tasks, the
model can accumulate the shared knowledge among tasks.
After training, it uses the knowledge gained from similar
tasks as the prior knowledge to perform well on new unseen few-shot tasks. Meta-learning is one popular approach
for few-shot learning where the model learns at two stages:
rapid learning within a new task, which is guided by prior
knowledge gained from gradual learning across tasks [30].
In meta-learning, the model is trained on a large number
of few-shot tasks to learn the shared inter-task knowledge.
The learned model is evaluated based on its generalization
capabilities on unseen few-shot tasks.
Few-shot tasks have limited data to learn from (in some
cases just 1 example/class). So, some model predictions
may not be reliable. For critical applications (e.g. autonomous driving), it is essential to quantify the prediction
uncertainty. Some existing approaches indirectly provide
uncertainty information of few-shot tasks by learning a posterior predictive distribution for testing data samples [7, 10,
12, 17, 28]. However, they usually suffer from a high computational cost and rely on assumptions/approximations that
may be invalid in practice.
Additionally, few-shot tasks used in meta training are
usually sampled randomly from a task distribution formed
using a large pool of labeled data samples. Thus, metatraining for many optimization-based meta-learning approaches is computationally expensive, requiring evaluation
of the second-order derivative (i.e., Hessian) of the (global)
model parameters over each of the sampled tasks. Furthermore, the large number of tasks leads to high labeling costs
in many real-world problems. However, not all the tasks
contribute equally to the learning of the (global) model parameters, and evaluating the Hessian over these tasks can
significantly slow down the meta training process.
In this paper, we present a novel Uncertainty-aware task
selection model for efficient meta-learning (referred to as

14391

