Relieving Long-tailed Instance Segmentation via Pairwise Class Balance
Yin-Yin He1 ,* Peizhen Zhang2 *†, Xiu-Shen Wei3,1 , Xiangyu Zhang2 , Jian Sun2
1

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
MEGVII Technology
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
heyy@lamda.nju.edu.cn, weixs.gm@gmail.com
{zhangpeizhen, zhangxiangyu, sunjian}@megvii.com

Abstract

bandage
tennis_ball

1. Introduction
The success of modern object detectors and instance segmentors has been verified on rich and balanced datasets.
However, their performance drops dramatically when ap* Equal contribution. This paper is supported by the National Key
R&D Plan of the Ministry of Science and Technology (Project No.
2020AAA0104400), CAAI-Huawei MindSpore Open Fund, and Beijing
Academy of Artificial Intelligence (BAAI). This work is done during YinYin He’s internship at MEGVII Technology.
† Corresponding author.

−5

sunglasses

Ground-Truth

calendar
−10

measuring_cup
cart

−15

fruit_juice
pool_table
garbage

−20

le
bag
e
cis
ter
n
gar

ce

tab

jui

ol_

it_
fru

po

cup
car
t

ar

g_

end

rin

cal

me

asu

all

sun

gla
s

e

_b

dag

nis

ban

ses

cistern

ten

Long-tailed instance segmentation is a challenging task
due to the extreme imbalance of training samples among
classes. It causes severe biases of the head classes (with
majority samples) against the tailed ones. This renders “how
to appropriately define and alleviate the bias” one of the
most important issues. Prior works mainly use label distribution or mean score information to indicate a coarse-grained
bias. In this paper, we explore to excavate the confusion
matrix, which carries the fine-grained misclassification details, to relieve the pairwise biases, generalizing the coarse
one. To this end, we propose a novel Pairwise Class Balance (PCB) method, built upon a confusion matrix which
is updated during training to accumulate the ongoing prediction preferences. PCB generates fightback soft labels for
regularization during training. Besides, an iterative learning
paradigm is developed to support a progressive and smooth
regularization in such debiasing. PCB can be plugged and
played to any existing method as a complement. Experimental results on LVIS demonstrate that our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance without bells and whistles. Superior results across various architectures show the generalization ability. The code and trained models are available at
https://github.com/megvii-research/PCB.

Prediction

Figure 1. Visualization of a randomly sampled 10-class categorical
confusion matrix of Mask R-CNN with ResNet-50-FPN on LVIS
v0.5 after taking logarithm with base 2. In current palette, higher
probabilities are shown with lighter colors. It reflects the model
biases clearly (e.g., the probability of misclassifying sunglasses to
measuring cup is larger than the reverse).

plied to datasets like LVIS [12] which is closer to the longtailed and large-vocabulary category distribution in the realworld scenario. The devil lies in the classification prediction
bias caused by extreme imbalanced training sample volumes
among foreground classes [35]. Typically, it is common
to leverage instructive indications with positive correlation
with the prediction bias into modeling for de-biasing and
thus achieve better results. Prior works exploit the class-wise
sample frequencies in the training set as an intuitive indication [4,12,26,34]. However, the learning quality of a class is
not only about the distribution prior but also factors like optimization hardness [9], relevant to model learning process.
Feng et al. proposed the mean classification score [10] metric. Such train-time model statistics can reflect the learning

7000

