Amodal Segmentation through Out-of-Task and
Out-of-Distribution Generalization with a Bayesian Model
Yihong Sun Adam Kortylewski Alan Yuille
Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
Amodal completion is a visual task that humans perform easily but which is difficult for computer vision algorithms. The aim is to segment those object boundaries
which are occluded and hence invisible. This task is particularly challenging for deep neural networks because data
is difficult to obtain and annotate. Therefore, we formulate amodal segmentation as an out-of-task and out-ofdistribution generalization problem. Specifically, we replace the fully connected classifier in neural networks with
a Bayesian generative model of the neural network features. The model is trained from non-occluded images using bounding box annotations and class labels only, but
is applied to generalize out-of-task to object segmentation
and to generalize out-of-distribution to segment occluded
objects. We demonstrate how such Bayesian models can
naturally generalize beyond the training task labels when
they learn a prior that models the object’s background context and shape. Moreover, by leveraging an outlier process,
Bayesian models can further generalize out-of-distribution
to segment partially occluded objects and to predict their
amodal object boundaries. Our algorithm outperforms alternative methods that use the same supervision by a large
margin, and even outperforms methods where annotated
amodal segmentations are used during training, when the
amount of occlusion is large. Code is publicly available at
https://github.com/YihongSun/Bayesian-Amodal.

1. Introduction
In our everyday life, we often observe partially occluded
objects. Humans can reliably recognize the visible parts
of an object and use them as cues to estimate the occluded
parts. This perception of the object’s complete structure under occlusion is referred to as amodal perception [28].
In computer vision, amodal segmentation is important to
study, both for its theoretical values and real-world applications. The main limitation of current approaches is the

Figure 1. Our Bayesian model takes the object bounding box as
input and estimates the three segmentation masks on the right: the
visible object parts in blue, the invisible object parts in red, and the
background context in green. The model is fully probabilistic, and
the pixel brightness shows the confidence of the model prediction.

requirement of detailed supervision of amodal object masks
either through human annotation [13, 24, 30] or by generating artificially occluded images [38]. Moreover, these methods assume that the object class of the occluder is known at
training time. This is an important limitation in real-world
applications, such as autonomous driving, where potential
occluders can be any kind of real-world object.
We formulate amodal segmentation as an out-of-task
and out-of-distribution generalization problem, where a
Bayesian generative model is trained from non-occluded
objects with bounding boxes and class annotations only, but
generalizes to amodal segmentation of partially occluded
objects (Figure 1). Intuitively, our model can be understood as a convolutional neural network, in which the fullyconnected classification head is replaced with a Bayesian
generative model of the neural features. During inference,
the latent model parameters (i.e. object class and amodal
segmentation) are estimated such that the features of the input image are explained by the Bayesian model with max-

1215

