Disentangling visual and written concepts in CLIP
Joanna MaterzyÂnska
MIT

Antonio Torralba
MIT

David Bau
Harvard

jomat@mit.edu

torralba@mit.edu

davidbau@seas.harvard.edu

Figure 1. Generated images conditioned on text prompts (top row) disclose the entanglement of written words and their visual concepts.
Our proposed orthogonal projections of the vector space disentangle the space into one corresponding to visual concepts (middle row), and
written words (bottom row).

Abstract
The CLIP network measures the similarity between natural text and images; in this work, we investigate the entanglement of the representation of word images and natural
images in its image encoder. First, we find that the image
encoder has an ability to match word images with natural
images of scenes described by those words. This is consistent with previous research that suggests that the meaning
and the spelling of a word might be entangled deep within
the network. On the other hand, we also find that CLIP has
a strong ability to match nonsense words, suggesting that
processing of letters is separated from processing of their
meaning. To explicitly determine whether the spelling capability of CLIP is separable, we devise a procedure for
identifying representation subspaces that selectively isolate
or eliminate spelling capabilities. We benchmark our methods against a range of retrieval tasks, and we also test them
by measuring the appearance of text in CLIP-guided generated images. We find that our methods are able to cleanly
separate spelling capabilities of CLIP from the visual processing of natural images.

1. Introduction
The distinction between written words and visual objects
is crystal clear for us: we would never confuse an object
with a written word describing that object. However, it has
been shown [9] that attaching a white sheet of paper with
ªiPadº written on it to an apple, will cause a neural network to shift its prediction to lean towards what is written
instead of recognizing the fruit. We hypothesize that the
network learns to confuse text with objects because of the
prevalence of text in real-world training data: text on products, signs, and labels is often visible next to the thing it
represents (Figure 2), which is perhaps why a neural network would struggle to distinguish an object from its written name. Beginning with a pretrained network that exhibits
this text/object confusion, we ask if the perception of text by
a network can be separated from the perception of objects.
We study the representations of the CLIP [20] network,
which is trained to measure the similarity between natural text and images, and which has been shown to be vulnerable to confusion between written text and visual concepts [9,16]. In [9], feature visualizations of neurons within
CLIP revealed the presence of ªmulti-modal neuronsº that

16410

