When Does Contrastive Visual Representation Learning Work?
Elijah Cole1
1

Caltech

Xuan Yang2
2

Google

3

Kimberly Wilber2

University of Edinburgh

4

Alan Turing Institute

Abstract
Recent self-supervised representation learning techniques have largely closed the gap between supervised and
unsupervised learning on ImageNet classification. While
the particulars of pretraining on ImageNet are now relatively well understood, the field still lacks widely accepted
best practices for replicating this success on other datasets.
As a first step in this direction, we study contrastive selfsupervised learning on four diverse large-scale datasets.
By looking through the lenses of data quantity, data domain, data quality, and task granularity, we provide new
insights into the necessary conditions for successful selfsupervised learning. Our key findings include observations
such as: (i) the benefit of additional pretraining data beyond
500k images is modest, (ii) adding pretraining images from
another domain does not lead to more general representations, (iii) corrupted pretraining images have a disparate
impact on supervised and self-supervised pretraining, and
(iv) contrastive learning lags far behind supervised learning on fine-grained visual classification tasks.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL) techniques can now produce visual representations which are competitive with representations generated by fully supervised networks for
many downstream tasks [18]. This is an important milestone for computer vision, as removing the need for large
amounts of labels at training time has the potential to scale
up our ability to address challenges in domains where supervision is currently too difficult or costly to obtain. However,
with some limited exceptions, the vast majority of current
state-of-the-art approaches are developed and evaluated on
standard datasets like ImageNet [40]. As a result, we do not
have a good understanding of how well these methods work
when they are applied to other datasets.
Under what conditions do self-supervised contrastive
representation learning methods produce “good” visual
representations? This is an important question for computer
vision researchers because it adds to our understanding of
SSL and highlights opportunities for new methods. This is

Oisin Mac Aodha3,4
5

Serge Belongie5

University of Copenhagen

1. Dataset size

2. Domain

Domain A

Downstream
tasks

3. Quality

4. Task granularity

Source dataset

Downstream
tasks

Coarse-grained
downstream
tasks

Fine-grained
downstream
tasks

Figure 1. What conditions are necessary for successful selfsupervised pretraining on domains beyond ImageNet? We
investigate the impact of self-supervised and supervised training
dataset size, the downstream domain, image quality, and the granularity of downstream classification tasks.

also an important question for domain experts with limited
resources who might be interested in applying SSL to realworld problems. With these objectives in mind, we attempt
to answer the following questions:
(i) What is the impact of data quantity? How many unlabeled images do we need for pretraining, and when is it
worthwhile to get more? How much labeled data do we
need for linear classifier training or end-to-end fine-tuning
on a downstream task? In which regimes do self-supervised
features rival those learned from full supervision?
(ii) What is the impact of the pretraining domain? How
well do self-supervised representations trained on one domain transfer to another? Can we learn more general representations by combining datasets? Do different pretraining
datasets lead to complementary representations?
(iii) What is the impact of data quality? How robust are
self-supervised methods to training time image corruption
such as reduced resolution, compression artifacts, or noise?
Does pretraining on corrupted images lead to poor downstream performance on uncorrupted images?
(iv) What is the impact of task granularity? Does SSL

14755

