Uncertainty-Aware Adaptation for Self-Supervised 3D Human Pose Estimation
Varun Jampani2
Pradyumna YM1 *
Jogendra Nath Kundu1
Siddharth Seth1 *
Anirban Chakraborty1
R. Venkatesh Babu1
1
2
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
Google Research

Abstract

1. Introduction
3D human pose estimation forms a core component of
several human-centric technologies such as augmented reality [24], gesture recognition [6], etc. Most of the 3D human
pose estimation approaches heavily rely on fully supervised
training objectives [15, 59, 80], demanding access to largescale datasets with paired 3D pose annotation. However,
the inconvenience of 3D pose acquisition stands as a significant bottleneck. Unlike a 2D pose, it is difficult to manually annotate an anthropomorphically constrained 3D pose
for an in-the-wild RGB image. Thus, most of the paired 3D
pose datasets are collected in lab environments via bodyworn sensors or multi-camera studio setups [28, 78] that are
* equal contribution.
1 Project page: https://sites.google.com/view/mrp-net

?

?
Synthetic
Dataset

Syn

?

Target
Dataset

Syn

Tgt

Synthetic

BL
E

Target
Background

Domain
Adaptation

BR

Tgt

MultiRepresentation
Consistency

histogram

The advances in monocular 3D human pose estimation
are dominated by supervised techniques that require largescale 2D/3D pose annotations. Such methods often behave
erratically in the absence of any provision to discard unfamiliar out-of-distribution data. To this end, we cast the
3D human pose learning as an unsupervised domain adaptation problem. We introduce MRP-Net1 that constitutes
a common deep network backbone with two output heads
subscribing to two diverse configurations; a) model-free
joint localization and b) model-based parametric regression. Such a design allows us to derive suitable measures to
quantify prediction uncertainty at both pose and joint level
granularity. While supervising only on labeled synthetic
samples, the adaptation process aims to minimize the uncertainty for the unlabeled target images while maximizing
the same for an extreme out-of-distribution dataset (backgrounds). Alongside synthetic-to-real 3D pose adaptation,
the joint-uncertainties allow expanding the adaptation to
work on in-the-wild images even in the presence of occlusion and truncation scenarios. We present a comprehensive
evaluation of the proposed approach and demonstrate stateof-the-art performance on benchmark datasets.

Syn

Tgt

BG

BG

BG
Pose-uncertainty →

Figure 1. The proposed unsupervised adaptation framework utilizes a multi-representation consistency based uncertainty estimation for simultaneous OOD detection and adaptation.

difficult to install outdoors. This often limits the dataset diversity in terms of the variety in poses, appearances (background and lighting conditions), and outfits.
Some works [69, 71] propose weakly supervised techniques to bypass the requirement of 3D pose annotations.
Several of these works leverage available paired 2D pose
datasets or off-the-shelf image-to-2D pose estimation networks [34, 63, 83]. To address the inherent 2D-to-3D ambiguity, some works either rely on multi-view image pairs [11,
32,38] or utilize unpaired 3D pose samples [10,88]. Though
such methods perform well when evaluated on the same
dataset, they lack cross-dataset generalization.
Consider a scenario where we want to deploy a 3D human pose estimation system in a new application environment (i.e. target domain). From the vendor’s perspective, a
general approach would be to improve the system’s generalization via supervised training on a wide variety of labeled
source domains [48]. However, target-specific training usually achieves the best performance beyond the generic system. Though it is not convenient to collect annotations for
every novel deployment scenario, an effective unsupervised
adaptation framework stands as the most practical way forward. Unsupervised adaptation [19, 37, 84] seeks a learning technique that can minimize the domain discrepancy be-

20448

