SPAct: Self-supervised Privacy Preservation for Action Recognition
Ishan Rajendrakumar Dave, Chen Chen, Mubarak Shah
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida, Orlando, USA
ishandave@knights.ucf.edu, {chen.chen, shah}@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
Visual private information leakage is an emerging key issue for the fast growing applications of video understanding
like activity recognition. Existing approaches for mitigating privacy leakage in action recognition require privacy
labels along with the action labels from the video dataset.
However, annotating frames of video dataset for privacy labels is not feasible. Recent developments of self-supervised
learning (SSL) have unleashed the untapped potential of the
unlabeled data. For the first time, we present a novel training framework which removes privacy information from input video in a self-supervised manner without requiring privacy labels. Our training framework consists of three main
components: anonymization function, self-supervised privacy removal branch, and action recognition branch. We
train our framework using a minimax optimization strategy
to minimize the action recognition cost function and maximize the privacy cost function through a contrastive selfsupervised loss. Employing existing protocols of knownaction and privacy attributes, our framework achieves a
competitive action-privacy trade-off to the existing stateof-the-art supervised methods. In addition, we introduce
a new protocol to evaluate the generalization of learned
the anonymization function to novel-action and privacy attributes and show that our self-supervised framework outperforms existing supervised methods. Code available at:
https://github.com/DAVEISHAN/SPAct

1. Introduction
Recent advances in action recognition have enabled a
wide range of real-world applications, e.g. video surveillance camera [7, 24, 35], smart shopping systems like Amazon Go, elderly person monitor systems [2, 22, 45]. Most
of these video understanding applications involve extensive
computation, for which a user needs to share the video data
to the cloud computation server. While sharing the videos
to the cloud server for the utility action recognition task, the
user also ends up sharing the private visual information like
gender, skin color, clothing, background objects etc. in the
videos as shown in Fig. 1. Therefore, there is a pressing

need for solutions to privacy preserving action recognition.
A simple-yet-effective solution for privacy preservation
in action recognition is to utilize very low resolution videos
(Fig. 1a) [5, 23, 37]. Although this downsampling method
does not require any specialized training to remove privacy
features, it does not provide a good trade-off between action
recognition performance and privacy preservation.
Another set of methods use pretrained object-detectors
to detect the privacy regions and then remove or modify
the detected regions using synthesis [34] or blurring [47]
as shown in Fig. 1b. The detection-based approaches require the bounding-box level annotations for the privacy attributes, and removing the privacy features without an endto-end learning framework may result in the performance
drop of the action recognition task.
Wu et al. [41] propose a novel approach to remove
the privacy features via learning an anonymization function
through an adversarial training framework, which requires
both action and privacy labels from the video. Although the
method is able to get a good trade-off of action recognition
and privacy preservation, it has two main problems. First,
it is not feasible to annotate a video dataset for privacy attributes. For instance, Wu et al. [41] acknowledge the issue
of privacy annotation time, where it takes immense efforts
for them to annotate privacy attributes for even a small-scale
(515 videos) video dataset PA-HMDB. Second, the learned
anonymization function from the known privacy attributes
may not generalize in anonymizing the novel privacy attributes. For example, in Fig. 1 the learned anonymization
function for human-related privacy attributes (e.g. gender,
skin color, clothing) may still leave other privacy information like scene or background objects un-anonymized.
The performance of the action recognition task depends
on the spatio-temporal cues of the input video. Wu et
al. [41] show that anonymizing the privacy features like
face, gender, etc. in the input video does not lead to any
reduction in the action recognition performance. Instead of
just focusing on the cues based on the privacy annotations,
our goal is twofold: 1) learning an anonymization function
that can remove all spatial cues in all frames without significantly degrading action recognition performance; and

20164

