ASM-Loc: Action-aware Segment Modeling for
Weakly-Supervised Temporal Action Localization
Bo He1 , Xitong Yang1 , Le Kang2 , Zhiyu Cheng2 , Xin Zhou2 , Abhinav Shrivastava1
1

2

University of Maryland, College Park

Baidu Research, USA

{bohe,xyang35,abhinav}@cs.umd.edu, {kangle01,zhiyucheng,zhouxin16}@baidu.com

Abstract
CricketBowling

Weakly-supervised temporal action localization aims to
recognize and localize action segments in untrimmed videos
given only video-level action labels for training. Without
the boundary information of action segments, existing methods mostly rely on multiple instance learning (MIL), where
the predictions of unlabeled instances (i.e., video snippets)
are supervised by classifying labeled bags (i.e., untrimmed
videos). However, this formulation typically treats snippets
in a video as independent instances, ignoring the underlying temporal structures within and across action segments.
To address this problem, we propose ASM-Loc, a novel
WTAL framework that enables explicit, action-aware segment modeling beyond standard MIL-based methods. Our
framework entails three segment-centric components: (i)
dynamic segment sampling for compensating the contribution of short actions; (ii) intra- and inter-segment attention
for modeling action dynamics and capturing temporal dependencies; (iii) pseudo instance-level supervision for improving action boundary prediction. Furthermore, a multistep refinement strategy is proposed to progressively improve action proposals along the model training process.
Extensive experiments on THUMOS-14 and ActivityNetv1.3 demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, establishing new state of the art on both datasets. The code
and models are publicly available at https://github.
com/boheumd/ASM-Loc.

1. Introduction
Weakly-supervised temporal action localization
(WTAL) has attracted increasing attention in recent
years. Unlike its fully-supervised counterpart, WTAL
only requires action category annotation at the video level,
which is much easier to collect and more scalable for
building large-scale datasets. To tackle this problem, recent
works [1–12] mostly rely on the multiple instance learning
(MIL) framework [13], where the entire untrimmed video
is treated as a labeled bag containing multiple unlabeled

CricketBowling

CricketShoting

CricketShoting

GT
MIL-based
Proposals
Missed detection of short actions
Dynamic Segment Sampling

Over-completeness and Incompleteness
Intra- and Inter-Segment Attention

Up-Sample

ASM-Loc

Figure 1. Action-aware segment modeling for WTAL. Our
ASM-Loc leverages the action proposals as well as the proposed
segment-centric modules to address the common failures in existing MIL-based methods.

instances (i.e., video frames or snippets). The action classification scores of individual snippets are first generated
to form the temporal class activation sequences (CAS) and
then aggregated by a top-k mean mechanism to obtain the
final video-level prediction [3, 6, 8, 14].
While significant improvement has been made in prior
work, there is still a huge performance gap between the
weakly-supervised and fully-supervised settings. One major challenge is localization completeness, where the models tend to generate incomplete or over-complete action segments due to the inaccurate predictions of action boundaries. Another challenge is the missed detection of short
action segments, where the models are biased towards segments with longer duration and produce low-confidence
predictions on short actions. Figure 1 demonstrates an example of these two common errors. Although these challenges are inherently difficult due to the lack of segmentlevel annotation, we argue that the absence of segmentbased modeling in existing MIL-based methods is a key reason for the inferior results. In particular, these MIL-based

13925

