Blind2Unblind: Self-Supervised Image Denoising with Visible Blind Spots
Zejin Wang1,2
1

Jiazheng Liu1,3

Guoqing Li1

Hua Han1,3,∗

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Future Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
Real noisy-clean pairs on a large scale are costly
and difficult to obtain. Meanwhile, supervised denoisers
trained on synthetic data perform poorly in practice. Selfsupervised denoisers, which learn only from single noisy
images, solve the data collection problem. However, selfsupervised denoising methods, especially blindspot-driven
ones, suffer sizable information loss during input or network design. The absence of valuable information dramatically reduces the upper bound of denoising performance.
In this paper, we propose a simple yet efficient approach
called Blind2Unblind to overcome the information loss in
blindspot-driven denoising methods. First, we introduce a
global-aware mask mapper that enables global perception
and accelerates training. The mask mapper samples all pixels at blind spots on denoised volumes and maps them to
the same channel, allowing the loss function to optimize
all blind spots at once. Second, we propose a re-visible
loss to train the denoising network and make blind spots
visible. The denoiser can learn directly from raw noise images without losing information or being trapped in identity
mapping. We also theoretically analyze the convergence of
the re-visible loss. Extensive experiments on synthetic and
real-world datasets demonstrate the superior performance
of our approach compared to previous work. Code is available at https://github.com/demonsjin/Blind2Unblind.

1. Introduction
Image denoising, an essential task of low-level image
processing, aims to remove noise and restore a clean image.
In vision applications, the quality of denoising significantly
affects the performance of downstream tasks, such as superresolution [16], semantic segmentation [22], and object detection [31]. In addition, the denoiser can significantly improve the quality of images captured by mobile phones and
other devices, reflecting a broad demand in imaging fields.
∗ Corresponding author

With the development of neural networks, learningbased denoisers [3, 6, 13, 29, 35, 36, 38, 39] have recently
shown superior performance than traditional methods [5, 8,
9, 12]. However, supervised denoisers, e.g., U-Net [29],
DnCNN [38], FFDNet [39], RIDNet [3], SANet [6], rely
on numerous noisy-clean pairs, which are costly and hard
to collect. The performance of denoisers drops dramatically once processing unknown noise patterns. Lehtinen et
al. [21] then propose to recover clean signals directly from
corrupted image pairs. Using corrupted pairs reduces the
difficulty of data collection but remains challenging for dynamic scenes with deformations and image quality variations.
To alleviate the above limitations, self-supervised denoising [4, 15, 18, 20, 26, 32, 33] that learns from a single
noisy image has attracted much interest from researchers.
Ulyanov et al. [32] learn deep prior only from a single
noisy image. Namely, each degraded image has to be
trained from scratch. Manual masking, e.g., Noise2Self [4],
Noise2Void [18], avoids custom denoising for each image.
Since blind spots on the inputs occupy a large area, the receptive field of predicted pixels loses much valuable context, resulting in poor performance. Moreover, optimizing partial pixels in each iteration causes slow convergence.
Laine et al. [20] design a blind spot network to bound the receptive field in four directions instead of manual masking.
Masked convolution accelerates training and increases the
receptive field to all areas except the blind spot. Similarly,
the dilated blindspot network [33] sets blindspots on the
receptive field without masking the inputs. Regardless of
masked input or blind-spot networks, lower accuracy limits
practical applications. Bayesian estimation [19, 20, 33] is
used for explicit noise modeling as post-processing. However, noise modeling performs poorly on real-world data
with complex patterns. Some works [25, 34] perform noise
reduction for noisier-noise pairs even though the additional
noise increases the information loss and requires that the
extra noise has the same distribution as the original one.
Subsequently, Pang et al. [26] develop a data augmentation
technique with the known noise level to address the overfit-

2027

