PONI: Potential Functions for ObjectGoal Navigation
with Interaction-free Learning
Santhosh Kumar Ramakrishnan1,2 , Devendra Singh Chaplot1 , Ziad Al-Halah2 ,
Jitendra Malik1,3 , Kristen Grauman1,2
1
Meta AI 2 UT Austin 3 UC Berkeley

Abstract
State-of-the-art approaches to ObjectGoal navigation
(ObjectNav) rely on reinforcement learning and typically
require significant computational resources and time for
learning. We propose Potential functions for ObjectGoal
Navigation with Interaction-free learning (PONI), a modular approach that disentangles the skills of ‘where to look?’
for an object and ‘how to navigate to (x, y)?’. Our key insight is that ‘where to look?’ can be treated purely as a
perception problem, and learned without environment interactions. To address this, we propose a network that predicts two complementary potential functions conditioned on
a semantic map and uses them to decide where to look for
an unseen object. We train the potential function network
using supervised learning on a passive dataset of top-down
semantic maps, and integrate it into a modular framework
to perform ObjectNav. Experiments on Gibson and Matterport3D demonstrate that our method achieves the stateof-the-art for ObjectNav while incurring up to 1,600× less
computational cost for training. Code and pre-trained models are available.1

1. Introduction
Embodied visual navigation is the computer vision problem where an agent uses visual sensing to actively interact
with the world and perform navigation tasks [2, 3, 6, 51].
We have witnessed substantial progress in embodied visual
navigation over the past decade, fueled by the availability of
large-scale photorealistic 3D scene datasets [10, 45, 60] and
fast simulators for embodied navigation [33, 51, 60].
ObjectNav has gained popularity in recent years [2, 6,
50]. Here, an agent enters a novel and unmapped 3D scene,
and is given an object category to navigate to (e.g., a chair).
To successfully solve the task, the agent needs to efficiently
navigate to the object and stop near it within a given time
budget. This is a fundamental problem for embodied agents
which requires semantic reasoning about the world (e.g.,

TV is in the living room, oven is in the kitchen, and chairs
are near tables), and it serves as a precursor to more complex object manipulation tasks [33, 55].
Prior work has made good progress on this task by
formulating it as a reinforcement learning (RL) problem
and developing useful representations [21, 62], auxiliary
tasks [63], data augmentation techniques [37], and improved reward functions [37]. Despite this progress, end-toend RL incurs high computational cost, has poor sample efficiency, and tends to generalize poorly to new scenes [8,13,
37] since skills like moving without collisions, exploration,
and stopping near the object are all learned from scratch
purely using RL. Modular navigation methods aim to address these issues by disentangling ‘where to look for an object?’ and ‘how to navigate to (x, y)?’ [13,36]. These methods have emerged as strong competitors to end-to-end RL
with good sample efficiency, better generalization to new
scenes, and simulation to real-world transfer [12,13]. However, since ‘where to look?’ is formulated as an RL problem with interactive reward-based learning, these methods
require extensive computational resources (∼8 GPUs) over
multiple days for training.
We hypothesize that the ‘where to look?’ question for an
unseen object is fundamentally a perception problem, and
can be learned without any interactions. Based on this insight, we introduce a simple-yet-effective method for ObjectNav – Potential functions for ObjectGoal Navigation
with Interaction-free learning (PONI). A potential function
is a 0-1 valued function defined at the frontiers of a 2D topdown semantic map2 , i.e., the map locations that lie on the
edges of the explored and unexplored regions (see Fig. 1,
right). It represents the value of visiting each location in
order to find the object (higher the value, the better). Given
the potential function, we can decide ‘where to look?’ by
simply selecting the maximum potential location.
We propose the potential function network, a convolutional encoder-decoder model that estimates the potential
function from a partially filled semantic map. Critically,
we propose to train it interaction-free using a dataset of

1 Website: https://vision.cs.utexas.edu/projects/poni/

2 The 2D semantic map contains the object category per map location.

18890

