Tencent-MVSE: A Large-Scale Benchmark Dataset for
Multi-Modal Video Similarity Evaluation
Zhaoyang Zeng, Yongsheng Luo, Zhenhua Liu, Fengyun Rao, Dian Li, Weidong Guo, Zhen Wen
QQ Browser Lab, Tencent
{zhaoyanzeng,yongshenluo,edinliu,fengyunrao,goodli,weidongguo,zhenzwen}@tencent.com

Abstract
Multi-modal video similarity evaluation is important
for video recommendation systems such as video deduplication, relevance matching, ranking, and diversity
control. However, there still lacks a benchmark dataset that
can support supervised training and accurate evaluation. In
this paper, we propose the Tencent-MVSE dataset, which is
the first benchmark dataset for the multi-modal video similarity evaluation task. The Tencent-MVSE dataset contains
video pairs similarity annotations, and diverse metadata including Chinese title, automatic speech recognition (ASR)
text, as well as human-annotated categories/tags. We provide a simple baseline with a multi-modal Transformer architecture to perform supervised multi-modal video similarity evaluation. We also explore pre-training strategies
to make use of the unpaired data. The whole dataset as
well as our baseline will be released to promote the development of the multi-modal video similarity evaluation.
The dataset has been released in https://tencentmvse.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the rapid development of
online video-sharing platforms. More and more platforms
such as YouTube, Youku, iQIYI, Tencent Video, and TikTok have emerged to become a crucial part of our daily life.
To satisfy the diverse requirements of users, these platforms
implement complicated video recommendation systems to
perform diverse tasks, including video de-duplication, relevance matching, ranking, diversity control, etc. All of
these applications rely on effective similarity evaluation algorithms that process a thorough understanding of video
contents.
The “similarity” of video content is reflected in multiple
modalities, including visual content and metadata. Figure 1
shows some examples of video pairs that might be “similar”. For the first example, the two videos have similar

梅西告诉你，点球不是非要射门，成人之美也是一
种美德！(Messi tells you, we don’t have to shoot when
playing stop kick, helping others is also a virtue!)

面对这样的门将，连穆勒都无可奈何，足球场上运气
也很重要！(Facing such a goalkeeper, even Muller has
no alternative, luck is also important on the football field!)

德云社“大小姐”郭麒麟，你这是要出师了么？这么狠
呢(Deyunshe “young madam” Qilin Guo, are you going
to finish your apprenticeship? So cruel)

德云社，不愧是亲搭档，郭德纲和于谦借着唱戏名义
占高峰便宜！(Deyunshe, be worthy of partners, Degang
and Qian profit at Feng’s expense in the name of singing!)

用了这个灵敏度，不仅能压平底锅，还能压信号枪！
(Using such sensitivity, not only can press pan, but also
can press flare gun!)

光子，你卖的什么破伞，我要退钱(Guangzi, what
broken parachute you sell, I want a refund)

Figure 1. Some examples of similar video pairs. The video pairs
in the three rows are similar in their visual contents, titles, and
semantic information.

visual contents about “playing football”. Videos from the
second pair have different visual contents, while they are
both crosstalks acted by the same troupe according to their
titles. For the third example, the two videos have different
visual contents and titles, while they share “similar” visual
and text information related to the same game. Since the
similarity exists in such diverse manners, in real application
scenarios, video similarity should be evaluated by considering multi-modal information. Inspired by the recent success
in the field of natural language processing and computer vision, large-scale labeled datasets are mandatory to advance
research progress. However, when creating a video similarity benchmark dataset, the multiple modalities bring significant challenges for data annotation and evaluation.
Learning video representations for similarity evaluation
requires the supervision of video pairs similarity. Most
existing approaches learn video representations via multilabel classification by using the semantic tags as supervi-

3138

