End-to-End Trajectory Distribution Prediction Based on Occupancy Grid Maps
Ke Guo1 , Wenxi Liu2 , Jia Pan1 *
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 College of Computer and Data Science, Fuzhou University
{kguo,jpan}@cs.hku.hk, wenxi.liu@hotmail.com

Abstract
In this paper, we aim to forecast a future trajectory distribution of a moving agent in the real world, given the social
scene images and historical trajectories. Yet, it is a challenging task because the ground-truth distribution is unknown and unobservable, while only one of its samples can
be applied for supervising model learning, which is prone to
bias. Most recent works focus on predicting diverse trajectories in order to cover all modes of the real distribution, but
they may despise the precision and thus give too much credit
to unrealistic predictions. To address the issue, we learn the
distribution with symmetric cross-entropy using occupancy
grid maps as an explicit and scene-compliant approximation to the ground-truth distribution, which can effectively
penalize unlikely predictions. In specific, we present an inverse reinforcement learning based multi-modal trajectory
distribution forecasting framework that learns to plan by
an approximate value iteration network in an end-to-end
manner. Besides, based on the predicted distribution, we
generate a small set of representative trajectories through
a differentiable Transformer-based network, whose attention mechanism helps to model the relations of trajectories.
In experiments, our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on the Stanford Drone Dataset and Intersection
Drone Dataset.

1. Introduction
Trajectory prediction has gained increasing attention due
to its emerging applications such as robot navigation and
self-driving cars. Due to the inherent multimodal uncertainty from an agent’s intention or environment, a large
number of works have been proposed to learn a multimodal distribution of the future trajectories. For example,
in [20, 26], the multimodal distribution is explicitly modeled using the Gaussian mixture model, though it is hard to
* Jia Pan is the corresponding author. This project is supported by HKSAR RGC GRF 11202119, 11207818, T42-717/20-R, HKSAR Technology Commission under the InnoHK initiative, and the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 62072110).

Figure 1. Illustration of trajectory prediction distributions of P2T
and our method on Stanford Drone Dataset. Although the prediction of P2T is more diverse, it predicts many infeasible outcomes
(e.g., those trajectories intersecting with the parterre) and assigns
too high probability to the turning action.

optimize and prone to overfitting. Others have attempted
to model the trajectory distribution implicitly using generative models such as conditional variational autoencoder
(CVAE) [6, 19, 28, 44], normalizing flow (NF) [34, 38], or
generative adversarial network (GAN) [2, 8, 9, 11, 43].
However, most previous works focus on the diversity
of the predicted trajectories rather than the more important
precision, except a few works (e.g. [34, 38]). The issue is
that if the model is only encouraged to cover all modes of
real distribution, it may assign too many probabilities to unrealistic predictions and cannot accurately reflect the real
probability density. One such example is shown in Fig. 1
where a large portion of the diverse trajectories predicted
by P2T [6] turn and intersect with obstacles, which are certainly implausible and inconsistent with common knowledge that moving straight ahead is more likely than turning. In such circumstances, a navigation decision based on
the predictions will overreact to less likely futures, while
underestimating the more likely ones.
Specifically, to learn a diverse trajectory distribution,
previous works usually minimize the variety loss [6, 9, 13]
or the forward cross-entropy [23, 26, 44]. Yet, the variety
loss does not penalize bad predictions as long as there exists one prediction close to the ground-truth, and it does
not lead to ground-truth distribution but approximately its
square root [46]. On the other hand, the forward cross-

2242

