Stereo Magnification with Multi-Layer Images
T. Khakhulin1,2 D. Korzhenkov1 P. Solovev1 G. Sterkin1 A.-T. Ardelean1,2 V. Lempitsky2 *
1

2

Samsung AI Center – Moscow
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow

https://samsunglabs.github.io/StereoLayers/

Abstract
Representing scenes with multiple semitransparent colored layers has been a popular and successful choice for
real-time novel view synthesis. Existing approaches infer
colors and transparency values over regularly spaced layers of planar or spherical shape. In this work, we introduce
a new view synthesis approach based on multiple semitransparent layers with scene-adapted geometry. Our approach
infers such representations from stereo pairs in two stages.
The first stage produces the geometry of a small number of
data-adaptive layers from a given pair of views. The second
stage infers the color and transparency values for these layers, producing the final representation for novel view synthesis. Importantly, both stages are connected through a
differentiable renderer and are trained end-to-end. In the
experiments, we demonstrate the advantage of the proposed
approach over the use of regularly spaced layers without
adaptation to scene geometry. Despite being orders of magnitude faster during rendering, our approach also outperforms the recently proposed IBRNet system based on implicit geometry representation.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen rapid progress in image-based
rendering and novel view synthesis, with a multitude of various methods based on neural rendering approaches [32].
Among this diversity, the approaches that are based on
semitransparent multi-layer representations [21, 29, 30, 34,
39] stand out due to their combination of fast rendering
time, compatibility with traditional graphics engines, and
good quality of re-rendering in the vicinity of the input
frames.
Existing approaches [4, 17, 21, 29, 30, 34, 39] build multilayer representations over grids of regularly spaced surfaces
* Most of the work was done while Victor Lempitsky was at Samsung
AI Center

such as planes or spheres with uniformly changing inverse
depth. As the number of layers is necessarily limited by
resource constraints and the risk of overfitting, this number is usually taken to be relatively small (e.g. 32). The resulting semi-transparent representation may therefore only
coarsely approximate the true geometry of the scene, which
limits the generalization to novel views and introduces artefacts. The most recent works [4, 17] use excessive number of spheres (up to 128) and then merge the resulting geometry using a non-learned post-processing merging step.
While the merge step creates scene-adapted and compact
geometric representation, it is not incorporated into the
learning process of the main matching network, and degrades the quality of novel view synthesis [4].
The coarseness of layered geometry used by multilayer approaches is in contrast to more traditional imagebased rendering methods that start by estimating the nondiscretized scene geometry in the form of mesh [25, 33],
view-dependent meshes [11], a single-layer depth map [23,
27, 37]. Geometry estimates may come from multiview
dense stereo matching or from monocular depth. All these
approaches obtain a finer approximation to scene geometry,
although most of them have to use a relatively slow neural
rendering step to compensate for the errors in the geometry
estimation.
Our approach called StereoLayers (Fig. 1) combines
scene geometry adaptation with multi-layer representation.
This model is designed for a case known as stereo magnification problem: it reconstructs the scene from as few as
two input images. The proposed method starts by building
a geometric proxy that is customized to a particular scene.
The proxy is formed by a small number of mesh layers with
continuous depth coordinate values. In the second stage,
similarly to other multi-layer approaches, we estimate the
transparency and color textures for each layer, resulting in
the final representation of the scene. When processing a
new scene, both stages take the same pair of images of
that scene as input. Two deep neural networks trained on
a dataset of similar scenes are used to implement these two

8687

