Learning Local-Global Contextual Adaptation for Multi-Person Pose Estimation
Gui-Song Xia1,3
Liangpei Zhang3
Nan Xue1,2
Tianfu Wu2 *
1
2
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
Department of ECE, NC State University
3
State Key Lab. of Information Engieering in Surveying, Mapping and Remote Sensing, Wuhan University
Code& Models available at: https://github.com/cherubicXN/logocap

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of multi-person pose estimation in a bottom-up fashion. With a new and strong
observation that the localization issue of the center-offset
formulation can be remedied in a local-window search
scheme in an ideal situation, we propose a multi-person
pose estimation approach, dubbed as LOGO-CAP, by learning the LOcal-GlObal Contextual Adaptation for human
Pose. Specifically, our approach learns the keypoint attraction maps (KAMs) from the local keypoints expansion maps
(KEMs) in small local windows in the first step, which are
subsequently treated as dynamic convolutional kernels on
the keypoints-focused global heatmaps for contextual adaptation, achieving accurate multi-person pose estimation.
Our method is end-to-end trainable with near real-time inference speed in a single forward pass, obtaining state-ofthe-art performance on the COCO keypoint benchmark for
bottom-up human pose estimation. With the COCO trained
model, our method also outperforms prior arts by a large
margin on the challenging OCHuman dataset.

1. Introduction
2D human pose estimation is a classical computer vision
problem that aims to parsing articulated structures of human parts from natural images. With rich and longstanding
studies, we have witnessed great successes on single-person
pose estimation [21, 31] by convolutional neural networks.
Therefore, it is of great interest in pushing the pose estimation from the single-person to multi-person configuration.
The problem of multi-person pose estimation from
images has been extensively studied in top-down
paradigms [21, 31, 36] that formulate the problem as
single-person pose estimation with an off-the-shelf person
detector with an impressively high AP (e.g, 56% on
the COCO-2017 validation dataset [36]). Although the
top-down paradigm has been dramatically pushed into a
high-performing stages, it remains several problems in both
aspects of efficiency and accuracy due to the dependency
of detecting person bounding boxes. Motivated by this,
* Corresponding author

OKS = 0.826

OKS = 0.912

Initial Pose

Final Pose

Figure 1. An illustrative example of multi-person pose estimation
by the proposed LOGO-CAP with the HRNet-W32 backbone. For
each initial pose obtained by the center-offset regression, LOGOCAP learns 11 × 11 local filters for each joint, and then refines the
initial keypoint by convolution with the learned kernels: The local
filters are learned to refocusing those initially-less-accurate pose
keypoints towards better placement. In more detailed, we show
an example of the initial center-offset pose that only obtains the
OKS of 0.826 due to the misplacement between the keypoints of
the right elbow and the right wrist. We mark the
residual vectors between the predictions and the groundtruth with
yellow and red dash lines respectively. The LOGO-CAP improves
the OKS by 10.4%. Please see text for details.

we are interested in studying the problem of multi-person
pose estimation without incurring extra priors of bounding
boxes, which is conventionally termed as bottom-up pose
estimation.
Bottom-up pose estimation approaches pay much atten-

13065

