Bending Graphs: Hierarchical Shape Matching using Gated Optimal Transport
Mahdi Saleh1*
Nassir Navab1
1

Shun-Cheng Wu1*
Benjamin Busam1

Luca Cosmo2,3
Federico Tombari1,4

2
Technische Universität München
Ca’ Foscari University of Venice, Italy
3
4
USI University of Lugano, Switzerland
Google

Abstract
Shape matching has been a long-studied problem for the
computer graphics and vision community. The objective
is to predict a dense correspondence between meshes that
have a certain degree of deformation. Existing methods either consider the local description of sampled points or discover correspondences based on global shape information.
In this work, we investigate a hierarchical learning design,
to which we incorporate local patch-level information and
global shape-level structures. This flexible representation
enables correspondence prediction and provides rich features for the matching stage. Finally, we propose a novel
optimal transport solver by recurrently updating features on
non-confident nodes to learn globally consistent correspondences between the shapes. Our results on publicly available datasets suggest robust performance in presence of severe deformations without the need of extensive training or
refinement.

1. Introduction
Deformable surfaces have been studied extensively by
both computer graphics and computer vision communities.
Dense correspondence estimation is closely linked to applications such as reconstruction and human pose estimation. In a standard formulation, we want to find a function
f : G → H where f is a mapping from a shape G to another shape H. A shape is usually discretized in a triangle
mesh that can be expressed in the form of a graph G =
(V, E) constituted by vertices V with associated 3D coordinates and edges E.Among the most successful optimization methods to find correspondences between deformable
shapes, there is the Functional Map framework [41]. The
pointwise correspondence between two shapes is expressed
* The authors contributed equally to this paper

Code: https://github.com/mahdi-slh/BendingGraphs

Local Graphs

Shape Graphs

Figure 1. We process deformable shape pairs by two levels of hierarchy, local graphs and shape graphs. Such hierarchical structure
offers a flexible and holistic shape representation that enables correspondence matching and provides rich features for an optimal
transport matching stage.

as a linear map between the functional bases (i.e. eigenfunctions of the Laplace Beltrami Operator) defined on the
shapes.
As a first work to pair the functional map framework
with deep neural networks on deformable shapes, deep
functional maps [32] present a pipeline to seek a correspondence using as input SHOT [60] handcrafted descriptors on sampled points. Despite building on top of point
cloud features, FMNet [32] finds correspondences densely
on deformable shapes. Recent works [22, 61] also use
learned point cloud features [59] to describe local regions.
Other methods also suggest integrating spectral manifold
wavelets [26] or iterative spectral upsampling into functional maps [37]. While these methods investigate dense
correspondences, many require numerous initial keypoints
or are sensitive to initial sparse matches.

11757

