DiSparse: Disentangled Sparsification for Multitask Model Compression
Xinglong Sun1 , Ali Hassani1 , Zhangyang Wang2 , Gao Huang3 , Humphrey Shi1,4
SHI Lab @ UIUC & U of Oregon, 2 UT Austin,3 Tsinghua University, 4 Picsart AI Research (PAIR)

Cityscapes Converged Multitask Training Loss

Abstract

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [29] are considered the go-to architecture for computer vision, ever since
the inception of AlexNet [28], especially in fundamental
vision tasks such as image classification [8], object detection [22, 35] and segmentation [3, 38]. As more complex
and difficult vision tasks are explored, substantial efforts
are devoted to scaling deep convolutional networks to enormous sizes. Many models exist with parameters as many
as billions, which significantly challenges those targeting
edge device applications. Therefore, effectively compressing deep convolutional networks for efficient storage and
computation has been a very active research area, and var-

0.54
Training loss

Despite the popularity of Model Compression and Multitask Learning, how to effectively compress a multitask
model has been less thoroughly analyzed due to the challenging entanglement of tasks in the parameter space.
In this paper, we propose DiSparse, a simple, effective,
and first-of-its-kind multitask pruning and sparse training
scheme. We consider each task independently by disentangling the importance measurement and take the unanimous decisions among all tasks when performing parameter pruning and selection. Our experimental results demonstrate superior performance on various configurations and
settings compared to popular sparse training and pruning
methods. Besides the effectiveness in compression, DiSparse also provides a powerful tool to the multitask learning community. Surprisingly, we even observed better performance than some dedicated multitask learning methods
in several cases despite the high model sparsity enforced
by DiSparse. We analyzed the pruning masks generated
with DiSparse and observed strikingly similar sparse network architecture identified by each task even before the
training starts. We also observe the existence of a "watershed" layer where the task relatedness sharply drops, implying no benefits in continued parameters sharing. Our code
and models will be available at: https://github.com/SHILabs/DiSparse-Multitask-Model-Compression.

0.56

Cityscapes Converged Multitask Validation Loss
0.68

SNIP
Random
LTH
RigL
DiSparse (static)
DiSparse (dynamic)
Baseline

0.58

SNIP
Random
LTH
RigL
DiSparse (static)
DiSparse (dynamic)
Baseline

0.66
0.64
Validation loss

1

0.52
0.5

0.62
0.6

0.48

0.58

0.46

0.56
0.54

0.44
30

50

70
Sparsity (%)

90

30

50

70

90

Sparsity (%)

Figure 1. Converged training and validation multitask loss on
Cityscapes. Our method DiSparse obtains the best training and
validation behavior in both static and dynamic sparse training
paradigms comparing to other methods. DiSparse even beats the
unsparsified baseline at several sparsity levels.

ious approaches have been proposed and developed [6, 9]
over the years.
Generally, neural network compression techniques can
be categorized [9] into pruning [20, 30, 32], quantization [4,
37, 56], low-rank factorization [10, 33, 58], and knowledge
distillation [25, 26, 36]. Network pruning, as a popular subfield of model compression, aims to discard certain parameters in the model, while retaining performance as much
as possible. Pruning methods usually try to assign the
best saliency score (also referred to as importance score)
to each parameter and perform selection and pruning based
on these importance measurements. Despite the diversity
in the pruning schemes proposed in recent years, chasing
sparsity in the network, either in a structured or unstructured manner, has been one of the central themes since the
very beginning [21,30]. Parameter efficiency of sparse neural networks has been demonstrated [19, 52], and multiple
works [15,48] have shown inference time speedups are possible using sparsity for convolutional neural networks.
Notwithstanding the increasing attention on model pruning and sparse training, effectively sparsifying a multitask network remains unexplored in spite of its importance.
Multitask Learning (MTL) focuses on simultaneously solving multiple related tasks using a single model, which can
significantly reduce the training and inference time and im-

12382

