Pix2NeRF: Unsupervised Conditional π-GAN for Single Image to Neural
Radiance Fields Translation
Shengqu Cai
ETH Zürich

Anton Obukhov
ETH Zürich

Dengxin Dai
MPI for Informatics
ETH Zürich

Train

Luc Van Gool
ETH Zürich
KU Leuven

Train

Pix2NeRF

Pix2NeRF

Figure 1. Overview of Pix2NeRF: We propose a method for unsupervised learning of neural representations of scenes, sharing a common
pose prior. At test time, Pix2NeRF disentangles pose and content from an input image and renders novel views of the content. Top: π-GAN
is trained on a dataset without pose supervision. Bottom: a trained model is conditioned on a single image to obtain pose-dependent views.

Abstract
We propose a pipeline to generate Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRF) of an object or a scene of a specific class,
conditioned on a single input image. This is a challenging
task, as training NeRF requires multiple views of the same
scene, coupled with corresponding poses, which are hard
to obtain. Our method is based on π-GAN, a generative
model for unconditional 3D-aware image synthesis, which
maps random latent codes to radiance fields of a class of
objects. We jointly optimize (1) the π-GAN objective to utilize its high-fidelity 3D-aware generation and (2) a carefully
designed reconstruction objective. The latter includes an
encoder coupled with π-GAN generator to form an autoencoder. Unlike previous few-shot NeRF approaches, our
pipeline is unsupervised, capable of being trained with independent images without 3D, multi-view, or pose supervision.
Applications of our pipeline include 3d avatar generation,
object-centric novel view synthesis with a single input image,
and 3d-aware super-resolution, to name a few.

1. Introduction
Following the success of Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRF) [23], encoding scenes as weights of
multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) has emerged as a promising
research direction. Novel View Synthesis is an important
application: given sparse sample views of a scene, the task
is to synthesize novel views from unseen camera poses.
NeRF addresses it by encoding color and volume density at
each point of the 3D scene into a neural network and uses
traditional volume rendering to compose 2D views.
While NeRF is capable of synthesizing novel views with
high fidelity, it is often impractical due to being “overfitted” to a given scene and requiring multiple views of the
scene to train. Several follow-up works attempt to address
these limitations via making NeRF generalize to new scenes.
Corresponding author: Shengqu Cai (shecai@ethz.ch)
Code: https://github.com/HexagonPrime/Pix2NeRF

3981

