Bridging Global Context Interactions for High-Fidelity Image Completion
Chuanxia Zheng1
Tat-Jen Cham2
Jianfei Cai1
Dinh Phung1
1
Department of Data Science & AI, Monash University, Australia
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
chuanxia.zheng@monash.edu, ASTJCham@ntu.edu.sg, {Jianfei.Cai,dinh.phung}@monash.edu

(a) Masked input

(a) Masked input

(b) CRFill [54]ICCV’2021

(c) Ours TFill

(a) Masked input

(b) DSI [37]CVPR’2021

(c) Ours TFill

(a) Masked input

(a) Masked input

(b) PIC [60]CVPR’2019

(b) HiFill [51]CVPR’2020

(b) ICT [47]ICCV’2021

(c) Ours TFill

(c) Ours TFill

(c) Ours TFill

Figure 1. Example completion results of our method on different sceneries with various masks (missing regions shown in white, a
transparency ratio is set for better visualization). Our TFill model not only effectively removes large objects (left), but also infers reasonable
contents and plausible appearances for semantical image completion on various settings (right). (Zoom in to see the details.)

Abstract
Bridging global context interactions correctly is important for high-fidelity image completion with large masks.
Previous methods attempting this via deep or large receptive field (RF) convolutions cannot escape from the dominance of nearby interactions, which may be inferior. In
this paper, we propose to treat image completion as a directionless sequence-to-sequence prediction task, and deploy a transformer to directly capture long-range dependence. Crucially, we employ a restrictive CNN with small
and non-overlapping RF for weighted token representation,
which allows the transformer to explicitly model the longrange visible context relations with equal importance in
all layers, without implicitly confounding neighboring tokens when larger RFs are used. To improve appearance
consistency between visible and generated regions, a novel
attention-aware layer (AAL) is introduced to better exploit
distantly related high-frequency features. Overall, extensive experiments demonstrate superior performance compared to state-of-the-art methods on several datasets. Code

is available at https://github.com/lyndonzheng/TFill.

1. Introduction
Image completion refers to the task of filling reasonable
content with photorealistic appearance into missing regions,
conditioned on partially visible information (as shown in
Fig. 1). Earlier methods infer the pixels of missing regions by propagating pieces from neighboring visible regions [1–3, 9], while more recent ones directly learn to generate content and appearance using deep neural networks
[17, 28, 29, 35–37, 47, 51, 52, 54, 60].
A main challenge in this task is the requirement of bridging and exploiting visible information globally, after it had
been degraded by arbitrary masks. As depicted on the left
of Fig. 1, when the entire person is masked, the natural expectation is to complete the masked area based on the visible background context. In contrast, on the right of Fig. 1,
when large free-form irregular masks cover the main parts
but leave the partial information visible, it is necessary but
highly challenging to correctly capture long-range depen-

11512

