Make It Move: Controllable Image-to-Video Generation with Text Descriptions
Yaosi Hu1 * Chong Luo2 Zhenzhong Chen1
Wuhan University1 Microsoft Research Asia2
ys hu@whu.edu.cn

cluo@microsoft.com

zzchen@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Generating controllable videos conforming to user intentions is an appealing yet challenging topic in computer
vision. To enable maneuverable control in line with user intentions, a novel video generation task, named Text-Imageto-Video generation (TI2V), is proposed. With both controllable appearance and motion, TI2V aims at generating videos from a static image and a text description. The
key challenges of TI2V task lie both in aligning appearance and motion from different modalities, and in handling
uncertainty in text descriptions. To address these challenges, we propose a Motion Anchor-based video GEnerator (MAGE) with an innovative motion anchor (MA) structure to store appearance-motion aligned representation. To
model the uncertainty and increase the diversity, it further
allows the injection of explicit condition and implicit randomness. Through three-dimensional axial transformers,
MA is interacted with given image to generate next frames
recursively with satisfying controllability and diversity. Accompanying the new task, we build two new video-text
paired datasets based on MNIST and CATER for evaluation. Experiments conducted on these datasets verify the effectiveness of MAGE and show appealing potentials of TI2V
task. Datasets are available at https:// github.com/ YouncyHu/ MAGE.

1. Introduction
Video generation has undergone revolutionary changes
and has made great progress in recent years. Early research
of unconditional video generation [24, 26, 28] focused on
how to generate a video from noise or a latent vector from
an aligned latent space. Recently, more emphases have been
put on controllable video generation [4, 11, 30], which allows users to express their intentions about how the scene
or the objects look like (appearance information) or how
the objects move (motion information). Controllable video
generation has many potential applications, including facilitating designers in artistic creation and assisting machine
learning practitioners for data augmentation.
* This work was done while Yaosi Hu was an intern at MSRA.

Figure 1. An illustration of the proposed TI2V task. An image
and a detailed text description provide the appearance and motion
information for video generation, respectively.

Existing controllable video generation tasks can be
grouped into three categories, namely Image-to-Video generation (I2V), Video-to-Video generation (V2V), and Textto-Video generation (T2V). These tasks provide different
ways for users to inject the appearance and the motion information and therefore have different levels of control over
these two factors. I2V and V2V have strong control over
the appearance of generated video, as separate images are
usually provided to set the scene. As for the motion, I2V
shows limited controllability since the task is defined to
accept only coarse-grained motion clues, such as predefined action labels or directions [4]. In contrast, V2V can
generate videos with highly controllable motion because
detailed motion guidance, such as trajectories [11] or action sequences [6, 19], are provided in the form of input
video. But one drawback of V2V in practical use is that
such motion guidance is hard to be obtained. Among all the
three tasks, T2V has the weakest control over the generated
video. Users provide both appearance and motion information through text, which is imprecise and sometimes ambiguous. Nevertheless, text description of motion is more
in line with human habits [35] and leaves a lot of room for
creation and imagination in video generation.
In this paper, we introduce a novel video generation task,
named Text-Image-to-Video generation (TI2V). It provides
a natural way for users to express their intentions, using a
single static image to set the scene and a natural text de-

18219

