Knowledge Distillation with the Reused Teacher Classifier
Defang Chen1,2,3 Jian-Ping Mei4 Hailin Zhang1,2,3
Can Wang1,2,3∗ Yan Feng1,2,3 Chun Chen1,2,3
1
Zhejiang University 2 Shanghai Institute for Advanced Study of Zhejiang University
3
ZJU-Bangsun Joint Research Center 4 Zhejiang University of Technology
defchern@zju.edu.cn, jpmei@zjut.edu.cn, {zzzhl, wcan, fengyan, chenc}@zju.edu.cn

Pre-trained Teacher Model

Abstract
Knowledge distillation aims to compress a powerful yet
cumbersome teacher model into a lightweight student model
without much sacrifice of performance. For this purpose,
various approaches have been proposed over the past few
years, generally with elaborately designed knowledge representations, which in turn increase the difficulty of model
development and interpretation. In contrast, we empirically show that a simple knowledge distillation technique
is enough to significantly narrow down the teacher-student
performance gap. We directly reuse the discriminative classifier from the pre-trained teacher model for student inference and train a student encoder through feature alignment
with a single ℓ2 loss. In this way, the student model is able to
achieve exactly the same performance as the teacher model
provided that their extracted features are perfectly aligned.
An additional projector is developed to help the student encoder match with the teacher classifier, which renders our
technique applicable to various teacher and student architectures. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our technique achieves state-of-the-art results at the modest cost of
compression ratio due to the added projector.

1. Introduction
Given a powerful teacher model with large numbers of
parameters, the goal of knowledge distillation (KD) is to
help another less-parameterized student model gain a similar generalization ability as the larger teacher model [4, 24].
A straightforward way to achieve this goal is by aligning
their logits or class predictions given the same inputs [2,24].
Due to its conceptual simplicity and practical effectiveness,
KD technique has achieved great success in a variety of applications, such as object detection [8], semantic segmentation [32] and the training of transformers [45].
One limitation of the vanilla KD is that the performance
∗ Corresponding author

Training
Image 𝒙𝒙

Encoder 𝑓𝑓 𝑡𝑡

Student Model
Encoder 𝑓𝑓 𝑠𝑠

Classifier

Alignment

Projector

Reuse
Classifier

Figure 1. An overview of our proposed SimKD. A simple ℓ2 loss
is adopted for feature alignment in the preceding layer of the final
classifier. Only the student feature encoder and dimension projector are updated during training (boxes with the black border). The
pre-trained teacher classifier is reused for student inference.

gap between the original teacher model and the distilled student model is still significant. To overcome this drawback,
a bunch of approaches have been proposed in the last few
years [19, 48]. Most of them benefit from exploiting additional supervision from the pre-trained teacher model, especially the intermediate layers [1, 6, 39, 44, 46, 50, 53]. Besides aligning the plain intermediate features [6, 39, 50], the
existing efforts are typically based on elaborately designed
knowledge representations, such as mimicking spatial attention maps [53], pairwise similarity patterns [36, 37, 46]
or maximizing the mutual information between teacher and
student features [1, 44, 55]. Although we indeed see constant improvements of these works in student performance,
neither effective representations nor well-optimized hyperparameters ensuring their success are easily achievable in
practice. Furthermore, the diversity of transferred knowledge hinders the emergence of a unified and clear interpretation of the final improvement in student performance.
In this paper, we present a simple knowledge distillation
technique and demonstrate that it can significantly bridge
the performance gap between teacher and student models
with no need for elaborate knowledge representations. Our
proposed “SimKD” technique is illustrated in Figure 1. We

11933

