SIOD: Single Instance Annotated Per Category Per Image for Object Detection
Hanjun Li1 ,* Xingjia Pan2 , Ke Yan 2†, Fan Tang 3 , Wei-Shi Zheng1,4,5 †
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
2
Youtu Lab, Tencent 3 Jilin University 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory
5
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education
lihj85@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {xjia.pan,tfan.108}@gmail.com,kerwinyan@tencent.com, wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract

backpack
person

tennis racket

Object detection under imperfect data receives great
attention recently. Weakly supervised object detection
(WSOD) suffers from severe localization issues due to the
lack of instance-level annotation, while semi-supervised
object detection (SSOD) remains challenging led by the
inter-image discrepancy between labeled and unlabeled
data. In this study, we propose the Single Instance
annotated Object Detection (SIOD), requiring only one
instance annotation for each existing category in an image.
Degraded from inter-task (WSOD) or inter-image (SSOD)
discrepancies to the intra-image discrepancy, SIOD provides more reliable and rich prior knowledge for mining
the rest of unlabeled instances and trades off the annotation cost and performance. Under the SIOD setting, we
propose a simple yet effective framework, termed DualMining (DMiner), which consists of a Similarity-based
Pseudo Label Generating module (SPLG) and a Pixel-level
Group Contrastive Learning module (PGCL). SPLG firstly
mines latent instances from feature representation space to
alleviate the annotation missing problem. To avoid being
misled by inaccurate pseudo labels, we propose PGCL
to boost the tolerance to false pseudo labels. Extensive
experiments on MS COCO verify the feasibility of the SIOD
setting and the superiority of the proposed method, which
obtains consistent and significant improvements compared
to baseline methods and achieves comparable results with
fully supervised object detection (FSOD) methods with only
40% instances annotated. Code is available at https:
//github.com/solicucu/SIOD.

1. Introduction
With the boom of Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
and Vision Transformer [9, 16, 13, 23, 30, 33], object
* Work partially done during the Youtu Lab internship
† Corresponding author

backpack
person

person

sports ball

skis

skis

(a) WSOD
backpack
person

(b) SSOD
backpack
person

person

tennis racket

person

tennis racket

sports ball

sports ball

skis

(c) SAOD

(d) SIOD (Ours)

Figure 1. Different annotation setup for (a) WSOD, (b) SSOD, (c)
SAOD and (d) SIOD (Ours).

detection [3, 5, 20, 22, 26, 27, 28, 50] has achieved great
improvements with a large number of instance-level annotations. However, these annotations are not only laborintensive and time-consuming, but also prevent detectors
from generalizing to most realistic scenarios where only few
labeled data is available.
Weakly supervised object detection (WSOD), which
requires only image-level labels for training, has received
much attention in computer vision community. Although
great advances [2, 19, 34, 29, 8] have been achieved in
recent years, it still remains a huge performance gap between WSOD and FSOD. WSOD suffers from severe localization issues due to the large discrepancy between imagelevel annotation and instance-level task. Semi-supervised
object detection (SSOD) is an alternative few-label object
detection task, where only a small number of instance-level
annotations are available. SSOD methods [14, 15, 1, 35,
17, 49] obtain superior localization accuracy compared to
WSOD methods, but the inter-image discrepancy between
labeled and unlabeled data limits further improvement by
a large margin due to the lack of explicit inter-image
communication in popular mini-batch optimization manner.
Sparsely annotated object detection (SAOD) is recently
proposed, which annotates a part of instances in each image.
Specifically, SAOD methods [37, 43, 45] usually imitate
sparse annotation by randomly erasing different proportion
of annotations from completely annotated object detection

14197

