Tree Energy Loss: Towards Sparsely Annotated Semantic Segmentation
Zhiyuan Liang1 *
Tiancai Wang2
Xiangyu Zhang2
Jian Sun2
Jianbing Shen3
1
Beijing Institute of Technology 2 MEGVII Technology 3 SKL-IOTSC, University of Macau

Abstract
Sparsely annotated semantic segmentation (SASS) aims
to train a segmentation network with coarse-grained (i.e.,
point-, scribble-, and block-wise) supervisions, where only
a small proportion of pixels are labeled in each image. In
this paper, we propose a novel tree energy loss for SASS
by providing semantic guidance for unlabeled pixels. The
tree energy loss represents images as minimum spanning
trees to model both low-level and high-level pair-wise affinities. By sequentially applying these affinities to the network prediction, soft pseudo labels for unlabeled pixels are
generated in a coarse-to-fine manner, achieving dynamic
online self-training. The tree energy loss is effective and
easy to be incorporated into existing frameworks by combining it with a traditional segmentation loss. Compared
with previous SASS methods, our method requires no multistage training strategies, alternating optimization procedures, additional supervised data, or time-consuming postprocessing while outperforming them in all SASS settings.
Code is available at https://github.com/megviiresearch/TreeEnergyLoss.

(a) Auxiliary task

(b) Pseudo proposal

(c) Regularized loss

(d) Consistency learning

(e) Our tree energy loss

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, aiming to assign each pixel a semantic label for given images, is one of the fundamental
tasks in computer vision. Previous methods [4,18,25,26,36]
tend to leverage large amounts of fully annotated labels like
Fig. 2(b) to achieve satisfying performance. However, manually annotating such high-quality labels is labor-intensive.
To reduce the annotation cost and preserve the segmentation
performance, some recent works research on semantic segmentation with sparse annotations, such as point-wise [2]
and scribble-wise ones [17]. As shown in Fig. 2(c-d), the
point-wise annotation assigns each semantic object with a
* This work was performed during an internship at MEGVII Technology. This work was supported by The National Key Research and Development Program of China (2020AAA0105200) and Beijing Academy
of Artificial Intelligence (BAAI). Corresponding author: Jianbing Shen.
Email: shenjianbingcg@gmail.com

Figure 1. Illustration of current SASS approaches. S and E denote
the segmentation and auxiliary models, respectively. Our method
leverages the minimum spanning trees (MSTs) to capture both
low-level and high-level affinities to generate soft pseudo labels,
performing online self-training.

single-pixel label while the scribble-wise annotation draws
at least a scribble label for the object.
As illustrated in Fig. 1(a-d), existing approaches are
mainly based on auxiliary tasks, pseudo proposals, regularized losses, and consistency learning to solve SASS. However, there are some shortcomings in these approaches. The
predictive error from the auxiliary task [15,34,35] may hinder the performance of semantic segmentation. The proposal generation [17, 39, 42] is time-consuming and usually
calls for a multi-stage training strategy. The regularized

16907

