Point Cloud Pre-training with Natural 3D Structures
Ryosuke Yamada1 * Hirokatsu Kataoka1 * Naoya Chiba2
1

Yukiyasu Domae1

Tetsuya Ogata1,2

2

Waseda University

National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST)

Abstract
Pre-training

The construction of 3D point cloud datasets requires a
great deal of human effort. Therefore, constructing a largescale 3D point clouds dataset is difficult. In order to remedy this issue, we propose a newly developed point cloud
fractal database (PC-FractalDB), which is a novel family
of formula-driven supervised learning inspired by fractal
geometry encountered in natural 3D structures. Our research is based on the hypothesis that we could learn representations from more real-world 3D patterns than conventional 3D datasets by learning fractal geometry. We
show how the PC-FractalDB facilitates solving several recent dataset-related problems in 3D scene understanding,
such as 3D model collection and labor-intensive annotation. The experimental section shows how we achieved the
performance rate of up to 61.9% and 59.0% for the ScanNetV2 and SUN RGB-D datasets, respectively, over the current highest scores obtained with the PointContrast, contrastive scene contexts (CSC), and RandomRooms. Moreover, the PC-FractalDB pre-trained model is especially effective in training with limited data. For example, in 10% of
training data on ScanNetV2, the PC-FractalDB pre-trained
VoteNet performs at 38.3%, which is +14.8% higher accuracy than CSC. Of particular note, we found that the proposed method achieves the highest results for 3D object detection pre-training in limited point cloud data. 1

1. Introduction
Recently, 3D object recognition with 3D point clouds is
expected to become increasingly helpful in real-world applications, such as mobile robots and self-driving cars. In
particular, 3D object detection estimates the location and
category of an object from 3D scenes. Compared with
image-based detection models, 3D point clouds enable robust detection of real-world objects without relying on appearance. However, a limitation of constructing 3D datasets
is that this requires a significant workforce to create and an* indicates equal contribution.
1 Dataset release: https://ryosuke- yamada.github.io/

PointCloud-FractalDataBase/

VoteNet
・
・
・

・
・
・

PC-FractalDB data

Estimation result

Transfer pre-trained parameters

VoteNet
・
・
・

・
・
・

Fine-tuning

ScanNetV2 data

Estimation result

(a) Pre-training: 3D object detection with PC-FractalDB.
60.2
53.8
46.7
38.3

55.7

54.7

47.4

49.7
46.1

36.5

42.2

41.8

23.5
32.4

33.6

23.9

(b) Fine-tuning results for a limited ScanNet data.

Figure 1. Pre-training effects on the PC-FractalDB as a family
of formula-driven supervised learning. Although the proposed
method does not use real data, it is a better pre-training approach
to understand a 3D scene, especially in a limited data scenario.

notate the 3D model, and such 3D models cannot usually
be collected in large quantities via the Internet. For this reason, it is necessary to either create 3D models via computeraided design (CAD) software or scan 3D scenes from the
real environment using sensors such as LiDAR scans. In
addition, constructing a point cloud dataset based on a 3D
scene will result in human annotators and cross-validators.
Training with limited data or annotation tends to cause overfitting of the detection model. Therefore, the present study
focuses on pre-training with the point cloud dataset to solve
the abovementioned problems.
We have already witnessed the effectiveness of pretraining in point cloud processing. In order to address the

21283

