The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Dynamic Determinantal Point Processes
Takayuki Osogami, Rudy Raymond

Akshay Goel

IBM Research AI

Graduate School of Mathematics
Kyushu University

Tomoyuki Shirai
Takanori Maehara

Institute of Mathematics for Industry
Kyushu University

RIKEN Center for
Advanced Intelligence Project
A key challenge in the applications of a DPP is in the
high computational complexity that is needed for learning the probability distribution from data. Because the loglikelihood of a DPP is generally non-concave with respect
to its parameters, and maximum likelihood estimation of a
DPP is conjectured to be NP-hard (Kulesza 2012), the standard approach in the literature is to ﬁnd a local maxima
via gradient-based methods. However, even one iteration of
gradient ascent can be computationally prohibitive. Speciﬁcally, a DPP can be speciﬁed by an M × M kernel matrix,
where M is the size of the ground set. An iteration of gradient ascent involves basic matrix-operations such as inversion, multiplication, and determinant, and a naive approach
would require O(M 3 ) time.
Recently, Gartrell et al. (2017) have proposed an efﬁcient learning algorithm for DPPs, where they assume that
the kernel has a low rank and leverage its low-rank factorization. The per iteration complexity of their gradientbased approach is O(T κ3 + K M 2 ), where K is the rank
of the kernel, T is the number of the subsets in training
data, and κ is the maximum size of those subset. This significantly improves upon learning algorithms for full-rank kernels, which require O(T κ3 + M 3 ) (Mariet and Sra 2015) or
more (Gillenwater et al. 2014).
We extend the algorithm by Gartrell et al. to the DPP
whose kernel can change over time, which we refer to as
a Dynamic DPP. We design the Dynamic DPP in a way
that the dynamic kernel not only allows low-rank factorization but also has a particular parametrization that enables efﬁcient learning through (stochastic) gradient-based
approaches. Speciﬁcally, our dynamic kernel can be represented by a matrix that is a linear function of the statistics of
previously selected subsets. The deﬁnition of the Dynamic
DPP is our ﬁrst contribution.
In developing a learning algorithm for the Dynamic DPP,
we make three improvements to the algorithm by Gartrell
et al. First, we use a dual representation of the kernel to
reduce the computational complexity of a bottleneck from
O(K M 2 ) to O(K 2 M ). Second, we replace an expression involving the inverse of a matrix that might not be
convertible with a slightly simpler expression with pseudoinverse. Third, we represent our algorithm in vector-matrix
operations. When our algorithm for the Dynamic DPP is
specialized for the (standard) DPP, its per step complex-

Abstract
The determinantal point process (DPP) has been receiving increasing attention in machine learning as a generative model
of subsets consisting of relevant and diverse items. Recently,
there has been a signiﬁcant progress in developing efﬁcient
algorithms for learning the kernel matrix that characterizes
a DPP. Here, we propose a dynamic DPP, which is a DPP
whose kernel can change over time, and develop efﬁcient
learning algorithms for the dynamic DPP. In the dynamic
DPP, the kernel depends on the subsets selected in the past,
but we assume a particular structure in the dependency to allow efﬁcient learning. We also assume that the kernel has a
low rank and exploit a recently proposed learning algorithm
for the DPP with low-rank factorization, but also show that its
bottleneck computation can be reduced from O(M 2 K) time
to O(M K 2 ) time, where M is the number of items under
consideration, and K is the rank of the kernel, which can be
set smaller than M by orders of magnitude.

Introduction
A determinantal point process (DPP) deﬁnes a probability
distribution over the subsets of items in a given ground set
in a way that the subsets consisting of relevant and diverse
items have high probabilities (Macchi 1975; Kulesza and
Taskar 2012; Soshnikov 2000; Shirai and Takahashi 2003a;
2003b). The DPP is receiving increasing attention in machine learning because of its broad applicability to recommendation of products (Gillenwater et al. 2014; Gartrell,
Paquet, and Koenigstein 2017), summarization of documents or videos (Gong et al. 2014), modeling neural spiking
(Snoek, Zemel, and Adams 2013), and other areas where we
want to select a subset of relevant and diverse items.
In some of these applications, it is important to take into
account the dependency across time (Affandi, Kulesza, and
Fox 2012; Gong et al. 2014; Qiao et al. 2016; Snoek, Zemel,
and Adams 2013). For example, a customer who purchased
a particular subset of products last week might want to purchase another particular subset of products that are otherwise unneeded this week. In this paper, we study a DPP
whose distribution can change over time depending on the
subsets that have been selected.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3868

