The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Weighted Abstract Dialectical Frameworks
Gerhard Brewka, Hannes Strass

Johannes P. Wallner, Stefan Woltran

Leipzig University, Computer Science Institute
Leipzig, Germany

TU Wien, Institute of Information Systems
Vienna, Austria

cannot be jointly accepted. The latter speciﬁes that every set
of accepted arguments must defend itself against attacks. A
variety of semantics has been deﬁned, ranging from Dung’s
original complete, preferred, stable, and grounded semantics
to the more recent ideal and cf2 semantics. The different
semantics reﬂect different intuitions about what “coherent
world view” means in this context, see e.g. (Baroni, Caminada, and Giacomin 2011) for an overview.
Despite their popularity, there have been various attempts
to generalize AFs as many researchers felt a need to cover
additional relevant relationships among arguments (see e.g.
the work of Cayrol and Lagasquie-Schiex, 2009). One of
the most systematic and ﬂexible outcomes of this research
are abstract dialectical frameworks (ADFs) (Brewka and
Woltran 2010; Brewka et al. 2013). ADFs allow for arbitrary relationships among arguments. In particular, arguments can not only attack each other, they also may provide support for other arguments and interact in various
complex ways. This is achieved by adding explicit acceptance conditions to the arguments which are most naturally
expressed in terms of a propositional formula (with atoms
referring to parent arguments). This way, it is possible
to specify individually for a particular argument, say, under what conditions the available supporting arguments outweigh the counterarguments. Meanwhile various applications of ADFs have been presented, for instance in legal reasoning (Al-Abdulkarim, Atkinson, and Bench-Capon 2014;
2016) and text exploration (Cabrio and Villata 2016). A mobile argumentation app based on ADF techniques was developed by Pührer (2017).
The operator-based semantics of ADFs can be traced
back to the work of Denecker, Marek, and Truszczyński
(2000; 2003; 2004) on approximation ﬁxpoint theory (AFT),
an algebraic framework for studying semantics of knowledge representation formalisms. We refer to the work of
Strass (2013) for a detailed analysis of the relationship between ADFs and AFT. The presentation of our approach in
this paper does not assume speciﬁc background knowledge
in AFT.
The motivation for the work presented here is as follows.
The deﬁnition of the various ADF semantics is based on
an analysis in terms of partial two-valued (or, equivalently,
three-valued) interpretations. The output provided by ADFs
(and AFs, for that matter) is thus restricted to three options:

Abstract
Abstract Dialectical Frameworks (ADFs) generalize Dung’s
argumentation frameworks allowing various relationships
among arguments to be expressed in a systematic way. We
further generalize ADFs so as to accommodate arbitrary acceptance degrees for the arguments. This makes ADFs applicable in domains where both the initial status of arguments and their relationship are only insufﬁciently speciﬁed
by Boolean functions. We deﬁne all standard ADF semantics
for the weighted case, including grounded, preferred and stable semantics. We illustrate our approach using acceptance
degrees from the unit interval and show how other valuation
structures can be integrated. In each case it is sufﬁcient to
specify how the generalized acceptance conditions are represented by formulas, and to specify the information ordering
underlying the characteristic ADF operator. We also present
complexity results for problems related to weighted ADFs.

1

Introduction

Computational models of argumentation are a highly active area of current research. The ﬁeld has two main subareas, namely logic-based argumentation and abstract argumentation. The former studies the structure of arguments,
how they can be constructed from a given formal knowledge
base, and how they logically interact with each other. The
latter, in contrast, assumes a given set of abstract arguments
together with speciﬁc relations among them. The focus is
on evaluating the arguments based on their interactions with
one another. This evaluation typically uses a speciﬁc semantics, thus identifying subsets of the available arguments
satisfying intended properties so that the chosen set arguably
can be viewed as representing a coherent world view.
In the abstract approach, Dung’s argumentation frameworks (AFs) (Dung 1995) and their associated semantics
are widely used. In a nutshell, an AF is a directed graph
with each vertex being an abstract argument and each directed edge corresponding to an attack from one argument
to another. These attacks are then resolved using appropriate semantics. The semantics are typically based on two important concepts, namely conﬂict-freeness and admissibility.
The former states that if there is a conﬂict between two arguments, i.e. one argument attacks the other, then the two
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1779

