The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Incorporating GAN for Negative Sampling
in Knowledge Representation Learning
Peifeng Wang

Shuangyin Li

Rong Pan∗

School of Data and Computer Science,
Sun Yat-sen University, China.
wangpf3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

iPIN Inc., Shenzhen, China.
shuangyinli@ipin.com

School of Data and Computer Science,
Sun Yat-sen University, China.
panr@sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

Positive triplet
Negative triplet

Knowledge representation learning aims at modeling knowledge graph by encoding entities and relations into a low dimensional space. Most of the traditional works for knowledge
embedding need negative sampling to minimize a marginbased ranking loss. However, those works construct negative samples through a random mode, by which the samples
are often too trivial to ﬁt the model efﬁciently. In this paper,
we propose a novel knowledge representation learning framework based on Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN). In
this GAN-based framework, we take advantage of a generator to obtain high-quality negative samples. Meanwhile, the
discriminator in GAN learns the embeddings of the entities
and relations in knowledge graph. Thus, we can incorporate
the proposed GAN-based framework into various traditional
models to improve the ability of knowledge representation
learning. Experimental results show that our proposed GANbased framework outperforms baselines on triplets classiﬁcation and link prediction tasks.

1

margin

Training
margin

Figure 1: Illustration of zero loss problem in the random
mode. After training for a while, the random mode often
samples triplets in the red segmented circle, which are out
of the margin and bring no loss. A certain number of negative triplets are thus ignored within the margin as shown in
the blue dotted circle.

Introduction

Knowledge graph refers to a network whose nodes are entities in the real world and edges are relations between entities. Such a network builds up a structural system for
human knowledge and is composed of a large number of
facts in the form of triplet (head entity, relation, tail entity). Knowledge graph plays an important role in supporting applications such as web search, question answering, and personalized recommendation. Many knowledge
graphs, such as Freebase (Bollacker et al. 2008), DBpedia (Auer et al. 2007), and YAGO (Suchanek, Kasneci,
and Weikum 2007), have already been well-developed. Lots
of previous works (Bordes et al. 2013; Wang et al. 2014;
Lin et al. 2015; He et al. 2015) on knowledge graphs make
great efforts in knowledge representation learning to handle data sparsity and incompleteness. Knowledge representation learning attempts to embed a knowledge graph into
a continuous vector space. It provides a numerical computation framework for knowledge graph completion and captures semantic similarity between entities, which is useful
for solving data sparsity.

To date, many knowledge representation learning models
have been proposed and have shown to achieve great successes for their efﬁciency. These models try different approaches to score a triplet (h, r, t), which assume that there
are positive triplets from the training set and man-made negative triplets. The target of these models is to minimize a
margin-based ranking loss which aims to separate the scores
of the positive triplets from those of the negative triplets by
a ﬁxed margin.
Nevertheless, the negative triplets are constructed by replacing either head or tail entities of positive triplets with
entities randomly sampled from the whole entities set. Such
a random sampling method is effective at the beginning of
the training since most of the negative triplets are still within
the margin to the positive triplets. However, when the training process goes on, if we still construct negative triplets by
random sampling, they are very likely to be out of the margin, which gives rise to zero loss problem as illustrated in
Figure 1. Thus, these trivial negative triplets fail to provide
guidances on model training.
Moreover, a high-quality negative triplet can help push the
model to its limit. Take the triplet (Steve Jobs, FounderOf,
Apple Inc.) as an example. We would like to replace its head

∗

Corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2005

