The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Resource-Constrained Scheduling for Maritime Trafﬁc Management
Lucas Agussurja, Akshat Kumar, Hoong Chuin Lau
{lagussurja, akshatkumar, hclau}@smu.edu.sg
School of Information Systems
Singapore Management University

which is a set of mandatory one-direction routes designed
to reduce collision risk among vessels transitioning through
the Straits, and fairway where vessels may travel in any direction. Other features include berths, anchorages, and pilot
boarding grounds. As fairway is relatively narrow, vessels
entering it require a local pilot onboard from pilot boarding
grounds. The water area is also divided into smaller zones
by dividing the TSS, fairway, and anchorages into smaller
parts. Such zones, also shown in ﬁgure 1, form the basis of
our scheduling approach.
We model each vessel as performing a sequence of activities in TSS and fairway. Each such activity requires certain shared resources (e.g., physical sea space, pilots, berths
among others). The activity that directly affects congestion is
the navigation activity. For a vessel, the traversing of a zone
in the Straits/port waters is considered an activity. E.g., the
second activity of vessel 1 is navigating the zone 10EB in
ﬁgure 1. Each vessel is modeled as performing a sequence of
such navigation activities with no precedence relation with
other vessels. To improve safety of navigation, for each zone,
we limit the maximum number of vessels that can be simultaneously present in the zone. Such a limit can be directly
derived from data (e.g., by ﬁnding the maximum number of
vessels present at any instant in the zone from historical data),
or provided as parameter from domain experts. Our goal is to
optimize the schedule of vessels (when should each activity
start and end) such that different resource limits are respected
and the resulting schedule has maximum efﬁciency (or least
possible delay).
The above problem can be considered as a restricted variant of RCPSP (Kolisch and Hartmann 1999), with dependency graph consisting of a set of linear dependencies per
vessel. Nevertheless, the problem is still challenging. There
is no lag/slack time between any two consecutive activities
as vessels cannot stop mid way during navigation. This can
seen as a special case of RCPSP/max with time lags set to
zero (Bartusch, Möhring, and Radermacher 1988). In contrast to ﬁxed activity durations in RCPSPs, the vessels are
allowed to speed up or slow down on the TSS/fairway up to
certain limits depending on the zones. This translates to activities having minimum and maximum durations, where the
actual durations are part of the decision variables—duration
of an activity directly translates into an average speed as the
length of the zone is known. This is the crucial difference

Abstract
We address the problem of mitigating congestion and preventing hotspots in busy water areas such as Singapore Straits and
port waters. Increasing maritime trafﬁc coupled with narrow
waterways makes vessel schedule coordination for just-in-time
arrival critical for navigational safety. Our contributions are:
1) We formulate the maritime trafﬁc management problem
based on the real case study of Singapore waters; 2) We model
the problem as a variant of the resource-constrained project
scheduling problem (RCPSP), and formulate mixed-integer
and constraint programming (MIP/CP) formulations; 3) To
improve the scalability, we develop a combinatorial Benders
(CB) approach that is signiﬁcantly more effective than standard MIP and CP formulations. We also develop symmetry
breaking constraints and optimality cuts that further enhance
the CB approach’s effectiveness; 4) We develop a realistic
maritime trafﬁc simulator using electronic navigation charts
of Singapore Straits. Our scheduling approach on synthetic
problems and a real 55-day AIS dataset results in signiﬁcant
reduction of the trafﬁc density while incurring minimal delays.

1

Introduction

The Straits of Malacca and Singapore is one of the busiest
shipping areas in the world providing the shortest route between the Indian Ocean and the South China Sea. The vessel
trafﬁc in Straits has been consistently increasing, with very
large container vessels (VLCC) one of the fastest growing
segments (Hand 2017). Congestion around busy port waters
critically affects safety of navigation as it limits manoeuvrability for large vessels, leads to increased cross trafﬁc,
and requires vessels to frequently change course to avoid
other vessels (Segar 2015). Recently, several vessel collisions
causing oil spill in Straits have also threatened the environment (Lim 2017; Tan 2017). Therefore, our goal is to study
and develop maritime trafﬁc coordination techniques to mitigate congestion and prevent hotspots for safety of navigation
in busy waterways such as Singapore Straits. The framework
and techniques we develop are fairly general and are also
applicable to other heavily trafﬁcked ports.
The water area used as the case study, shown in ﬁgure 1, is
based on the e-navigation charts of the Straits. Different features in this area include the trafﬁc separation scheme (TSS)
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6086

