The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Truthful and Near-Optimal Mechanisms for
Welfare Maximization in Multi-Winner Elections
Umang Bhaskar

Varsha Dani

Abheek Ghosh

Tata Institute of Fundamental Research,
Mumbai, India 400 005

University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA

Indian Institute of Technology,
Guwahati, India 781039

available to their local government should be spent. Here,
voters are presented with a number of candidate projects
with costs, and must select a budget-feasible set of projects
to fund. In the US, funds worth more than $250 million
have been allocated via participatory budgeting in more than
440 community projects. Cities as diverse as Porto Alegre
in Brazil to Chicago in the US use participatory budgeting to fund projects. Researchers in computational social
choice have contributed signiﬁcantly to this effort, both in
the design and theoretical analysis of mechanisms, as well
as building systems for participatory budgeting, e.g., (Goel
et al. 2016; Caragiannis et al. 2017).
The classical approach for designing mechanisms for
preference aggregation is axiomatic: we identify properties
that are intuitively appealing and design mechanisms that
satisfy these properties. Typical properties of interest include Pareto-optimality, truthfulness, and monotonicity.1 A
natural and common assumption is that the the agents possess cardinal utilities for the candidates, not just ordinal preferences over them. This allows, e.g., the characterization of
truthful randomized mechanisms (Gibbard 1977). When the
utilities of different agents have a common measure and are
comparable, the aggregate utility, or utilitarian welfare, is
a commonly used measure to design and evaluate mechanisms. This is a standard assumption, e.g., in mechanism
design, agents’ preferences are expressed as money. In transportation systems, the time spent in transit is often used as a
measure of utility, and the aggregate time spent as a measure
of efﬁciency (e.g., (Mclean 2016)). Good utilitarian welfare
does not substitute for other properties, but a mechanism
with bad utilitarian welfare arguably has little use for most
practical applications.
Our work focuses on the utilitarian welfare of mechanisms. We assume that candidates have cardinal utilities for
the candidates, and in addition, for each agent, the sum of
utilities for the candidates is unity. This is known as the
unit-sum representation, and is based on the premise that all
agents have equal weight. In contrast, the unit-range representation requires the sum of candidate utilities to be ar-

Abstract
Mechanisms for aggregating the preferences of agents in
elections need to balance many different considerations, including efﬁciency, information elicited from agents, and manipulability. We consider the utilitarian social welfare of
mechanisms for preference aggregation, measured by the distortion. We show that for a particular input format called
threshold approval voting, where each agent is presented with
an independently chosen threshold, there is a mechanism with
nearly optimal distortion when the number of voters is large.
Threshold mechanisms are potentially manipulable, but place
a low informational burden on voters.
We then consider truthful mechanisms. For the widelystudied class of ordinal mechanisms which elicit the rankings of candidates from each agent, we show that truthfulness essentially imposes no additional loss √
of welfare. We
give truthful mechanisms with distortion
√ O( m log m) for
k-winner elections, and distortion O( m log m) when candidates have arbitrary costs, in elections with m candidates.
These nearly match known lower bounds for ordinal mechanisms that ignore the strategic behavior. We further tighten
these lower bounds and show that for truthful mechanisms
our ﬁrst upper bound is tight. Lastly, when agents decide between two candidates, we give tight bounds on the distortion
for truthful mechanisms.

1

Introduction

How should a group of agents, presented with a set of candidates, collectively decide which candidates to select? This
problem of deciding how to aggregate the preferences of
multiple rational agents is the fundamental challenge in social choice theory and has implications for diverse ﬁelds,
including government formation, recommendation systems,
and resource allocation. In many of these applications multiple candidates can be selected. Each candidate carries a
cost, and a budget typically constrains the total cost of the
selected set of candidates. For example, in the selection of k
members for a committee, each candidate has cost 1/k while
the budget available is 1.
A particularly appealing recent application of preference
aggregation is participatory budgeting, which enables individuals who are directly affected to decide how the budget

1

Informally, a mechanism is Pareto-optimal if no other outcome
increases the welfare of all the agents, truthful if every agent maximizes its utility by reporting preferences truthfully, and monotone
if increasing the preference by an agent for a candidate does not
decrease the probability that the candidate is selected.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

925

