The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

How AI Wins Friends and Inﬂuences People
in Repeated Games with Cheap Talk
Mayada Oudah

Talal Rahwan

Tawna Crandall

Jacob W. Crandall

Dept. of Computer Science
Masdar Institute
Abu Dhabi, UAE
oudah.mayada@gmail.com

Dept. of Computer Science
Khalifa Univ. of Sci. and Tech.
Abu Dhabi, UAE
trahwan@masdar.ac.ae

Computer Science Dept.
Brigham Young University
Provo, UT, USA
tawnac@gmail.com

Computer Science Dept.
Brigham Young University
Provo, UT, USA
crandall@cs.byu.edu

tasks will require these agents to repeatedly interact with
other people (apart from their stakeholders) who may not
share all of their preferences. To be successful in such scenarios, autonomous agents must, like humans, be able to win
friends and inﬂuence people.
In this paper, we study how an AI can develop successful long-term relationships, modeled as repeated games with
cheap talk (RGCTs), with people. Dealing successfully with
people, we argue, entails two properties. First, a successful
AI should obtain high material payoffs for its stakeholder,
which requires it to effectively inﬂuence the behavior of people with whom it interacts. We refer to this property as inﬂuencing people. Second, a successful AI should win friends,
meaning that the people with whom it interacts should both
think highly of it and desire to continue associating with it.
In short, the success of an AI in RGCTs is determined by its
ability to both win friends and inﬂuence people.
An AI’s ability to win friends and inﬂuence people in
RGCTs depends on both its behavioral strategy (what it
does) and its signaling strategy (what it says). While behavior generation in repeated games has been well studied,
effectively signaling in RGCTs is less understood. To begin
to address this shortcoming, we derive several algorithms
for RGCTs by combining existing behavioral strategies with
signaling strategies based on known philosophies for dealing with people, including Thumper’s Rule (if you can’t say
something nice, don’t say anything at all), Carnegie’s Principles (Carnegie 1937), and other alternative theories. Via user
studies, we then evaluate the abilities of these algorithms to
win friends and inﬂuence people across four RGCTs.
This paper has two primary contributions. First, we propose that, when interacting with people in RGCTs, algorithms should be evaluated with respect to both winning
friends and inﬂuencing people, rather than the single metric class (payoff maximization) traditionally considered in
repeated games. Second, our results suggest sufﬁcient properties for winning friends and inﬂuencing people in RGCTs.
These results show that an algorithm that (1) quickly learns
an effective behavioral strategy while using a signaling strategy built on both (2) Carnegie’s Principles and (3) explainable AI (XAI) (Gunning 2016) was more successful at winning friends and inﬂuencing people than algorithms that
lacked any of those characteristics. This ﬁnding has important implications for the design of algorithms that interact

Abstract
Research has shown that a person’s ﬁnancial success is more
dependent on the ability to deal with people than on professional knowledge. Sage advice, such as “if you can’t say
something nice, don’t say anything at all” and principles articulated in Carnegie’s classic How to Win Friends and Inﬂuence People, offer trusted rules-of-thumb for how people
can successfully deal with each other. However, alternative
philosophies for dealing with people have also emerged. The
success of an AI system is likewise contingent on its ability to
win friends and inﬂuence people. In this paper, we study how
AI systems should be designed to win friends and inﬂuence
people in repeated games with cheap talk (RGCTs). We create several algorithms for playing RGCTs by combining existing behavioral strategies (what the AI does) with signaling
strategies (what the AI says) derived from several competing
philosophies. Via user study, we evaluate these algorithms in
four RGCTs. Our results suggest sufﬁcient properties for AIs
to win friends and inﬂuence people in RGCTs.

Introduction
In his classic book How to Win Friends and Inﬂuence People, Dale Carnegie argued that a person’s ﬁnancial success is
impacted more by the ability to “deal with people” than by
professional knowledge (Carnegie 1937, p. 15)1 . However,
so-called people skills are not easy to come by. For many
of us, it takes years (and even a lifetime) of guidance and
practice to learn the “ﬁne art” of getting along with others,
particularly in situations in which other people’s interests are
not fully aligned with our own.
As AI matures, autonomous agents will perform more
tasks in behalf of their human stakeholders. Many of these
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Carnegie’s full statement is worth noting: “Dealing with people is probably the biggest problem you face, especially if you are
in business. Yes, and that is also true if you are a housewife, architect or engineer. Research done a few years ago under the auspices
of the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching uncovered a most important and signiﬁcant fact–a fact later conﬁrmed
by additional studies made at the Carnegie Institute of Technology.
These investigations revealed that even in such technical lines as
engineering, about 15 percent of one’s ﬁnancial success is due to
one’s technical knowledge and about 85 percent is due to skill in
human engineering–to personality and the ability to lead people.”

1519

