The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

SAP: Self-Adaptive Proposal Model for
Temporal Action Detection Based on Reinforcement Learning
Jingjia Huang, Nannan Li, Tao Zhang, Ge Li, Tiejun Huang, Wen Gao
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University
Lishui Road 2199, Nanshan District, Shenzhen, China 518055
jjhuang@pku.edu.cn, linn@pkusz.edu.cn, t zhang@pku.edu.com,geli@ece.pku.edu.cn,
tjhuang@pku.edu.cn, wgao@pku.edu.cn
current window and that of true action region, the optimal
algorithm should be the process of sequential, iterative observation and reﬁnement consuming search steps as less as
possible.
In this paper, we propose a class-speciﬁc action detection
model called SAP that learns to continuously adjust the current region to cover the groundtruth more precisely in a selfadapted way. This is achieved by applying a sequence of
transformations to a temporal window that is initially placed
at the beginning of the video and ﬁnally ﬁnds and covers
action region as large as possible. The sequence of transformation is decided by an agent that analyzes the content of
the current attended region and select the next best action
according to a learned policy, which is trained via reinforcement learning based on Deep Q-Learning algorithm (Mnih
et al. 2015). Different from existing approaches that locate
the action following a ﬁxed path, our method generates various search trajectories for different action instances, depending on the video scenarios, the starting search position and
the sequences of actions adopted. As a result, the trained
agent will locate a single instance of an action in about 15
steps, which means that the model only processes 15 successive regions of an image to explore an uncover video segment, thus it is of great computational efﬁciency to compare
with sliding window based approaches.
Our model draws the inspiration from works that have
used reinforcement learning to build active models for object localization in image (Caicedo and Lazebnik 2015;
Jie et al. 2016; Bellver et al. 2016). However, we can not
handle the video in a top-down way that is proved to perform
effectively for image object localization, as the duration of
the video is usually too long (from hundreds to thousands
frames). We start the search from a position initially placed
at the beginning of the video, which will terminate until a
instance of action has been found or the maximum transformation steps has been reached, and then a new search begins from the position on the right side away from current
attended region. We incorporate temporal pooling operation
with feature extraction process to better represent the long
video segment and design a ”jump” action to avoid the agent
trapping itself in the region where no action occurs. We conducted a comprehensive experimental evaluation in the challenging THUMOS’14 dataset (Jiang et al. 2014), and the results demonstrate that SAP can achieve competitive perfor-

Abstract
Existing action detection algorithms usually generate action
proposals through an extensive search over the video at multiple temporal scales, which brings about huge computational
overhead and deviates from the human perception procedure.
We argue that the process of detecting actions should be naturally one of observation and reﬁnement: observe the current
window and reﬁne the span of attended window to cover true
action regions. In this paper, we propose a Self-Adaptive Proposal (SAP) model that learns to ﬁnd actions through continuously adjusting the temporal bounds in a self-adaptive way.
The whole process can be deemed as an agent, which is ﬁrstly
placed at the beginning of the video and traverse the whole
video by adopting a sequence of transformations on the current attended region to discover actions according to a learned
policy. We utilize reinforcement learning, especially the Deep
Q-learning algorithm to learn the agent’s decision policy. In
addition, we use temporal pooling operation to extract more
effective feature representation for the long temporal window,
and design a regression network to adjust the position offsets
between predicted results and the ground truth. Experiment
results on THUMOS’14 validate the effectiveness of SAP,
which can achieve competitive performance with current action detection algorithms via much fewer proposals.

Introduction
Temporal action detection requires not only to determine
whether an action occurs in a video but also to locate the
temporal extent of when it occurs, which is a challenging
problem for real-life long untrimmed videos. Most of modern approaches (Shou, Wang, and Chang 2016; Zhu and
Newsam 2016; Xiong et al. 2017) usually solve the problem
via a two-step pipeline: ﬁrstly generate a set of class independent action proposals, which are obtained via running a
action/background classiﬁer over a video at multiple temporal scales; then the proposals are classiﬁed by the pre-trained
action detector, and post processing such as non-maximum
suppression is applied. However, such extensive search for
action localization is unsatisfying in terms of both accuracy
and computational efﬁciency. Like the human detects the action through successively altering the span of attended region to narrow down the difference between the bounds of
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6951

