The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Double Forward Propagation
for Memorized Batch Normalization
Yong Guo,∗ Qingyao Wu,∗ Chaorui Deng, Jian Chen, Mingkui Tan†
School of Software Engineering, South China University of Technology, China
{guo.yong, secrdyz}@mail.scut.edu.cn, {qyw, ellachen, mingkuitan}@scut.edu.cn

stochastic gradient descent (SGD) (Bottou 1998), the input
of each layer will change due to the update of model parameters of the previous layers. As a result, the gradient vanishing or exploding problems may occur with a large probability, which severely hampers the performance (Glorot and
Bengio 2010; Srivastava, Greff, and Schmidhuber 2015).
To address this issue, Ioffe and Szegedy (Ioffe and
Szegedy 2015) proposed the Batch Normalization (BN)
method, which seeks to reduce the Internal Covariate Shift
by applying data normalization for the input of each layer.
The data in each batch B can be normalized by

Abstract
Batch Normalization (BN) has been a standard component in
designing deep neural networks (DNNs). Although the standard BN can signiﬁcantly accelerate the training of DNNs
and improve the generalization performance, it has several
underlying limitations which may hamper the performance in
both training and inference. In the training stage, BN relies on
estimating the mean and variance of data using a single minibatch. Consequently, BN can be unstable when the batch size
is very small or the data is poorly sampled. In the inference
stage, BN often uses the so called moving mean and moving variance instead of batch statistics, i.e., the training and
inference rules in BN are not consistent. Regarding these issues, we propose a memorized batch normalization (MBN),
which considers multiple recent batches to obtain more accurate and robust statistics. Note that after the SGD update
for each batch, the model parameters will change, and the
features will change accordingly, leading to the Distribution
Shift before and after the update for the considered batch.
To alleviate this issue, we present a simple Double-Forward
scheme in MBN which can further improve the performance.
Compared to related methods, the proposed MBN exhibits
consistent behaviors in both training and inference. Empirical results show that the MBN based models trained with the
Double-Forward scheme greatly reduce the sensitivity of data
and signiﬁcantly improve the generalization performance.

x̂i =

x i − μB
, yi = γ x̂i + β,
σB

(1)

where μB and σB are the mean and variance of the data
batch, and γ and β are learnable parameters to restore the
representative power of the model. In fact, by setting γ to
σB and β to μB , one can recover the original input xi . When
doing the inference, however, the statistics of a single minibatch can be very unstable due to insufﬁcient data or the
unreliable data quality. To address this, one may average the
statistics of more batches. For example, in many deep learning packages, such as PyTorch and TensorFlow, the so called
moving mean μmov and moving variance σmov are used for
inference. By moving averages over all the training batches,
μmov and σmov can be computed recursively via

Introduction

μmov := θμB + (1 − θ)μmov , σmov := θσB + (1 − θ)σmov, (2)

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have become the workhorse
of many learning tasks and real-world applications including
computer vision (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012;
He et al. 2016; Szegedy et al. 2017), natural language understanding (Goldberg 2016; Vendrov et al. 2015; Zhou and
Yu 2017) and speech recognition (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015; Xiong et al. 2017; Heymann, Drude, and HaebUmbach 2016). Training very deep DNNs is an important
problem and comes with its own set of challenges. One
of the most challenging issues is brought by the so called
Internal Covariate Shift (Ioffe and Szegedy 2015), which
refers to the data distribution changes for each layer during
training. Speciﬁcally, when training DNNs with mini-batch

where θ ≤ 1 is the coefﬁcient of the linear combination.
Batch normalization can signiﬁcantly accelerate the training of DNNs by effectively addressing the gradient vanishing issue. Moreover, as BN is able to reduce the distribution bias of each layer, we can train deep models with
a large learning rate and without the need of careful initialization (He et al. 2016). Batch normalization has also
been extended to other models such as recurrent neural networks(RNNs) (Laurent et al. 2016; Amodei et al. 2016;
Cooijmans et al. 2016) and successfully been applied on
many challenging tasks (Ba, Kiros, and Hinton 2016; Dumoulin, Shlens, and Kudlur 2017; Li et al. 2016; Tang, Hua,
and Wang 2017; Zhang, Zheng, and Qi 2017).
However, the standard BN which relies on a single batch
of data has some underlying limitations. First, the training and inference are inconsistent, which means that the
learned rules are not optimal. Second, the mean and vari-

∗

Authors contributed equally.
Corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

3134

