The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Inference on Syntactic and
Semantic Structures for Machine Comprehension
Chenrui Li,1 Yuanbin Wu,1, 2 Man Lan1, 2
1

School of Computer Science and Software Engineering, East China Normal University
2
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing
{lcrr2011}@163.com, {ybwu, mlan}@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract

Method

Hidden Variable

Inference

Hidden variable models are important tools for solving open
domain machine comprehension tasks and have achieved remarkable accuracy in many question answering benchmark
datasets. Existing models impose strong independence assumptions on hidden variables, which leaves the interaction
among them unexplored. Here we introduce linguistic structures to help capturing global evidence in hidden variable
modeling. In the proposed algorithms, question-answer pairs
are scored based on structured inference results on parse trees
and semantic frames, which aims to assign hidden variables
in a global optimal way. Experiments on the MCTest dataset
demonstrate that the proposed models are highly competitive
with state-of-the-art machine comprehension systems.

Direct lexical matching
(Sachan et al. 2015)
(Wang et al. 2015)
This work

no

no

independent

direct

dependent

tractable

Table 1: Comparisons with related work.
Narasimhan and Barzilay 2015; Sachan et al. 2015; Sachan
and Xing 2016).
In existing formulations, hidden variables are assumed to
be independent. For example, Sachan et al. (2015) use hidden variables to describe word alignments between questions and stories. Suppose that we have two question words
qu and qv , and both of them have multiple possible alignments to the given story. In (Sachan et al. 2015), the alignments of qu , qv are assumed to be independent, which might
lose some important information. For instance, if qu is the
subject of qv in the question sentence, their correct alignments would also keep certain “agent-action” relation in the
story. Hence, assignments of the two hidden variables should
be correlated. The same problem also appears in (Wang et al.
2015) which uses hidden variables to describe the most relevant story sentences to a question.
In this work, we try to enlarge the expressiveness of hidden variables by capturing dependencies among them. Two
new models are proposed based on structured inference on
syntactic trees and semantic frames. Speciﬁcally, in the tree
model, we organize hidden variables according to the dependency tree structure. For each node (word) in the dependency tree of a question, we associate it with a variable to indicate its aligned story sentence. The tree edges
will describe the dependencies among hidden variables. In
the frame model, we group hidden variables according to
semantic frames. Each frame element is associated with a
variable. Assignments of the variables are thus guided by the
semantic frame structures. In both models, question-answer
pairs are scored according to structured inference results:
the structured inference ﬁrst ﬁnds the optimal assignment
of hidden variables, then the ﬁnal answer is scored based on
the assignment.
The inference algorithms of the two models are exact and
fast. Combined with the lexical matching baseline and the

Introduction
Being of great practical use, open domain machine comprehension attracts a long lasting research interest. Both
world knowledge and linguistic analysis are important for
the task. Modern machine comprehension algorithms (especially, deep learning based algorithms) show that how to
represent and organize external world knowledge (e.g., distributed representation) is key to gain high performances.
On the other side, to establish a deeper understanding of
answer inference process, exploring linguistic structures remains critical and fundamental. In this work, we focus on
answer reasoning with limited world knowledge following
the setting of MCTest (Richardson, Burges, and Renshaw
2013). Given a ﬁctional story written for elementary school
students, MCTest is designed to test systems’ ability of natural language inference based on the given texts.
Hidden variable models are powerful tools for building
robust and interpretable machine comprehension systems.
Intuitively, it is always helpful that a system could identify some critical hidden information in text, such as the
most relevant story sentences to the question, or the most
plausible alignments between words in the question and
words in the story. In fact, although simple lexical matching methods (Smith et al. 2015) are essential and complex deep learning models (Yin, Ebert, and Schütze 2016;
Wang et al. 2016a) are competitive, most state-of-the-art
systems are based on hidden variables (Wang et al. 2015;
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5844

