The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Argument Mining for Improving the
Automated Scoring of Persuasive Essays
Huy V. Nguyen

Diane J. Litman

Computer Science Department
University of Pittsburgh, PA 15260
hvn3@pitt.edu

Computer Science Department
University of Pittsburgh, PA 15260
litman@cs.pitt.edu

key attributes that we believe to be important when evaluating argument mining for AES.
An end-to-end (e2e) argument mining system takes a text
as input and outputs argumentative structure(s) in a fully
automated manner, and thus is more applicable to AES in
practice. (Persing and Ng 2015) as well as (Wachsmuth,
Al Khatib, and Stein 2016) each used the output of an endto-end argument mining system to improve scoring the essay dimension of argument strength. While it may be intuitive that argument mining can help predict argument-related
scores1 , predicting holistic scores (hs) of essays could be
much more challenging as many other criteria are also taken
into account, e.g., grammar, ﬂuency, coherence. (Ghosh et
al. 2016) and (Klebanov et al. 2016) indeed examined this
more difﬁcult scenario by proposing a wide range of argumentative features for holistic score prediction. However,
their experiments used simple baselines, i.e., word and sentence counts, but not advanced (av) AES systems. Moreover, ﬁndings in (Ghosh et al. 2016) were limited in that their
argument mining system is not end-to-end but depended on
human-annotated boundaries (i.e., character indices) of argument components.
Despite their limitations, ﬁndings of prior research were
impressive in that AES performance gain could be demonstrated using at least some noisy outputs of an argument
mining system. For example, all of the above studies have
extracted features from argument components and their labels, and achieved AES beneﬁts. However, features from argumentative relations (re) between components were not
addressed in (Persing and Ng 2015; Wachsmuth, Al Khatib,
and Stein 2016). In contrast, (Ghosh et al. 2016) performed
feature ablation (fa) studies spanning multiple tasks from
Figure 1 to compare argument component and argumentative relation features. However as noted above, not all of
their argumentative features were fully automatically extracted. An examination of the most useful outputs for AES
from end-to-end argument mining tasks is thus needed.
Finally, from a practical perspective, since student populations can vary and even the same population can have
a wide range of writing assignments, AES approaches that
work well across multiple data sets (md) (e.g., produced

Abstract
End-to-end argument mining has enabled the development of
new automated essay scoring (AES) systems that use argumentative features (e.g., number of claims, number of support relations) in addition to traditional legacy features (e.g.,
grammar, discourse structure) when scoring persuasive essays. While prior research has proposed different argumentative features as well as empirically demonstrated their utility
for AES, these studies have all had important limitations. In
this paper we identify a set of desiderata for evaluating the
use of argument mining for AES, introduce an end-to-end argument mining system and associated argumentative feature
sets, and present the results of several studies that both satisfy
the desiderata and demonstrate the value-added of argument
mining for scoring persuasive essays.

Introduction
Argument mining is an emerging ﬁeld which aims to automatically identify argumentative text portions and the
relevant components of the presented argument (Peldszus
and Stede 2013). Recent years have seen the development of argument mining architectures and systems (Stab
and Gurevych 2014; Peldszus and Stede 2015; Stab and
Gurevych 2017) as well as the use of argument mining output to improve applications such as summarization, opinion
mining, and automated essay scoring (Boltužić and Šnajder
2014; Egan, Siddharthan, and Wyner 2016; Barker and
Gaizauskas 2016; Ghosh et al. 2016; Klebanov et al. 2016;
Wachsmuth, Al Khatib, and Stein 2016). As an example,
Figure 1 depicts our argument mining system based on our
prior studies (Nguyen and Litman 2016b; 2016a).
In automated essay scoring (AES) – “the process of
scoring written prose via computer program” (Shermis and
Burstein 2013), argumentative features have been extracted
from the output of a range of argument mining systems to
help predict both argument-related (e.g., argument strength)
and holistic essay scores. It was hypothesized that the use
of good argumentive structures would correlate with essay
quality, and that argument mining - which extracts argumentative structures from essays - should thus be able to help
improve AES (Klebanov et al. 2016). We identify a set of 7
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
See (Wachsmuth et al. 2017) for a survey of how argumentation quality has been computationally modeled and assessed.

5892

