The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Sparse Modeling-Based Sequential Ensemble Learning
for Effective Outlier Detection in High-Dimensional Numeric Data
Guansong Pang,† Longbing Cao,† Ling Chen,† Defu Lian, Huan Liu‡
†



School of Software, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
‡
Computer Science and Engineering, Arizona State University, USA
pangguansong@gmail.com, {longbing.cao;ling.chen}@uts.edu.au, dove.ustc@gmail.com, huan.liu@asu.edu
However, identifying outliers in high-dimensional numeric data is a challenging task. Speciﬁcally, highdimensional data poses the two major challenges below. (i)
It often contains a large percentage of irrelevant features.
The irrelevant features mask outliers as normal objects and
thus they are ‘noise’ to outlier detection (a.k.a. outlier scoring). Irrelevant features also form a major cause of the ‘curse
of dimensionality’ (Zimek, Schubert, and Kriegel 2012). (ii)
The number of candidate feature subsets increases exponentially as the dimensionality increases, leading to great difﬁculty in a complete search of the feature space.
To detect outliers in the above high-dimensional data, subspace/feature selection-based methods (Lazarevic and Kumar 2005; Keller, Muller, and Bohm 2012; Noto, Brodley,
and Slonim 2012; Paulheim and Meusel 2015) are the major
solutions. They search for relevant feature subset(s) to apply
off-the-shell outlier detection methods on these relevant feature subset(s) to alleviate the negative effect brought by irrelevant features. However, these methods often separate the
subspace search from the subsequent outlier scoring methods. Consequently, they may retain feature subsets that are
irrelevant to the scoring methods and the resultant detection
performance of the outlier scoring methods is largely biased.
Due to the unsupervised nature of outlier detection and the
huge search space, it is challenging to involve the outlier
scoring methods when searching the feature subset(s).
In this paper, we introduce a novel SparsE Modelingbased Sequential Ensemble learning (SEMSE for short)
framework for outlier detection in high-dimensional numeric data. Speciﬁcally, SEMSE ﬁrst uses a given outlier
scoring method to compute the outlier scores of data objects,
and deﬁnes an outlier thresholding function to identify a set
of outlier candidates. SEMSE then performs sparse regression on the outlier candidate set by treating the outlier scores
as a target feature and the original features as predictors
to select the most relevant features w.r.t. the outlier scores.
This process is referred to as fragmentary sparse modeling
to highlight that the sparse regression is built on a small data
subset (i.e., the outlier candidate set) rather than the full data
set. SEMSE ﬁnally applies the same given outlier detector to
the data with the selected features to produce a reﬁned outlier scoring. The above three steps are iteratively performed
to produce a set of outlier scores until the loss function of
the sparse regression does not decrease.

Abstract
The large proportion of irrelevant or noisy features in reallife high-dimensional data presents a signiﬁcant challenge
to subspace/feature selection-based high-dimensional outlier detection (a.k.a. outlier scoring) methods. These methods often perform the two dependent tasks: relevant feature subset search and outlier scoring independently, consequently retaining features/subspaces irrelevant to the scoring
method and downgrading the detection performance. This paper introduces a novel sequential ensemble-based framework
SEMSE and its instance CINFO to address this issue. SEMSE
learns the sequential ensembles to mutually reﬁne feature selection and outlier scoring by iterative sparse modeling with
outlier scores as the pseudo target feature. CINFO instantiates SEMSE by using three successive recurrent components
to build such sequential ensembles. Given outlier scores output by an existing outlier scoring method on a feature subset, CINFO ﬁrst deﬁnes a Cantelli’s inequality-based outlier thresholding function to select outlier candidates with
a false positive upper bound. It then performs lasso-based
sparse regression by treating the outlier scores as the target
feature and the original features as predictors on the outlier candidate set to obtain a feature subset that is tailored
for the outlier scoring method. Our experiments show that
two different outlier scoring methods enabled by CINFO (i)
perform signiﬁcantly better on 11 real-life high-dimensional
data sets, and (ii) have much better resilience to noisy features, compared to their bare versions and three state-of-theart competitors. The source code of CINFO is available at
https://sites.google.com/site/gspangsite/sourcecode.

Introduction
High-dimensional data is ubiquitous in broad real-life applications, e.g., thousands of molecular or gene expression
features in bioinformatics, and millions of trading behaviors
in stock market surveillance. Identifying outliers that deviate signiﬁcantly from the majority of data objects can provide important insights into these applications. For example, the detection of outlying gene expressions can facilitate
early treatment of diseases (Aggarwal 2017); and the recognition of abnormal trading can signal abusive and manipulative trading practices (Cao, Ou, and Yu 2012) .
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3892

