The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Optimizing Interventions via Ofﬂine
Policy Evaluation: Studies in Citizen Science
Avi Segal, Kobi Gal

Ece Kamar, Eric Horvitz

Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel

Microsoft Research, Redmond WA

Grant Miller
University of Oxford, U.K.
We formalize the task of computing effective interventional policies as a problem in sequential decision making
under uncertainty, where an agent can choose whether to
generate one of several possible motivational messages to
users at a given point in time. Interventions are associated
with a cost of interruption that can interfere with the user’s
work (Horvitz, Jacobs, and Hovel 1999). Thus, the agent
needs to manage the tradeoff between intervening at a current state versus waiting to collect more information and taking the risk that the user will disengage from the system.
The agent also needs to balance the long-term beneﬁts and
short-term disruptions associated with different intervention
actions.
The online nature and quick turnaround of individual
users in volunteer-based crowdsourcing poses new challenges for optimizing intervention decisions. We do not
know the dynamics governing people’s online behavior and
their responses to potential interventions. However, efforts
to learn a good policy online by performing experiments via
interventions may disrupt the work of volunteers and contribute to early disengagement.
We address these challenges by applying a combination
of techniques from model-based reinforcement learning and
ofﬂine policy evaluation on historical data collected previously from trials with random interventions. We search iteratively for a representation that succinctly maps histories
to states. We build on previous efforts that have used offline policy evaluation to compute non-biased estimates of
the value of a given policy using an existing set of random
trials (Precup 2000; Mandel et al. 2014). We show with experiments that traditional uses of importance sampling can
be arbitrarily noisy when applied to human interaction data.
We extend these approaches by providing an ofﬂine methodology for correcting candidate policies, under the constraint
that users can be interrupted only once during a session in
order to bound the potential disruption.
Our approach, called Trajectory Corrected Intervention
(TCI), searches iteratively for the representation that leads
to the best intervention policy. For any candidate representation, TCI builds a corresponding MDP based on a training
set taken from past trajectories and solves the MDP to extract a target policy. The resulting target policy is evaluated
using importance sampling on a validation set taken from
the past trajectories. The search terminates when perturbing

Abstract
Volunteers who help with online crowdsourcing such as citizen science tasks typically make only a few contributions
before exiting. We propose a computational approach for increasing users’ engagement in such settings that is based on
optimizing policies for displaying motivational messages to
users. The approach, which we refer to as Trajectory Corrected Intervention (TCI), reasons about the tradeoff between
the long-term inﬂuence of engagement messages on participants’ contributions and the potential risk of disrupting their
current work. We combine model-based reinforcement learning with off-line policy evaluation to generate intervention
policies, without relying on a ﬁxed representation of the domain. TCI works iteratively to learn the best representation
from a set of random intervention trials and to generate candidate intervention policies. It is able to reﬁne selected policies off-line by exploiting the fact that users can only be interrupted once per session. We implemented TCI in the wild
with Galaxy Zoo, one of the largest citizen science platforms
on the web. We found that TCI was able to outperform the
state-of-the-art intervention policy for this domain, and signiﬁcantly increased the contributions of thousands of users.
This work demonstrates the beneﬁt of combining traditional
AI planning with off-line policy methods to generate intelligent intervention strategies.

Introduction
Volunteer-based crowdsourcing has been harnessed to
engage thousands of people in solving challenges online. Examples include citizen science applications like
Foldit (Khatib et al. 2011), e-bird (Sullivan et al. 2009) and
Zooniverse (Simpson, Page, and De Roure 2014), as well as
question and answer sites like stack overﬂow (Anderson et
al. 2012). A large majority of people coming to these sites
only make a few contributions before leaving (Preece and
Shneiderman 2009; Varshney 2012). We address the challenge of engagement in such systems through adaptive interventions, aimed at unlocking additional value that would
come with more sustained contributions (Eveleigh et al.
2014; Segal et al. 2015). We show the value of generating
interventional policies based on joining model-based reinforcement learning with ofﬂine policy evaluation.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1536

