The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Temporal-Enhanced Convolutional
Network for Person Re-identiﬁcation
Yang Wu, Jie Qiu, Jun Takamatsu, Tsukasa Ogasawara
Nara Institute of Science and Technology
8916-5 Takayama-cho, Ikoma, Nara, 630-0192, Japan
yangwu@rsc.naist.jp, {qiu.jie.qf3, j-taka, ogasawar}@is.naist.jp

Abstract
We propose a new neural network called Temporal-enhanced
Convolutional Network (T-CN) for video-based person reidentiﬁcation. For each video sequence of a person, a spatial
convolutional subnet is ﬁrst applied to each frame for representing appearance information, and then a temporal convolutional subnet links small ranges of continuous frames to
extract local motion information. Such spatial and temporal
convolutions together construct our T-CN based representation. Finally, a recurrent network is utilized to further explore
global dynamics, followed by temporal pooling to generate
an overall feature vector for the whole sequence. In the training stage, a Siamese network architecture is adopted to jointly
optimize all the components with losses covering both identiﬁcation and veriﬁcation. In the testing stage, our network
generates an overall discriminative feature representation for
each input video sequence (whose length may vary a lot) in
a feed-forward way, and even a simple Euclidean distance
based matching can generate good re-identiﬁcation results.
Experiments on the most widely used benchmark datasets
demonstrate the superiority of our proposal, in comparison
with the state-of-the-art.

Figure 1: The overall architecture of our proposed model.
when the inputs are individual still images, and video-based
person Re-ID when inputting video sequences (Zheng,
Yang, and Hauptmann 2016). The later is a relatively less
popular topic, because of some additional challenges such
as arbitrary sequence lengths for each person, unknown dynamic occlusions, extra noises brought by tracking inaccuracy, and a lack of public benchmarks in the early dates due
to hardness for ground-truth labeling. However, the most
typical application of person Re-ID is video surveillance, for
which captured data is usually in the form of videos, so it is
more natural to directly work on videos. Moreover, videos
contain not only much richer spatial information (about appearance) than few still images but also important temporal
information (e.g. gait) that does not exist in individual images but can be very helpful for re-identiﬁcation, so using
videos as input can generally result in better performance.
This paper contributes to video-based person Re-ID by
proposing a new neural network called Temporal-enhanced
Convolutional Network (T-CN), as shown in Figure 1. The
main contributions and novelties are two-fold (more details
are given in the following related work section).

Introduction
Person re-identiﬁcation (Re-ID) is about associating tracks
of people by their identities from potentially any number
of cameras with or without overlapping views. Re-ID plays
a very important role in intelligent video surveillance, as
it links lower-level analytic results, such as human detection and tracking, with higher-level demands, such as tracing speciﬁc persons (e.g. suspects) and understanding human activities in a relatively large time and space scale (e.g.
one day’s activity at different places). However, it is not easy
to solve this problem, because Re-ID requires reliable association of the same person given possibly large appearance
changes due to body motion, interactions with objects and/or
other people, dynamic and cluttered backgrounds, viewpoint
and environmental changes between cameras, etc. Meanwhile, Re-ID needs to ensure good differentiation among
people with similar appearances (body shape, clothes, etc.),
which is hard when the resolution is low.
Existing studies on person Re-ID fall into two categories
based on the type of input data: image-based person Re-ID

1. Introducing a novel network structure based on temporal convolutions (thus it is called Temporal ConvNet)
for low-level and/or mid-level motion representation.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7412

