The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Maximum A Posteriori Inference
in Sum-Product Networks
Jun Mei, Yong Jiang, Kewei Tu
ShanghaiTech University
{meijun,jiangyong,tukw}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

MPE. Peharz et al.(2016) showed a different proof based on
the NP-hardness results from Bayesian networks. Conaty,
Mauá, and de Campos(2017) discussed approximation complexity of MAP in SPNs and gave several useful theoretical
results.
In this paper, we investigate MAP inference in SPNs from
both theoretical and algorithmic perspectives. For the theoretical part, we make the following two contributions. First,
we deﬁne a special MAP inference problem called MAX
that has no evidence and hidden variables, and we show that
MAP can be reduced to MAX in linear time. This implies
that to study MAP we can instead focus on MAX, which has
a much simpler form. Second, we show
that it is NP-hard to

approximate the MAP problem to 2n fox ﬁxed 0 ≤  < 1,
where n is the input size. This result is similar to a theorem
proved by Conaty, Mauá, and de Campos(2017), but we use
a proof strategy that is arguably much simpler than theirs.
For the algorithmic part, we present an exact MAP solver
and an approximate MAP solver. Our comprehensive experiments on real-world datasets show that our exact solver runs
reasonably fast and could handle SPNs with up to 1k variables and 150k arcs within ten minutes; our approximate
solver provides a good trade-off between speed and accuracy and has better overall performance than previous approximate methods.

Abstract
Sum-product networks (SPNs) are a class of probabilistic
graphical models that allow tractable marginal inference.
However, the maximum a posteriori (MAP) inference in
SPNs is NP-hard. We investigate MAP inference in SPNs
from both theoretical and algorithmic perspectives. For the
theoretical part, we reduce general MAP inference to its special case without evidence and hidden variables; we also show

that it is NP-hard to approximate the MAP problem to 2n for
ﬁxed 0 ≤  < 1, where n is the input size. For the algorithmic
part, we ﬁrst present an exact MAP solver that runs reasonably fast and could handle SPNs with up to 1k variables and
150k arcs in our experiments. We then present a new approximate MAP solver with a good balance between speed and
accuracy, and our comprehensive experiments on real-world
datasets show that it has better overall performance than existing approximate solvers.

Introduction
SPNs are a class of probabilistic graphical models known for
its tractable marginal inference (Poon and Domingos 2011).
In the previous work, SPNs were mainly employed to do
marginal inference. On the other hand, although MAP inference is widely used in many applications in natural language
processing, computer vision, speech recognition, etc., MAP
inference in SPNs has not been widely studied.
Some previous work on MAP inference focuses on selective SPNs (Peharz, Gens, and Domingos 2014), which
is also known as determinism in the context of knowledge
compilation (Darwiche and Marquis 2002) and arithmetic
circuits (Darwiche 2003; Lowd and Domingos 2008; Choi
and Darwiche 2017). Huang, Chavira, and Darwiche(2006)
presented an exact solver for MAP based on deterministic arithmetic circuits. Peharz et al.(2016) showed that most
probable explanation (MPE), a special case of MAP without
hidden variables, is tractable on selective SPNs.
Selectivity, however, is not guaranteed in most of the
SPN learning algorithms (Gens and Domingos 2012; 2013;
Rooshenas and Lowd 2014) and applications (Poon and
Domingos 2011; Cheng et al. 2014; Peharz et al. 2014).
For SPNs without the selectivity assumption, Peharz(2015)
showed that MPE in SPNs is NP-hard by reducing SAT to

Background
We adapt the notations from Peharz et al.(2015). A random
variable is denoted as an upper-case letter, e.g. X, Y . The
corresponding lower-case letter x denotes a value X can assume. The set of all the values X can assume is denoted as
val(X). Thus x ∈ val(X).
A set of variables is denoted as a boldface upper-case letter, e.g. X = {X1 , X2 , . . . , XN }. The corresponding boldface lower-case letter x denotes a compound value X can
assume. The set of all the compound values X can assume
is denoted as val(X), i.e. val(X) = ×N
n=1 val(Xn ). Thus
x ∈ val(X). For X ∈ X, x[X] denotes the projection of x
onto X. Thus x[X] ∈ val(X). For Y ⊆ X, x[Y] denotes
the projection of x onto Y. Thus x[Y] ∈ val(Y).
A compound value x is also a complete evidence, assigning each variable in X a value. Partial evidence about X is
deﬁned as X ⊆ val(X). Partial evidence about X is deﬁned
as X := ×N
n=1 Xn . Thus X ⊆ val(X). For X ∈ X, we

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1923

