The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Active Lifelong Learning with “Watchdog”
Gan Sun,1, 2 Yang Cong,1 Xiaowei Xu3

1

State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China. ∗
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China.
3
Department of Information Science, University of Arkansas at Little Rock, USA.
sungan@sia.cn, congyang81@gmail.com, xwxu@ualr.edu

Abstract
Lifelong learning intends to learn new consecutive tasks depending on previously accumulated experiences, i.e., knowledge library. However, the knowledge among different new
coming tasks are imbalance. Therefore, in this paper, we
try to mimic an effective “human cognition” strategy by actively sorting the importance of new tasks in the process of
unknown-to-known and selecting to learn the important tasks
with more information preferentially. To achieve this, we consider to assess the importance of the new coming task, i.e., unknown or not, as an outlier detection issue, and design a hierarchical dictionary learning model consisting of two-level
task descriptors to sparse reconstruct each task with the 0
norm constraint. The new coming tasks are sorted depending
on the sparse reconstruction score in descending order, and
the task with high reconstruction score will be permitted to
pass, where this mechanism is called as “watchdog”. Next,
the knowledge library of the lifelong learning framework encode the selected task by transferring previous knowledge,
and then can also update itself with knowledge from both
previously learned task and current task automatically. For
model optimization, the alternating direction method is employed to solve our model and converges to a ﬁxed point. Extensive experiments on both benchmark datasets and our own
dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed model
especially in task selection and dictionary learning.

Figure 1: Demonstration of our active lifelong learning
framework with a pool of m candidate tasks, where different shapes and colors denote different task base and weights,
respectively. Whether each coming task is unknown or not
is determined via the reconstruction score, and the one with
higher reconstruction score will be marked as the next task.

(Zhang, Ghahramani, and Yang 2008). However, when encountering a new task, such MTL learning system must be
capable of efﬁciently and continually acquiring knowledge
over a serial tasks, i.e., lifelong learning.
In the context of lifelong learning framework, most stateof-the-arts (Saha et al. 2011; Ruvolo and Eaton 2013b;
Ammar et al. 2014) intend to learn tasks sequentially while
maximizing its performance across all learned tasks. The
major procedure in these methods is to transfer knowledge
from the previously learned tasks to the next coming task,
where new task arrives in a stochastic manner. Further,
nearly equivalent model performance has been demonstrated
in comparison with batch multi-task learning (Kumar and
Daumé 2012) while also exhibiting impressive speedups.
However, tasks in a candidate pool do not have equal knowledge. Some new tasks that are similar to tasks learned before
are well-known and further being redundant, while other irrelevant / strange tasks are unknown. To accumulate knowledge rapidly in “human learning”, it is reasonable to ﬁlter
the well-known tasks out automatically, and pay more exogenous attention (And and Yantis 1997) to the unknown /
novel information. Take birds categorization task as an example: suppose that we have only learned different species
of Gull, e.g., Ring billed Gull. When a pool of candidate
tasks contains California Gull, Herring Gull and Cardinal,
categorization task of whether a bird is California Gull or

Introduction
Multi-task learning (MTL) (Caruana 1997) is a learning
paradigm designed to learn multiple tasks such as classiﬁcation or regression task simultaneously. One of the basic
assumptions for MTL is that taking into account the related
/ shared information among different tasks can lead to a better generalization performance than independently learning
single task. In this setting, dramatic successes have been
achieved in many areas by utilizing MTL, such as medical diagnosis (Bi et al. 2008), handwritten character recognition (Obozinski, Taskar, and Jordan 2007), relative attributes
learning (Chen, Zhang, and Li 2014) and text classiﬁcation
∗

This work is supported by NSFC (61722311, U1613214,
61533015), CAS-Youth Innovation Promotion Association Scholarship (2012163).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4107

