The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Policy Learning for Continuous Space
Security Games Using Neural Networks
Nitin Kamra,1 Umang Gupta,1 Fei Fang,2 Yan Liu,1 Milind Tambe1
University of Southern California1 , Carnegie Mellon University2
{nkamra, umanggup, yanliu.cs, tambe}@usc.edu1 , feifang@cmu.edu2

locations, green security domains are categorized by continuous spaces (e.g., a whole conservation area needs protection). Previous works mostly discretize the area into grid
cells and restrict the players’ actions to discrete sets (Yang
et al. 2014; Haskell et al. 2014; Gan et al. 2017) to ﬁnd the
equilibrium strategy using LP or MILP. However, a coarse
discretization may lead to low solution quality, and a ﬁnegrained discretization would make it intractable to compute the optimal defender strategy using mathematical programming based techniques, especially when there are multiple defender resources. Other approaches handle continuous space by exploiting spatio-temporal structure of the
game (Fang, Jiang, and Tambe 2013; Yin, An, and Jain
2014) or by numerically solving differential equations for
special cases (Johnson, Fang, and Tambe 2012), which cannot be extended to general settings.
In this paper, we provide a novel approach for solving security games based on policy learning, ﬁctitious play and
deep learning. This approach extends the existing toolkit to
handle complex settings such as general games with continuous spaces. We make the following major contributions:

Abstract
A wealth of algorithms centered around (integer) linear programming have been proposed to compute equilibrium strategies in security games with discrete states and actions. However, in practice many domains possess continuous state and
action spaces. In this paper, we consider a continuous space
security game model with inﬁnite-size action sets for players and present a novel deep learning based approach to extend the existing toolkit for solving security games. Specifically, we present (i) OptGradFP, a novel and general algorithm that searches for the optimal defender strategy in a parameterized continuous search space, and can also be used
to learn policies over multiple game states simultaneously;
(ii) OptGradFP-NN, a convolutional neural network based
implementation of OptGradFP for continuous space security
games. We demonstrate the potential to predict good defender
strategies via experiments and analysis of OptGradFP and
OptGradFP-NN on discrete and continuous game settings.

1

Introduction

Stackelberg Security Games (SSGs) have been extensively
used to model defender-adversary interaction in protecting
important infrastructure targets such as airports, ports, and
ﬂights (Tambe 2011; Rosenfeld and Kraus 2017; Cermák
et al. 2016; Basilico et al. 2017). In SSGs, the defender
(referred to as “she”) perpetually defends a set of targets
with limited resources. The adversary (referred to as “he”)
can surveil and learn the defender’s strategy and plan an attack based on this information. Exact and approximate approaches have been proposed to maximize the defender’s
expected utility in SSGs given that the adversary will best
respond to her strategy (Conitzer and Sandholm 2006; Kiekintveld et al. 2009; Amin, Singh, and Wellman 2016). Most
approaches rely on linear programming (LP) and mixed integer linear programming (MILP) which do not scale well to
large-scale and complex security games, despite techniques
such as column generation and cutting planes (Tambe 2011).
Recently, there has been an increasing interest in SSGs for
green security domains such as protecting wildlife (Kar et al.
2015; Wang, Zhang, and Zhong 2017), ﬁsheries (Haskell et
al. 2014) and forests (Johnson, Fang, and Tambe 2012). Unlike infrastructure protection domains which have discrete

• We present OptGradFP, a novel and general algorithm
which considers continuous space parameterized policies
for two-player zero-sum games and optimizes them using
policy gradient learning and game theoretic ﬁctitious play.
• We provide a continuous space security game model for
forest protection, which incorporates inﬁnite action sets
over two-dimensional continuous areas and asymmetric
target distributions. Existing approaches based on MILP
or differential equations fail to handle such games.
• We provide a convolutional neural network based implementation of OptGradFP (called OptGradFP-NN), which
after learning on various game states, shifts computation
in security games from online to ofﬂine, by predicting
good defender strategies on previously unseen states.
Our experimental analysis with OptGradFP and
OptGradFP-NN demonstrates the superiority of our
approach against comparable approaches such as StackGrad
(Amin, Singh, and Wellman 2016) and Cournot Adjustment
(CA) (Fudenberg and Levine 1998). Our approach gives a
good strategy for both players, even when the baselines fail
to converge.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1103

