The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

CoChat: Enabling Bot and Human
Collaboration for Task Completion
†

Xufang Luo,†∗ Zijia Lin,‡ Yunhong Wang,† Zaiqing Nie§
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University, Beijing, China
‡
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
§
Alibaba AI Labs, Beijing, China
{luoxufang,yhwang}@buaa.edu.cn; zijlin@microsoft.com; zaiqing.nzq@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract

Chatbots have drawn signiﬁcant attention of late in both industry and academia. For most task completion bots in the
industry, human intervention is the only means of avoiding
mistakes in complex real-world cases. However, to the best
of our knowledge, there is no existing research work modeling the collaboration between task completion bots and human workers. In this paper, we introduce CoChat, a dialog
management framework to enable effective collaboration between bots and human workers. In CoChat, human workers can introduce new actions at any time to handle previously unseen cases. We propose a memory-enhanced hierarchical RNN (MemHRNN) to handle the one-shot learning challenges caused by instantly introducing new actions
in CoChat. Extensive experiments on real-world datasets well
demonstrate that CoChat can relieve most of the human workers’ workload, and get better user satisfaction rates comparing
to other state-of-the-art frameworks.

Figure 1: Illustration of the CoChat Framework

heavily involved in many common task completion systems,
e.g., call centers. Hence, modeling the collaboration between bots and human workers is a reasonable approach. It
can even be the only practical way for learning and using the
dialog manager in many real-world applications.
In this paper, we propose a practical dialog management
framework named CoChat to enable effective collaboration
between bots and human workers. To the best of our knowledge, our work is the ﬁrst to model the collaboration between task completion bots and human workers, which is
necessary and reasonable for many real-world applications.
In CoChat, human workers can intervene in the learning process at any time, and the dialog manager can be continuously improved via learning from labeled dialog logs, human workers’ feedback and users’ feedback. As illustrated
in Fig. 1, the dialog manager is ﬁrstly initialized via supervised learning. After that, the bot can collaborate with human workers, suggest actions for them to reduce their workload, and continuously learn from their feedback via online learning. When human workers are unavailable, e.g., off
work, and users are willing to try the bot, the bot can directly
interact with users, and its dialog manager can be further improved via reinforcement learning. Brieﬂy, the dialog manager is continuously improved to maximize user satisfaction,
and relieve human workers’ workload during collaboration.
Having human workers involved, generally allows the
introduction of new actions to handle complex or unseen
cases, and thus raises challenges of learning new actions for
the dialog manager. In previous works like (Lee et al. 2010;
Su et al. 2017), the dialog manager requires a ﬁxed action
set, and then learns to select one action from it to handle each
case. However, this setting is unrealistic when human workers are involved to handle complex or unseen cases, because

Introduction
Task completion bots are attracting lots of attention from
both industry and academia. They aim to help users complete speciﬁc tasks (e.g., booking movie tickets) via more
natural interactions, i.e., conversations. The focus of task
completion bots is to complete tasks successfully, while
achieving high user satisfaction. A good dialog manager is
a crucial component for such task completion bots. It takes
language understanding results as input, and decides which
action (e.g., asking for a movie name) should be taken.
Therefore, the dialog manager directly controls dialog ﬂow,
decides the success/failure of task completion, and also affects user satisfaction (Lee et al. 2010; Young et al. 2013).
Although there are many methods for developing an automatic dialog manager, such automatic systems are potentially problematic, as they don’t share the same experience
from human workers on how to avoid serious mistakes that
would negatively affect users, e.g., failing the task or annoying them. Currently, human intervention is the only means
of avoiding such mistakes in complex real-world domains
(Saunders et al. 2017). Besides, human workers are already
∗
This work was done when the ﬁrst author was on an internship
with Microsoft Research.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5301

