The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Liquid Democracy: An Algorithmic Perspective
Anson Kahng

Simon Mackenzie

Ariel D. Procaccia

Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
akahng@cs.cmu.edu

Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
simonm@andrew.cmu.edu

Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University
arielpro@cs.cmu.edu

democracy is particularly problematic, as nicely articulated
by Green-Armytage (2015):

Abstract
We study liquid democracy, a collective decision making
paradigm that allows voters to transitively delegate their
votes, through an algorithmic lens. In our model, there are
two alternatives, one correct and one incorrect, and we are interested in the probability that the majority opinion is correct.
Our main question is whether there exist delegation mechanisms that are guaranteed to outperform direct voting, in the
sense of being always at least as likely, and sometimes more
likely, to make a correct decision. Even though we assume
that voters can only delegate their votes to better-informed
voters, we show that local delegation mechanisms, which
only take the local neighborhood of each voter as input (and,
arguably, capture the spirit of liquid democracy), cannot provide the foregoing guarantee. By contrast, we design a nonlocal delegation mechanism that does provably outperform
direct voting under mild assumptions about voters.

1

“Even if it were possible for every citizen to learn everything they could possibly know about every political issue, people who did this would be able to do little
else, and massive amounts of time would be wasted in
duplicated effort. Or, if every citizen voted but most
people did not take the time to learn about the issues,
the results would be highly random and/or highly sensitive to overly simplistic public relations campaigns.”
By contrast, under liquid democracy, voters who did not
invest an effort to learn about the issue at hand (presumably, most voters) would ideally delegate their votes to wellinformed voters. This should intuitively lead to collective
decisions that are less random, and more likely to be correct, than those that would be made under direct democracy.
Our goal is to rigorously investigate the intuition that liquid
democracy “outperforms” direct democracy from an algorithmic viewpoint. Indeed, we are interested in delegation
mechanisms, which decide how votes should be delegated
based on how relatively informed voters are, and possibly
even based on the structure of an underlying social network.
Our main research question is

Introduction

Liquid democracy is a modern approach to voting in which
voters can either vote directly or delegate their vote to other
voters. In contrast to the classic proxy voting paradigm
(Miller 1969), the key innovation underlying liquid democracy is that proxies — who were selected by voters to vote
on their behalf — may delegate their own vote to a proxy,
and, in doing so, further delegate all the votes entrusted to
them. Put another way (to justify the liquid metaphor), votes
may freely ﬂow through the directed delegation graph until
they reach a sink, that is, a vertex with outdegree 0. When the
election takes place, each voter who did not delegate his vote
is weighted by the total number of votes delegated to him,
including his own. In recent years, this approach has been
implemented and used on a large scale, notably by eclectic
political parties such as the German Pirate Party (Piratenpartei) and Sweden’s Demoex (short for Democracy Experiment).

... are there delegation mechanisms that are guaranteed
to yield more accurate decisions than direct voting?

Overview of the Model and Results
We focus on a (common) setting where there a decision is to
be made on a binary issue, i.e., one of two alternatives must
be selected (see Section 5 for a discussion of the case of
more than two alternatives). To model the idea of accuracy,
we assume that one alternative is correct, and the other is
incorrect. Each voter i has a competence level pi , which is
the probability he would vote correctly if he cast a ballot
himself.

One reason for the success of liquid democracy is that it
is seen as a practical compromise between direct democracy (voters vote directly on every issue) and representative
democracy, and, in a sense, is the best of both worlds. Direct

Voters may delegate their votes to neighbors in a social network, represented as a directed graph. At the heart of our
model is the assumption that voters may only delegate their
votes to strictly more competent neighbors (and, therefore,
there can be no delegation cycles). Speciﬁcally, we say that

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1095

