Towards Perceptual Image Dehazing by
Physics-Based Disentanglement and Adversarial Training
Xitong Yang, Zheng Xu

Jiebo Luo

Department of Computer Science
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20740
{xyang35, xuzh}@cs.umd.edu

Department of Computer Science
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
jluo@cs.rochester.edu

Abstract
Single image dehazing is a challenging under-constrained
problem because of the ambiguities of unknown scene radiance and transmission. Previous methods solve this problem
using various hand-designed priors or by supervised training
on synthetic hazy image pairs. In practice, however, the predeﬁned priors are easily violated and the paired image data
is unavailable for supervised training. In this work, we propose Disentangled Dehazing Network, an end-to-end model
that generates realistic haze-free images using only unpaired
supervision. Our approach alleviates the paired training constraint by introducing a physical-model based disentanglement and reconstruction mechanism. A multi-scale adversarial training is employed to generate perceptually haze-free
images. Experimental results on synthetic datasets demonstrate our superior performance compared with the state-ofthe-art methods in terms of PSNR, SSIM and CIEDE2000.
Through training on purely natural haze-free and hazy images
from our collected HazyCity dataset, our model can generate
more perceptually appealing dehazing results.

  

   











Figure 1: (a) Unpaired dataset with natural hazy images and
haze-free images. (b) Overall architecture of our Disentangled Dehazing Network. GJ , Gt , GA indicate the generators for the scene radiance, the medium transmission and the
global atmosphere light, respectively.

Introduction
Images with clear visibility is desirable for most current
computer vision applications.However, images taken in outdoor scenes usually suffer from visual degradation due to
the presence of aerosols in the atmosphere. These small
particles, as the constituents of haze, attenuate and scatter
the light in the atmosphere and affect the visibility of the
image (Narasimhan and Nayar 2002). As a result, image
dehazing, especially single image dehazing, is highly desirable and the problem has been extensively studied over
the past ten years (Fattal 2008; He, Sun, and Tang 2011;
Tang, Yang, and Wang 2014; Zhu, Mai, and Shao 2015;
Cai et al. 2016; Berman, Avidan, and others 2016; Li et al.
2017a).
Many of the successful approaches rely on strong priors
or assumptions to estimate the medium transmission map,
for example, the well-known Dark-Channel Prior (He, Sun,
and Tang 2011) and the more recent Non-local Color Prior
(Berman, Avidan, and others 2016). However, these priors
can be easily violated in practice, especially when the scene
is complex or contains irregular illumination. For instance,
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

the dark-channel prior does not hold for areas that are similar
to the atmospheric light. This usually leads to unsatisﬁed
dehazing quality for sky regions or bright objects. The nonlocal color prior, on the other hand, may fail in scenes where
the airlight is signiﬁcantly brighter than the scene.
Recent works propose to use convolutional neural networks to estimate the transmission map or even the scene
radiance directly (Cai et al. 2016; Ren et al. 2016; Li et al.
2017a). Although these methods can obtain encouraging results by virtue of the modeling power of CNN, they are restricted in practical application because the model training
requires a large amount of “paired” data for supervision. To
create the image pairs for training, (Cai et al. 2016) and (Ren
et al. 2016) synthesize hazy local patches (16×16) under the
assumption that image content is independent of the locally
constant transmission within a patch. This strategy is suboptimal as the training process only considers very local information and loses the global correlation. (Li et al. 2017a)
synthesizes hazy images using the depth meta-data from an
indoor dataset. However, it is almost impossible to obtain
the ground-true depth information in most real-world scenarios. It is also arguable that using synthetic hazy images

