The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Quantized Memory-Augmented Neural Networks
Seongsik Park,1 Seijoon Kim,1 Seil Lee,1 Ho Bae,2 Sungroh Yoon1,2
1

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea
2
Interdisciplinary Program in Bioinformatics, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea
sryoon@snu.ac.kr

Abstract

Table 1: Computation-energy consumption from (Horowitz 2014)

Memory-augmented neural networks (MANNs) refer to a
class of neural network models equipped with external memory (such as neural Turing machines and memory networks).
These neural networks outperform conventional recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) in terms of learning long-term dependency, allowing them to solve intriguing AI tasks that
would otherwise be hard to address. This paper concerns the
problem of quantizing MANNs. Quantization is known to be
effective when we deploy deep models on embedded systems with limited resources. Furthermore, quantization can
substantially reduce the energy consumption of the inference procedure. These beneﬁts justify recent developments
of quantized multilayer perceptrons, convolutional networks,
and RNNs. However, no prior work has reported the successful quantization of MANNs. The in-depth analysis presented
here reveals various challenges that do not appear in the quantization of the other networks. Without addressing them properly, quantized MANNs would normally suffer from excessive quantization error which leads to degraded performance.
In this paper, we identify memory addressing (speciﬁcally,
content-based addressing) as the main reason for the performance degradation and propose a robust quantization method
for MANNs to address the challenge. In our experiments, we
achieved a computation-energy gain of 22× with 8-bit ﬁxedpoint and binary quantization compared to the ﬂoating-point
implementation. Measured on the bAbI dataset, the resulting
model, named the quantized MANN (Q-MANN), improved
the error rate by 46% and 30% with 8-bit ﬁxed-point and
binary quantization, respectively, compared to the MANN
quantized using conventional techniques.

Arithmetic
Energy
Bit
operation
(pJ)
Fixed
add
8
0.03
point
mult
8
0.2
Floating
add
32
0.9
point
mult
32
3.7
a
compared with 32-bit ﬂoating-point mult
Type

Gaina
123.3×
18.5×
4.1×
1.0×

In recent years, Memory-Augmented Neural Networks
(MANNs), which couple the external memory and the neural network, have been proposed for improving the learning
capability of the neural network. MANNs, including neural Turing machines (Graves, Wayne, and Danihelka 2014),
memory networks (Weston, Chopra, and Bordes 2014), and
differentiable neural computers (Graves et al. 2016), can
handle complex problems such as long-sequence tasks and
Question and Answer (QnA).

Although various types of neural networks have shown
promising results in many applications, they demand
tremendous amounts of computational energy (Silver et al.
2016). This has been the biggest obstacle for employing
deep learning on embedded systems with limited hardware
resources.
Previous work overcame this challenge by introducing
the concept of quantization (e.g., ﬁxed-point and binary)
to deep learning (Courbariaux, Bengio, and David 2014;
Lin, Talathi, and Annapureddy 2015; Gupta et al. 2015;
Hubara et al. 2016; Courbariaux, Bengio, and David 2015;
Courbariaux et al. 2016; Rastegari et al. 2016; Zhou et al.
2016; Tang, Hua, and Wang 2017).
Quantization can avoid ﬂoating-point operations which
consume considerable computing energy (Horowitz 2014).
As shown in Table 1, an 8-bit ﬁxed-point addition can obtain
a computation-energy gain of 123.3× over a 32-bit ﬂoatingpoint multiplication (Supplementary1 Table 3).
Typically, low-power and real-time processing are recommended features in a limited-resource environment.
NVIDIA has recently introduced TensorRT (Allison et al.
2017), a deep learning inference optimizer for low-power
and real-time processing with 8-bit or 16-bit representation. For the reasons mentioned above, quantization has become a critical process to employ deep learning in a limitedresource environment.
In this paper, we applied ﬁxed-point and binary quantization to a conventional MANN to enable it to be employed in
a limited-resource environment. We evaluated its feasibility
by training and inference with ﬁxed-point quantized param-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Supplementary is available at http://data.snu.ac.kr/pub/QMANN/AAAI2017.suppl.pdf

Introduction

3909

