The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Sublinear Search Spaces for Shortest
Path Planning in Grid and Road Networks
Johannes Blum

Stefan Funke

Sabine Storandt

Julius-Maximilians-Universität Würzburg
97072 Würzburg, Germany
blum@informatik.uni-wuerzburg.de

Universität Stuttgart
70569 Stuttgart, Germany
funke@fmi.uni-stuttgart.de

Julius-Maximilians-Universität Würzburg
97072 Würzburg, Germany
storandt@informatik.uni-wuerzburg.de

space consumption. But there is still a lack of theoretical explanation why these approaches perform so remarkably well
in practice. The main question is which characteristics of a
network are necessary or sufﬁcient to guarantee efﬁciency.
The notion of highway dimension (Abraham et al. 2010)
was introduced for this purpose. Intuitively, the highway dimension h of a graph is small if there exist sparse local hitting sets for shortest paths of a certain length. For CH and
HL, query times in O(h log D) were proven (with D denoting the network diameter), and O(h2 ) for TN. The space
consumption was shown to be in O(nh log D) or O(hn), respectively. The hope would be that real-world networks exhibit a highway dimension which is logarithmic in the size
n of the √
network. But for grid graphs with uniform costs,
h ∈ Θ( n) was proven. Grids comply with all standard
characterizations of road networks, as constant maximum
degree Δ, a linear number of edges m = |E|, and (near)
planarity. And all three – CH, TN and HL – have been
successfully applied to (pure) grid graphs (Storandt 2013;
Antsfeld et al. 2012; Delling et al. 2014). The notion of highway dimension is not sufﬁcient to explain these results
√ as,
e.g., the query times of TN are superlinear for h ∈ Θ( n).
And as many real-world road networks contain large gridlike substructures, a highway dimension in the same order is
to be expected. For the U.S. road network and for the German road network with about 20 million nodes each, a highway dimension of more than 1,000 is known, which renders
a logarithmic highway dimension unlikely.
We will use a different model, assuming that the underlying graph metric has bounded growth. This model was
empirically proven to reﬂect real-world road networks well
(Funke and Storandt 2015), and also subsumes grid graphs.
We show that the bounded growth assumption sufﬁces to
prove sublinear query times, a clearly subquadratic space
consumption and randomized polynomial time preprocessing for CH, TN and HL in unweighted graphs.

Abstract
Shortest path planning is a fundamental building block in
many applications. Hence developing efﬁcient methods for
computing shortest paths in e.g. road or grid networks is an
important challenge. The most successful techniques for fast
query answering rely on preprocessing. But for many of these
techniques it is not fully understood why they perform so remarkably well and theoretical justiﬁcation for the empirical
results is missing. An attempt to explain the excellent practical performance of preprocessing based techniques on road
networks (as transit nodes, hub labels, or contraction hierarchies) in a sound theoretical way are parametrized analyses,
e.g., considering the highway dimension or skeleton dimension of
√a graph. But these parameters tend to be large (order
of Θ( n)) when the network contains grid-like substructures
– which inarguably is the case for real-world road networks
around the globe. In this paper, we use the very intuitive notion of bounded growth graphs to describe road networks and
also grid graphs. We show that this model sufﬁces to prove
sublinear search spaces for the three above mentioned stateof-the-art shortest path planning techniques. For graphs with
a large highway or skeleton dimension, our results turn out
to be superior. Furthermore, our preprocessing methods are
close to the ones used in practice and only require randomized polynomial time.

Introduction
Shortest paths in general graphs can be computed by Dijkstra’s algorithm in near-linear time. Nevertheless, this is
still too slow for many practical purposes, as e.g. providing
driving directions in real-time for road networks of continental size, or ﬁnding shortest paths in large grid domains
as game maps. This spurred the development of preprocessing based shortest path speed-up techniques. Here, auxiliary data is created in a preprocessing phase which can then
be used to prune the search space for subsequent queries
yet preserving optimality of the result. Incarnations of this
scheme, as contraction hierarchies [CH] (Geisberger et al.
2012), transit nodes [TN] (Bast et al. 2007), and hub labels
[HL] (Abraham et al. 2011b), allow the answering of shortest path queries on large road networks and grids in milliseconds or less, while exhibiting small preprocessing times and

Related Work
There have been some attempts besides the highway dimension trying to explain the good performance of shortest path
planning techniques. We will now brieﬂy review these methods and ideas. For a concise overview, we refer to Table 1.
For HL, the recently described skeleton dimension k
(Kosowski and Viennot 2017) is also suitable to prove a the-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6119

