The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Catching Captain Jack: Efﬁcient Time and Space Dependent
Patrols to Combat Oil-Siphoning in International Waters
Xinrun Wang,1 Bo An,2 Martin Strobel,3 Fookwai Kong4
1,2,3

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
4
DSO National Laboratories, Singapore
1,2
{xwang033, boan}@ntu.edu.sg, 3, 4 {martin.r.strobel, dfookwaikong}@gmail.com

efﬁciently deploy patrol resources is extremely challenging
to the security agencies.
During the last decade, several scheduling and patrolling
systems based on security games were developed and deployed in the real world, e.g., ARMOR used by the LA International Airport (Jain et al. 2010), IRIS supporting the
U.S. Federal Air Marshal Service (Jain et al. 2010), and
PROTECT used by the U.S. Coast Guard (An et al. 2012).
The successful deployment has led to the creation of a new
and active research area of security games and even subareas like green security games considering environmental
issues (Fang et al. 2016; Yin and An 2016) and protecting
large public events (Yin, An, and Jain 2014). However, these
methods cannot be directly applied to our problem due to
three main issues: i) our game is highly time and space
dependent and both players take paths as their strategies
while most previous works assume that at most one player
takes paths (Basilico, Gatti, and Amigoni 2009; Fang, Stone,
and Tambe 2015) or the values of targets are static over
time (Zhang et al. 2017); ii) continuous externalities, e.g.,
alarm inﬂuence, are incorporated to make our model more
realistic, which are ignored (Yin et al. 2012) or only considered for protecting targets (Gan, An, and Vorobeychik 2015;
Gan et al. 2017); iii) our game, with a reasonable discretion of time and space, is extremely large-scale and cannot be solved by the existing methods (Yin et al. 2012;
Yin and An 2016). We also note another line of research
relate to our problem (Bošanskỳ et al. 2011; Jakob, Vaněk,
and Pechoucek 2011; Vaněk et al. 2013) where the attacker
attacks the ships whose schedules are ﬁxed and known to
both players. However, according to the incident reports, the
attacker may damage the communication system and move
the ship to another place, which deviates from the schdule.
In this paper we address the above challenges and provide four key contributions. First, we construct a Stackelberg
Model of the Oil-Siphoning problem (SMOS), where both
players take time-dependent paths on the grid as their strategies, based on the incident reports from actual attacks as
well as special reports conducted by maritime authorities to
make the model realistic and computable; Second, in order to
compute the efﬁcient defender’s patrol strategy, we propose a
compact formulation and a constraint generation (CG) algorithm, which avoids the exponentially increasing number of
pure strategies of the defender and the attacker, respectively;

Abstract
Pirate syndicates capturing tankers to siphon oil, causing an
estimated cost of $5 billion a year, has become a serious security issue for maritime trafﬁc. In response to the threat, coast
guards and navies deploy patrol boats to protect international
oil trade. However, given the vast area of the sea and the highly
time and space dependent behaviors of both players, it remains
a signiﬁcant challenge to ﬁnd efﬁcient ways to deploy patrol
resources. In this paper, we address the research challenges
and provide four key contributions. First, we construct a Stackelberg model of the oil-siphoning problem based on incident
reports of actual attacks; Second, we propose a compact formulation and a constraint generation algorithm, which tackle the
exponentially growth of the defender’s and attacker’s strategy
spaces, respectively, to compute efﬁcient strategies of security
agencies; Third, to further improve the scalability, we propose
an abstraction method, which exploits the intrinsic similarity
of defender’s strategy space, to solve extremely large-scale
games; Finally, we evaluate our approaches through extensive
simulations and a detailed case study with real ship trafﬁc
data. The results demonstrate that our approach achieves a dramatic improvement of scalability with modest inﬂuence on the
solution quality and can scale up to realistic-sized problems.

Introduction
It was around midnight on the 4th of June 2015 when a group
of pirates boarded the Malaysia-registered oil tanker Orkim
Victory from a speed boat while under way to Kuantan port,
Malaysia. After taking control of the ship, the pirates moved
the Orkrim Victory to a different location where a second
tanker pulled up alongside it. Within a couple of hours the pirates siphoned 770 metric tons of Automotive Diesel Oil and
disappeared. This was the eighth of eleven piracy incidents
occurring in the South China Sea (SCS) in 2015 (ReCAAP
2015a; 2015c). The estimated worldwide economic damage
due to piracy reaches from $5 to $12 billion a year and a
major part of the attacks occur in the SCS (Kemp 2015;
Bowden et al. 2010). To combat the threat of piracy in the
SCS, Singapore, Malaysia and Indonesia plan to establish
patrols in the region (Xue 2015). Given the vast area of the
SCS, the huge number of merchant ships passing through and
the limited number of patrol boats, the question of how to
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

208

