The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Abduction Under Partial Observability
Brendan Juba, Zongyi Li, Evan Miller
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
Washington University in St. Louis
{bjuba, zli, evan.a.miller} @wustl.edu

background knowledge. We observe that by using a covering algorithm, it is possible to guarantee signiﬁcantly better
explanations when a small hypothesis (using relatively few
terms) is adequate. Concretely, when some r-term k-DNF
explanation on n attributes has an error rate of ∗ , we obtain
an error rate of Õ(r(log log n + log k)∗ ), in contrast to the
bound obtained for the state-of-the-art algorithm
of Zhang et
√
al. (2017), which gave an error rate of Õ( nk ∗ ) (but does
not consider the effect of the size of the hypothesis).

Abstract
Our work extends Juba’s formulation of learning abductive
reasoning from examples, in which both the relative plausibility of various explanations, as well as which explanations
are valid, are learned directly from data. We extend the formulation to consider partially observed examples, along with
declarative background knowledge about the missing data.
We show that it is possible to use implicitly learned rules
together with the explicitly given declarative knowledge to
support hypotheses in the course of abduction. We observe
that when a small explanation exists, it is possible to obtain a much-improved guarantee in the challenging exceptiontolerant setting.

Preliminaries
We work in a standard machine learning model in which the
data consists of many examples, assigning boolean values to
a variety of attributes. For example, if our data is about birds,
each bird may correspond to an example and then there can
be attributes such as: whether the bird has feathers or not,
whether it eats bugs or not, and other properties.

Introduction
Abduction is the task of inferring a plausible hypothesis to
explain an observed or hypothetical condition. Although it is
most prominently observed in scientiﬁc inquiry as the step of
proposing a hypothesis to be investigated, it is also an everyday mode of inference. Simple tasks such as understanding
stories (Hobbs et al. 1990) and images (Poole 1990) involve
a process of abduction to infer an interpretation of the larger
events, context, and motivations that are only partially depicted.
In this work, we consider a PAC-learning (Valiant 1984;
2000) formulation of the combined task of learning to abduce, introduced by Juba (2016). In this formulation, one is
given a collection of examples drawn from the prior distribution (i.e., example jointly sampled values of attributes) together with a condition to explain, represented as a Boolean
formula c on the attributes. The task is then to propose a
formula h, which essentially must be a k-DNF for computational reasons, satisfying the following two criteria:
1. Plausibility: the probability that h is satisﬁed on the prior
distribution must be at least some (given) minimum value
μ>0
2. Entailment: the probability that the condition to explain
c is satisﬁed, conditioned on the hypothesis h holding, is
at least 1 −  for some given error tolerance  > 0.
Our works extend Juba’s formulation of the abduction task
to use partial examples and draw on declaratively speciﬁed

Partial Observability In the real world, it is hard to require each example to contain all of the attributes. So, we
want to make inferences with incomplete data. Partial observability means that some attributes of examples may
be unknown. We represent this by allowing the value of
each attribute to be 1 (true), 0 (false), or ∗ (unobserved).
For instance, an example ρ(i) could be [x1 = 1, x2 =
∗, · · · , xn = 0]. (For convenience, we denote ρ(i) to be
the ith example and ρi to be the ith coordinate of an example ρ.) In our abduction task, we say our partial examples
are drawn from such a masked distribution M (D).
Implicit Learning The main tool to deal with partial
observability is implicit learning. Implicit learning means
learning without producing explicit representations. Given a
knowledge base (a set of formulas), and a query formula, we
want to know if the knowledge base can derive the query formula. The main theorem of implicit learning says, as long as
the formulas in a knowledge base are sufﬁciently observed in
partial examples, we can determine whether the knowledge
base can derive the query without explicitly constructing or
representing the knowledge base.
Deﬁnition 1 (Witnessed Formula) Given a partial example ρ, we say a formula φ is witnessed if φ|ρ is 0 or 1.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Where φ|ρ means the formula φ restricted to example ρ. Informally speaking, we get the restricted formula by plugging

8097

