The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Towards Neural Speaker Modeling in Multi-Party Conversation:
The Task, Dataset, and Models
1

Zhao Meng,1,2 Lili Mou,1,3 Zhi Jin1
Key Laboratory of High Conﬁdence Software Technologies, MoE; Software Institute, Peking University
2
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
3
David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo
zhmeng@student.ethz.ch, doublepower.mou@gmail.com, zhijin@sei.pku.edu.cn
Abstract

Task Formulation and Data Collection

In this paper, we address the problem of speaker classiﬁcation in multi-party conversation, and collect massive data
to facilitate research in this direction. We further investigate temporal-based and content-based models of speakers,
and propose several hybrids of them. Experiments show that
speaker classiﬁcation is feasible, and that hybrid models outperform each single component.1

Assume that we have segmented a multi-party conversation into several parts by speakers; each segment comprises one or a few consecutive sentences u1 , u2 , · · · , uN ,
uttered by a particular speaker. A candidate set of speakers S = {s1 , s2 , · · · , sk } is also given. In our experiments,
we assume u1 , u2 , · · · , uN ’s speaker si is in S. The task
of speaker classiﬁcation is to identify the speaker si of
u 1 , · · · , uN .
We represent the current utterance(s) as a real-valued vector u with recurrent neural networks. Speakers are also represented as vectors si , · · · , sk . The speaker classiﬁcation is
accomplished by a softmax-like function

Introduction
Speaker modeling is important to dialog systems, and has
been studied in traditional dialog research. However, existing methods are usually based on hand-crafted statistics and
ad hoc to a certain application (Lin and Walker 2011). Recently, neural networks have become a prevailing technique
in both task-oriented and open-domain dialog systems. After
single-turn and multi-turn dialog studies, a few researchers
have realized the role of speakers in neural conversational
models. Li et al. (2016) show that, with speaker identity
information, a sequence-to-sequence neural dialog system
tends to generate more coherent replies. In their approach,
a speaker is modeled by a learned vector (also known as an
embedding). Such method, unfortunately, requires massive
conversational data for a particular speaker to train his/her
embedding, and thus does not generalize to rare or unseen
speakers.
In this paper, we propose a speaker classiﬁcation task that
predicts the speaker of an utterance. It serves as a surrogate
task for general speaker modeling, similar to next utterance
classiﬁcation (Lowe et al. 2015, NUC) being a surrogate
task for dialog generation. The proposed task could also be
useful in applications like speech diarization, which aims at
answering “who spoke when” (Anguera et al. 2012).
We further propose a neural model that combines temporal and content information with interpolating or gating
mechanisms. We investigate different strategies for combination, ranging from linear interpolation to complicated gating mechanisms.



pi = exp s
i u ,

pi
p(si ) = 
j
jp

(1)

Because the number of candidate speakers may vary, the
“weights” of softmax are not a ﬁxed-size matrix, but the distributed representations of candidate speakers, s1 , · · · , sk .
To facilitate the speaker classiﬁcation task, we crawled
transcripts of more than 8,000 episodes of TV talk shows,
comprimising more than 200,000 individual sentences. We
assumed that the current speaker is within the nearest k
speakers. (k = 5, but at the beginning, k may be less than 5.)
Since too few utterances do not provide much information,
we required each speaker having at least 3 previous utterances, but kept at most 5. Samples failing to meet the above
requirements were ﬁltered out during data preprocessing.
We split train/val/test sets according to TV show episodes instead of sentences; therefore no utterance overlaps between
training and testing.

Methodology
We use a hierarchical recurrent neural network to model the
current utterances u1 , · · · , uN (Figure 1a), and obtain the
utterance embedding u, which is used in Equation 1.
Prediction with Content Information. Figure 1b illustrates
the content-based model: a hierarchical RNN yields a vector si for each speaker, based on his or her nearest several
utterances. The speaker vector si is multiplied by current utterances’ vector u for softmax-like prediction (Equation 1).
During prediction, we pick the candidate speaker that has
the highest probability.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
Full and future version(s) can be found at https://arxiv.org/pdf/
1708.03152.pdf Code and data available at https://sites.google.
com/site/neuralspeaker/

8121

