The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Lagrangian Constrained Community Detection
Mohadeseh Ganj, James Bailey, Peter J. Stuckey
School of Computing and Information Systems,
University of Melbourne, Australia
sghasempour@student.unimelb.edu.au, {baileyj,pstuckey}@unimelb.edu.au

expert knowledge in the domain. Some constraints may also
be imposed on the system due to known natural or resource
limitations.
Incorporating side information has been studied in constrained clustering schemes such as constrained k-means
adaptations (Ganji, Bailey, and Stuckey 2016; Wagstaff et al.
2001; Pelleg and Baras 2007). However, one cannot directly
apply the k-means type constrained clustering algorithms for
a constrained community detection problem without proper
embedding of the network into Euclidean space. However,
choice of a proper embedding technique for semi-supervised
applications without compromising on the network topological information is a challenge. To the best of our knowledge, this approach is not used in constrained community
detection literature.
In recent years, some semi-supervised approaches have
been devised for community detection to incorporate known
labels and pairwise instance level supervision constraints.
Some directly modify the network adjacency matrix based
on the supervision information (Zhang 2013; Ma et al.
2010). In another scheme (Eaton and Mansbach 2012), a
variation of so called modularity measure (Newman and
Girvan 2004) is proposed to incorporate supervision constraints. Some approaches also have been proposed based
on NMF, non-negative matrix factorization, (Ma et al. 2010;
Li et al. 2017) which consider a ﬁxed penalty term for violating the supervision constraints.
However, these approaches have some drawbacks and
limitations: First, they often have little control over the constraint satisfaction rate and may fail to satisfy many of the
constraints. This is mainly because the existing approaches
don’t have any mechanism to differentiate between easy and
difﬁcult constraints. Some constraints are easy to satisfy
even using an unsupervised scheme, because the constraint
aligns with the similarity measure or objective of the corresponding algorithm. However, some constraints are difﬁcult (eg. those which cannot be satisﬁed by an unsupervised
scheme). The existing approaches assume the same level
of difﬁculty for all of the supervision constraints and they
don’t have any adaptation mechanism to deal with more difﬁcult constraints. Consequently they often leave such constraints unsatisﬁed. Second, existing semi-supervised community detection algorithms often require a large amount
of side information to be able to achieve a signiﬁcant im-

Abstract
Semi-supervised or constrained community detection incorporates side information to ﬁnd communities of interest in
complex networks. The supervision is often represented as
constraints such as known labels and pairwise constraints.
Existing constrained community detection approaches often
fail to fully beneﬁt from the available side information. This
results in poor performance for scenarios such as: when the
constraints are required to be fully satisﬁed, when there is
a high conﬁdence about the correctness of the supervision
information, and in situations where the side information
is expensive or hard to achieve and is only available in a
limited amount. In this paper, we propose a new constrained
community detection algorithm based on Lagrangian multipliers to incorporate and fully satisfy the instance level
supervision constraints. Our proposed algorithm can more
fully utilise available side information and ﬁnd better quality
solutions. Our experiments on real and synthetic data sets
show our proposed LagCCD algorithm outperforms existing
algorithms in terms of solution quality, ability to satisfy the
constraints and noise resistance.

Introduction
Community detection is an important task in knowledge
discovery which aims to identify densely connected subgraphs or communities in networks. Many physical, social
and biological networks exhibit community structure which
is fundamental for analyzing such complex systems (Lancichinetti and Fortunato 2009). A community can be deﬁned
as a group of vertices where there are more edges inside the
community than edges linking vertices of the community
with the rest of the network (Fortunato 2010). As community detection is mainly deployed as an unsupervised task
in knowledge discovery, communities are found by analyzing just the topological structure of the network. However, in
some applications of community detection, there exists other
information available about the true communities or desired
assignments of vertices, which can help the community detection process to achieve better quality results and noise resistance (Eaton and Mansbach 2012). The side information
may be obtained as a result of complex experiments or from
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2983

