The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Complex Sequential Question Answering: Towards Learning to Converse Over
Linked Question Answer Pairs with a Knowledge Graph
Amrita Saha∗

Vardaan Pahuja†

Mitesh M. Khapra

IBM Research AI and I.I.T. Madras, India
amrsaha4@in.ibm.com

MILA, Université de Montréal
vardaanpahuja@gmail.com

I.I.T. Madras, India
miteshk@cse.iitm.ac.in

Karthik Sankaranarayanan

Sarath Chandar

IBM Research AI
kartsank@in.ibm.com

apsarathchandar@gmail.com
MILA, Université de Montréal
Cameron}). Such knowledge graphs can indeed be handy
when the bot is used in speciﬁc domains such as education, entertainment, sports, etc. where it is often required
to answer factual questions while being aware of the context of the conversation. While Question Answering (?; ?;
?; ?; ?; ?; ?; ?; ?; ?) and Conversation Systems (?; ?; ?;
?) have received a lot of attention in the recent past, we
would like to focus on such real life settings encountered
by chatbots which involve a combination of QA and dialog.
Speciﬁcally, we are interested in building systems which can
learn to converse over a series of coherently linked questions
that can be answered from a large scale knowledge graph. We
refer to this task as Complex Sequential Question Answering
(CSQA).

Abstract
While conversing with chatbots, humans typically tend to
ask many questions, a signiﬁcant portion of which can be
answered by referring to large-scale knowledge graphs (KG).
While Question Answering (QA) and dialog systems have
been studied independently, there is a need to study them
closely to evaluate such real-world scenarios faced by bots
involving both these tasks. Towards this end, we introduce
the task of Complex Sequential QA which combines the two
tasks of (i) answering factual questions through complex inferencing over a realistic-sized KG of millions of entities, and
(ii) learning to converse through a series of coherently linked
QA pairs. Through a labor intensive semi-automatic process,
involving in-house and crowdsourced workers, we created a
dataset containing around 200K dialogs with a total of 1.6M
turns. Further, unlike existing large scale QA datasets which
contain simple questions that can be answered from a single
tuple, the questions in our dialogs require a larger subgraph
of the KG. Speciﬁcally, our dataset has questions which require logical, quantitative, and comparative reasoning as well
as their combinations. This calls for models which can: (i)
parse complex natural language questions, (ii) use conversation context to resolve coreferences and ellipsis in utterances,
(iii) ask for clariﬁcations for ambiguous queries, and ﬁnally
(iv) retrieve relevant subgraphs of the KG to answer such questions. However, our experiments with a combination of state
of the art dialog and QA models show that they clearly do not
achieve the above objectives and are inadequate for dealing
with such complex real world settings. We believe that this
new dataset coupled with the limitations of existing models
as reported in this paper should encourage further research in
Complex Sequential QA.

Needless to say, CSQA is very different from the kind
of conversations found in existing dialog datasets such as
the Twitter (?), Ubuntu (?) and Movie Subtitles (?) datasets.
Table ?? shows an example of one such conversation from
our dataset containing a series of questions. Note that to
answer the question in Turn 11, the bot needs to remember
that the question involves the same predicate (‘diplomatically
related’) as the previous question, but with a different subject
(‘Australia’). In other words, it is difﬁcult to answer this
question without retaining the context of the conversation.
Further, in a natural conversation, some of the questions
may require co-reference resolution (as in Turn 2), ellipsis
resolution (as in Turn 11), etc. Finally, in some cases the
question could be ambiguous (as in Turn 2) in which case
the bot needs to ask for clariﬁcations keeping in mind other
entities and relations which were previously mentioned in the
conversation.

Introduction

While the example in Table ?? already highlights some
of the challenges involved in CSQA, we now discuss an
orthogonal set of challenges which arise from the complexity of the questions. Existing datasets for Factual QA (?;
?; ?) deal with Simple Questions, each of which can be answered from a single tuple in the KG. However, in a real-life
setting, a bot could encounter more complex questions requiring logical, quantitative and comparative reasoning. Table ??
shows some examples of such questions. It should be clear
that unlike simple questions, which can be answered from
a single tuple, these questions require a larger subgraph of

In recent years there has been an increased demand for
AI driven personal assistants which are capable of conversing coherently with humans. Such personal assistants could
beneﬁt from large scale knowledge graphs which contain
millions of facts stored as tuples of the form {predicate,
subject, object} (for example, {director, Titanic, James
∗

Equal Contribution
Work done while at IBM Research
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

705

