The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Dual Transfer Learning for Neural Machine Translation
with Marginal Distribution Regularization∗
Yijun Wang,1 Yingce Xia,2 Li Zhao,3 Jiang Bian,3 Tao Qin,3 Guiquan Liu,1 Tie-Yan Liu3
1

Anhui Province Key Lab. of Big Data Analysis and Application, University of Science and Technology of China
2
University of Science and Technology of China
3
Microsoft Research Asia
wyjun@mail.ustc.edu.cn, yingce.xia@gmail.com, {lizo, jiabia, taoqin, tyliu }@microsoft.com, gqliu@ustc.edu.cn
equate high-quality parallel corpora. To address this challenge, increasing attention has been paid to leveraging other
more easily obtained information, especially huge amount
of monolingual corpora on the web, to improve NMT.
(Gulcehre et al. 2015) proposed to train language models
(Mikolov et al. 2010; Sundermeyer, Schlüter, and Ney 2012)
independently with target-side monolingual sentences, and
incorporate them into NMT models during decoding by
re-scoring the candidate words according to the weighted
sum of the scores provided by the translation model and
the language model, or concatenating the two hidden states
from translation and language model for further processing.
While such an approach can achieve certain improvement, it
overlooks the potential of taking advantage of monolingual
data into enhancing NMT training, since it is only used to
obtain a language model.
Other studies attempt to enlarge the parallel bilingual
training dataset through translating the monolingual data
with a model trained by the given parallel corpora. Such an
idea has been used both in NMT (Sennrich, Haddow, and
Birch 2016) and statistical machine translation (Bertoldi and
Federico 2009; Lambert et al. 2011; Uefﬁng, Haffari, and
Sarkar 2007). Although this approach can increase the volume of parallel training data, it may introduce low-quality
pseudo sentence pairs into the NMT training in the mean
time.
(He et al. 2016a) propose the concept of dual learning, in
which two translation models teach each other through a reinforcement learning process, by minimizing the reconstruction error of a monolingual sentences, in either source or target languages. One potential issue of their approach, is that it
requires to back-propagate through the sequence of discrete
predictions using reinforcement learning-based approaches
which are notoriously inefﬁcient. Adopting the same idea of
reconstruction error minimization, (Cheng et al. 2016) propose to append a reconstruction term to the training objective.
In this work, motivated by the law of total probability,
we propose a principled way to exploit monolingual data for
NMT base on transfer learning. We transfer the knowledge
learned from the dual translation task (target-to-source translation) (He et al. 2016a; Xia et al. 2017b; 2017a) to our primary translation task (source-to-target translation), and we
name our method as dual transfer learning.

Abstract
Neural machine translation (NMT) heavily relies on parallel bilingual data for training. Since large-scale, high-quality
parallel corpora are usually costly to collect, it is appealing
to exploit monolingual corpora to improve NMT. Inspired by
the law of total probability, which connects the probability of
a given target-side monolingual sentence to the conditional
probability of translating from a source sentence to the target one, we propose to explicitly exploit this connection to
learn from and regularize the training of NMT models using monolingual data. The key technical challenge of this approach is that there are exponentially many source sentences
for a target monolingual sentence while computing the sum
of the conditional probability given each possible source sentence. We address this challenge by leveraging the dual translation model (target-to-source translation) to sample several
mostly likely source-side sentences and avoid enumerating
all possible candidate source sentences. That is, we transfer the knowledge contained in the dual model to boost the
training of the primal model (source-to-target translation),
and we call such an approach dual transfer learning. Experiment results on English→French and German→English tasks
demonstrate that dual transfer learning achieves signiﬁcant
improvement over several strong baselines and obtains new
state-of-the-art results.

Introduction
Machine translation aims at mapping a sentence from the
source language space X into the target language space Y.
Recent development of neural networks has witnessed the
success of Neural Machine Translation (NMT), which has
achieved state-of-the-art performance (Bahdanau, Cho, and
Bengio 2015; Britz et al. 2017; Gehring et al. 2017) through
end-to-end learning. In particular, given a parallel sentence
pair (x, y), where x ∈ X and y ∈ Y, the learning objective of most NMT algorithms is to maximize the conditional
probability P (y|x; θ) parameterized by θ.
While neural networks have led to better performance,
the huge number, usually tens of millions, of parameters in
the NMT model raises a major challenge that it heavily relies on large-scale parallel bilingual corpora for model training. Unfortunately, it is usually quite difﬁcult to collect ad∗

This work was conducted at Microsoft Research Asia.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5553

