The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Controlling Global Statistics in
Recurrent Neural Network Text Generation
Thanapon Noraset, David Demeter, Doug Downey
Department of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science
Northwestern University, Evanston IL 60208, USA
{nor, ddemeter}@u.northwestern.edu, d-downey@northwestern.edu

text generators tend to fail is by repeating the same words
or phrases too often, leading to nonsensical output (See,
Liu, and Manning 2017; Paulus, Xiong, and Socher 2017;
Noraset et al. 2017). Can we learn a low-perplexity model
that avoids this failure mode? Likewise, we may want to adjust our model’s output distribution to not reﬂect undesirable
biases in our training corpus, or to utilize a different style,
such as shorter sentences or more positive sentiment.
In this paper, we present a regularization technique that
allows modelers to specify additional soft constraints on
language models during the training. For example, the constraints might encourage the model to repeat words less often, or to use shorter sentences, etc. The constraints are
stated as a reference distribution that gives target marginal
probability values for events in the text (e.g., the probability
that a certain word will repeat consecutively). The regularizer encourages the global statistics of the model to match
the reference distribution. Implementing the regularizer in
RNNLMs is challenging because the marginal output probabilities of an RNNLM do not correspond directly to parameters of the model (as they do in simpler n-gram models),
and instead must be inferred. In this work, we solve this
problem by computing estimates of the model’s marginals
from a sample of generated text, which is continually updated as training proceeds. We then use the estimates during
training to encourage the model to generate text that matches
the reference distribution by minimizing the KL-divergence.
We refer to this method as Dynamic KL Regularization.
To evaluate our approach, we experiment with two types
of constraints in RNNLMs. The ﬁrst type aims to reduce local repetition. Local repetition is a long-standing issue with
RNNLMs: the models disproportionately repeat the same
word within a short window (see Figure 1). The problem becomes particularly acute when we ask the RNN to generate
its estimate of the high-likelihood text for a given input. We
show how using dynamic KL regularization to encourage the
RNNLM to exhibit a similar repetition proﬁle to the training
data can reduce repetition with little harm to perplexity. The
second type of constraints attempt to match n-gram statistics from a reference corpus. Training an RNNLM on even
tens of millions of tokens can be computationally costly, but
often we can readily acquire n-gram statistics over even billions of tokens. We show how dynamic KL regularization
can be used to incorporate large-corpus statistics that im-

Abstract
Recurrent neural network language models (RNNLMs) are an
essential component for many language generation tasks such
as machine translation, summarization, and automated conversation. Often, we would like to subject the text generated
by the RNNLM to constraints, in order to overcome systemic
errors (e.g. word repetition) or achieve application-speciﬁc
goals (e.g. more positive sentiment). In this paper, we present
a method for training RNNLMs to simultaneously optimize
likelihood and follow a given set of statistical constraints on
text generation. The problem is challenging because the statistical constraints are deﬁned over aggregate model behavior, rather than model parameters, meaning that a straightforward parameter regularization approach is insufﬁcient. We
solve this problem using a dynamic regularizer that updates
as training proceeds, based on the generative behavior of the
RNNLMs. Our experiments show that the dynamic regularizer outperforms both generic training and a static regularization baseline. The approach is successful at improving wordlevel repetition statistics by a factor of four in RNNLMs on
a deﬁnition modeling task. It also improves model perplexity when the statistical constraints are n-gram statistics taken
from a large corpus.

Introduction
Recurrent neural network language models (RNNLMs) are
a critical component of many natural language generation tasks such as machine translation, summarization, automated conversation, and caption generation (Sutskever,
Vinyals, and Le 2014; Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014;
Rush, Chopra, and Weston 2015; Karpathy and Fei-Fei
2015; Li et al. 2016). The models are trained to maximize the
likelihood of a training corpus, and evaluated on the likelihood they assign to a held-out test corpus (measured in terms
of perplexity). RNNLMs, and in particular Long Short-term
Memory Networks (LSTM) (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber
1997), have provided dramatic improvements in the perplexities of language models in recent years (Jozefowicz et al.
2016; Melis, Dyer, and Blunsom 2017).
However, while RNNLMs optimize well on the perplexity metric, when we utilize the models to generate text we
often wish to encourage the models to obey additional statistical constraints. For example, one way in which RNNLM
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5333

