The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Online Clustering of
Contextual Cascading Bandits
Shuai Li, Shengyu Zhang
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Sha Tin, Hong Kong
{shuaili, syzhang}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

on an item (and receives reward 0 otherwise). The learning agent aims to maximize its cumulative rewards after n
rounds. Previous work (Li et al. 2016; Zong et al. 2016)
considered a setting of linear cascading bandits to deal with
ever-changing set of items. Roughly speaking, the learning
agent adaptively learns a linear mapping between expected
rewards and features of items and users.
One important limit of the linear cascading bandit algorithms is that they mainly work in a content-dependent
regime, discarding the often useful method of collaborative
ﬁltering. One way to utilize the collaborative effect of users
is to consider their clustering structure. In this paper, we formulate the problem of online clustering of contextual cascading bandits, and design an algorithm to learn the clustering information and extract user feature vectors adaptively
with low cumulative regret. Following the approach in (Gentile, Li, and Zappella 2014), we use a dynamic graph on all
users to represent clustering structure, where an edge indicates the similarity between the two users. Edges between
different clusters are gradually removed as the algorithms
learns from the feedback that the pairs√of users are not similar. We prove an upper bound of O(d mnK ln(n)) for the
cumulative regret, where m is the number of clusters, d is
the dimension of feature space, n is the number of rounds,
and K is the number of recommended items. This extends
and improves the existing results in the degenerate setting of
only one cluster (m = 1). Finally we experiment on both
synthetic and real datasets to demonstrate the advantage of
the model and algorithm.
The organization of this paper is as follows. We ﬁrst introduce previous work related to our setting, then formulates the setting of Online Clustering of Contextual Cascading Bandits with some appropriate assumptions. Next we
give our UCB-like algorithm CLUB-cascade and the cumulative regret bound, which is better than the existing results
in the degenerate case. Then we report experimental results
on both synthetic data and real data to demonstrate the advantage of incorporating online clustering. Last is the conclusion of the paper.

Abstract
We consider a new setting of online clustering of contextual
cascading bandits, an online learning problem where the underlying cluster structure over users is unknown and needs to
be learned from a random preﬁx feedback. More precisely, a
learning agent recommends an ordered list of items to a user,
who checks the list and stops at the ﬁrst satisfactory item,
if any. We propose an algorithm of CLUB-cascade for this
√
setting and prove an n-step regret bound of order Õ( n).
Previous work (Li et al. 2016) corresponds to the degenerate
case of only one cluster, and our general regret bound in this
special case also signiﬁcantly improves theirs. We conduct
experiments on both synthetic and real data, and demonstrate
the effectiveness of our algorithm and the advantage of incorporating online clustering method.

Introduction
Most recommendation systems nowadays display
items in an ordered list. Examples include typical hotels/restaurants/goods recommendation, search engines,
etc. This is especially the case for apps or games recommendations on mobile devices due to the limited size of
screen. Click behaviors and feedback in such ordered lists
have their distinctive features, and a cascade model was
recently developed for studying feedback of user click
behaviors (Craswell et al. 2008). In the model, after a
user receives a list of items, she checks the items in the
given order and clicks the ﬁrst satisfactory one. After
the click, she stops checking the rest items in the list.
The learning agent receives the feedback of the click and
knows that the items before the clicked one have been
checked and are unsatisfactory, but whether the user likes
any items after the clicked one is unknown. The cascade
model is straightforward but effective in characterizing user
behaviors (Chuklin, Markov, and Rijke 2015).
In this paper, we consider an online learning variant of
cascading bandits (Kveton et al. 2015a; 2015b). In our
model, the learning agent uses exploration-exploitation techniques to learn the preferences of users over items by interactions with users. At each time step, the learning agent
recommends a list of items to the current user, observes the
click feedback, and receives a reward of 1 if the user clicks

Related Work
(Kveton et al. 2015a; Katariya et al. 2016) introduced the
click model with cascading feedback and DCM feedback to
the MAB framework, which describes the random feedback

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3554

