The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Efﬁciently Approximating the Pareto Frontier:
Hydropower Dam Placement in the Amazon Basin
Xiaojian Wu

Jonathan Gomes-Selman

Qinru Shi

Yexiang Xue

Dept of Computer Science
Cornell University
xw458@cornell.edu

Dept of Computer Science
Stanford University
jgs8@stanford.edu

Dept of Computer Science
Cornell University
qs63@cornell.edu

Dept of Computer Science
Cornell University
yexiang@cs.cornell.edu

Roosevelt Garcı́a-Villacorta
Dept of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology
Cornell University
rg676@cornell.edu

Scott Steinschneider

Elizabeth Anderson

Suresh Sethi

Dept of Earth & Environment
U.S. Geological Survey
Florida International University New York Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Unit
epanders@ﬁu.edu
Cornell University
suresh.sethi@cornell.edu

Alexander Flecker

Dept of Biological & Environ. Engr. Dept of Ecology & Evolutionary Biology
Cornell University
Cornell University
ss3378@cornell.edu
asf3@cornell.edu

Carla P. Gomes
Dept of Computer Science
Cornell University
gomes@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
Real–world problems are often not fully characterized by
a single optimal solution, as they frequently involve multiple competing objectives; it is therefore important to identify the so-called Pareto frontier, which captures solution
trade-offs. We propose a fully polynomial-time approximation scheme based on Dynamic Programming (DP) for computing a polynomially succinct curve that approximates the
Pareto frontier to within an arbitrarily small  > 0 on treestructured networks. Given a set of objectives, our approximation scheme runs in time polynomial in the size of the
instance and 1/. We also propose a Mixed Integer Programming (MIP) scheme to approximate the Pareto frontier. The
DP and MIP Pareto frontier approaches have complementary
strengths and are surprisingly effective. We provide empirical results showing that our methods outperform other approaches in efﬁciency and accuracy. Our work is motivated
by a problem in computational sustainability concerning the
proliferation of hydropower dams throughout the Amazon
basin. Our goal is to support decision-makers in evaluating
impacted ecosystem services on the full scale of the Amazon
basin. Our work is general and can be applied to approximate
the Pareto frontier of a variety of multiobjective problems on
tree-structured networks.

1

Figure 1: Dams throughout the Amazon basin: around 500
dams are proposed, planned, or under construction.
economic, and societal objectives. In multi-objective optimization, solutions are evaluated with respect to several, often competing, criteria. We are interested in understanding
the trade-offs between the objectives for different solutions:
the so-called Pareto frontier.
Our work is motivated by a challenging real-world computational sustainability problem concerning the placement
of hydropower dams in a river network. In recent years,
there has been a signiﬁcant proliferation of hydropower
dams in the Amazon basin: around 500 dams are proposed, planned, or under construction. Hydropower dams
affect many ecosystem services such as, energy production, navigation, biodiversity, sediment export, nutrient cycling, and freshwater ﬁsheries. Therefore, it is impera-

Introduction

In recent years there has been considerable interest in the
study of multi-objective optimization problems (see e.g.,
(Ehrgott and Gandibleux 2000; Qian, Tang, and Zhou 2016;
Terra-Neves, Lynce, and Manquinho 2017; Wiecek et al.
2008)). Multi-objective optimization is critical in Computational Sustainability (Gomes 2009), as real-world sustainability problems often involve balancing environmental,
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

849

