The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Privacy-Preserving Policy Iteration
for Decentralized POMDPs
†

Feng Wu,† Shlomo Zilberstein,‡ Xiaoping Chen†
School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, CHN
‡
College of Information and Computer Sciences, University of Massachusetts Amherst, USA
wufeng02@ustc.edu.cn, shlomo@cs.umass.edu, xpchen@ustc.edu.cn

the past decade, numerous optimal and approximate DecPOMDP algorithms have been developed (Amato, Dibangoye, and Zilberstein 2009; Wu, Zilberstein, and Chen
2010b; Pajarinen and Peltonen 2011; Oliehoek et al. 2013;
Kumar, Zilberstein, and Toussaint 2015; Dibangoye et al.
2016; Wu, Zilberstein, and Chen 2017). However, the associated privacy issues have not been addressed. Specifically, researchers usually assume that the Dec-POMDP
model is constructed by domain experts and then solved
by a planner in a centralized manner. In the modeling
and planning phases, the experts and the planner generally have complete information about the problem and the
agents. However, this assumption is limiting in domains
where the agents belong to different parties and privacy is
a concern. To date, privacy has been extensively studied for
multi-agent systems in other contexts such as agent negotiation (Zhang and Makedon 2005), multi-agent reinforcement
learning (Sakuma, Kobayashi, and Wright 2008), distributed
constraint optimization (DCOP) (Léauté and Faltings 2013;
Grinshpoun and Tassa 2014; Tassa, Zivan, and Grinshpoun
2015), and multi-agent classical planning (Brafman 2015),
but has not been tackled in the more complex setting captured by Dec-POMDPs.

Abstract
We propose the ﬁrst privacy-preserving approach to address
the privacy issues that arise in multi-agent planning problems modeled as a Dec-POMDP. Our solution is a distributed
message-passing algorithm based on trials, where the agents’
policies are optimized using the cross-entropy method. In our
algorithm, the agents’ private information is protected using a public-key homomorphic cryptosystem. We prove the
correctness of our algorithm and analyze its complexity in
terms of message passing and encryption/decryption operations. Furthermore, we analyze several privacy aspects of our
algorithm and show that it can preserve the agent privacy of
non-neighbors, model privacy, and decision privacy. Our experimental results on several common Dec-POMDP benchmark problems conﬁrm the effectiveness of our approach.

Introduction
Many real-world applications require a group of agents to
work together towards a common goal, which may be impossible or complicated for a single agent to achieve. In critical domains such as health care and e-commerce, privacy is
a major concern because the agents may carry sensitive and
private data that should not be accessed without authorization. Privacy is also a crucial issue if the agents in a team
are from different parties with different interests. For example, the network infrastructure of a communication network
may belong to multiple providers; sensor stations of a sensor network may be owned by several organizations; robots
in disaster response may be designed by different companies and operated by different rescue teams (Wu et al. 2015;
Ramchurn et al. 2016). They may have constraints on sharing the information about agent models, decision rules, sensor data, etc. In such cases, agents from different parties
must collaborate with each other while preserving privacy.
We assume in this work that while agents may have
privacy concerns, they otherwise operate cooperatively on
the task at hand. The Decentralized Partially Observable
Markov Decision Process (Dec-POMDP) (Bernstein et al.
2002) offers a rich framework for planning under uncertainty in such settings. The model extends the single-agent
POMDP model to cooperative multi-agent settings. Over

We propose Privacy-Preserving Policy Iteration (P3I) —
a novel privacy-preserving planning algorithm for solving
Dec-POMDPs. We consider three types of privacy that are
relevant to multi-agent systems, that is, agent privacy, model
privacy, and decision privacy. To preserve privacy, we devise a distributed message-passing algorithm based on trials.
Speciﬁcally, our solution is model-free where each agent’s
policy is optimized iteratively with the local information
collected in several trials by that agent. In more detail,
we optimize each agent’s policy using a variation of the
Cross-Entropy (CE) method (Oliehoek, Kooij, and Vlassis 2008; Omidshaﬁei et al. 2016; Clark-Turner and Amato 2017). Like most of the existing algorithms for DecPOMDPs, privacy issues are not concerned in the vanilla
CE method (Oliehoek, Kooij, and Vlassis 2008). To address that, we use a public-key homomorphic cryptosystem
to encrypt the messages and apply techniques such as random masking and random permutation to protect the agents’
private information. Hence, our method is much more efﬁcient than the general secure function evaluation (Goldreich
2009), which is impractical given a large number of trials.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4759

