The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Deep Representation-Decoupling Neural Networks
for Monaural Music Mixture Separation
Zhuo Li,1 Hongwei Wang,2 Miao Zhao,1 Wenjie Li,1 Minyi Guo2
1

The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, {cszhuoli, csmiaozhao, cswjli}@comp.polyu.edu.hk
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, wanghongwei55@gmail.com, myguo@sjtu.edu.cn

 

Abstract



   


Monaural source separation (MSS) aims to extract and reconstruct different sources from a single-channel mixture, which
could facilitate a variety of applications such as chord recognition, pitch estimation and automatic transcription. In this
paper, we study the problem of separating vocals and instruments from monaural music mixture. Existing works for
monaural source separation either utilize linear and shallow
models (e.g., non-negative matrix factorization), or do not explicitly address the coupling and tangling of multiple sources
in original input signals, hence they do not perform satisfactorily in real-world scenarios. To overcome the above limitations, we propose a novel end-to-end framework for monaural music mixture separation called Deep RepresentationDecoupling Neural Networks (DRDNN). DRDNN takes advantages of both traditional signal processing methods and
popular deep learning models. For each input of music
mixture, DRDNN converts it to a two-dimensional timefrequency spectrogram using short-time Fourier transform
(STFT), followed by stacked convolutional neural networks
(CNN) layers and long-short term memory (LSTM) layers to
extract more condensed features. Afterwards, DRDNN utilizes a decoupling component, which consists of a group of
multi-layer perceptrons (MLP), to decouple the features further into different separated sources. The design of decoupling component in DRDNN produces puriﬁed single-source
signals for subsequent full-size restoration, and can signiﬁcantly improve the performance of ﬁnal separation. Through
extensive experiments on real-world dataset, we prove that
DRDNN outperforms state-of-the-art baselines in the task of
monaural music mixture separation and reconstruction.





Figure 1: Illustration of monaural source separation for music mixture.
David 2010). Figure 1 gives an illustrative example of utilizing MSS to separate distinct audio signals (i.e., vocal, drum,
bass and other sources) from a mixture, which is similar to
the cocktail party problem that recognizes what one person
is saying when others are speaking at the same time (McDermott 2009).
Generally speaking, MSS is a challenging problem since
only one single channel is available. A common approach
for MSS is to ﬁrst convert the monaural music mixture into
the form of spectrogram by signal processing transforms,
then factorize the spectral representation by assigning each
time-frequency element of the mixed spectrogram a speciﬁc
source (Grais, Sen, and Erdogan 2013; Huang et al. 2014a).
Conventional methods for spectrogram factorization are typically based on linear matrix factorization methods, for example, non-negative matrix factorization (NMF). NMF approximates a non-negative data matrix X by the product of
non-negative basis matrices W and H, i.e., X ≈ W H (Ozerov and Fevotte 2010). Though NMF is effective in learning
hidden representations, it still shows limitations in the ﬁeld
of MSS, because music mixture is generally complex signal
with non-linear patterns, which cannot be well handled by
such shallow representation learning models due to its linear
structure. Moreover, the coupling and tangling of multiple
signals in music mixture make it even harder for traditional
linear methods to achieve satisfactory results for MSS.
Instead of directly utilizing linear models for spectrogram separation, some tentative efforts have considered applying non-linear mappings from the mixed spectrogram
to multiple sources in MSS. Recently, deep learning based
models are widely used in audio and music processing,
which achieve great success due to their stacked non-linear

Introduction
The problem of monaural source separation (MSS) generally refers to, given a mixture consisting of a series of
acoustical signals, how to separate and recover the original
sources from the combined signals. MSS is capable to extract the audio signals of interest from background noises
and facilitate a wide range of real-world applications, for
example, automatic recording and transcription of music
and poly-instruments (Dong and Li 2015), automatic chord
recognition (ACR) (Cheng et al. 2008), and pitch estimation (Signol, Barras, and Lienard 2008; Emiya, Badeau, and
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

93

