The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Neural Knowledge Acquisition via Mutual Attention
between Knowledge Graph and Text
Xu Han,1 Zhiyuan Liu,1∗ Maosong Sun1,2

1
Department of Computer Science and Technology,
State Key Lab on Intelligent Technology and Systems,
National Lab for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Imaging Technology,
Capital Normal University, Beijing, China

Mintz et al. (2009) propose a distant supervision method
to align text with KGs to generate labeled instances, which
is a milestone work for RE and also a pioneering attempt to
combine KGs and text. Although this alignment mechanism
is simple, it inspires some works to jointly consider KGs and
text for KA. Weston et al. (2013) directly sum up two ranking scores of KGs and text for feature fusion. Toutanova et
al. (2015) and Xie et al. (2016) use relevant text descriptions
to enhance entity or relation embeddings. These models conduct one-to-one alignments to link KGs with corresponding
text. However, not all entities and relations in KGs can be
aligned well with text.
Methods requiring non-strict data correspondence have
also been proposed. Wang et al. (2014a) align entities of
KGs and entity mentions in text by sharing their embeddings. Riedel et al. (2013) and Verga and McCallum (2016)
adopt probabilistic models of matrix factorization and collaborative ﬁltering to capture correlations between knowledge relations and textual patterns via their co-occurrence
entity pairs. These works perform well with soft alignments
between KGs and text. However, they either consider only
partial text information (just entity mentions or textual relations) or rely on complicated linguistic analysis which may
bring inevitable parsing errors. Their mainly designed for
surface statistical features frameworks also make themselves
hard to generalize well and incorporate complex structural
and semantic information.
To address these issues, we propose a general joint representation learning framework. As shown in Figure 1, the
framework employs a joint learning mechanism for both
KGs and text, which is based on comprehensive alignments
with respect to words, entities, and relations instead of partial information. For entities mentioned in text, their embeddings are shared with their corresponding mentions to build
entity-level alignments. For relations of KGs and their corresponding textual relations, a transfer mapping matrix is
adopted to build relation-level alignments. Moreover, we apply neural networks instead of conventional linguistic analysis to automatically encode sentence semantics, which is a
powerful way to model large-scale noisy web text.
In order to further alleviate problems caused by noise in
datasets and obtain more discriminative representations, we
propose a novel mutual attention mechanism. The attention
mechanism allows the models of KGs and text to use their

Abstract
We propose a general joint representation learning framework
for knowledge acquisition (KA) on two tasks, knowledge
graph completion (KGC) and relation extraction (RE) from
text. In this framework, we learn representations of knowledge graphs (KGs) and text within a uniﬁed parameter sharing semantic space. To achieve better fusion, we propose an
effective mutual attention between KGs and text. The reciprocal attention mechanism enables us to highlight important
features and perform better KGC and RE. Different from conventional joint models, no complicated linguistic analysis or
strict alignments between KGs and text are required to train
our models. Experiments on relation extraction and entity link
prediction show that models trained under our joint framework are signiﬁcantly improved in comparison with other
baselines. Most existing methods for KGC and RE can be
easily integrated into our framework due to its ﬂexible architectures. The source code of this paper can be obtained from
https://github.com/thunlp/JointNRE.

Introduction
People construct various knowledge graphs (KGs, also
known as Knowledge Bases) to organize world knowledge.
A typical knowledge graph (KG) is usually a multiple relational directed graph, recorded as a set of relational triples
(h, r, t), which indicate relation r between two entities h
and t, e.g., (Mark Twain, PlaceOfBirth, Florida). KGs
play an important role in many applications such as question
answering and web search because of their rich structural information.
Nonetheless, KGs are far from completion. There are two
typical approaches to extend KGs, knowledge graph completion (KGC) and relation extraction (RE). KGC aims to
enrich KGs with novel facts based on the inherent structure of KGs, including graph-based models (Lao and Cohen
2010), tensor-based models (Socher et al. 2013) and translation models (Bordes et al. 2013). RE aims to extract relational facts from plain text. Many efforts are also devoted
to RE, such as kernel-based models (Zelenko, Aone, and
Richardella 2003), embedding-based models (Gormley, Yu,
and Dredze 2015), and neural models (Socher et al. 2012).
∗

Corresponding author: Zhiyuan Liu (liuzy@tsinghua.edu.cn)
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4832

