The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Word Attention for Sequence to Sequence Text Understanding
Lijun Wu,1∗ Fei Tian,2 Li Zhao,2 Jianhuang Lai,1,3 Tie-Yan Liu2
1

School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University
2
Microsoft Research
3
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology
wulijun3@mail2.sysu.edu.cn; {fetia, lizo, tie-yan.liu}@microsoft.com; stsljh@mail.sysu.edu.cn

the entire source sentence, and makes it possible to generate
distinct and more relevant source sentence representation for
each decoding step.
Typical attention mechanism models the dependency between source and target sentences through the interaction
between encoder and decoder RNN hidden states, and summarizes such dependency into context vectors. Concretely,
as the ﬁrst step, the encoder RNN processes the source sentence into a memory consisting of all hidden state vectors.
Such a memory is then queried by the target side RNN hidden state at each decoding step, generating a distribution
over the memory itself. Based on such a distribution, the hidden states in the source side memory are linearly weighted
into a context vector to represent source sentence, which is
further used in generating the target side word in every step.
It is therefore observed that the context vector acts as the
key component of attention mechanism, since it dynamically
represents all the source side information.
In current attention mechanism, the context vectors are
built upon the RNN hidden state vectors, which act as representations of preﬁx substrings of the source sentence, given
the sequential nature of RNN computation. Apart from such
subsequence level context vectors, in this paper, we propose to leverage an additional context vector computed by
a new attention mechanism named word attention, which
allows the decoder to directly and selectively touch more
raw source sentence information on word level without any
complicated sequential operations. From the perspective of
source side representation, our word attention enhanced
model extracts the semantic information of the source sentence at different abstractive levels, combining previous subsequence level representation with low-level word representation. In this way, we are able to rebuild more adaptive and
comprehensive context vectors to encode source sentence,
which assist the attention model in every decoding step.
Concretely, our proposed word attention is a complementary attention that concentrates on speciﬁc source word information during target sentence generation. At each decoding step, the word attention will selectively pay attention to different source side words, and generate an attentive
word context that is built directly upon word embeddings.
The word context vector is then used to emit the target side
word, together with previous context vector that arises from
RNN hidden states that summarize source sentence at sub-

Abstract
Attention mechanism has been a key component in Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) based sequence to sequence
learning framework, which has been adopted in many text
understanding tasks, such as neural machine translation and
abstractive summarization. In these tasks, the attention mechanism models how important each part of the source sentence
is to generate a target side word. To compute such importance scores, the attention mechanism summarizes the source
side information in the encoder RNN hidden states (i.e., ht ),
and then builds a context vector for a target side word upon
a subsequence representation of the source sentence, since
ht actually summarizes the information of the subsequence
containing the ﬁrst t-th words in the source sentence. We in
this paper, show that an additional attention mechanism called
word attention, that builds itself upon word level representations, signiﬁcantly enhances the performance of sequence to
sequence learning. Our word attention can enrich the source
side contextual representation by directly promoting the clean
word level information in each step. Furthermore, we propose to use contextual gates to dynamically combine the subsequence level and word level contextual information. Experimental results on abstractive summarization and neural
machine translation show that word attention signiﬁcantly
improve over strong baselines. In particular, we achieve the
state-of-the-art result on WMT’14 English-French translation
task with 12M training data.

1

Introduction

Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) based encoder-decoder
framework has been successfully applied to various sequence to sequence text understanding tasks, e.g. neural machine translation (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014;
Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014), abstractive summarization (Nallapati et al. 2016a) and dialogue system (Asri,
He, and Suleman 2016). The key component to the success of RNNs based sequence to sequence learning is the
attention mechanism (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014;
Luong, Pham, and Manning 2015). The attention mechanism is able to allow the model automatically rely on different parts of the source sentence when generating a target
word, and hence avoids using a ﬁxed-size vector to represent
∗

This work was conducted at Microsoft Research Asia.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5578

