The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

PegasusN: A Scalable and
Versatile Graph Mining System
Ha-Myung Park,1 Chiwan Park,2 U Kang2
1

KAIST, 2 Seoul National University
hamyung.park@kaist.ac.kr, chiwanpark@snu.ac.kr, ukang@snu.ac.kr

Node
Features

Graph
Structure
Analyses

Triangle

How can we ﬁnd patterns and anomalies in peta-scale graphs?
Even recently proposed graph mining systems fail in processing peta-scale graphs. In this work, we propose PegasusN,
a scalable and versatile graph mining system that runs on
Hadoop and Spark. To handle enormous graphs, PegasusN
provides and seamlessly integrates efﬁcient algorithms for
various graph mining operations: graph structure analyses,
subgraph enumeration, graph generation, and graph visualization. PegasusN quickly processes extra-large graphs that
other systems cannot handle.

Destination

Abstract

Source

Graph Degree
Visualization
Gra

Graph

Triangle

ph
Subgraphs

Graph
Seed
graph Intermediate Result
graph
graph

Graph
Generation

Introduction

PegasusN>

Subgraph
Enumeration

Interactive
Shell

Graphs are everywhere: friendship networks, the World
Wide Web, knowledge bases, biological networks, etc. Many
machine learning tasks are directly or indirectly related to
graphs; some tasks such as clustering, partitioning, and classiﬁcation operate directly on graphs, while others use graph
properties such as degrees, graph patterns, connected components, and centralities (Faloutsos, Faloutsos, and Faloutsos 1999; Kang et al. 2010; 2011; Jung et al. 2017). Meanwhile, with the rapid development of technologies, graphs
that do not ﬁt into the memory are now commonplace: e.g.,
more than one billion Facebook users form a huge friendship network, and trillions of web pages are linked to each
other on the Web.
Several systems have been developed to handle such enormous graphs but they all fail in processing web-scale graphs.
Single machine systems like GraphChi (Kyrola, Blelloch,
and Guestrin 2012) and distributed memory systems like
GraphX (Gonzalez et al. 2014) cannot process graphs exceeding the external memory space and the distributed memory space, respectively. Even Pegasus (Kang, Tsourakakis,
and Faloutsos 2009), a MapReduce based system resolving the space shortage problem, cannot process extra large
graphs because of heavy network and disk I/Os by reading
and shufﬂing the entire data many times.
In this work, we introduce PegasusN, a scalable and versatile graph mining package that runs on Hadoop and Spark.
To handle enormous graphs, PegasusN provides and seamlessly integrates distributed algorithms for the following four
types of operations with various applications (see Figure 1).

Figure 1: System overview.
Graph structure analyses on a peta-scale graph with
PageRank, radii/diameter, shortest-paths, random walk with
restart, connected components, and label propagation (Park
et al. 2016; 2017). Applications: pattern and anomaly detection, spectral analysis, personalized recommendation, graph
partitioning, and node importance measurement.
Subgraph enumeration to ﬁnd all subgraphs of a large
graph that are isomorphic to a pattern graph (Park, Myaeng,
and Kang 2016). Applications: social network analysis, signiﬁcance measurement of motifs, web spam detection, and
community detection.
Peta-scale graph generation of R-MAT, Kronecker, and
Erdős-Rényi random graph (Jeon, Jeon, and Kang 2015).
Applications: simulation for new algorithm, graph modeling, and graph sampling/extrapolation.
Graph visualization providing a quick and useful view of
peta-scale graphs (Jeon, Jeon, and Kang 2015).
The codes of PegasusN are available at http://datalab.snu.
ac.kr/pegasusn.

System Overview
PegasusN provides an integrated interactive shell managing all the functionalities. Graph structure analyses and subgraph enumeration enable us to compute various graph fea-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8214

