The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Alternating Circulant Random Features for Semigroup Kernels
Yusuke Mukuta

Yoshitaka Ushiku

Tatsuya Harada

The University of Tokyo
mukuta@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

The University of Tokyo
ushiku@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

The University of Tokyo and RIKEN AIP
harada@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

This is not negligible when d is large because in most
cases, D ≥ d. Thus, recent work has proposed methods
to calculate the features with O(D log d). Most existing
work approximates the Gaussian kernel (Felix et al. 2016;
Le, Sarlós, and Smola 2013; Yu et al. 2015) or polynomial
kernels (Pham and Pagh 2013). In this work, we propose
a fast method that approximates semigroup kernels that is
effective for positive vectors but where we cannot apply existing fast methods directly.
A wide range of features, including histograms, discrete
probabilistic distributions, and activations of convolutional
neural networks (CNNs), are associated with the space of
positive vectors Rd+ . The semigroup kernel is a kernel that
exploits such positive deﬁniteness. For two inputs x, y ∈
Rd+ , the kernel value of the semigroup kernel depends only
on the summation of the two inputs x + y. In such a case,
Berg et al. (Berg, Christensen, and Ressel 1984) have proven
that there exists a distribution p(w) on Rd+ such that

t
k(x + y) = e−w (x+y) p(w)dw.
(1)

Abstract
The random features method is an efﬁcient method to approximate the kernel function. In this paper, we propose novel random features called “alternating circulant random features,”
which consist of a random mixture of independent random
structured matrices. Existing fast random features exploit random sign ﬂipping to reduce the correlation between features.
Sign ﬂipping works well on random Fourier features for
real-valued shift-invariant kernels because the corresponding weight distribution is symmetric. However, this method
cannot be applied to random Laplace features directly because the distribution is not symmetric. The method proposed
herein yields alternating circulant random features, with the
correlation between features being reduced through the random sampling of weights from multiple independent random
structured matrices instead of via random sign ﬂipping. The
proposed method facilitates rapid calculation by employing
structured matrices. In addition, the weight distribution is preserved because sign ﬂipping is not implemented. The performance of the proposed alternating circulant random features
method is theoretically and empirically evaluated.

1

Based on Eq. (1), Yang et al. (Yang etal. 2014) proposed

Introduction

random Laplace features, which use {

Kernel methods are effective for classiﬁcation using nonlinear relationships between data. However, the complexity of
these methods increases as the dataset size grows. Thus, kernel approximation methods are necessary.
The random features method is an approximation method
that ﬁrst represents the given kernel function by the expectation of the product of the parameterized function values
of two inputs and then approximates the kernel with the inner product of vectors composed of the values of randomly
sampled functions. Various random features techniques have
been proposed, with their construction depending on the
structure of the given input feature and kernel function (Pennington, Felix, and Kumar 2015; Kar and Karnick 2012;
Rahimi and Recht 2007; Yang et al. 2014).
When we apply the random features method on largescale data, we need to consider the cost involved in calculating the approximate feature vectors. Naive approximation methods often require O(Dd) computation, where d
and D denote input and output dimensions, respectively.

1 −wj x D
}j=1 with
De

{wj }D
j=1 sampled from p(w) as a D-dimensional feature
vector. Random Laplace features exhibit superior performance to existing commonly used kernels such as the Gaussian and χ2 kernels with regard to the classiﬁcation of histogram data. The computational complexity is O(Dd). As
the dimension of the input feature grows, this linear dependency on d becomes non-negligible.
In this paper, we propose a method to calculate the feature vector with O(D log d) complexity by exploiting structured matrices to approximate the semigroup kernel quickly.
Structured matrices are matrices with special structures that
enable us to calculate the matrix-vector products recursively with O(d log d) time complexity and O(d) memory at the expense of independency between different feature elements. Existing fast Gaussian kernel approximation
methods (Felix et al. 2016; Le, Sarlós, and Smola 2013;
Yu et al. 2015) combine structured matrices with random
sign ﬂipping to reduce the correlation between different
feature elements. For random Fourier features on a shiftinvariant kernel such as Gaussian kernel, the sample distribution is symmetric. Thus, sign ﬂipping does not change the

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3836

