The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning to Predict Readability Using
Eye-Movement Data from Natives and Learners
Ana V. González-Garduño, Anders Søgaard
Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen
{ana, soegaard}@di.ku.dk

correlation between eye-tracking measures such as ﬁrst pass
duration and regression duration, and perceived text difﬁculty (Rayner et al. 2012).
The work most similar to ours is by Singh et al. (2016),
who presents a two-level system to predicting the readability of Wikipedia sentences. Singh et al. (2016) used reading
times from the Dundee eye-tracking corpus to learn to predict reading times in the ﬁrst level of the system and then
used these as features for predicting readability in the second. They found this to be a successful approach, however,
their results were slightly below the state-of-the-art (Ambati,
Reddy, and Steedman 2016).
In contrast to Singh et al. (2016), our study focuses on
the effects of using eye movement data from native speakers versus learners of English, in a multi-task learning set-up
(Caruana 1997), with text readability assessment as our main
task. In multi-task Learning, the training signals of one task,
the auxiliary task, are used to improve the performance of
the main task, by sharing information throughout the training process. Speciﬁcally in this study, we use the task of
eye-movement prediction to induce models of readability.
Furthermore, we compare using eye-movement prediction
for native speakers as an auxiliary task, to using gaze prediction for language learners. In both cases, we use the auxiliary task to induce a multi-task Multi-Layered Perceptron
model for text readability assessment.
We evaluate our models on both Simple Wikipedia vs
Normal Wikipedia (Coster and Kauchak 2011) and OneStopEnglish (Vajjala and Meurers 2014) corpus. We use
preﬁx probabilities, surprisal, ambiguity scores as well as
other low-level features typically used in readability assessment in order to represent each sentence of the corpora. The
gaze data that we use for our auxiliary tasks comes from the
Dundee corpus (Kennedy and Pynte 2003), as well as the
recently introduced Ghent Eye-Tracking Corpus (GECO)
(Cop et al. 2017), which includes both gaze measures from
native speakers and learners of English.

Abstract
Readability assessment can improve the quality of assisting technologies aimed at language learners. Eye-tracking
data has been used for both inducing and evaluating generalpurpose NLP/AI models, and below we show that unsurprisingly, gaze data from language learners can also improve
multi-task readability assessment models. This is unsurprising, since the gaze data records the reading difﬁculties of
the learners. Unfortunately, eye-tracking data from language
learners is often much harder to obtain than eye-tracking
data from native speakers. We therefore compare the performance of deep learning readability models that use native
speaker eye movement data to models using data from language learners. Somewhat surprisingly, we observe no significant drop in performance when replacing learners with natives, making approaches that rely on native speaker gaze information, more scalable. In other words, our ﬁnding is that
language learner difﬁculties can be efﬁciently estimated from
native speakers, which suggests that, more generally, readily available gaze data can be used to improve educational
NLP/AI models targeted towards language learners.

Introduction
Automatic readability assessment is a common task in
NLP/AI and refers to the task of predicting reading difﬁculties. Some work in automatic readability assessment is
directed at predicting reading difﬁculties of native speakers
with normal reading abilities, but there is also a growing literature using readability assessment to select appropriate literature for language learners.
Vajjala and Meurers (2012), for example, found that developmental measures from second language acquisition
research, in combination with traditional features such as
word length and sentence length, improve document level
readability assessment. More recently, Xia, Kochmar, and
Briscoe (2016) used self-training to adapt models of text
readability trained on native speaker data to estimate readability for learners.
In parallel, recent studies in text readability have made
use of eye movement data from native speakers of English in order to evaluate their models (Klerke et al. 2015;
Green 2014). These studies attempt to take into account the

Contributions This is, to the best of our knowledge, the
ﬁrst application of multi-task learning to readability prediction, comparing data from natives speakers versus learners
of English. We begin with the observation that, unsurprisingly, gaze data of language learners can be used to improve
readability assessment for language learners. This is unsur-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5118

