The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

ARC: Adversarial Robust Cuts for
Semi-Supervised and Multi-Label Classiﬁcation
Sima Behpour, Wei Xing, Brian D. Ziebart
Department of Computer Science
University Of Illinois at Chicago
{sbehpo2,wxing3,bziebart}@uic.edu

learning for binary associative Markov networks and attractive pairwise relationships. ARC takes the form of a zerosum game between a predictor trying to minimize an additive loss over predicted variables and an adversarial training
label approximator that seeks to maximize this same loss.
It provides loss bounds that are always meaningful since
the game outcome is always within the range of the evaluation loss function. Using the double oracle method (McMahan, Gordon, and Blum 2003), which is a constraint generation method for zero-sum games, inference reduces to solving a sequence of minimum-cut/linear programming problems. Learning corresponds to a convex optimization problem that we address using standard gradient-based methods.
We demonstrate the beneﬁts of our approach on multi-label
and semi-supervised binary classiﬁcation tasks. In the latter
tasks, our approach combines inductive parametric modeling with similarity-based reasoning.
Adversarial learning methods have seen a recent resurgence, particularly for deep generative models (Goodfellow
et al. 2014). Early methods sought to make predictors robust to manipulations of the training data (Dalvi et al. 2004).
Our work follows a line of research with a less powerful adversary: the inherent uncertainty of true distributions in inductive learning settings given limited training data (Topsøe
1979; Grünwald and Dawid 2004). We contribute an extension of structured prediction using this minimax perspective beyond the previous work on classiﬁcation problems
with zero-one loss (Fathony et al. 2016), ordinal regression
(Fathony, Bashiri, and Ziebart 2017), more general costsensitive losses (Asif et al. 2015), multivariate losses (Wang
et al. 2015), and chain structures (Li et al. 2016).

Abstract
Many structured prediction tasks arising in computer vision
and natural language processing tractably reduce to making
minimum cost cuts in graphs with edge weights learned using maximum margin methods. Unfortunately, the hinge loss
used to construct these methods often provides a particularly
loose bound on the loss function of interest (e.g., the Hamming loss). We develop Adversarial Robust Cuts (ARC), an
approach that poses the learning task as a minimax game
between predictor and “label approximator” based on minimum cost graph cuts. Unlike maximum margin methods,
this game-theoretic perspective always provides meaningful
bounds on the Hamming loss. We conduct multi-label and
semi-supervised binary prediction experiments that demonstrate the beneﬁts of our approach.

Introduction
Structured prediction—the task of predicting multiple interrelated variables—is increasingly important for machine
learning applications in computer vision (Kolmogorov and
Zabin 2004), natural language processing (Flake, Tarjan, and
Tsioutsiouliklis 2004), computational biology, and other areas (Blum and Chawla 2001; Blum et al. 2004). Though
intractable in general (even when only pairwise relationships exist (Wainwright and Jordan 2008)), certain restricted
relationships and structures (e.g., chains, trees, and other
low-treewidth structures) do have efﬁcient inference algorithms. The most general of these—binary-valued associative Markov networks (Taskar, Chatalbashev, and Koller
2004) and the special case of attractive pairwise relationships (Boykov, Veksler, and Zabih 2001)—use minimum
graph cuts (Greig, Porteous, and Seheult 1989) for inference
and maximum margin methods (Tsochantaridis et al. 2004;
Joachims 2005) for training. Unfortunately, the hinge loss
surrogate employed by this approach can be quite loose, often providing meaningless performance guarantees in practice. For example, the surrogate loss may be worse than random predictions or even the worst possible loss.
Seeking to tighten this gap between training objective
and evaluative loss function for structured prediction tasks,
we present Adversarial Robust Cuts (ARC), an approach to

Background
Notation and Learning Task
We consider n predicted variables, y = (y1 , . . . , yn ), chosen from a ﬁxed set of labels yi ∈ Y, ∀i ∈ [n], where
[n] = {1, . . . , n}. We denote the corresponding random
variables for these label variables using capitalization, Y =
(Y1 , . . . , Yn ), and denote vectors and multivariate variables
in bold. We denote given information or side information
variables using a single vector, x ∈ X , with a corresponding random variable denoted as X. (Strict sub-portions of x
may be relevant to each variable yi , but for notational sim-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2704

