The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Neural Stochastic Volatility Model
Rui Luo,† Weinan Zhang,‡ Xiaojun Xu,‡ Jun Wang†
†

University College London
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{r.luo,j.wang}@cs.ucl.ac.uk, {wnzhang,xuxj}@apex.sjtu.edu.cn
‡

conditional heteroscedasticity (ARCH) model (Engle 1982)
and the extension, generalised ARCH (GARCH) (Bollerslev
1986), which makes use of autoregression to capture the
properties of time-varying volatility within many time series. As an alternative to the GARCH model family, the class
of stochastic volatility (SV) models specify the variance
to follow some latent stochastic process (Hull and White
1987). Heston (Heston 1993) proposed a continuous-time
model with the volatility following an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck
process and derived a closed-form solution for options pricing. Since the temporal discretisation of continuous-time dynamics sometimes leads to a deviation from the original trajectory of system, those continuous-time models are seldom
applied in forecasting. For practical purposes of forecasting, the canonical model (Jacquier, Polson, and Rossi 2002;
Kim, Shephard, and Chib 1998) formulated in a discretetime fashion for regularly spaced data such as daily prices of
stocks is of great interest. While theoretically sound, those
approaches require strong assumptions which might involve
detailed insight of the target sequences and are difﬁcult to
determine without a thorough inspection.
In this paper, we take a fully data driven approach and determine the conﬁgurations with as few exogenous input as
possible, or even purely from the historical data. We propose a neural network re-formulation of stochastic volatility
by leveraging stochastic models and recurrent neural networks (RNNs). In inspired by the work from Chung et al.
(Chung et al. 2015) and Fraccaro et al. (Fraccaro et al. 2016),
the proposed model is rooted in variational inference and
equipped with the latest advances of stochastic neural networks. The model inherits the fundamentals of SV model
and provides a general framework for volatility modelling;
it extends previous sequential frameworks with autoregressive and bidirectional architecture and provide with a more
systematic and volatility-speciﬁc formulation on stochastic
volatility modelling for ﬁnancial time series. We presume
that the latent variables follow a Gaussian autoregressive
process, which is then utilised to model the variance process. Our neural network formulation is essentially a general
framework for volatility modelling, which covers two major
classes of volatility models in ﬁnancial study as the special
cases with speciﬁc weights and activations on neurons.
Experiments with real-world stock price datasets are performed. The result shows that the proposed model produces

Abstract
In this paper, we show that the recent integration of statistical
models with deep recurrent neural networks provides a new
way of formulating volatility (the degree of variation of time
series) models that have been widely used in time series analysis and prediction in ﬁnance. The model comprises a pair of
complementary stochastic recurrent neural networks: the generative network models the joint distribution of the stochastic volatility process; the inference network approximates the
conditional distribution of the latent variables given the observables. Our focus here is on the formulation of temporal
dynamics of volatility over time under a stochastic recurrent
neural network framework. Experiments on real-world stock
price datasets demonstrate that the proposed model generates a better volatility estimation and prediction that outperforms mainstream methods, e.g., deterministic models such
as GARCH and its variants, and stochastic models namely
the MCMC-based stochvol as well as the Gaussian-processbased, on average negative log-likelihood.

Introduction
The volatility of the price movements reﬂects the ubiquitous uncertainty within ﬁnancial markets. It is critical
that the level of risk (aka, the degree of variation), indicated by volatility, is taken into consideration before investment decisions are made and portfolio are optimised (Hull
2006); volatility is substantially a key variable in the pricing
of derivative securities. Hence, estimating and forecasting
volatility is of great importance in branches of ﬁnancial studies, including investment, risk management, security valuation and monetary policy making (Poon and Granger 2003).
Volatility is measured typically by employing the standard
deviation of price change in a ﬁxed time interval, such as
a day, a month or a year. The higher the volatility is, the
riskier the asset should be. One of the primary challenges
in designing volatility models is to identify the existence
of latent stochastic processes and to characterise the underlying dependences or interactions between variables within
a certain time span. A classic approach has been to handcraft the characteristic features of volatility models by imposing assumptions and constraints, given prior knowledge
and observations. Notable examples include autoregressive
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6401

