The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Revisiting Immediate Duplicate
Detection in External Memory Search
Shunji Lin, Alex Fukunaga
Graduate School of Arts and Sciences
The University of Tokyo

RAM-based graph search, where duplicate detection is performed on each node expansion or generation by immediate
duplicate detection (IDD). However, in view of recent improvements in solid state drive (SSD) performances, capacities and cost per byte, it is natural to consider the use of
SSDs as an alternative to HDDs in external memory search.
The key difference between SSDs and HDDs is that SSDs
allow much faster random access because they do not use
a physical read/write head. Although there have been some
past work on SSD-based external memory search (Edelkamp
and Sulewski 2008), to our knowledge, DDD and IDD have
not been compared empirically using SSDs, and the feasibility of IDD in SSD-based external memory search remains an
open question (Edelkamp 2016).
We propose a method for IDD in external memory search,
segmented compression, which improves upon the hashbased IDD method of compression (Edelkamp, Schrödl, and
Koenig 2010) by adding a mapping structure that allows us
to signiﬁcantly reduce expensive lookups incurred by false
positive probes into secondary memory. Using this method,
we implement and evaluate A*-IDD, an external memory
search variant of A*.
This paper is organized as follows. First, we review duplicate detection in external memory search. Then, we describe
the new segmented compression strategy and A*-IDD. We
evaluate A*-IDD on domain-independent planning using International Planning Competition (IPC) benchmarks, and
ﬁrst show that segmented compression signiﬁcantly outperforms compression. Then, we compare A*-IDD to External A* (Edelkamp, Jabbar, and Schrödl 2004) and A*-DDD
(Korf 2004; Hatem 2014), two DDD-based A* algorithms,
and show that A*-IDD is competitive with DDD-based approaches in domain-independent planning.

Abstract
External memory search algorithms store the open and closed
lists in secondary memory (e.g., hard disks) to augment limited internal memory. To minimize expensive random access
in hard disks, these algorithms typically employ delayed duplicate detection (DDD), at the expense of processing more
nodes than algorithms using immediate duplicate detection
(IDD). Given the recent ubiquity of solid state drives (SSDs),
we revisit the use of IDD in external memory search. We propose segmented compression, an improved IDD method that
signiﬁcantly reduces the number of false positive access into
secondary memory. We show that A*-IDD, an external search
variant of A* that uses segmented compression-based IDD,
signiﬁcantly improves upon previous open-addressing based
IDD. We also show that A*-IDD can outperform DDD-based
A* on some domains in domain-independent planning.

1

Introduction

Graph search algorithms, such as breadth ﬁrst search, Dijkstra’s algorithm, and A*, are constrained by the memory
available to store the open list and the closed list. The open
list acts as a priority queue for nodes to be expanded, while
the closed list keeps track of previously expanded nodes in
order to prevent the reexpansion of nodes via an operation
known as duplicate detection. Without duplicate detection,
there can be an exponential increase in the number of states
visited by graph search, as the same states can be reached by
many different paths.
In order to deal with large search problems that exhaust
internal memory, external memory search algorithms have
been developed using secondary memory such as hard disk
drives (HDDs). The main hurdle in designing such algorithms is the need to overcome/avoid the latency of random
read/write access into secondary memory, which is orders of
magnitude slower than accessing RAM. Most previous external memory search algorithms were developed with the
use of HDDs, using the method of delayed duplicate detection (DDD) (Korf 2003). In DDD, all generated nodes are
ﬁrst stored on disk and duplicate detection is performed using a separate duplicate elimination phase that removes duplicates in a single batch operation. This is in contrast to

2

Background: Duplicate Detection in
External Memory Search

Secondary memory can be used in duplicate detection when
the number of nodes expanded exceeds main memory capacity. However, a naive implementation (e.g., simply storing
the closed list as a ﬁle on disk) is impractical, as each query
of the closed list incurs a random I/O access into secondary
memory, which is orders of magnitude slower than accessing
an in-memory closed list. To circumvent this problem, sev-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1347

