The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

HogRider: Champion Agent of Microsoft
Malmo Collaborative AI Challenge
Yanhai Xiong,∗ Haipeng Chen,∗ Mengchen Zhao, Bo An
Nanyang Technological University
{yxiong003,chen0939,zhao0204,boan}@ntu.edu.sg

other agents where the uncertain information can be modelled probabilistically. A more challenging type of uncertainty lies in the environment-related factors which we do
not know how to model.
These two challenges are signiﬁcantly ampliﬁed when it
comes to sequential decision making, where we need to look
at not only short term rewards but also rewards in the long
run. Therefore, one has to consider subsequent effect of the
current action, especially in a dynamic environment. Another crucial characteristic is the limited learning trials. On
the Minecraft platform, it usually takes several seconds to
complete one episode of game. Therefore, it is extremely
time consuming to learn an effective policy.
The Microsoft Malmo Collaborative AI Challenge
(MCAC), which is designed to encourage research relating to various problems in Collaborative AI, builds on a
Minecraft mini-game (Mojang 2017) called “Pig Chase”.
Pig Chase is played on a 9 × 9 grid where agents can either work together to catch the pig and achieve high scores,
or give up cooperation and achieve low scores. After playing certain episodes (e.g., 100) of games, the agent who
achieves the highest average scores wins the challenge. Despite its simple rules, this game has all the above stated key
characteristics. Though there are numerous papers studying sequential decision making in complex multiagent systems, they only address a subset of these characteristics. We
hope to shed some light on solving this class of problems
by presenting HogRider, a champion agent which won 2017
Microsoft Malmo Collaborative AI Challenge (Kuno and
Schwiderski-Grosche 2017), with the following key contributions.
First, via enormous simulations, we provide thorough
analysis of the Minecraft game, and identify its key challenges. Speciﬁcally, we discover several important aspects
of the game that are not revealed by the MCAC rule, such
as the pig’s uncertain behavior model, the uncertainty in observing the other agent’s actions, among others.
Second, we propose a novel agent type hypothesis approach for dealing uncertainties about the type of the other
agent and the observation of the other agent’s actions. When
forming ad hoc teams, it is important to identify the types of
the collaborating agents. A typical approach is to maintain
a belief of their type, and update it based on the actions of
the other agents using Bayes theorem (Barrett, Stone, and

Abstract
It has been an open challenge for self-interested agents to
make optimal sequential decisions in complex multiagent
systems, where agents might achieve higher utility via collaboration. The Microsoft Malmo Collaborative AI Challenge
(MCAC), which is designed to encourage research relating
to various problems in Collaborative AI, takes the form of a
Minecraft mini-game where players might work together to
catch a pig or deviate from cooperation, for pursuing high
scores to win the challenge. Various characteristics, such as
complex interactions among agents, uncertainties, sequential
decision making and limited learning trials all make it extremely challenging to ﬁnd effective strategies. We present
HogRider - the champion agent of MCAC in 2017 out of 81
teams from 26 countries. One key innovation of HogRider is
a generalized agent type hypothesis framework to identify the
behavior model of the other agents, which is demonstrated to
be robust to observation uncertainty. On top of that, a second
key innovation is a novel Q-learning approach to learn effective policies against each type of the collaborating agents.
Various ideas are proposed to adapt traditional Q-learning to
handle complexities in the challenge, including state-action
abstraction to reduce problem scale, a warm start approach
using human reasoning for addressing limited learning trials, and an active greedy strategy to balance exploitationexploration. Challenge results show that HogRider outperforms all the other teams by a signiﬁcant edge, in terms of
both optimality and stability.

Introduction
In complex multiagent systems, sequential decision making
has long been a signiﬁcant challenge with many characteristics. One prominent characteristic is the interactions among
the agents. In many practical scenarios (e.g., the Stag-Hunt
game), agents need to cooperate with each other to achieve a
common goal with high rewards (e.g., hunting stags), while
each individual agent is self-interested and might deviate
from the cooperation for less risky goals with low rewards
(e.g., hunting rabbits). Another critical characteristic comes
from various uncertainties. One type of uncertainty arises
from the lack of accurate knowledge of environment and
∗

Denotes equal contribution.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4767

