The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Dual Deep Neural Networks Cross-Modal Hashing
Zhen-Duo Chen, Wan-Jin Yu, Chuan-Xiang Li, Liqiang Nie, Xin-Shun Xu∗
School of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong University
School of Software, Shandong University
{chenzd.sdu, rcwanjinyu, chuanxiang.lee, nieliqiang}@gmail.com, xuxinshun@sdu.edu.cn

Recently, deep neural networks have been widely used
in various ﬁelds, e.g., computer vision and data mining
(Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012; He et al. 2016).
Thereinto, deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
have demonstrated its theoretical and practical success in
feature learning. Inspired by this, some deep hashing methods have been proposed for cross-modal retrieval.
Generally, these deep cross-modal hashing methods can
obtain better results than the shallow methods in many realworld datasets. However, there are still some problems that
need to be further considered. For example, nearly all the
deep cross-modal hashing methods are pairwise optimized,
which means that these methods become inefﬁcient if all supervised information is used for training. This makes them
hardly be extended to large-scale datasets. Thus, in real applications, they usually sample only a small subset with
m points for training where m is typically less than ten
thousands even the given training set is very large. Therefore, such methods cannot make full use of all available
data samples. In addition, many single-modal hashing methods can obtain good results on single-modal data. Apparently, the binary codes generated by a single-modal hashing method contain useful information of intra-modality. If
a model could make use of these binary codes and avoid the
pairwise optimization problem, it is expected to obtain better
results and become efﬁcient.
Motivated by this, in this paper, we propose a novel tristage deep cross-modal hashing method – Dual Deep Neural
Networks Cross-Modal Hashing (DDCMH) for cross-modal
retrieval, which employs two deep neural networks to generate hash codes for different modalities. Distinct from the existing deep hashing methods, in DDCMH, the two deep networks are optimized independently; therefore, it can avoid
the pairwise optimization problem. Without loss of generality, suppose that each sample has two modalities, i.e., text
and image. In Stage 1, DDCMH leverages a single-modal
hashing method to generate the binary codes of the textual
modality of the training set; as to Stage 2, these binary codes
are treated as supervised information to train an image network, which maps the image modality to a binary representation; when it comes to Stage 3, these image modality codes
are reconstructed according to a reconstruction procedure,
and be used as supervised information to train a text network, which generates better hash codes for textual modal-

Abstract
Recently, deep hashing methods have attracted much attention in multimedia retrieval task. Some of them can even perform cross-modal retrieval. However, almost all existing deep
cross-modal hashing methods are pairwise optimizing methods, which means that they become time-consuming if they
are extended to large scale datasets. In this paper, we propose
a novel tri-stage deep cross-modal hashing method – Dual
Deep Neural Networks Cross-Modal Hashing, i.e., DDCMH,
which employs two deep networks to generate hash codes for
different modalities. Speciﬁcally, in Stage 1, it leverages a
single-modal hashing method to generate the initial binary
codes of textual modality of training samples; in Stage 2,
these binary codes are treated as supervised information to
train an image network, which maps visual modality to a binary representation; in Stage 3, the visual modality codes are
reconstructed according to a reconstruction procedure, and
used as supervised information to train a text network, which
generates the binary codes for textual modality. By doing this,
DDCMH can make full use of inter-modal information to
obtain high quality binary codes, and avoid the problem of
pairwise optimization by optimizing different modalities independently. The proposed method can be treated as a framework which can extend any single-modal hashing method
to perform cross-modal search task. DDCMH is tested on
several benchmark datasets. The results demonstrate that it
outperforms both deep and shallow state-of-the-art hashing
methods.

Introduction
With the explosive growth of various kinds of data, hashing is becoming more and more popular in approximate
nearest neighbor (ANN) search due to its fast query speed
and low storage cost (Wang et al. 2017b; Tang et al. 2015;
Yang et al. 2014; Liu et al. 2016b; Wang et al. 2015;
2017c). Most of the pioneer efforts are speciﬁcally proposed
for single-modal data; yet, in many scenarios, data exhibit
multiple modalities such as text, acoustic and image. In a
sense, cross-modal search deserves our attention. For instance, given textual content, we search the images from
database. As compared to the single-modal hashing methods, efforts on the multi-modal ones are relatively sparse.
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

274

