The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

LTLf /LDLf Non-Markovian Rewards
Ronen I. Brafman

Giuseppe De Giacomo, Fabio Patrizi

Ben-Gurion University, Beer-Sheva, Israel
brafman@cs.bgu.ac.il

Sapienza Università di Roma, Italy
{degiacomo,patrizi}@dis.uniroma1.it

of the last state and action. With non-Markovian rewards, an
explicit representation is no longer possible, as the number of
possible histories or futures of a state is inﬁnite. Hence, we
must use an implicit speciﬁcation that can express properties
of past (or future) states. To date, two speciﬁcation languages
have been proposed. (Bacchus, Boutilier, and Grove 1996)
suggest using a temporal logic of the past. Whether a state
satisﬁes such a past temporal formula depends on the entire sequence of states leading to the state. Thus, we can
reward appropriate response to a “bring-coffee” command
by associating a reward with the property: the “bring-coffee”
command was issued in the past, and now I have coffee. A
second proposal, by (Thiébaux et al. 2006), uses a temporal
logic of the future with a special symbol to denote awarding
a reward. At each step, one checks whether this symbol must
be true in the current state, for the reward formula to be satisﬁed in the initial state. If that is the case, the current state is
rewarded. This language is not often used in other areas, and
its semantics is more involved.
Existing MDP solution methods, possibly with the exception of Monte-Carlo tree search algorithms (Kocsis and
Szepesvári 2006), rely heavily on the Markov assumption,
and cannot be applied directly with non-Markovian rewards.
To address this, both proposals above transform the nonMarkovian model to an equivalent Markovian one that can be
solved using existing algorithms, by enriching the state with
information about the past. For example, if we extend our
state to record whether a “bring-coffee” command was issued
earlier, a reward for bringing coffee in states indicating that
“bring-coffee” was issued in the past, is now Markovian. It
rewards the same behaviors as the non-Markovian reward on
the original state. We call a model obtained by extending the
state space of the original non-Markovian MDP, an extended
MDP.
Using extended MDPs is a well-known idea. Since state
space size affects the practical and theoretical complexity of
most MDP solution algorithms, the main question is how to
minimally enrich the state so as to make rewards Markovian.
(Bacchus, Boutilier, and Grove 1996) provide algorithms
for constructing an extended MDP that attempt to minimize
size by reducing the amount of information about the past
that is maintained. While their construction does not generate a minimal extended MDP, they allude to using automata
minimization techniques to accomplish this. (Thiébaux et

Abstract
In Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), the reward obtained in
a state is Markovian, i.e., depends on the last state and action.
This dependency makes it difﬁcult to reward more interesting
long-term behaviors, such as always closing a door after it
has been opened, or providing coffee only following a request.
Extending MDPs to handle non-Markovian reward functions
was the subject of two previous lines of work. Both use LTL
variants to specify the reward function and then compile the
new model back into a Markovian model. Building on recent
progress in temporal logics over ﬁnite traces, we adopt LDLf
for specifying non-Markovian rewards and provide an elegant
automata construction for building a Markovian model, which
extends that of previous work and offers strong minimality
and compositionality guarantees.

Introduction
Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) are a central model for
sequential decision making under uncertainty. They are used
to model and solve many real-world problems, and to address the problem of learning to behave well in unknown
environments. The Markov assumption is a key element of
this model. It states that the effects of an action depend only
on the state it was executed in, and that a reward given at a
state depends only on the previous action and state. It has
long been observed (Bacchus, Boutilier, and Grove 1996;
Thiébaux et al. 2006) that many performance criteria call
for more sophisticated reward functions that do not depend
on the last state only. For example, we may want to reward
a robot that eventually delivers coffee each time it gets a
request; or, to ensure it will access restricted areas only after having acquired the right permission. Such rewards are
non-Markovian. Interestingly, Littman has advocated at IJCAI 2015 that it may actually be more convenient, from a
design perspective, to assign rewards to the satisfaction of
(non-Markovian) declarative temporal properties, rather than
to states (Littman et al. 2017).
To extend MDPs with non-Markovian rewards we need
a language for specifying such rewards. Markovian rewards
are speciﬁed as a function R from the previous state and action to the reals. R can be speciﬁed using an explicit reward
matrix, or implicitly, by associating a reward with properties
Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1771

