The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Trace Ratio Optimization with Feature Correlation
Mining for Multiclass Discriminant Analysis
Forough Rezaei Boroujeni,1 Sen Wang,1 Zhihui Li,2 Nicholas West,3
Bela Stantic,1 Lina Yao,4 Guodong Long5
1

School of Information and Communication Technology, Grifﬁth University, Gold Coast, Australia
2
Beijing Etrol Technologies Company Ltd., Beijing 100095, China
3
Immunology Research Group, Grifﬁth Health Centre, Grifﬁth University, Gold Coast, Australia
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, The University of New South Wales, Australia
5
Centre for Aritiﬁcial Intelligence (CAI), University of Technology Sydney, Australia
forough.rezaeiboroujeni@grifﬁthuni.edu.au,{sen.wang, n.west, b.stantic}@grifﬁth.edu.au, zhihuilics@gmail.com,
lina.yao@unsw.edu.au, Guodong.long@uts.edu.au
Fisher’s linear discriminant analysis (FLDA) is a wellknown supervised feature extraction method which was proposed by Fisher (1936) for binary classiﬁcation, and then
extended to the multiclass scenario by Rao (1948). The objective of FLDA is to ﬁnd a transformation matrix from an
n-dimensional feature space to a d-dimensional space by
maximising the between-class scatter matrix while minimising the within-class scatter matrix. The fast and easy procedure for identifying the transformation matrix has made
this method attractive. However, FLDA may encounter the
small sample size problem. This problem happens when the
number of features is far larger than the number of training
samples. In this instance, the within-class scatter matrix may
be singular, and the use of LDA may be impossible. Furthermore, FLDA can identify a subspace with the dimensions
of at most c − 1, wherein c is the class number. Overemphasizing the large class distances is another drawback of
this method, and this drawback makes the criterion of FLDA
suboptimal. In this case, the close class pairs tend to overlap
in the subspace, and this is known as the class separation
problem.
To deal with the class separation problem, many weighting methods such as the approximate pairwise accuracy criterion (aPAC) (Loog 1999), have been proposed. Loog et al.
(2001) employed an approximation of the Bayes error for
pairs of classes in order to reduce the merging of close class
pairs. Harmonic mean for subspace selection (HMSS) (Bian
and Tao 2008) and geometric mean-based subspace selection (GMSS) (Tao et al. 2009), are other weighting methods to reduce the class separation problem. However, these
weighting methods still cannot be guaranteed a solution to
the class separation problem (Hu et al. 2014).
In order to guarantee the separation of all class pairs,
Max-Min distance analysis (MMDA) was introduced by
Bian and Tao (2011). MMDA directly maximises the
minimum pairwise between-class distance in the lowdimensional subspace. Inspired by the idea of the maxmin, several dimensionality reduction methods have been
proposed (Hu et al. 2014; Shao and Sang 2012; 2017;
Su et al. 2015). However, applying these methods is not
feasible when datasets are high dimensional, and when the

Abstract
Fisher’s linear discriminant analysis is a widely accepted dimensionality reduction method, which aims to ﬁnd a transformation matrix to convert feature space to a smaller space
by maximising the between-class scatter matrix while minimising the within-class scatter matrix. Although the fast and
easy process of ﬁnding the transformation matrix has made
this method attractive, overemphasizing the large class distances makes the criterion of this method suboptimal. In this
case, the close class pairs tend to overlap in the subspace. Despite different weighting methods having been developed to
overcome this problem, there is still a room to improve this
issue. In this work, we study a weighted trace ratio by maximising the harmonic mean of the multiple objective reciprocals. To further improve the performance, we enforce the
2,1 -norm to the developed objective function. Additionally,
we propose an iterative algorithm to optimise this objective
function. The proposed method avoids the domination problem of the largest objective, and guarantees that no objectives
will be too small. This method can be more beneﬁcial if the
number of classes is large. The extensive experiments on different datasets show the effectiveness of our proposed method
when compared with four state-of-the-art methods.

1

Introduction

High dimensional samples make the learning tasks more
complex and computationally demanding. To confront these
problems, data dimensionality reduction methods are used to
reduce the representation of a dataset since the reduced data
delivers greater accuracy and faster learning. Dimensionality reduction algorithms can be classiﬁed as feature selection
and feature extraction. Feature selection techniques reduce
the representation of a dataset through a reduction in the
number of attributes which can learn faster with higher accuracy compared to the initial dataset (Kantardzic 2011). In
contrast, feature extraction algorithms transform or project
the original data onto a smaller dataset which is more compact and of stronger discriminating power (Nie et al. 2010;
2008; Chang et al. 2014; Chang and Yang 2016; Canedo and
Marono 2014; Han, Pei, and Kamber 2011).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2746

