The Twenty-Third AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium

Reading with Robots: Towards a Human-Robot
Book Discussion System for Elderly Adults
Natalie Parde
Human Intelligence and Language Technologies (HiLT) Laboratory
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
University of North Texas

they process novel but not conventional metaphors (Mashal,
Gavrieli, and Kav 2011). Moreover, probable Alzheimer’s
disease patients suffer no impairments in comprehending
conventional metaphors, but struggle to comprehend novel
metaphors (Amanzio et al. 2008). These ﬁndings make discussions of novel metaphors a particularly intriguing, previously unstudied means of proactive cognitive exercise.
However, although there has been no shortage of
metaphor detection research to date (that is, a binary decision of whether or not a unit of text is a metaphor), there
has been a paucity of research attempting to score metaphor
novelty, or distinguish novel from conventional metaphors.
This has been at least partially due to a lack of noveltyannotated data (Haagsma and Bjerva 2016). Thus, for this
thesis I not only establish a benchmark for metaphor novelty
scoring, but also publish a large corpus of metaphor noveltyannotated data to stimulate further research in this area.
Finally, various companion robots have been developed
for elderly users. A limitation of systems to date has been
that none have been able to engage users in dialogue, instead
relying on motion (Wada and Shibata 2007) or buttons and
canned speech (Tapus, Tapus, and Mataric 2009) for communication. To generate meaningful, cognitively stimulating
discussion, more advanced NLP capabilities are needed.

Abstract
As people age, it is critical that they maintain not only their
physical health, but also their cognitive health—for instance,
by engaging in cognitive exercise. Recent advancements in
AI have uncovered novel ways through which to facilitate
such exercise. In this thesis, I propose the ﬁrst human-robot
dialogue system designed speciﬁcally to promote cognitive
exercise in elderly adults, through discussions about interesting metaphors in books. I describe my work to date, including
the development of a new, large corpus and an approach for
automatically scoring metaphor novelty. Finally, I outline my
plans for incorporating this work into the proposed system.

Introduction
Companion robots have received much attention recently as
their presence in the commercial marketplace has grown.
However, the language technologies guiding their interactions are still nascent. Here, I propose several contributions
to natural language processing that will enable a companion robot to engage in more advanced discourse, speciﬁcally
through discussions of novel metaphors in books. My contributions are driven by the overarching question of whether
metaphor can be leveraged as a tool to facilitate cognitive reserve, which gives rise to the following technical questions:
• Can novel metaphoric pairs be reliably extracted from unstructured text (ﬁction books)?

Research Plan
Data Collection

• What types of features are most beneﬁcial for doing so?

I constructed a new dataset of 18,439 syntactically-related
word pairs annotated on a scale from 0 (non-metaphoric)
to 3 (highly novel metaphor). The annotations were crowdsourced using Amazon Mechanical Turk, and two trained
annotators also labeled each test instance (3162 instances).
We (my advisor and I) devised a regression-based approach
to aggregate the crowdsourced training data, ﬁnding that
this technique outperformed traditional aggregation strategies (Parde and Nielsen 2017). We used the adjudicated labels from trained annotators as labels for the test set. Table
1 shows instances from our corpus and their scores.

• How can natural-sounding, introspective questions be
generated about identiﬁed novel metaphors?
• Are companion robots a suitable mode through which to
facilitate book discussions with elderly users?
In this work, I describe my work thus far toward answering these questions, and my research plans for the future.

Related Work
Prior work in neuroscience and psycholinguistics has indicated that processing novel metaphors requires additional
cognitive effort (Lai, Curran, and Menn 2009), and that
older adults experience age-related changes in the way that

Metaphor Novelty Scoring
Using our dataset, I trained a deep neural network to predict
metaphor novelty scores (Parde and Nielsen 2018). I tested a
variety of features for this task, some of which were derived

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8030

