The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

EMD Metric Learning
Zizhao Zhang, Yubo Zhang, Xibin Zhao∗ , Yue Gao∗
Key Laboratory for Information System Security, Ministry of Education
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology
School of Software, Tsinghua University, China.
{zz-zh14,zhangyb17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{zxb,gaoyue}@tsinghua.edu.cn
* indicates corresponding authors
Abstract
Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD), targeting at measuring the
many-to-many distances, has shown its superiority and been
widely applied in computer vision tasks, such as object recognition, hyperspectral image classiﬁcation and gesture recognition. However, there is still little effort concentrated on
optimizing the EMD metric towards better matching performance. To tackle this issue, we propose an EMD metric learning algorithm in this paper. In our method, the objective is to
learn a discriminative distance metric for EMD ground distance matrix generation which can better measure the similarity between compared subjects. More speciﬁcally, given a
group of labeled data from different categories, we ﬁrst select a subset of training data and then optimize the metric for
ground distance matrix generation. Here, both the EMD metric and the EMD ﬂow-network are alternatively optimized until a steady EMD value can be achieved. This method is able
to generate a discriminative ground distance matrix which can
further improve the EMD distance measurement. We then apply our EMD metric learning method on two tasks, i.e., multiview object classiﬁcation and document classiﬁcation. The
experimental results have shown better performance of our
proposed EMD metric learning method compared with the
traditional EMD method and the state-of-the-art methods. It
is noted that the proposed EMD metric learning method can
be also used in other applications.

Figure 1: The illustration of Earth Mover’s Distance, where
f eai is the feature for the center of Pi , and wi is the corresponding weight of Pi . dij is the cost of shipping a unit of
supply from Pi to Qj , and fij is the corresponding ﬂow.

Variable-size descriptions of distributions, such as Gaussian Mixture Models (GMM) (Li, Wang, and Zhang 2013)
have been widely used to represent multidimensional distributions in a compact way. These descriptors can be regarded as signatures, which are a set of the main clusters
of a distribution. Here, each cluster is represented by a single point (i.e., the cluster center) in the underlying space,
together with a weight that denotes the size or the importance of that cluster. This is a common-used data description method and accordingly there are many methods to
measure the distance between two signatures, such as KL divergence (Goldberger, Gordon, and Greenspan 2003),
Jensen-Shannon divergence (Endres and Schindelin 2003),
and maximum mean discrepancy (Borgwardt et al. 2006).
Among these methods, the Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD)

(Rubner, Tomasi, and Guibas 2000) is a general and ﬂexible way to measure the dissimilarity between two signatures, which is a special case of the Wasserstein distances
(Villani 2009) in its continuous form. EMD has shown its
superior performance on the many-to-many matching problem and been used in many computer vision tasks, such as
object recognition (Zhang et al. 2007), hyperspectral image
classﬁcation (Sun et al. 2015) and gesture recognition (Wang
and Chan 2014).
The original EMD is based on a solution to the old transportation problem, as shown in Figure 1, which can be
formalized as a linear programming problem: given a set
of suppliers P = {P1 , P2 , . . . , Pn }, a set of consumers
Q = {Q1 , Q2 , . . . , Qm }, and a ground distance matrix
D = {dij } whose elements dij deﬁnes the cost of shipping
a unit of supply from Pi to Qj , the aim is to ﬁnd an optimal
set F of the ﬂows fij , i.e. the amount of supply shipped from
to the j-th consumer Qj , to minimize the
the i-th supplier
 n Pi 
m
overall cost i=1 j=1 dij fij , subjecting to the following
constraints
f
ij ≥ 0 (1 ≤ i ≤ n, 1 ≤ j ≤ m),
n
fij ≤ wQj (1 ≤ j ≤ m),
(1)
i=1
m
f
≤
w
(1
≤
i
≤
n),
ij
P
i
j=1

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

where wPi is the supply of the i-th supplier and wQj is the
capacity of the j-th consumer.

Introduction

4490

