The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Sum-Product Autoencoding: Encoding and
Decoding Representations Using Sum-Product Networks
Antonio Vergari

Robert Peharz

Nicola Di Mauro

antonio.vergari@uniba.it
University of Bari, Italy

rp587@cam.ac.uk
University of Cambridge, UK

nicola.dimauro@uniba.it
University of Bari, Italy

Alejandro Molina

Kristian Kersting

Floriana Esposito

alejandro.molina@tu-dortmund.de
TU Dortmund, Germany

kersting@cs.tu-darmstadt.de
TU Darmstadt, Germany

ﬂoriana.esposito@uniba.it
University of Bari, Italy

resentation can be extracted and fed into a classiﬁer (Coates,
Lee, and Ng 2011; Marlin et al. 2010), or used to initialize another neural architecture (Hinton and Salakhutdinov
2006). A particular advantage of such generative encodingdecoding schemes is that we can work with a potentially
easier-to-predict target space, e.g., for structured prediction. Several variants of non-probabilistic autoencoders exist (Vincent et al. 2010; Rifai et al. 2011), tackling this problem by jointly learning encoding and decoding functions via
optimizing the closeness of their decoded reconstructions.
Speciﬁcally, we demonstrate that SPNs are naturally well
suited for Representation Learning (RL), compared to the
aforementioned models, since they offer: i.) exactly answering a wider range of queries in a tractable way, e.g.
marginals (Poon and Domingos 2011; Bekker et al. 2015),
enabling natural inference formulations for RL; ii.) a recursive, hierarchical and part-based deﬁnition, allowing the
extraction of rich and compositional representations well
suited for image and other natural data; and iii.) time and
effort saved in hyperparameter tuning since both their structure and weights can be learned in a “cheap” way (Gens and
Domingos 2013). This makes SPNs an excellent choice for
encoding-decoding tasks: although learned in a generative
way and without training them to reconstruct their inputs,
SPNs extract surprisingly good representations and allow to
decode them effectively.
To encode samples, we either use the SPNs’ latent variable semantics or treat them as neural networks, adopting the
natural inference scenario SPNs offer—computing a Most
Probable Explanation (MPE) (Poon and Domingos 2011;
Peharz et al. 2017)—dealing with both categorical and continuous embeddings. We characterize conditions when the
proposed decoding schemes for SPNs deliver the same sample reconstructions. Moreover, we leverage MPE inference
to cope with partial embeddings, i.e. comprising missing
values—a difﬁcult scenario even for probabilistic autoencoders. The beneﬁts of the resulting Sum-Product Autoencoding (SPAE) routines are demonstrated by extensive experiments on Multi-Label Classiﬁcation (MLC) tasks. SPAE
is competitive to RBMs, deep probabilistic (Germain et
al. 2015) and non-probabilistic autoencoders like contractive (Rifai et al. 2011), denoising (Vincent et al. 2010) and
stacked autoencoders tailored for label embeddings (Wicker,

Abstract
Sum-Product Networks (SPNs) are a deep probabilistic architecture that up to now has been successfully employed for
tractable inference. Here, we extend their scope towards unsupervised representation learning: we encode samples into
continuous and categorical embeddings and show that they
can also be decoded back into the original input space by
leveraging MPE inference. We characterize when this SumProduct Autoencoding (SPAE) leads to equivalent reconstructions and extend it towards dealing with missing embedding information. Our experimental results on several multilabel classiﬁcation problems demonstrate that SPAE is competitive with state-of-the-art autoencoder architectures, even
if the SPNs were never trained to reconstruct their inputs.

Introduction
Recent years have seen a signiﬁcant interest in learning
tractable representations facilitating exact probabilistic inference for a range of queries in polynomial time (Lowd and
Domingos 2008; Choi and Darwiche 2017). Being instances
of arithmetic circuits (Darwiche 2003), Sum-Product Networks (SPNs) were among the ﬁrst learnable representations of these kind (Poon and Domingos 2011). They are
deep probabilistic models that, by decomposing a distribution into a hierarchy of mixtures (sums) and factorizations
(products), have achieved impressive performances in various AI tasks, such as computer vision (Gens and Domingos
2012; Amer and Todorovic 2016), speech (Zohrer, Peharz,
and Pernkopf 2015), natural language processing (Cheng
et al. 2014; Molina, Natarajan, and Kersting 2017), and
robotics (Pronobis, Riccio, and Rao 2017). So far, however, SPNs have mainly been used as “black box” inference
machines: only their output—the answer to a probabilistic
query—has been used in the tasks at hand.
We here extend the scope of SPNs towards Representation Learning (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2012). We
leverage their learned inner representations to uncover explanatory factors in the data and use these in predictive tasks.
Indeed, other probabilistic models have traditionally been
used in similar ways, such as Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBMs): After unsupervised training, a feature repc 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4163

