The Twenty-Third AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium

Enhancing Machine Learning Classiﬁcation for
Electrical Time Series Applications
Mark Valovage
Computer Science and Engineering
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN
valovage@cs.umn.edu

The Beneﬁts Hiding in Electrical Data

approaches assume error-free labels in training data, an unrealistic assumption for data labeled by naı̈ve consumers.
In (Valovage and Gini 2016), I introduced the ﬁrst method
to automatically correct labels in consumer-labeled training
samples, enabling realistic application of supervised methods to a single house. I improved this method in (Valovage
and Gini 2017) to use a parameter-free model, making it
scalable to millions of homes. While these improvements
overcome limiting assumptions, supervised learning still requires hours of work by consumers to meticulously label individual appliance samples. To enable a system that requires
no consumer setup, unsupervised learning is required.

Machine learning applications to electrical time series data
will have wide-ranging impacts in the near future. Electricity disaggregation holds the promise of reducing billions of
dollars of electrical waste every year. In the power grid, automatic classiﬁcation of disturbance events detected by phasor
measurement units could prevent cascading blackouts before they occur. Additional applications include better market segmentation by utility companies, improved design of
appliances, and reliable incorporation of renewable energy
resources into the power grid. However, existing machine
learning methods remain unimplemented in the real world
because of limiting assumptions that hinder performance.
My research contributions are summarized as follows: In
electricity disaggregation, I introduced the ﬁrst label correction approach for supervised training samples. For unsupervised disaggregation, I introduced event detection that does
not require parameter tuning and appliance discovery that
makes no assumptions on appliance types. These improvements produce better accuracy, faster computation, and more
scalability than any previously introduced method and can
be applied to natural gas disaggregation, water disaggregation, and other source separation domains. My current work
challenges long-held assumptions in time series shapelets, a
classiﬁcation tool with applicability in electrical time series
and dozens of additional domains.

Unsupervised Electricity Disaggregation
It is more challenging for unsupervised learning methods
to accurately identify appliances since they lack training
samples and must be able to identify a wide range of appliances. Unsupervised disaggregation requires two distinct
steps. First, during event detection, the aggregate power data
stream is segmented into signiﬁcant events that represent a
state change in one or more appliances. Second, appliance
discovery reconstructs appliances from these events. Existing methods for both of these steps have their own shortcomings that limit real-world deployment, detailed below.
Parameter-Free Event Detection: Previously introduced
event detection methods depend on parameters optimized
for a single appliance or dataset, limiting scalability to millions of buildings. In (Valovage and Gini 2017), I introduced
the ﬁrst event detection method that does not require parameter tuning using a modiﬁed version of Bayesian change
detection. Tests on 2 publicly available datasets containing
7 different houses showed Bayesian change detection performed on par with or better than existing state-of-the-art
event detection methods without the need to tune parameters, making it scalable to millions of homes. Furthermore,
my modiﬁcations to Bayesian change detection reduced its
space and time complexity from O(n2 ) to O(n), enabling it
to run in real-time on inexpensive hardware.

Electricity Disaggregation
Electricity disaggregation identiﬁes individual appliances
from one or more aggregate data streams. By inexpensively
collecting and reporting individual appliance power consumption to consumers, disaggregation has the potential to
reduce billions of dollars of annual waste. Such data could
also be fed into an automated system that could turn off unused appliances or shift their operation to a later time.

Label Correction for Supervised Disaggregation
Supervised learning methods ﬁrst train on appliance samples
recorded in isolation. Afterwards these methods can then
identify appliances that are operating simultaneously while
being recorded by a single smart meter. However, existing

Model-Free Iterative Appliance Discovery: Following
event detection, events must be recombined into their respective appliances. Doing this with no previous assumptions is challenging since appliances can operate for different amounts of time and often overlap in operation. In addi-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8042

