The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Fast and Slow:
Levels of Learning in General Autonomous Intelligent Agents
John E. Laird

Shiwali Mohan

University of Michigan
2260 Hayward Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2121
laird@umich.edu

PARC
3333 Coyote Hill Rd.
Palo Alto, CA 94304
shiwali.mohan@parc.com
creates the experiences that are consolidated by automatic
L1 memory mechanisms, making the number available for
later recall. L2 strategies do not include additional learning
mechanisms, but instead take advantage of the underlying
L1 mechanisms to extract regularities and record knowledge
structures from the generated experiences.
We posit that these two learning levels are ubiquitous in
humans and provide a useful dichotomy for thinking about
and developing learning in long-lived general autonomous
intelligent agents. L1 mechanisms learn no matter what time
or task constrains there are. L2 strategies come in when the
agent has time to deliberately attempt to improve its learning. An intriguing hypothesis that L2 methods are unique to
humans. We have the meta-cognitive capabilities to both reﬂect on our behavior and learning, develop strategies for improving them, communicate them to others, and use them.
Animals appear to be missing many or all these capabilities,
at least in the depth and breadth possible in humans, and as a
result they do not deliberately create or use strategies whose
goal is to improve their learning.
In this paper, we examine these levels, provide examples, and discuss their implications for agent design, development, and long-term existence. We describe some of the
processing stages found in Level 2, and illustrate them with
an agent we have developed that can learn completely new
tasks from natural language interaction. We then explore the
possibility of levels in addition to L1 and L2 and conclude.

Abstract
We propose two distinct levels of learning for general
autonomous intelligent agents. Level 1 consists of ﬁxed
architectural learning mechanisms that are innate and
automatic. Level 2 consists of deliberate learning strategies that are controlled by the agent’s knowledge. We
describe these levels and provide an example of their
use in a task-learning agent. We also explore other potential levels and discuss the implications of this view
of learning for the design of autonomous agents.

Introduction
General autonomous intelligent agents have many challenges when it comes to learning. They must continually
react to their environment, focusing their computational resources on making the best decision for the current situation
using all their available knowledge. They also need to learn
everything they can from their experience, building up their
knowledge so that they are prepared for making the best decisions in the future. Learning must be ubiquitous, on line,
and not disruptive when task demands are high. However, an
intelligent agent can also step back and deliberately structure its behavior to enhance its learning. It can pursue tasks
whose purpose is to acquire knowledge, such as through rehearsal, imitation, retrospection, reading a book, attending a
lecture, or even pursuing academic research.
In this paper, we propose that in human-like agents, learning can be split into two levels, inspired by research across
neuroscience, psychology, and cognitive architecture (Laird,
Lebiere, and Rosenbloom 2017). Level 1, or L1, encompasses architectural learning mechanisms that are innate,
automatic, on line, and effortless, such as the temporal difference update mechanism in reinforcement learning. Level
2, or L2, encompasses deliberate learning strategies that
are realized through knowledge and controlled by an agent.
These strategies are essentially tasks that the agent adopts,
and they compete with other tasks for mental (and physical) resources. In addition, they themselves can be learned.
A simple example in humans is deciding to explicitly rehearse a phone number in order to memorize it. Deliberately
repeating the number several times aloud (or to one’s self)

Level 1: Architectural Learning Algorithms
L1 consists of architectural learning algorithms that automatically and continually extract regularities from an agent’s
experience and reasoning, and directly modify the agent’s
long-term memories. They are innate, fast, effortless, and
outside the agent’s control. We cannot explicitly invoke
them (“I will learn this right now!”) nor can we explicitly inhibit them (“I refuse to learn this!”); however, as described below in Level 2, we can adopt strategies to inﬂuence what they learn. From a cognitive architecture perspective (Laird, Lebiere, and Rosenbloom 2017), they include
learning mechanisms for all of the types of long-term memories found in a general agent: perceptual, procedural, motor, episodic, and semantic. From a psychology perspective,
L1 is related to implicit learning (Ebbinghaus 1885), where
the subject is not aware that they are learning (Frensch and

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7983

