The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Consonant-Vowel Sequences as
Subword Units for Code-Mixed Languages
Upendra Kumar, Vishal Singh, Chris Andrew,
Santhoshini Reddy, Amitava Das
Indian Institute of Information Technology, Sri City, AP, India, 517588
{upendra.k14, vishal.s14, chris.g14, santhoshini.g14, amitava.das}@iiits.in

Related Works

Abstract

In recent times, a signiﬁcant amount of research has been
done to develop computational models for identifying sentiment from code-mixed texts. (Sharma, Srinivas, and Balabantaray 2015) use Hindi SentiWordNet and normalization
techniques to detect sentiment in Hi-En code-mixed tweets.
(Rudra et al. 2016) use lexicon based features (swear words,
exclamation marks, sentiment words and negation words)
for developing a classiﬁer for sentiment analysis. The ﬁrst
attempt for a deep learning based method for Hindi-English
code-mixed text was proposed by (Joshi et al. 2016). They
used character n-grams as sub-word units that were obtained
as convolutions over characters and passed to a LSTM layer
followed by softmax layer. For Hi-En code-mixed text (Joshi
et al. 2016) address the problem of rare or out-of-vocabulary
words without any text normalization. In this paper, we propose a novel approach, without any need of explicit text normalization, for creating sub-word units and a new hierarchical model that efﬁciently learns sentence representations
from these units.

In this research work, we develop a state-of-art model for
identifying sentiment in Hindi-English code-mixed language.
We introduce new phonemic sub-word units for HindiEnglish code-mixed text along with a hierarchical deep learning model which uses these sub-word units for predicting sentiment. The results indicate that the model yields a signiﬁcant
increase in accuracy as compared to other models.

Introduction
The evolution of social media texts such as blogs, microblogs (e.g., Twitter), WhatsApp, and informal chats have
created many new opportunities for information access and
language technologies, but have also presented many new
challenges. This makes it one of the primary research areas of the present era. In social media, non-English speakers [according to statistics half of messages on Twitter arent in English (Schroeder, Minocha, and Schneider 2010)]
do not always use English to express their thoughts. Users
can be frequently seen using their native language to convey meaning, inserting English words in between for easier
comprehension. In order to study the phenomenon of mixing multiple languages, researchers have introduced two key
language generation processes known as code-mixing and
code-borrowing. In this paper, however, we do not distinguish between the two.
Our work focuses on addressing the speciﬁc challenges
of using out-of-vocabulary words required for developing
an efﬁcient model to analyze sentiment from Hindi-English
code-mixed language. In order to do so efﬁciently, we introduce a heuristic for segmenting words in phonemic subword units instead of using word or character level features.
We use CNNs and Bi-LSTMs to learn representations from
these sub-word units to evaluate the sentiment of a sentence.
We observe that the phonemic sub-words are able to obtain better representation when compared with word, character or character n-gram based representations. For the purpose of testing our models, we have created a new dataset of
Hindi-English code-mixed sentences consisting of 18k sentences collected from Twitter.

Dataset
Due to paucity of available code-mixed text, research on
code-mixed texts has been limited to handcrafted lexicon
based models. In order to address this problem, we have
created a dataset of 18K code-mixed tweets using the Twitter API1 by querying tweets from Twitter accounts that frequently use Hindi-English code-mixed style for tweeting.
Based on the sentiment of the text, data was manually annotated into three classes: positive, neutral and negative(-1, 0,
1). The collected dataset was further labelled for language
tags (Hi, En, Un) on the word-level. The Code-mixing index, which measures the degree of mixing or inter-usage
of the two languages with each other, is also evaluated for
each sentence in the corpus. Out of 18K tweets, around 4K
tweets were discarded to make the sentiment distribution
equal across the three classes. 80% of the corpus data was
used for training and 20% was used for testing.

Methodology
In this paper we focus on romanized texts, where both Hindi
and English words are expressed using Roman script. How-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

8103

https://developer.twitter.com/en/docs

