The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Multi-Attention Recurrent Network
for Human Communication Comprehension
Amir Zadeh

Paul Pu Liang

Soujanya Poria

Carnegie Mellon University, USA
abagherz@cs.cmu.edu

Carnegie Mellon University, USA
pliang@cs.cmu.edu

NTU, Singapore
sporia@ntu.edu.sg

Prateek Vij

Erik Cambria

Louis-Philippe Morency

NTU, Singapore
prateek@sentic.net

NTU, Singapore
cambria@ntu.edu.sg

Carnegie Mellon University, USA
morency@cs.cmu.edu

modalities. For example, the arrangement of words in a sentence according to the generative grammar of the language
(language modality) or the activation of facial muscles for
the presentation of a smile (vision modality). Cross-view dynamics refer to dynamics between modalities and are divided
into synchronous and asynchronous categories. An example
of synchronous cross-view dynamics is the simultaneous cooccurrence of a smile with a positive sentence and an example
of asynchronous cross-view dynamics is the delayed occurrence of a laughter after the end of sentence. For machines
to understand human communication, they must be able to
understand these view-speciﬁc and cross-view dynamics.

Abstract
Human face-to-face communication is a complex multimodal
signal. We use words (language modality), gestures (vision
modality) and changes in tone (acoustic modality) to convey
our intentions. Humans easily process and understand face-toface communication, however, comprehending this form of
communication remains a signiﬁcant challenge for Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (AI). AI must understand each modality and the interactions between them that shape the communication. In this
paper, we present a novel neural architecture for understanding
human communication called the Multi-attention Recurrent
Network (MARN). The main strength of our model comes
from discovering interactions between modalities through time
using a neural component called the Multi-attention Block
(MAB) and storing them in the hybrid memory of a recurrent component called the Long-short Term Hybrid Memory
(LSTHM). We perform extensive comparisons on six publicly
available datasets for multimodal sentiment analysis, speaker
trait recognition and emotion recognition. MARN shows stateof-the-art results performance in all the datasets.

To model these dual dynamics in human communication,
we propose a novel deep recurrent neural model called the
Multi-attention Recurrent Network (MARN). MARN is distinguishable from previous approaches in that it explicitly accounts for both view-speciﬁc and cross-view dynamics in the
network architecture and continuously models both dynamics
through time. In MARN, view-speciﬁc dynamics within each
modality are modeled using a Long-short Term Hybrid Memory (LSTHM) assigned to that modality. The hybrid memory
allows each modality’s LSTHM to store important cross-view
dynamics related to that modality. cross-view dynamics are
discovered at each recurrence time-step using a speciﬁc neural component called the Multi-attention Block (MAB). The
MAB is capable of simultaneously ﬁnding multiple crossview dynamics in each recurrence timestep. The MARN resembles the mechanism of our brains for understanding communication, where different regions independently process
and understand different modalities (Kuzmanovic et al. 2012;
Sergent and Signoret 1992) – our LSTHM – and are connected together using neural links for multimodal information integration (Jiang et al. 2012) – our MAB. We benchmark MARN by evaluating its understanding of different aspects of human communication covering sentiment of speech,
emotions conveyed by the speaker and displayed speaker
traits. We perform extensive experiments on 16 different
attributes related to human communication on public multimodal datasets. Our approach shows state-of-the-art performance in modeling human communication for all datasets.

Introduction
Humans communicate using a highly complex structure of
multimodal signals. We employ three modalities in a coordinated manner to convey our intentions: language modality
(words, phrases and sentences), vision modality (gestures
and expressions), and acoustic modality (paralinguistics and
changes in vocal tones) (Morency, Mihalcea, and Doshi
2011). Understanding this multimodal communication is natural for humans; we do it subconsciously in the cerebrum of
our brains everyday. However, giving Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(AI) the capability to understand this form of communication the same way humans do, by incorporating all involved
modalities, is a fundamental research challenge. Giving AI
the capability to understand human communication narrows
the gap in computers’ understanding of humans and opens
new horizons for the creation of many intelligent entities.
The coordination between the different modalities in human communication introduces view-speciﬁc and cross-view
dynamics (Zadeh et al. 2017). View-speciﬁc dynamics refer to dynamics within each modality independent of other
Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5642

