The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Bayesian Network Structure Learning: The Two-Step Clustering-Based Algorithm
Yikun Zhang

Jiming Liu,Yang Liu

School of Mathematics
Sun Yat-sen University
Guangzhou, China 510275
email: yikunzhang@foxmail.com

Department of Computer Science
Hong Kong Baptist University
Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong
email: jiming@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, csygliu@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

Algorithm 1 Two-step Clustering-based Bayesian Network
Structure Learning Algorithm
Input:
• Data set: D = {X1 , X2 , ..., XN } with N variables
• The number of clusters: K

Abstract
In this paper we introduce a two-step clustering-based strategy, which can automatically generate prior information from
data in order to further improve the accuracy and time efﬁciency of state-of-the-art algorithms for Bayesian network
structure learning. Our clustering-based strategy is composed
of two steps. In the ﬁrst step, we divide the potential nodes
into several groups via clustering analysis and apply Bayesian
network structure learning to obtain some pre-existing arcs
within each cluster. In the second step, with all the withincluster arcs being well preserved, we learn the betweencluster structure of the given network. Experimental results
on benchmark datasets show that a wide range of structure learning algorithms beneﬁt from the proposed clusteringbased strategy in terms of both accuracy and efﬁciency.

Step 1:
1: Compute the dissimilarity matrix.
2: Carry out clustering analysis via average linkage agglomerative clustering method with the pre-assigned
method and cut the dendrogram into K groups (clusters).
3: Learn Bayesian network structures within each cluster
using Algorithm A.1
Step 2:
1: Apply Algorithm A again on all variables with the retained arcs to combine clusters.
Output: Bayesian network structure learned from the
dataset D.

Introduction
Bayesian network models, ﬁrst introduced into artiﬁcial
intelligence by (Pearl 1982), have been applied to miscellaneous ﬁelds of science. To tackle the Bayesian network structure learning problem, some constraint-based and
score-based algorithms have been proposed in the last two
decades ((Margaritis 2003)). (Chickering 1996) proved that
this problem is NP-hard and might produce some undesired network structures that can hardly describe the original
datasets. Some prior information helps to ameliorate computational costs and accuracy of existing algorithms. (Friedman, Nachman, and Peér 1999) applied clustering to ﬁgure
out the candidate parents of a variable in a Bayesian network. This idea inspires us to resort to clustering analysis in
order to obtain some prior information about the existence
of arcs based on correlations between variables.

We utilize the correlations between variables as the distance metric for clustering analysis, as they can wellrepresent dependencies among variables. Here the wellknown Pearson correlation is used. To compute the correlations between discrete variables in real-world data, we introduce a technique to transform them.
1. Converting: Label attributes of discrete (or categorical)
variables by nonnegative integers
2. Centralization: Shift the variables such that their attributes are central at 0

Method

To determine the accuracy of a learned network structure,
we use the following accuracy metric.


T rue positive + T rue negative

(1)
Accuracy =
T otal population

Our two-step clustering-based (TSCB) strategy, which generates some pre-existing arcs in the ﬁrst step, can be applied
to any structure learning algorithms. We ﬁrst apply the clustering analysis to group strongly dependent variables and
learn the arcs among them, which work as the prior information for the second step of structure learning. To learn the
arcs in each cluster and combine clusters, we apply the same
structure learning algorithm. See Algorithm 1 for details.

Results
To justify the effectiveness of our method, experiments on
accuracy and time efﬁciency have been conducted. First,

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
This could be any traditional structure learning algorithm, like
the grow-shrink algorithm. See (Margaritis 2003) for details.

8183

