The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Automated Segmentation of Overlapping Cytoplasm
in Cervical Smear Images via Contour Fragments
∗

Youyi Song,∗ Jing Qin,∗ Baiying Lei,§ Kup-Sze Choi∗

Center for Smart Health, School of Nursing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
§
National-Regional Key Technology Engineering Laboratory for Medical Ultrasound, Guangdong Key Laboratory for
Biomedical Measurements and Ultrasound Imaging, School of Biomedical Engineering, Shenzhen University, China
{youyi.song, harry.qin, thomasks.choi}@polyu.edu.hk and {leiby}@szu.edu.cn
Abstract
We present a novel method for automated segmentation of
overlapping cytoplasm in cervical smear images based on
contour fragments. We formulate the segmentation problem
as a graphical model, and employ the contour fragments generated from cytoplasm clump to construct the graph. Compared with traditional methods that are based on pixels, our
contour fragment-based solution can take more geometric information into account and hence generate more accurate prediction of the overlapping boundaries. We further design a
novel energy function for the graph, and by minimizing the
energy function, fragments that come from the same cytoplasm are selected into the same set. To construct the energy
function, our fragments-based data term and pairwise term
are measured from the spatial relation and shape prior, which
offer more geometric information for the occluded boundary
inference. Afterwards, occluded boundaries are inferred using the minimal path model, in which shape of each individual cytoplasm is reconstructed on the selected fragments set.
Constructed shape is used as a constraint to locate the searching area, and curvature regulation is enforced to promote the
smoothness of inference result. The inference result, in turn,
is used as the shape prior to construct a high-level shape regulation energy term of the built graph, and then graph energy
is updated. In other words, fragments selection and occluded
boundary inference are iterative processed; this interaction
makes more potential shape information accessible. Using
two cervical smear datasets, the performance of our method
is extensively evaluated and compared with that of the stateof-the-art approaches; the results show the superiority of the
proposed method.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Illustrate the strong intensity confusions in the
occluded boundaries. Parts of the boundary of the cytoplasm
indicated by the green circle is heavily occluded by the cytoplasm indicated by the red circle. Its ground truth is shown
in the top left corner. (b) Illustrate our motivation of the proposed approach.

Accurate segmentation of cervical cells plays an essential role for the developing of the automatic screening system. Although extensive research has been devoted to this
task (Kitchener et al. 2011; Guan, Zhou, and Liu 2015;
Lu et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2014; 2017a; Song et al. 2017;
Tareef et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2016), segmenting overlapping cytoplasm is still an open and challenging problem.
The overlaps decrease intensity contrast or even hide partial
boundaries of cytoplasm, which leads to difﬁculty of perceiving the whole boundary of each individual cytoplasm
even for experienced histologists (an example is illustrated
in Fig. 1 (a)).
In this paper, we present a novel algorithm for segmenting
overlapping cervical cytoplasm. To better explain our motivation, please consider the image in Fig. 1 (b) where only
parts of boundary information are given. It seems relatively
easy for human to identify the whole object’s boundary even
though certain contour parts of the object are missing (Siddiqi, Tresness, and Kimia 1996). And intensity or color information seems to be not playing a signiﬁcant role in this
ability (De Winter and Wagemans 2004). Similarly, in our
task, the occluded boundaries of cytoplasm can be regarded
as the missing parts of contours, like those of the person or
horse in the Fig. 1 (b).
To imitate this ability, ﬁrst, we need to identify contour

Introduction
Cervical cancer has a global health impact second in women
(WHO 2013), and cytology-based screening is the most popular test in clinical to screen this disease at its early stage
(Davey et al. 2006). But high expertise is required for manually screening, which is also a labor-intensive task (Kitchener et al. 2011); therefore, population-wide screening is
still inaccessible in most developing countries (Saslow et al.
2012). To the end, automatic screening is highly demanded
in clinical practice.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

168

