The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Knowledge Enhanced Hybrid Neural
Network for Text Matching
†

Yu Wu,†♦ Wei Wu,‡ Can Xu,‡ Zhoujun Li†♦∗
State Key Lab of Software Development Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
‡
Microsoft Research, Beijing, China
♦
Authors are supported by AdeptMind Scholarship
{wuyu,lizj}@buaa.edu.cn {wuwei,can.xu}@microsoft.com
Question : Which school is better Voltaire or Bonaparte?
Tag from the asker: Family
An appropriate answer : Both are good schools but Bonaparte
will teach your kids to become a good leader but they concentrate mainly on outdoor physical activities, manoeuvers, strategies. Horse riding and lances swords are their speciality....
On the other hand Voltaire will make your child more of
a philosopher! They encourage independent thinking...and
mainly concentrates on indoor activities! They inculcate good
moral values in the child and he will surely grow up to be a
thinking person!

Abstract
Long text brings a big challenge to neural network based text
matching approaches due to their complicated structures. To
tackle the challenge, we propose a knowledge enhanced hybrid neural network (KEHNN) that leverages prior knowledge to identify useful information and ﬁlter out noise in
long text and performs matching from multiple perspectives.
The model fuses prior knowledge into word representations
by knowledge gates and establishes three matching channels
with words, sequential structures of text given by Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs), and knowledge enhanced representations. The three channels are processed by a convolutional
neural network to generate high level features for matching,
and the features are synthesized as a matching score by a
multilayer perceptron. In this paper, we focus on exploring
the use of taxonomy knowledge for text matching. Evaluation results from extensive experiments on public data sets
of question answering and conversation show that KEHNN
can signiﬁcantly outperform state-of-the-art matching models and particularly improve matching accuracy on pairs with
long text.

Table 1: An example from CQA
model achieves 38.7% R10 @1 (recall at position 1 in 10 candidates) on pairs longer than 20 words (M+R) compared to
41.1% R10 @1 on pairs shorter than 20 words. These numbers indicate that long text raises a new challenge for text
matching and inﬂuence the neural network performance.
The reason state-of-the-art matching models perform
badly on long text is that long text often has complicated
structures which might hinder the models from accurately
capturing semantic relations of the text pairs. For example,
semantics of long text may reside in words, phrases, clauses
and sentences. More seriously, much information in long
text is often useless or even noise to matching. Table 1 shows
an example from community question answering (CQA) to
illustrate the challenge. The answer is very long1 and contains a lot of information that well compare the two schools
but semantically far from the question (e.g., horse riding and
lances swords). The information makes the answer a high
quality one, but interferes the existing models in questionanswer matching.
We aim to improve matching accuracy on long text. Our
idea is that we introduce prior knowledge into matching
and perform matching from multiple perspectives including
words, local structures of text such as phrases and clauses,
and global context of text. The global context is represented
by the prior knowledge which could be topics, tags, and entities related to the text pair and obtained elsewhere. In matching, the representation of text is constructed under the supervision of the prior knowledge, and thus important parts

Introduction
Text matching is a fundamental problem in many NLP
tasks such as question answering (QA) (Voorhees and others
1999), retrieval based conversation (Wang et al. 2013), and
paraphrase identiﬁcation (Dolan, Quirk, and Brockett 2004).
The challenge of text matching lies in semantic gaps between text pairs. State-of-the-art methods tackle the challenge by representing text pairs or their semantic relations
from different levels of abstractions with neural networks
(Hu et al. 2014). The problem is that when text becomes
long, which often happens in many applications, the performance of these methods drops dramatically. For example,
in a public QA data set where we select a positive answer
for a question according to their matching degree, the stateof-the-art model only achieves 70.6% matching accuracy on
pairs longer than 30 words (Q+A) compared to its performance 78.8% on pairs shorter than 30 words. Similarly, in a
public dialog corpus where we select a proper response for a
message based on their matching degree, the state-of-the-art
∗

Corresponding Author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

5586

The original answer has 149 words.

