The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Boosted Generative Models
Aditya Grover, Stefano Ermon
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
{adityag, ermon}@cs.stanford.edu

reweighted version of the original dataset. In practice, algorithms based on boosting perform extremely well in machine
learning competitions (Caruana and Niculescu-Mizil 2006).
We show that a similar procedure can be applied to generative models. Given an initial generative model that provides an imperfect ﬁt to the data distribution, we construct
a second model to correct for the error, and repeat recursively. The second model is also a generative one, which
is trained on a reweighted version of the original training
set. Our meta-algorithm is general and can construct ensembles of any existing generative model that permits (approximate) likelihood evaluation such as fully-observed belief
networks, sum-product networks, and variational autoencoders. Interestingly, our method can also leverage powerful
discriminative models. Speciﬁcally, we train a binary classiﬁer to distinguish true data samples from “fake” ones generated by the current model and provide a principled way to
include this discriminator in the ensemble.
A prior attempt at boosting density estimation proposed a
sum-of-experts formulation (Rosset and Segal 2002). This
approach is similar to supervised boosting where at every round of boosting we derive a reweighted additive estimate of the boosted model density. In contrast, our proposed framework uses multiplicative boosting which multiplies the ensemble model densities and can be interpreted as
a product-of-experts formulation. We provide a holistic theoretical and algorithmic framework for multiplicative boosting contrasting with competing additive approaches. Unlike
prior use cases of product-of-experts formulations, our approach is black-box, and we empirically test the proposed
algorithms on several generative models from simple ones
such as mixture models to expressive parameteric models
such as sum-product networks and variational autoencoders.
Overall, this paper makes the following contributions:

Abstract
We propose a novel approach for using unsupervised boosting to create an ensemble of generative models, where models
are trained in sequence to correct earlier mistakes. Our metaalgorithmic framework can leverage any existing base learner
that permits likelihood evaluation, including recent deep expressive models. Further, our approach allows the ensemble
to include discriminative models trained to distinguish real
data from model-generated data. We show theoretical conditions under which incorporating a new model in the ensemble
will improve the ﬁt and empirically demonstrate the effectiveness of our black-box boosting algorithms on density estimation, classiﬁcation, and sample generation on benchmark
datasets for a wide range of generative models.

1

Introduction

A variety of deep generative models have shown promising
results on tasks spanning computer vision, speech recognition, natural language processing, and imitation learning (Poon and Domingos 2011; Oord, Kalchbrenner, and
Kavukcuoglu 2016; Kingma and Welling 2014; Goodfellow
et al. 2014; Zhao, Song, and Ermon 2017; Li, Song, and Ermon 2017). These parametric models differ from each other
in their ability to perform various forms of tractable inference, learning algorithms, and objectives. Despite signiﬁcant progress, existing generative models cannot ﬁt complex
distributions with a sufﬁciently high degree of accuracy, limiting their applicability and leaving room for improvement.
In this paper, we propose a technique for ensembling (imperfect) generative models to improve their overall performance. Our meta-algorithm is inspired by boosting, a technique used in supervised learning to combine weak classiﬁers (e.g., decision stumps or trees), which individually
might not perform well on a given classiﬁcation task, into
a more powerful ensemble. The boosting algorithm will attempt to learn a classiﬁer to correct for the mistakes made by
reweighting the original dataset, and repeat this procedure
recursively. Under some conditions on the weak classiﬁers’
effectiveness, this procedure can drive the (training) error to
zero (Freund, Schapire, and Abe 1999). Boosting can also
be thought as a feature learning algorithm, where at each
round a new feature is learned by training a classiﬁer on a

1. We provide theoretical conditions for additive and multiplicative boosting under which incorporating a new model
is guaranteed to improve the ensemble ﬁt.
2. We design and analyze a ﬂexible meta-algorithmic boosting framework for including both generative and discriminative models in the ensemble.
3. We demonstrate the empirical effectiveness of our algorithms for density estimation, generative classiﬁcation,
and sample generation on several benchmark datasets.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3077

