The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Stack-Captioning: Coarse-to-Fine
Learning for Image Captioning
Jiuxiang Gu,1 Jianfei Cai,2 Gang Wang,3 Tsuhan Chen,2
1
2

ROSE Lab, Interdisciplinary Graduate School, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Alibaba AI Labs, Hangzhou, China
{jgu004, asjfcai, tsuhan}@ntu.edu.sg, gangwang6@gmail.com
Abstract

The existing image captioning approaches typically train a
one-stage sentence decoder, which is difﬁcult to generate rich
ﬁne-grained descriptions. On the other hand, multi-stage image caption model is hard to train due to the vanishing gradient
problem. In this paper, we propose a coarse-to-ﬁne multi-stage
prediction framework for image captioning, composed of multiple decoders each of which operates on the output of the
previous stage, producing increasingly reﬁned image descriptions. Our proposed learning approach addresses the difﬁculty
of vanishing gradients during training by providing a learning
objective function that enforces intermediate supervisions. Particularly, we optimize our model with a reinforcement learning
approach which utilizes the output of each intermediate decoder’s test-time inference algorithm as well as the output
of its preceding decoder to normalize the rewards, which simultaneously solves the well-known exposure bias problem
and the loss-evaluation mismatch problem. We extensively
evaluate the proposed approach on MSCOCO and show that
our approach can achieve the state-of-the-art performance.

Figure 1: Illustration of our proposed coarse-to-ﬁne framework. Our model consists of one image encoder (CNN) and
a sequence of sentence decoders (attention-based LSTM networks), and it takes the image as input and reﬁnes the image
descriptions from coarse to ﬁne. Here we show the increasingly improved image descriptions in two stages (gray and
dark gray).

Introduction
propagate through many layers of a complex network. Secondly, there is an exposure bias between the training and
the testing (Ranzato et al. 2016; Wiseman and Rush 2016;
Gu, Cho, and Li 2017). Speciﬁcally, the sentence decoder
is trained to predict a word given the previous ground-truth
words, while at testing time, the caption generation is accomplished by greedy search or with beam search, which predicts
the next word based on the previously generated words that is
different from the training mode. Since the model has never
been exposed to its own predictions, it will result in error
accumulation at test time. To address the exposure bias problem, scheduled sampling (Bengio et al. 2015), i.e., randomly
selecting between previous ground-truth words and previously generated words, has become the current dominant
training procedure to ﬁt RNNs based models. However, it
can only mitigate the exposure bias but cannot largely solve
it. Thirdly, there is a loss-evaluation mismatch (Ranzato et
al. 2016). Speciﬁcally, language models are usually trained
to minimize the cross-entropy loss at each time-step, while
at testing time, we evaluate the generated captions with the
sentence-level evaluation metrics, e.g., BLEU-n (Papineni et
al. 2002), CIDEr (Vedantam, Lawrence Zitnick, and Parikh

The challenge of image captioning lies in designing a model
that can effectively utilize the image information and generate more human-like rich image descriptions. Motivated by
the recent advances in natural language processing, current
image captioning approaches typically follow the encodingdecoding framework (Ranzato et al. 2016), which consists of
a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) based image encoder
and a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) based sentence decoder, with various variants for image captioning (Fang et al.
2015; Mao et al. 2014; Wu et al. 2016). Most of these existing image captioning approaches are trained by maximizing
the likelihood of each ground-truth word given the previous
ground-truth words and the image with back propagation.
There are three major problems in these existing image
captioning methods. Firstly, it is extremely hard for them
to generate rich ﬁne-grained descriptions. This is because
rich descriptions require high-complexity models, where the
problem of vanishing gradients often occurs, considering
the back-propagated gradients diminish in strength as they
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6837

