The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Domain-Shared Group-Sparse Dictionary
Learning for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
1

Baoyao Yang,1 Andy J. Ma,1,2 Pong C. Yuen1

Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong
2
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University, China
byyang@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, majh8@mail.sysu.edu.cn, pcyuen@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation has been proved to be a
promising approach to solve the problem of dataset bias. To
employ source labels in the target domain, it is required to
align the joint distributions of source and target data. To do
this, the key research problem is to align conditional distributions across domains without target labels. In this paper, we propose a new criterion of domain-shared groupsparsity that is an equivalent condition for conditional distribution alignment. To solve the problem in joint distribution
alignment, a domain-shared group-sparse dictionary learning method is developed towards joint alignment of conditional and marginal distributions. A classiﬁer for target domain is trained using the domain-shared group-sparse coefﬁcients and the target-speciﬁc information from the target
data. Experimental results on cross-domain face and object
recognition show that the proposed method outperforms eight
state-of-the-art unsupervised domain adaptation algorithms.

1

Figure 1: Illustration of Domain-shared Group-sparse Representation (a) Group-sparse representation for source labeled data; (b) Sparse representation for target unlabeled
data; (c) Without target labels, we constrain the target coefﬁcients share the same group sparsity as the source domain.
As the computation of distribution does not rely on data order, conditional distributions across domains can be aligned
by the proposed domain-shared group-sparse constraint.

Introduction

Though many encouraging results have been reported in the
challenging tasks of classiﬁcation and recognition especially
with the development of the convolutional neural networks
(CNN) (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012), recent
researches (Long et al. 2016; Tsai et al. 2016) show that
the problem of dataset bias (Torralba and Efros 2011) remained unsolved. Even with more generative features learnt
by CNN, it can hardly ensure that the data distributions of
the training dataset (source domain) and the test dataset (target domain) are exactly the same. Some techniques (Bruzzone and Marconcini 2010; Yao et al. 2015) have been developed to reﬁne the source classiﬁer for the target domain
with target labeled data, but it is extremely expensive and
time-consuming to annotate target data in practical applications (e.g., large scale camera networks). Instead of collecting target labels, unsupervised domain adaptation (Gopalan,
Li, and Chellappa 2011) has been proposed to address the
problem of distribution mismatch under the situation that
target labels are unavailable. Existing methods can be categorized into two approaches as follows.
The ﬁrst approach assumes that conditional distributions
between the source and target domains are equal, and there-

fore, joint distribution alignment can be solved by aligning
marginal distributions across domains. Along this line, many
unsupervised domain adaptation methods, e.g. (Sun, Feng,
and Saenko 2016; Tsai et al. 2016; Tzeng et al. 2017), have
been proposed and the results are encouraging when the assumption is valid. However, in many practical applications
such as face and object recognition, conditional distributions
between source and target domains may be different.
The second approach matches the joint distributions
across domains without equal conditional distribution assumption. For this purpose, (Long et al. 2013b; Ming
Harry Hsu et al. 2015) proposed to estimate target labels
from unlabeled target data so that target conditional distribution can be estimated for joint distribution alignment.
However, accurately estimating labels from unlabeled target data is very difﬁcult due to the large data variations.
Instead, (Long et al. 2014; Gong et al. 2016) re-weighted
and/or transformed source data as target labeled data. Under
the assumptions of location-scale transformation and condi-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7453

