The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning the Behavior of a Dynamical System Via a “20 Questions” Approach

1

Abhijin Adiga,1 Chris J. Kuhlman,1 Madhav V. Marathe,1
S. S. Ravi,1,2 Daniel J. Rosenkrantz,2 Richard E. Stearns2

Biocomplexity Institute of Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061 2 University at Albany – SUNY, Albany, NY 12222
{abhijin, ckuhlman, mmarathe, ssravi}@vt.edu, drosenkrantz@gmail.com, thestearns2@gmail.com

In particular, small changes in the thresholds of nodes
can make a large difference in population dynamics. An example is provided in (Granovetter 1978), where a change
in one node’s threshold by a value of 1 in a large graph,
changes population-level collective action from non-existent
to full collective action. Several works have used mined data
to infer thresholds for applications ranging from protests,
to Twitter messaging, to joining social media (GonzálezBailón et al. 2011; Romero, Meeder, and Kleinberg 2011;
Ugander et al. 2012); see also (Easley and Kleinberg 2010).
Importantly, in all of these cases, heterogeneous (i.e., nonuniform) thresholds among agents have been inferred. Thus,
node thresholds must be determined based on a node’s individual behavior, its (local) neighborhood structure, and behaviors (and states) of its neighbors. Symmetric functions,
which generalize threshold functions, arise in game theoretic
settings (Papadimitriou and Roughgarden 2003).
Some works have studied threshold inference in a passive setting (e.g., (Adiga et al. 2017a)) where observations
are given and the problem is to infer thresholds from those
observations. In this work, we study the case where an algorithm has control over what information it extracts from
the system via querying the system for desired information.
In particular, the algorithm gives a set of conﬁgurations (or
queries) to the system and infers properties based on the system’s outputs. We study two query modes, namely batch
and adaptive modes, that differ in their degrees of control.
Under the batch mode, all the queries must be submitted together. In the adaptive mode, queries can be submitted in
several stages, and queries at a stage can depend on the answers to previous queries, a strategy similar to that used in
games such as “Twenty questions”1 .
We relate inference problems to well-studied graph theoretic problems such as coloring, using combinatorial and
algorithmic perspectives. The formulation also enables us
to quantify rigorously the complexity of inferring such systems. Motivation for these problems comes in part from the
DARPA Next Generation Social Science (NGS2) Program,
where experimental data on social networks are used to infer properties of predictive models. Our work is similar in
spirit—but quite different in problem domain and results—
to some of the recent works on inference (e.g. (Kleinberg,

Abstract
Using a graphical discrete dynamical system to model a networked social system, the problem of inferring the behavior
of the system can be formulated as the problem of learning the
local functions of the dynamical system. We investigate the
problem assuming an active form of interaction with the system through queries. We consider two classes of local functions (namely, symmetric and threshold functions) and two
interaction modes, namely batch mode (where all the queries
must be submitted together) and adaptive mode (where the
set of queries submitted at a stage may rely on the answers
received to previous queries). We develop complexity results
and efﬁcient heuristics that produce query sets under both
query modes. We demonstrate the performance of our heuristics through experiments on over 20 well-known networks.

1

Introduction

Background and Motivation. Graphical discrete dynamical systems are used in a variety of settings to understand
population-level contagion dynamics in terms of individual (human) agent behavior. Examples include the spread
of health behaviors (Valente 2010) such as drug overdose (Sherman et al. 2009); obesity (Christakis and Fowler
2007); segregation (Schelling 1971); becoming a user of an
online communications tool (Karsai et al. 2014); coordination (Rosenthal et al. 2015); and ﬁnancial contagions (Gai
and Kapadia 2010). The frameworks in these works and in
ours here are network representations of populations, where
nodes and edges represent entities such as humans and pairwise interactions, respectively. Each of the cited works can
be viewed as capturing inﬂuence through threshold models (Granovetter 1978; Schelling 1978), where a node vi
contracts a contagion if at least a speciﬁed number of its
neighbors has already contracted it. This number for vi is
called its threshold ti . We are interested in complex contagions (Centola and Macy 2007) that are characteristic of
social contagions, where ti ≥ 1; i.e., agents need multiple
reinforcing interactions to adopt a contagion. (Watts 2002)
argues that threshold models are useful in a host of settings
where incomplete information exists or when there is insufﬁcient time to make more deliberate decisions.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1

4630

See the Wikipedia entry on this game.

