The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

280 Birds with One Stone: Inducing Multilingual Taxonomies
from Wikipedia Using Character-Level Classiﬁcation
Amit Gupta, Rémi Lebret, Hamza Harkous, Karl Aberer
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
Route Cantonale, 1015 Lausanne

approaches (Hovy, Navigli, and Ponzetto 2013), thus leading
to a consistent body of research in this direction.
The ﬁrst line of work on taxonomy induction from
Wikipedia mainly focuses on the English language. This
includes WikiTaxonomy (Ponzetto and Strube 2008),
WikiNet (Nastase et al. 2010), YAGO (Suchanek, Kasneci,
and Weikum 2007; Hoffart et al. 2013), DBPedia (Auer et al.
2007), and Heads Taxonomy (Gupta et al. 2016).
The second line of work aims to exploit the multilingual nature of Wikipedia. MENTA (de Melo and Weikum 2010), one
of the largest multilingual lexical knowledge bases, is constructed by linking WordNet and Wikipedias of different languages into a single taxonomy. Similarly, YAGO3 (Mahdisoltani, Biega, and Suchanek 2015) extends YAGO by linking
Wikipedia entities in multiple languages with WordNet. The
most recent approach to multilingual taxonomy induction
from Wikipedia is the Multilingual Wikipedia Bitaxonomy
Project or MultiWiBi (Flati et al. 2016). MultiWiBi ﬁrst induces taxonomies for English, which are further projected to
other languages using a set of complex heuristics that exploit
the interlanguage links of Wikipedia. Unlike MENTA and
YAGO3, MultiWiBi is self-contained in Wikipedia, i.e., it
does not require labeled training examples or external resources such as WordNet or Wikitionary. While MultiWiBi
is shown to outperform MENTA and YAGO3 considerably, it
still achieves low precision for non-English pages that do not
have an interlanguage link to English (e.g., 59% for Italian).

Abstract
We propose a novel fully-automated approach towards inducing multilingual taxonomies from Wikipedia. Given an English
taxonomy, our approach ﬁrst leverages the interlanguage links
of Wikipedia to automatically construct training datasets for
the is-a relation in the target language. Character-level classiﬁers are trained on the constructed datasets, and used in an
optimal path discovery framework to induce high-precision,
high-coverage taxonomies in other languages. Through experiments, we demonstrate that our approach signiﬁcantly
outperforms the state-of-the-art, heuristics-heavy approaches
for six languages. As a consequence of our work, we release
presumably the largest and the most accurate multilingual
taxonomic resource spanning over 280 languages.

1

Introduction

Motivation. Machine-readable semantic knowledge in the
form of taxonomies (i.e., a collection of is-a or hypernym
edges) has proved to be beneﬁcial in an array of Natural
Language Processing (NLP) tasks, including inference, textual entailment, question answering, and information extraction (Biemann 2005). This has led to multiple large-scale
manual efforts towards taxonomy induction such as WordNet (Miller 1994). However, manual construction of taxonomies is time-intensive, usually requiring massive annotation efforts. Furthermore, the resulting taxonomies suffer
from low coverage and are unavailable for speciﬁc domains
or languages. Therefore, in the recent years, there has been
substantial interest in inducing taxonomies automatically,
either from unstructured text (Velardi, Faralli, and Navigli
2013), or from semi-structured collaborative content such as
Wikipedia (Hovy, Navigli, and Ponzetto 2013).
Wikipedia, the largest publicly-available source of multilingual, semi-structured content (Remy 2002), has served as a
key resource for automated knowledge acquisition. One of its
core components is the Wikipedia Category Network (hereafter referred to as WCN), a semantic network which links
Wikipedia entities (also referred to as Wikipedia pages), such
as Johnny Depp, with inter-connected categories of different
granularity (e.g., American actors, Film actors, Hollywood).
The semi-structured nature of WCN has enabled the acquisition of large-scale taxonomies using lightweight rule-based

Contributions. In this paper, we propose a novel approach
towards inducing multilingual taxonomies from Wikipedia.
Our approach is fully-automated and language-independent.
It provides a signiﬁcant advancement over state of the art in
multilingual taxonomy induction from Wikipedia because of
the following reasons:
• Most previous approaches such as MENTA or MultiWiBi
rely on a set of complex heuristics that utilize custom
hand-crafted features. In contrast, our approach employs
text classiﬁers in an optimal path search framework to
induce taxonomies from the WCN. The training set for text
classiﬁers is automatically constructed using the Wikipedia
interlanguage links. As a result, our approach is simpler,
more principled and easily replicable.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

• Our approach signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-of-the-art

4824

