The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Inferring Emotion from Conversational Voice Data: A
Semi-Supervised Multi-Path Generative Neural Network Approach
1

Suping Zhou,1 Jia Jia,1∗ Qi Wang,1 Yufei Dong,3 Yufeng Yin,1 Kehua Lei2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
Key Laboratory of Pervasive Computing, Ministry of Education
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology (TNList)
2
Academy of Arts & Design, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
University of Science & Technology Beijing, Beijing, China
jjia@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
2003) , another one is support vector machines (SVM) based
on high-level representations(Schuller et al. 2009). Recently,
more and more attention has been paid to deep learning for
speech emotion recognition which results in a better performance than the traditional framework (Kim, Lee, and
Provost 2013). Totally, two kinds of frameworks based on
deep learning have been proposed for speech emotion recognition. Some researches are based on utterance-level features
which usually extract high-level representations from lowlevel descriptors(LLDs) and then utilize deep neural network (DNN) for classiﬁcation (Xia and Liu 2017). Meanwhile, instead of high-level statistics representation, some
other researches utilize frame-level representation or raw
signal as input to neural network for an end-to-end training (Zhang et al. 2016; Trigeorgis et al. 2016). Also, some
works have focused on unsupervised learning for speech
emotion recognition (Ren et al. 2014; Wu et al. 2016;
Ghosh et al. 2016; Chang and Scherer 2017), which utilize
the unlabeled data to help improve the performance. Generally, deep learning have made a great contribution to speech
emotion learning.

Abstract
To give a more humanized response in Voice Dialogue Applications (VDAs), inferring emotion states from users’ queries
may play an important role. However, in VDAs, we have
tremendous amount of VDA users and massive scale of unlabeled data with high dimension features from multimodal
information, which challenge the traditional speech emotion recognition methods. In this paper, to better infer emotion from conversational voice data, we propose a semisupervised multi-path generative neural network. Speciﬁcally, ﬁrst, we build a novel supervised multi-path deep
neural network framework. To avoid high dimensional input, raw features are trained by groups in local classiﬁers.
Then high-level features of each local classiﬁers are concatenated as input of a global classiﬁer. These two kinds
classiﬁers are trained simultaneously through a single objective function to achieve a more effective and discriminative emotion inferring. To further solve the labeled-datascarcity problem, we extend the multi-path deep neural network to a generative model based on semi-supervised variational autoencoder(semi-VAE), which is able to train the labeled and unlabeled data simultaneously. Experiment based
on a 24,000 real-world dataset collected from Sogou Voice
Assistant1 (SVAD13) and a benchmark dataset IEMOCAP
show that our method signiﬁcantly outperforms the existing
state-of-the-art results.

1

However, for inferring emotion from conversational voice
data, these works based on deep learning have limitations
in the following two aspects. 1) for utterance-level framework, features generated from lots of statistics functions
usually concatenated without selection before input to nets,
which lead to difﬁculty for getting satisﬁed training performance because of high dimension features. Although some
dimensionality reduction techniques are explored to solve
this problem (Jin et al. 2014; Liu et al. 2017), ﬁnding a satisﬁed strategy is not easy because of some information must
be loss from raw features; 2) Previous works primarily focus on datasets with limited amount of labeled data, such
as IEMOCAP database (Busso et al. 2008). While in VDAs,
we have tremendous amount of users and massive scale conversational voice data which raise difﬁculty to manually label, so how to make use of labeled data and unlabeled data
jointly is a quite crucial factor. As for the works focused
on unsupervised learning, their frameworks usually contain
two steps: representation learning based on unlabeled data
and classiﬁer training based on labeled data. However, these
models, overﬁt easily due to the small amount labeled data

Introduction

The increasing popularity of Voice Dialogue Applications(VDAs), such as Siri2 , brings great convenience to our
daily life. As the same words said in different emotion can
convey quite different messages, inferring emotion from
these conversational voice data of queries can assist to understand the true meaning of users as well as provide more
humanized responses.
Traditionally, in speech emotion recognition, there are
two kinds of major frameworks. One is HMM-GMM framework based on dynamic features (Schuller, Rigoll, and Lang
∗
Corresponding author: J. Jia (jjia@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn)
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://yy.sogou.com
2
http://www.apple.com/ios/siri/

579

