The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

LSTD: A Low-Shot Transfer Detector for Object Detection
1

Hao Chen,∗1,2 Yali Wang,∗1 Guoyou Wang,2 Yu Qiao†1,3

Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality and Human Interaction Technology,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
{hao− chen, gywang}@hust.edu.cn, {yl.wang, yu.qiao}@siat.ac.cn
semi-supervised approaches (Tang et al. 2016; Singh, Xiao,
and Lee 2016; Liang et al. 2016; Dong et al. 2017) can be
used to relieve annotation difﬁculties in detection. However,
the performance of these detectors is often limited, because
of lacking sufﬁcient supervision on the training images.
An alternative solution is to perform transfer learning on
deep models (Yosinski et al. 2014), due to its success on
image classiﬁcation (Donahue et al. 2014; Sharif Razavian
et al. 2014). Compared to the weakly/semi-supervised solution, this is often a preferable choice without extra data collection. More importantly, the source-domain knowledge is
an effective supervision to generalize the learning procedure
of target domain, when the training set is scarce. However,
transfer learning for low-shot detection is still an open challenge due to the following reasons. First, it is inappropriate
to apply the general transfer strategy of object detection (i.e.,
initializing deep detectors from the pretrained deep classiﬁers), when the target detection set is limited. This is mainly
because, ﬁne-tuning with such small target sets is often hard
to eliminate the task difference between detection and classiﬁcation. Second, deep detectors are more prone to overﬁtting during transfer learning, compared to deep classiﬁers. It
is mainly because that, detectors have to learn more objectspeciﬁc representations for both localization and classiﬁcation tasks of detection. Finally, simple ﬁne-tuning may reduce transferability, since it often ignores the important object knowledge from both source and target domains.
To address the challenges above, we propose a low-shot
transfer detector (LSTD) in this paper, which is the ﬁrst
transfer learning solution for low-shot detection, according to our best knowledge. The main contributions are described as follows. First, we design a novel deep architecture of LSTD, which can boost low-shot detection via incorporating the strengths of two well-known deep detectors, i.e., SSD (Liu et al. 2016) and Faster RCNN (Ren et
al. 2016), into a non-trivial deep framework. In addition,
our LSTD can ﬂexibly perform bounding box regression
and object classiﬁcation on two different model parts, which
promotes a handy transfer learning procedure for low-shot
detection. Second, we propose a novel regularized transfer learning framework for LSTD, where we can ﬂexibly
transfer from source-domain LSTD to target-domain LSTD,
avoiding the task difference (such as transferring from classiﬁcation to detection in the general strategy). In this case,

Abstract
Recent advances in object detection are mainly driven by
deep learning with large-scale detection benchmarks. However, the fully-annotated training set is often limited for a target detection task, which may deteriorate the performance of
deep detectors. To address this challenge, we propose a novel
low-shot transfer detector (LSTD) in this paper, where we
leverage rich source-domain knowledge to construct an effective target-domain detector with very few training examples. The main contributions are described as follows. First,
we design a ﬂexible deep architecture of LSTD to alleviate
transfer difﬁculties in low-shot detection. This architecture
can integrate the advantages of both SSD and Faster RCNN
in a uniﬁed deep framework. Second, we introduce a novel
regularized transfer learning framework for low-shot detection, where the transfer knowledge (TK) and background depression (BD) regularizations are proposed to leverage object knowledge respectively from source and target domains,
in order to further enhance ﬁne-tuning with a few target images. Finally, we examine our LSTD on a number of challenging low-shot detection experiments, where LSTD outperforms other state-of-the-art approaches. The results demonstrate that LSTD is a preferable deep detector for low-shot
scenarios.

1

Introduction

Over the past years, a number of deep learning approaches
have achieved remarkable performance in object detection
(Girshick et al. 2014; Girshick 2015; Ren et al. 2015;
Redmon et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2016; He et al. 2017). However, the successes of these deep detectors heavily depend on
the large-scale detection benchmarks with fully-annotated
bounding boxes. In practice, the fully-annotated training set
may be limited for a given target detection task, which can
restrict the power of deep detectors.
One popular solution is to collect extra detection images
but with easily-annotated labels (e.g., image-level supervision). In this case, weakly-supervised (Diba et al. 2016;
Kantorov et al. 2016; Bilen and Vedaldi 2016; Li et al. 2016;
Cinbis, Verbeek, and Schmid 2017; Tang et al. 2017) or
∗

Equally-contributed ﬁrst authors
Corresponding author
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
†

2836

