The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Event Representations with Tensor-Based Compositions
Noah Weber

Niranjan Balasubramanian

Nathanael Chambers

Stony Brook University
Stony Brook, New York, USA
nwweber@cs.stonybrook.edu

Stony Brook University
Stony Brook, New York, USA
niranjan@cs.stonybrook.edu

United States Naval Academy
Annapolis, Maryland, USA
nchamber@usna.edu

Abstract
Robust and ﬂexible event representations are important to
many core areas in language understanding. Scripts were
proposed early on as a way of representing sequences of
events for such understanding, and has recently attracted
renewed attention. However, obtaining effective representations for modeling script-like event sequences is challenging. It requires representations that can capture event-level
and scenario-level semantics. We propose a new tensor-based
composition method for creating event representations. The
method captures more subtle semantic interactions between
an event and its entities and yields representations that are
effective at multiple event-related tasks. With the continuous representations, we also devise a simple schema generation method which produces better schemas compared to
a prior discrete representation based method. Our analysis
shows that the tensors capture distinct usages of a predicate
even when there are only subtle differences in their surface
realizations.

Figure 1: Additive compositions of word embeddings do not
distinguish distinct events. Tensor compositions can tease
out distinct events even with high lexical overlap, and recognize related events even with low lexical overlap.

accessible to simple composition methods. However, modeling scenario-level semantics is challenging. For example,
consider the following events: (i) she threw a football and
(ii) she threw a bomb. Even though the subject and the verb
are the same, these two events denote entirely different scenarios – sports and terrorism. The interaction of football or
bomb with the predicate threw is what determines the precise
semantics of the event and the broader scenario in which it
is embedded. A change to a single argument requires a large
shift in the event’s representation.
As illustrated in Figure 1, due to the overlap of words, parameterized additive models (Granroth-Wilding and Clark
2016; Modi 2016) and RNN-based models (Pichotta and
Mooney 2016; Hu et al. 2017) are limited in their transformations. Additive models combine the words in these
phrases by the passing the concatenation or addition of their
word embeddings to a parameterized function (usually a
feed forward neural network) that maps the summed vector into event embedding space. The additive nature of these
models makes it difﬁcult to model subtle differences in an
event’s surface form. Instead of additive models, we propose tensor-based composition models, which combine the
subject, predicate, and object to produce the ﬁnal event representation. The models capture multiplicative interactions
between these elements and are thus able to make large shifts
in event semantics with only small changes to the arguments.
This paper puts forth three main contributions:
• A scalable tensor-based composition model for event
representations, which can implicitly recognize different

Introduction
Understanding the events described in text is central to applications in artiﬁcial intelligence such as question answering, discourse understanding, and information extraction.
Research in event understanding ranges from relation extraction of individual events to full document understanding of all its events. Inspired by the concept of scripts, proposed in the seminal work by Schank and Abelson (1977),
much work has looked at modeling stereotypical sequences
of events in order to drive discourse understanding. Early
rule-based methods for this task were characteristically brittle and domain-speciﬁc. Later work proposed computational
models for script learning and understanding (Mooney and
DeJong 1985; Chambers and Jurafsky 2009; Balasubramanian et al. 2013), but they use shallow event representations
dependent on their speciﬁc surface words. Others have focused on training neural networks for robust event representations, using them to predict which events are likely to occur next (Modi 2016; Pichotta and Mooney 2016).
To be broadly useful, a good representation should
capture both event-level semantics (e.g., synonymy) and
broader scenario-level semantics. Event-level semantics are
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

4946

