The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Semi-Supervised Bayesian Attribute
Learning for Person Re-Identiﬁcation
1

Wenhe Liu,1 Xiaojun Chang,2 Ling Chen,1 Yi Yang1
Centre for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
2
Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
{wenhe.liu, ling.chen, yi.yang}@uts.edu.au, cxj273@gmail.com

result, re-ID performance often degrades (Zheng, Yang, and
Hauptmann 2016).
Existing approaches to re-ID have mainly focused on
representation learning and/or metric learning to overcome
these challenges. In representation learning, many frameworks learn a factor-based representation to enhance reID task performance (Kodirov, Xiang, and Gong 2015;
Liu et al. 2014). Several recent works have turned to attribute
learning methods for further improvement (Lin et al. 2017).
In Re-ID, attributes are mid-level features shared by multiple instances, such as hair color or wearing/not wearing a
dress. Overall, the general idea behind these methods is that
there are only a certain number of feature subsets that contribute to image matching performance. In metric learning,
algorithms learn a suitable metric in the given set of data,
which is then used to measure similarity (Xiong et al. 2014;
Hirzer et al. 2012).
Previous studies have demonstrated some exciting results,
but there are still challenges associated with each approach.
Determining the number of latent factors in factor-based representation models is a common problem. Typically, crossvalidation forms the solution, where the model evaluates
various numbers of latent factors that are manually predeﬁned. However, this is a time-consuming task for large
re-ID datasets, limiting the scalability of these methods. Another solution is to manually annotate the attributes to enhance learning performance (Lin et al. 2017; Su et al. 2016).
However, on large-scale datasets, this method has high human labor costs.
Metric learning re-ID methods also have drawbacks. Because they rely on learning a metric suitable to the re-ID targets, the performance is sensitive to the given dataset. Additionally, choosing the optimal method for calculating similarity distances, e.g., using 1 norm or 2 norm, can be problematic (Wang, Nie, and Huang 2014). Moreover, metric
learning methods rely on pair-wise label information, such
that performance suffers when there are only a few labels
(Yang, Jin, and Sukthankar 2012).
A few previous works have attempted to jointly apply both representation and metric learning to re-ID problems. Some use each technique independently to accomplish a speciﬁc goal. For instance, in (Liao et al. 2015;
Zhang, Xiang, and Gong 2016), researchers use representation learning methods in pre-processing stage to generate

Abstract
Person re-identiﬁcation (re-ID) tasks aim to identify the same
person in multiple images captured from non-overlapping
camera views. Most previous re-ID studies have attempted
to solve this problem through either representation learning
or metric learning, or by combining both techniques. Representation learning relies on the latent factors or attributes of
the data. In most of these works, the dimensionality of the
factors/attributes has to be manually determined for each new
dataset. Thus, this approach is not robust. Metric learning optimizes a metric across the dataset to measure similarity according to distance. However, choosing the optimal method
for computing these distances is data dependent, and learning the appropriate metric relies on a sufﬁcient number of
pair-wise labels. To overcome these limitations, we propose
a novel algorithm for person re-ID, called semi-supervised
Bayesian attribute learning. We introduce an Indian Buffet
Process to identify the priors of the latent attributes. The dimensionality of attributes factors is then automatically determined by nonparametric Bayesian learning. Meanwhile, unlike traditional distance metric learning, we propose a reidentiﬁcation probability distribution to describe how likely
it is that a pair of images contains the same person. This technique relies solely on the latent attributes of both images.
Moreover, pair-wise labels that are not known can be estimated from pair-wise labels that are known, making this a
robust approach for semi-supervised learning. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superior performance of our algorithm over several state-of-the-art algorithms on small-scale
datasets and comparable performance on large-scale re-ID
datasets.

Introduction
In the ﬁeld of computer vision, the study of person re-ID
has attracted considerable attention in recent years (Zheng,
Yang, and Hauptmann 2016). The main goal of re-ID is to
use a probe set of images that capture a person from one
camera view and re-identify that same person in a gallery
set of images captured by other non-overlapping camera
views. However, because the camera views do not overlap,
there may be uncontrollable and/or unpredictable variations
among the images in appearance, such as body pose, view
angle, occlusion, illumination conditions, and so on. As a
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7162

