The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Source-Target Inference Models
for Spatial Instruction Understanding
Hao Tan, Mohit Bansal
Department of Computer Science
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
{haotan, mbansal}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
Models that can execute natural language instructions for situated robotic tasks such as assembly and navigation have several useful applications in homes, ofﬁces, and remote scenarios. We study the semantics of spatially-referred conﬁguration and arrangement instructions, based on the challenging Bisk-2016 blank-labeled block dataset. This task involves
ﬁnding a source block and moving it to the target position (mentioned via a reference block and offset), where the
blocks have no names or colors and are just referred to via
spatial location features. We present novel models for the subtasks of source block classiﬁcation and target position regression, based on joint-loss language and spatial-world representation learning, as well as CNN-based and dual attention
models to compute the alignment between the world blocks
and the instruction phrases. For target position prediction, we
compare two inference approaches: annealed sampling via
policy gradient versus expectation inference via supervised
regression. Our models achieve the new state-of-the-art on
this task, with an improvement of 47% on source block accuracy and 22% on target position distance.

1

Figure 1: An example of the conﬁguration instruction understanding task (based on blank-labeled blocks). Our model is
able to correctly predict the source block and the target position in this case.

Models that can understand the semantics of block selection and moving instructions (and the involved referring
expressions) have been a topic of study since the 1970s,
e.g., the SHRDLU system (Winograd 1972). We focus on
the recent block-arrangement instructions dataset (its ‘much
more challenging’ blank-labeled version) by Bisk, Yuret,
and Marcu (2016), which is important and challenging because of several reasons. First, their instructions are freeform and substantially diverse in language vocabulary and
structure, making it hard for a formulaic or pattern-based
grammar model to capture the correct semantics. Secondly,
the reference to the source block and the target position
is solely based on complex spatial-relative information because all the blocks are identical except for their positions
(i.e., they have no names, labels, color, etc.). Hence, they involve varying hops of inference and use diverse blocks as
their reference (contextual) anchors. Third, the supervision
for the target task is only provided directly for the ﬁnal target position, and not for the intermediate reference block and
offset value. Lastly, the dataset size is limited compared to
its diversity and complexity.
We propose novel models for this conﬁguration-based instruction understanding dataset and task using joint-subtaskloss representation learning, dual and CNN based attention,
and expectation and sampling based inference approaches.
First, the source, reference, and offset subtask models all

Introduction

The task of robotic instruction execution involves developing models that can understand the semantics of freeform natural language instructions and execute them as a
sequence of actions. Such models have several useful applications in the domain of navigation, manipulation, and assembly, and in the scenarios of homes, ofﬁces, warehouses,
esp. in remote settings. In this paper, we address the task
of executing assembly-style conﬁguration (arrangement) instructions, where the goal is to predict the spatially-referred
source block and then move it to the target position, which
in turn is referred to in terms of a reference block and an
offset to it (again only using spatial features; see Fig. 1).
Our task is an idealization of the general assembly problem, while still involving similar challenges and features,
as well as requiring solutions that can be extended to other
robotic instruction problems such as those for navigation and
manipulation (e.g., instruction-world alignment with spatial
references, sampling with rewards, and joint representation
learning across subtasks).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5504

