The Twenty-Third AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium

Adaptive and Dynamic Team
Formation for Strategic and Tactical Planning
Sara Marie McCarthy
University of Southern California
sara.m.mccarthy@gmail.com

Introduction

efﬁciency in the ﬁeld? I studied this problem using the challenge of optimizing the defense of forests against illegal logging in Madagascar as a motivating domain, where I combine two different classes of security games (1) Green Security Games (Fang, Stone, and Tambe 2015) (Johnson et
al. 2012), which deal with the protection of forests, ﬁsh and
wildlife and (2) Network Security Games, where the challenge of simultaneously optimizing teams and deployment
is particularly challenging due to the combinatorially large
space of defender strategies (Jain et al. 2011). The fact that
the tactical question is computationally challenging emphasizes the difﬁculty of the SORT problem, which requires
evaluating the effectiveness of many teams to select the right
one.The challenge of optimizing a team of security resources
can be formulated as the following optimization problem:

Past work in security games has mainly focused on the problem static resource allocation; how to optimally deploy a
given ﬁxed team of resources. My research aims to address
the challenge of integrating operational planning into security games, where resources are heterogeneous and the defender is tasked with optimizing over both the investment
into these resources, as well as their deployment in the ﬁeld.
This allows the defender to design more adaptive strategies,
reason about the efﬁciency of their use of these resources as
well as their effectiveness in their deployment. This thesis
explores the challenges in integrating these two optimization problems in both the single stage and multi-stage setting and provides a formal model of this problem, which
we refer to as the Simultaneous Optimization of Resource
Teams and Tactics (SORT) as a new fundamental research
problem in security games that combines strategic and tactical decision making. The main contributions of this work
are solution methods to the SORT problem under various
settings as well as exploring various types of tradeoffs that
can arise in these settings. These include managing budget
for investment in resources as well as capacity constraints
on use of resources. My work addresses scenarios when the
tactical decision problem (optimal deployment) is difﬁcult,
and thus evaluating the performance of any given team is difﬁcult. Additionally, I address domains where we are tasked
with making repeated strategic level decision and where, due
to changing domain features, ﬂuctuations in time dependent
processes or the realization of uncertain parameters in the
problem, it becomes necessary to re-evaluate and adapt to
new information.



max F (λ) :
λ⊂R





bk ≤ B

k∈λ

Where the value of a team of resources λ selected from some
set of resources R is given by the expected utility of their
optimal deployment, denoted F (λ). F (λ) can computationally difﬁcult to calculate, particularly in Network Security
Games, because it requires ﬁnding the optimal tactical allocation to assess the utility of a given team λ. Since there
are an exponentially many possible teams, the sequential approach of evaluating F (λ) exactly for every team and picking the best one is impractical. Instead, in my approach to
SORT, I developed FORTIFY, a scalable branch and bound
style algorithm which integrates the analysis of the strategic
and tactical aspects of the problem to efﬁciently approximate
F (λ) and search the space of teams much more efﬁciently
and limit the number of instances where we evaluate F (λ)
exactly. The novelty of FORTIFY is a hierarchical abstractions of the Network Security Game which provide bounds
on F (λ) the value of different teams of resources to speed up
the search for the optimal team. I evaluated this work, using
real network and resource data obtained from our partners
working in Madagascar, and show that not only is the algorithm scalable, but as the number of possible combination
of resources grows it because more and more worthwhile to
perform this optimization over resources.

Completed Work
Team Formation
I ﬁrst provide a formal model of the SORT problem in
the single stage setting (McCarthy et al. 2016b), where we
are faced with two decision problems. Given a ﬁxed budget to invest in a set of heterogeneous resources, each with
different costs and capabilities, what is the optimal investment into these resources? And once the portfolio of security resources has been decided, how should those resources be combined into teams and deployed for optimal

Active Sensing

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

I also looked at this problem in the multi-stage setting we
are asked to make multiple investment decision, and where

8024

