The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Dress Fashionably: Learn Fashion Collocation
with Deep Mixed-Category Metric Learning
Long Chen, Yuhang He
School of Data and Computer Science, Sun Yat-sen University
Xiaoguwei Island, Panyu District, Guangzhou 510006, P. R. China

Abstract
In this paper, we seek to enable machine to answer questions like, given a clutch bag, what kind of skirt, heel and
even accessory best fashionably collocate with it? This problem, dubbed fashion collocation, has almost been neglected
by researchers due to the large uncertainty lies in fashion collocation and professional expertise required to address it. In
this paper, we narrow down the well-collocated samples to be
fashion images shared on fashion websites, with which we
propose an end-to-end trainable deep mixed-category metric learning method to project well-collocated clothing items
to lie close but items violating well-collocation far apart in
the deep embedding space. Speciﬁcally, we simultaneously
model the intra-category exclusiveness and cross-category inclusiveness of fashion collocation by feeding a set of wellcollocated clothing items and corresponding bad-collocated
clothing items to the deep neural network, further a hardaware online exemplar mining strategy is designed to force
the whole neural network to be trainable and learn discriminative features at the early and later training stages respectively.
To motivate more research in fashion collocation, we collect
a dataset of 0.2 million fashionably well-collocated images
consisting of either on-body or off-body clothing items or accessories. Extensive experimental results show the feasibility
and superiority of our method.

7[KX_)RUZNOTM/ZKS

=GXJXUHK

,GYNOUT)URRUIGZOUT8KY[RZ

Figure 1: Motivation: given a denim jacket, we retrieve the
best-collocated items from the “wardrobe”: chinos trouser,
white T-shirt, shoe, golden watch and accessory.

fashionable has to align with someone’s “look”, body characteristic as well as the temporal occasion he or she is involved in in order to be truly de rigueur. Although facing
so many uncertainties and obstacles, we still try to tackle
it by narrowing down good fashion collocation to be the
images shared by various fashion bloggers or professional
fashion websites. Leveraging the public taste as a proxy of
fashionability enables us to make fashion collocation to be
processible by machines. Moreover, from machine learning
perspective, we can get large amounts of images online to
delve deeper into collocation with powerful deep learning
methods (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012).
We hereby treat fashion collocation as a retrieval problem: given a single item (either top, bottom, shoe or accessory), we retrieve a couple of cross-category clothing items
that best collocate with it (see Fig. 1 for motivation illustration). Unlike traditional image retrieval problems which
retrieve images with similar visual appearance to the query
image, fashion collocation discussed here tries to retrieve
fashion images with both intra-category exclusiveness and
cross-category inclusiveness requirements (which would be
discussed later). To this end, we embrace the powerful deep
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to get feature representation. Furthermore, we leverage deep metric learning
to project these feature representations to deep embedding
space where a bunch of well-collocated items lie together
but irrelevant items lie far apart, even though they share obvious visual similarities. Specifically, our method initially
derives from triplet neural network (Schroff, Kalenichenko,

Introduction
People by nature care about their outfit look, their clothing
collocation choice should reflect their fashion taste, social
status and fit the social occasion. While it is widely accepted
that the elegant fashion collocation expertise is acquired by
a limited group of fashion experts, we dedicate to bring this
personal styling to the masses: teaching the machine to grasp
this capability so that people can consult it whenever they
have any fashion collocation question.
Fashion collocation is extremely difﬁcult. On the one
hand, the changes of public taste and consciousness towards
fashion collocation are ephemeral and resist to qualitative
analysis. It is hard to reach a consensus as it is to some
extent a matter of personal taste, and even depends on nationality, gender and temporal season. Also, fashion collocation is individual and instance-aware, an outﬁt itself being
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2103

