The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

FiLM: Visual Reasoning with a General Conditioning Layer
Ethan Perez,1,2 Florian Strub,4 Harm de Vries,1 Vincent Dumoulin,1 Aaron Courville1,3
1

MILA, Université de Montréal, 2 Rice University, 3 CIFAR Fellow,
Univ. Lille, CNRS, Centrale Lille, Inria, UMR 9189 CRIStAL France
ethanperez@rice.edu, ﬂorian.strub@inria.fr, mail@harmdevries.com,{dumouliv,courvila}@iro.umontreal.ca
4

Abstract
We introduce a general-purpose conditioning method for neural networks called FiLM: Feature-wise Linear Modulation.
FiLM layers inﬂuence neural network computation via a simple, feature-wise afﬁne transformation based on conditioning
information. We show that FiLM layers are highly effective
for visual reasoning — answering image-related questions
which require a multi-step, high-level process — a task which
has proven difﬁcult for standard deep learning methods that
do not explicitly model reasoning. Speciﬁcally, we show on
visual reasoning tasks that FiLM layers 1) halve state-of-theart error for the CLEVR benchmark, 2) modulate features in
a coherent manner, 3) are robust to ablations and architectural
modiﬁcations, and 4) generalize well to challenging, new data
from few examples or even zero-shot.

1

(a) Q: What number of
cylinders are small purple things or yellow rubber
things? A: 2

(b) Q: What color is the
other object that is the same
shape as the large brown
matte thing? A: Brown

Figure 1: CLEVR examples and FiLM model answers.

to exploit biases in the data rather than capture complex underlying structure behind reasoning (Goyal et al. 2017).
In this work, we show that a general model architecture
can achieve strong visual reasoning with a method we introduce as FiLM: Feature-wise Linear Modulation. A FiLM
layer carries out a simple, feature-wise afﬁne transformation
on a neural network’s intermediate features, conditioned on
an arbitrary input. In the case of visual reasoning, FiLM layers enable a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) over an input
question to inﬂuence Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
computation over an image. This process adaptively and radically alters the CNN’s behavior as a function of the input
question, allowing the overall model to carry out a variety
of reasoning tasks, ranging from counting to comparing, for
example. FiLM can be thought of as a generalization of Conditional Normalization, which has proven highly successful
for image stylization (Dumoulin, Shlens, and Kudlur 2017;
Ghiasi et al. 2017; Huang and Belongie 2017), speech recognition (Kim, Song, and Bengio 2017), and visual question
answering (de Vries et al. 2017), demonstrating FiLM’s
broad applicability.
In this paper, which expands upon a shorter report (Perez
et al. 2017), our key contribution is that we show FiLM is
a strong conditioning method by showing the following on
visual reasoning tasks:

Introduction

The ability to reason about everyday visual input is a fundamental building block of human intelligence. Some have
argued that for artiﬁcial agents to learn this complex, structured process, it is necessary to build in aspects of reasoning, such as compositionality (Hu et al. 2017; Johnson et
al. 2017b) or relational computation (Santoro et al. 2017).
However, if a model made from general-purpose components could learn to visually reason, such an architecture
would likely be more widely applicable across domains.
To understand if such a general-purpose architecture exists, we take advantage of the recently proposed CLEVR
dataset (Johnson et al. 2017a) that tests visual reasoning via
question answering. Examples from CLEVR are shown in
Figure 1. Visual question answering, the general task of asking questions about images, has its own line of datasets (Malinowski and Fritz 2014; Geman et al. 2015; Antol et al.
2015) which generally focus on asking a diverse set of
simpler questions on images, often answerable in a single
glance. From these datasets, a number of effective, generalpurpose deep learning models have emerged for visual question answering (Malinowski, Rohrbach, and Fritz 2015;
Yang et al. 2016; Lu et al. 2016; Anderson et al. 2017). However, tests on CLEVR show that these general deep learning
approaches struggle to learn structured, multi-step reasoning (Johnson et al. 2017a). In particular, these methods tend

1. FiLM models achieve state-of-the-art across a variety of
visual reasoning tasks, often by signiﬁcant margins.
2. FiLM operates in a coherent manner. It learns a complex,
underlying structure and manipulates the conditioned network’s features in a selective manner. It also enables the

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3942

