The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Approximation-Variance Tradeoffs in Facility Location Games
Ariel D. Procaccia

David Wajc

Hanrui Zhang

Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University

Computer Science Department
Carnegie Mellon University

Department of Computer Science
Duke University

therefore, to design facility location mechanisms that optimize the foregoing objectives, and are also strategyproof, in
the sense that no player can decrease her cost by misreporting her location.
This challenge is the original and paradigmatic instance
of approximate mechanism design without money (Procaccia and Tennenholtz 2013), an agenda that focuses on problems where monetary transfers are not allowed, which is
why the need for approximation typically stems from strategic considerations (the optimal solution is not strategyproof)
rather than computational complexity. Procaccia and Tennenholtz advocate using the approximation ratio of a strategyproof mechanism (the worst-case ratio between the objective value of the mechanism’s solution and the optimal solution) to quantify the solution quality that must inevitably be sacriﬁced in order to achieve strategyproofness.
The design of strategyproof approximation mechanisms for
facility location has been extensively studied (Procaccia
and Tennenholtz 2013; Alon et al. 2010; Lu et al. 2010;
Nissim, Smorodinsky, and Tennenholtz 2012; Thang 2010;
Fotakis and Tzamos 2010; 2013a; 2013b; Cheng, Yu, and
Zhang 2013; Wilf and Feldman 2013; Feldman, Fiat, and
Golumb 2016; Golomb and Tzamos 2017), and, in particular, has been a topic of signiﬁcant interest in recent AI conferences (Todo, Iwasaki, and Yokoo 2011; Zou and Li 2015;
Seraﬁno and Ventre 2015; Filos-Ratsikas et al. 2015; Cai,
Filos-Ratsikas, and Tang 2016).
Our point of departure from this dense literature is that we
re-examine the assumptions underlying randomized strategyproof mechanisms, which are known to provide better
guarantees than their deterministic counterparts (Procaccia
and Tennenholtz 2013). Speciﬁcally, in line with the literature on randomized approximation algorithms in general,
previous work measures the expected objective value of a
randomized mechanism, and disregards its variance. However, a risk-averse designer would be concerned with both.
In fact, expectation-variance analysis has long been viewed
as one of the fundamental approaches to reasoning about
risk aversion, and nowadays it is ubiquitous in economics
and ﬁnance (Markowitz 1952). In our case, given two distributions over facility locations with the same expected objective value, the designer should prefer the one with lower
risk (variance); and may prefer a distribution with higher
risk only if that risk is offset by sufﬁciently lower expected

Abstract
We revisit the well-studied problem of constructing strategyproof approximation mechanisms for facility location
games, but offer a fundamentally new perspective by considering risk averse designers. Speciﬁcally, we are interested
in the tradeoff between a randomized strategyproof mechanism’s approximation ratio, and its variance (which has long
served as a proxy for risk). When there is just one facility,
we observe that the social cost objective is trivial, and derive the optimal tradeoff with respect to the maximum cost
objective. When there are multiple facilities, the main challenge is the social cost objective, and we establish a surprising impossibility result: under mild assumptions, no smooth
approximation-variance tradeoff exists. We also discuss the
implications of our work for computational mechanism design at large.

1

Introduction

A facility location game consists of n players who are located on the real line; xi denotes the location of player i. A
mechanism f takes the vector of player locations x ∈ Rn as
input, and outputs a vector of k facility locations y ∈ Rk .
The facilities are usually thought of as public goods, such
as libraries or police stations, but the facility location setting can be interpreted in many other ways, e.g., player locations can represent opinions on a (quantitative) political
spectrum, and a facility can be a policy choice. The cost
of player i is her distance from the nearest facility, that is,
min∈[k] |xi − y |. We wish to minimize one of two natural objectives: the utilitarian objective of social cost, which
is the sum of individual costs; and Rawlsian objective of
maximum cost, which is, obviously, the maximum individual cost.
However, naı̈ve optimization of these objectives may lead
to undesirable strategic behavior on the part of the players.
For example, the optimal solution for the case of k = 1
(a single facility), and the maximum cost objective, is to
place the facility at the average of the leftmost and rightmost player locations, that is, at (mini xi + maxi xi )/2. The
problem is that, say, the rightmost player can drag the facility towards her true location by reporting a location that is
further to the right, thereby decreasing her cost. The goal is,
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1185

