The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Nonlinear Pairwise Layer and Its Training for Kernel Learning
Fanghui Liu, Xiaolin Huang, Chen Gong, Jie Yang,∗ Li Li



Institute of Image Processing and Pattern Recognition, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology

Department of Automation, Tsinghua University

distribution due to their shallow architecture. Accordingly,
some recent approaches (Lloyd et al. 2014; Zhong et al.
2014) target to develop more expressive kernels than the
traditional kernels to discover rich structure embedded in
the data. Existing advanced kernel-based algorithms can be
roughly grouped into two categories: multiple kernel learning (MKL) and deep kernel learning. MKL (Nen, Alpayd,
and Ethem 2011; Varma and Babu 2009) aims at learning
a combination of a set of predeﬁned kernels to obtain a
good integrated kernel, which would yield a “broader” kernel.
The heuristic approaches, Bayesian approaches, and boosting approaches are usually adopted by the representative
models in implement MKL (see a survey in (Nen, Alpayd,
and Ethem 2011)). Recently, motivated by the successes of
deep learning framework, some emerging studies (Cho 2012;
Zhuang, Tsang, and Hoi 2011; Wilson et al. 2016) have attempted to incorporate deep architecture into kernel learning
to further enhance the ﬂexibility of regular MKL and other
traditional kernel-based methods. As a result, deep kernel
architecture substantially increases the “richness” of representations when compared to a shallow architecture.

Abstract
Kernel learning is a fundamental technique that has been intensively studied in the past decades. For the complicated practical tasks, the traditional “shallow” kernels (e.g., Gaussian
kernel and sigmoid kernel) are not ﬂexible enough to produce
satisfactory performance. To address this shortcoming, this
paper introduces a nonlinear layer in kernel learning to enhance the model ﬂexibility. This layer is pairwise, which fully
considers the coupling information among examples. So our
model contains a ﬁxed single mapping layer (i.e. a Gaussian
kernel) as well as a nonlinear pairwise layer, thereby achieving
better ﬂexibility than the existing kernel structures. Moreover,
the proposed structure can be seamlessly embedded to Support
Vector Machines (SVM), of which the training process can be
formulated as a joint optimization problem including nonlinear
function learning and standard SVM optimization. We theoretically prove that the objective function is gradient-Lipschitz
continuous, which further guides us how to accelerate the optimization process in a deep kernel architecture. Experimentally,
we ﬁnd that the proposed structure outperforms other state-ofthe-art kernel-based algorithms on various benchmark datasets,
and thus the effectiveness of the incorporated pairwise layer
with its training approach is demonstrated.

However, there are two main drawbacks of these deep
kernel based methods. First, there has so far been no satisﬁed or proper optimization algorithms for these nested kernels in deep architecture during the training process. Second,
such deep kernel based methods often use a ﬁxed or regular
scheme to generate a nested kernel. The model ﬂexibility is
generally limited to such insufﬁcient scheme, and thus these
methods can hardly yield a promising performance as we
expected. To address such limitations, we introduce a nonlinear pairwise layer in kernel learning as shown in Fig. 1. One
can see that the kernel learning framework in SVM can be
analogous to the structure of a neural network. In our model,
we use a ﬁxed single mapping layer but add a nonlinear pairwise layer which is highly coupled with training examples to
capture the different local statistics of the input data. Such
pairwise layer can be interpreted as a nonlinear function
g(xi , xj ) that we need to learn, where xi is the ith example
of the input X = {x1 , x2 , · · · , xn }. By doing so, one hand,
we do not limit the speciﬁc formulation for the function g(·),
which provides more ﬂexibility when compared with other
deep nested kernels. On the other hand, we only need to learn
the function g(·) instead of learning a multi-layer kernel in
deep architecture to simplify the training process. As a result,

Introduction
Kernel learning (Schölkopf and Smola 2003) is one of the
enduring topics in machine learning community. The family
of kernel-based methods have been extensively studied over
the past decade, such as support vector machines (SVM)
(Vapnik 2000), kernel logistic regression (KLR) (Zhu and
Hastie 2002), and kernel PCA (Zhang et al. 2016). These
methods work by mapping the data from the original input
space into a high-dimensional (possibly inﬁnite-dimensional)
feature space. The mapping is implicitly deﬁned through
a kernel, namely a function that deﬁnes an inner product
between any two examples in the reproducing kernel Hilbert
space (RKHS) (Evgeniou, Pontil, and Poggio 2000).
Although these kernel-based methods obtain good performance to some extent, many empirical studies (Zhuang,
Tsang, and Hoi 2011; Huang et al. 2017a) suggest that they
are not sufﬁciently ﬂexible to accurately describe the data
∗

Corresponding Author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3659

