The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Deep Multi-View Spatial-Temporal Network for Taxi Demand Prediction
Huaxiu Yao,∗ Fei Wu

Jintao Ke∗

Xianfeng Tang

Pennsylvania State University
{huaxiuyao, fxw133}@ist.psu.edu

Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology
jke@connect.ust.hk

Pennsylvania State University
xianfeng@ist.psu.edu

Yitian Jia, Siyu Lu, Pinghua Gong,
Jieping Ye, Didi Chuxing

Zhenhui Li

{jiayitian, lusiyu, gongpinghua, yejieping}@didichuxing.com

Pennsylvania State University
jessieli@ist.psu.edu

consumption. Currently, with the increasing popularity of
taxi requesting services such as Uber and Didi Chuxing, we
are able to collect massive demand data at an unprecedented
scale. The question of how to utilize big data to better predict
trafﬁc demand has drawn increasing attention in AI research
communities.
In this paper, we study the taxi demand prediction problem; that problem being how to predict the number of taxi
requests for a region in a future timestamp by using historical taxi requesting data. In literature, there has been
a long line of studies in trafﬁc data prediction, including
trafﬁc volume, taxi pick-ups, and trafﬁc in/out ﬂow volume. To predict trafﬁc, time series prediction methods have
frequently been used. Representatively, autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) and its variants have
been widely applied for trafﬁc prediction (Li et al. 2012;
Moreira-Matias et al. 2013; Shekhar and Williams 2008).
Based on the time series prediction method, recent studies further consider spatial relations (Deng et al. 2016;
Tong et al. 2017) and external context data (e.g., venue,
weather, and events) (Pan, Demiryurek, and Shahabi 2012;
Wu, Wang, and Li 2016). While these studies show that
prediction can be improved by considering various additional factors, they still fail to capture the complex nonlinear
spatial-temporal correlations.
Recent advances in deep learning have enabled researchers to model the complex nonlinear relationships and
have shown promising results in computer vision and natural language processing ﬁelds (LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015). This success has inspired several attempts to use
deep learning techniques on trafﬁc prediction problems. Recent studies (Zhang, Zheng, and Qi 2017; Zhang et al. 2016)
propose to treat the trafﬁc in a city as an image and the
trafﬁc volume for a time period as pixel values. Given a
set of historical trafﬁc images, the model predicts the trafﬁc image for the next timestamp. Convolutional neural network (CNN) is applied to model the complex spatial correlation. Yu et al. (2017) proposes to use Long Short Term
Memory networks (LSTM) to predict loop sensor readings.
They show the proposed LSTM model is capable of modeling complex sequential interactions. These pioneering attempts show superior performance compared with previous
methods based on traditional time series prediction methods.
However, none of them consider spatial relation and tempo-

Abstract
Taxi demand prediction is an important building block to enabling intelligent transportation systems in a smart city. An
accurate prediction model can help the city pre-allocate resources to meet travel demand and to reduce empty taxis on
streets which waste energy and worsen the trafﬁc congestion. With the increasing popularity of taxi requesting services such as Uber and Didi Chuxing (in China), we are
able to collect large-scale taxi demand data continuously.
How to utilize such big data to improve the demand prediction is an interesting and critical real-world problem. Traditional demand prediction methods mostly rely on time series forecasting techniques, which fail to model the complex
non-linear spatial and temporal relations. Recent advances
in deep learning have shown superior performance on traditionally challenging tasks such as image classiﬁcation by
learning the complex features and correlations from largescale data. This breakthrough has inspired researchers to explore deep learning techniques on trafﬁc prediction problems.
However, existing methods on trafﬁc prediction have only
considered spatial relation (e.g., using CNN) or temporal relation (e.g., using LSTM) independently. We propose a Deep
Multi-View Spatial-Temporal Network (DMVST-Net) framework to model both spatial and temporal relations. Specifically, our proposed model consists of three views: temporal view (modeling correlations between future demand values with near time points via LSTM), spatial view (modeling
local spatial correlation via local CNN), and semantic view
(modeling correlations among regions sharing similar temporal patterns). Experiments on large-scale real taxi demand
data demonstrate effectiveness of our approach over state-ofthe-art methods.

Introduction
Trafﬁc is the pulse of a city that impacts the daily life of
millions of people. One of the most fundamental questions
for future smart cities is how to build an efﬁcient transportation system. To address this question, a critical component
is an accurate demand prediction model. The better we can
predict demand on travel, the better we can pre-allocate resources to meet the demand and avoid unnecessary energy
∗
The paper was done when these authors were interns in Didi
Chuxing.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2588

