The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Externally Supported Models for Efﬁcient
Computation of Paracoherent Answer Sets
Giovanni Amendola,1 Carmine Dodaro,2 Wolfgang Faber,3 Francesco Ricca1
1 DEMACS, University of Calabria, Italy
2 DIBRIS, University of Genova, Italy
3 University of Huddersﬁeld, UK

{amendola,ricca}@mat.unical.it, dodaro@dibris.unige.it, wf@wfaber.com
coherent has been chosen to highlight both similarities and
differences to paraconsistent semantics: their goal is similar, but the latter addresses classical logical contradictions,
while the former addresses contradictions due to unstratiﬁed
(“cyclic”) negation.
Practical applications of these paracoherent semantics
hinge on the availability of efﬁcient algorithms and implementations. There is a vast potential of applications,
the most immediate ones being debugging of ASP and
incoherence-tolerant query answering. But also applications
in diagnosis, planning, and reasoning about actions are conceivable (Amendola et al. 2016b).
So far, we are aware of only one very recent attempt on
providing efﬁcient reasoning support for paracoherent semantics. The work presented in (Amendola et al. 2017) relies on the epistemic transformation of ASP programs underlying the theoretical foundations of the semantics (Amendola et al. 2016b), and constructs a few algorithms around
it that build upon existing ASP solvers. The fact that this
method relies on the epistemic transformation introduces
considerable overhead, though. Indeed, it creates so many
auxiliary atoms and additional rules that the system described in (Amendola et al. 2017) often does not terminate
or even runs out of memory.
In this paper we present an alternative characterization of
paracoherent answer sets in terms of (extended) externally
supported models. The deﬁnition is based on a new transformation of the program that is more parsimonious than the
classical one in terms of the number of additional atoms and
the number of new rules. This transformation can be used in
place of the epistemic transformation in existing solving algorithms without requiring any other modiﬁcation. An empirical performance comparison on benchmarks from ASP
competitions shows that signiﬁcant performance improvements can be obtained by using the new transformation, and
the advantages are independent of the used algorithms and
underlying ASP solvers.

Abstract
Answer Set Programming (ASP) is a well-established formalism for nonmonotonic reasoning. While incoherence, the
non-existence of answer sets for some programs, is an important feature of ASP, it has frequently been criticised and
indeed has some disadvantages, especially for query answering. Paracoherent semantics have been suggested as a remedy, which extend the classical notion of answer sets to draw
meaningful conclusions also from incoherent programs. In
this paper we present an alternative characterization of the
two major paracoherent semantics in terms of (extended) externally supported models. This deﬁnition uses a transformation of ASP programs that is more parsimonious than the classic epistemic transformation used in recent implementations.
A performance comparison carried out on benchmarks from
ASP competitions shows that the usage of the new transformation brings about performance improvements that are independent of the underlying algorithms.

1

Introduction

Knowledge Representation and Reasoning are a core topic
in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and in the past decades, major
progress has been achieved. In the subarea of nonmonotonic reasoning, Answer Set Programming (ASP) has become the primarily used formalism (cf. (Brewka, Eiter,
and Truszczynski 2011; Gebser et al. 2012)). ASP offers a
declarative language and allows for solving difﬁcult, usually NP-hard, problems by encoding them as a logic program and computing its answer sets, which encode the problem solutions. The availability of efﬁcient solvers has leveraged a large variety of applications (Gaggl et al. 2015;
Manna, Ricca, and Terracina 2015; Amendola et al. 2016a;
Dodaro et al. 2016; Amendola et al. 2016c), including industrial ones (Grasso et al. 2011).
One important, but in some circumstances peculiar, feature is that some logic programs have no answer sets. While
this is sometimes desired for encoding problems that admit no solutions, it is sometimes perceived as detrimental,
especially when dealing with query answering. Addressing
this issue, paracoherent semantics based on answer sets have
been proposed to draw meaningful conclusions also from incoherent programs (Amendola et al. 2016b). The term para-

2

Preliminaries

We start with recalling the basic notions of answer set
semantics, and then present the semi-stable and semiequilibrium paracoherent semantics.
We concentrate on programs over a propositional signature Σ. A rule r is of the form

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1720

