The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Computing the Strategy to
Commit To in Polymatrix Games
Giuseppe De Nittis, Alberto Marchesi, Nicola Gatti
Politecnico di Milano
Piazza Leonardo da Vinci, 32
Milano, Italy
{giuseppe.denittis, alberto.marchesi, nicola.gatti}@polimi.it
supremum is attained, so a strategy providing an approximation of such value must be computed. While the literature has mainly focused on the optimistic case, it has been
recently showed that the pessimistic case is of extraordinary
importance in practice, since wrongly assuming the follower
to be optimistic may lead to an arbitrary loss. This suggests that optimistic and pessimistic equilibria—being the
extremes in terms of utility for the leader—should be considered together aiming to make a robust commitment.
The computation of the equilibrium in the 1-leader/1follower case requires polynomial time both in the optimistic (Conitzer and Sandholm 2006) and pessimistic
case (Von Stengel and Zamir 2010). However, while the
computation of an optimistic equilibrium is conceptually
simple and can be done by solving a single linear program (Conitzer and Korzhyk 2011), computing a pessimistic
equilibrium is much more involved and requires a nontrivial theoretical study (Von Stengel and Zamir 2010). Conversely, in the presence of uncertainty, ﬁnding an optimistic
equilibrium when the follower can be of a non-ﬁxed number of types and the utility of the leader depends on the
type of the follower (interdependent types) is Poly-APXcomplete (Letchford, Conitzer, and Munagala 2009). The
reduction does not apply to the simpliﬁed case in which the
types are independent and not even to the computation of a
pessimistic equilibrium, leaving these problems open.
The study of games with multiple followers is even
more challenging. On one side, the equilibrium-computation
problem is much more involved and largely unexplored. On
the other side, many practical scenarios present multiple independent followers (e.g., pricing, toll-setting, and security).
In this case, the followers’ game resulting from the leader’s
commitment can have different structures (e.g., followers
can play sequentially or simultaneously). In this paper, we
focus on games in which the followers play simultaneously,
reaching a Nash Equilibrium given the leader’s commitment.
The problem of computing an optimistic or pessimistic equilibrium is not in Poly-APX even with two followers in polymatrix games (Basilico, Coniglio, and Gatti 2017). Furthermore, an optimistic equilibrium can be found using global
optimization tools, whereas it is not known whether there
is a ﬁnite mathematical programming formulation to ﬁnd
a pessimistic one (Basilico et al. 2017). When restricting
the followers to play pure strategies in generic normal-form

Abstract
Leadership games provide a powerful paradigm to model
many real-world settings. Most literature focuses on games
with a single follower who acts optimistically, breaking ties
in favour of the leader. Unfortunately, for real-world applications, this is unlikely. In this paper, we look for efﬁciently
solvable games with multiple followers who play either optimistically or pessimistically, i.e., breaking ties in favour or
against the leader. We study the computational complexity of
ﬁnding or approximating an optimistic or pessimistic leaderfollower equilibrium in speciﬁc classes of succinct games—
polymatrix like—which are equivalent to 2-player Bayesian
games with uncertainty over the follower, with interdependent or independent types. Furthermore, we provide an exact
algorithm to ﬁnd a pessimistic equilibrium for those game
classes. Finally, we show that in general polymatrix games
the computation is harder even when players are forced to
play pure strategies.

Introduction
Leadership games have recently received a lot of attention in
the Artiﬁcial Intelligence literature, also thanks to their use
in many real-world applications, e.g., security and protection (Basilico, De Nittis, and Gatti 2017; Kar et al. 2017a;
2017b). In principle, the paradigm is simple—one or more
leaders commit to a potentially mixed strategy, the followers observe the commitments, and then they play their bestresponses—, but it can be declined in many different ways.
The crucial issue is the computational study of the problem
of ﬁnding the best leaders’ strategy. In this paper, we provide new computational complexity results and algorithms
for games with one leader and two or more followers.
Related works. In the 1-leader/1-follower case, we can
distinguish different scenarios according to how the follower breaks ties (in favour to the leader—optimistic—or
against—pessimistic) and the presence of uncertain information (Bayesian games). When the follower behaves pessimistically, the expected utility of the leader may not admit any maximum, and the equilibrium corresponds to the
supremum of the utility (Von Stengel and Zamir 2010). In
this case, there is no leader’s strategy where the value of the
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

989

