The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

BaitBuster: A Clickbait Identiﬁcation Framework
Md Main Uddin Rony, § Naeemul Hassan, § Mohammad Yousuf *
§

∗

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The University of Mississippi
Gaylord College of Journalism and Mass Communication, The University of Oklahoma
mrony@go.olemiss.edu, nhassan@olemiss.edu, yousuf@ou.edu

Abstract
The use of tempting and often misleading headlines (clickbait) to allure readers has become a growing practice nowadays among the media outlets. The widespread use of clickbait risks the reader’s trust in media. In this paper, we present
BaitBuster, a browser extension and social bot based framework, that detects clickbaits ﬂoating on the web, provides
brief explanation behind its decision, and regularly makes
users aware of potential clickbaits.

Introduction

Figure 1: System architecture of BaitBuster

Facebook engineers panic, pull plug on AI after bots develop their own language1 – this headline and its similar
versions, suggesting an apocalyptic situation, have misrepresented the true facts but, nonetheless, disrupted (shared
more than 300K times2 on Facebook alone) the social
media by exploiting a technique called as Clickbait. The
term clickbait refers to a form of web content that employs writing formulas and linguistic techniques in headlines to trick readers into clicking links (Palau-Sampio 2016;
Chakraborty et al. 2016), but does not deliver on promises3 .
Examples of clickbait are– You Won’t Believe What These
Dogs Are Doing!, What OJ’s Daughter Looks Like Now is
Incredible! and so on. According to a study performed by
Facebook4 , 80% users “preferred headlines that helped them
decide if they wanted to read the full article before they had
to click through”. (M. Scacco and Muddiman 2016) shows
that clickbait headlines lead to negative reactions among media users. In this paper, we describe a novel approach to
identify clickbaits, and present BaitBuster, a browser extension and social bot based solution framework.

of the continuous skip-gram model (Mikolov et al. 2013),
which leverages subwords (substring of a word) to compute word embeddings (Bojanowski et al. 2016). Rather
than treating each word as a unit like skip-gram, SkipGramsw breaks down words into subwords (length = 3)
and wants to correctly predict the context subwords of a
given subword. Then, the learned subword embeddings are
aggregated to form the embedding of a word. This extension allows sharing of the subword embeddings across different words, thus allowing to learn reliable representations
for rare words. We average the embeddings of words present
in a sentence to form the hidden representation of it. These
sentence representations are used to train a softmax classiﬁer. Further technical details can be found in (Rony, Hassan,
and Yousuf 2017).
Dataset: Using Facebook Graph API, we accumulated all
the Facebook posts created within January 1st , 2014 and
December 31st , 2016 by 153 U.S. based media outlets. By
considering only the link and video type posts, we had about
1.67 million Facebook posts ( details in (Rony, Hassan, and
Yousuf 2017)). We use this dataset to learn the subword embeddings. A collection of 32, 000 manually labeled news
headlines (15, 999 clickbait and 16, 001 non-clickbait), curated by (Chakraborty et al. 2016), was used to train a softmax classiﬁer.
Evaluation: We performed 10-fold cross-validation and repeated each experiment 5 times to avoid any random behavior. We proposed 5 different models and the best model
achieved an accuracy of 98.3% which is signiﬁcantly better than the accuracy (93%) reported in (Chakraborty et al.

Clickbait Detection
We deﬁne the clickbait detection task as a supervised binary
classiﬁcation problem. We use distributed subword embeddings as features instead of applying bag-of-words (BOW)
model. Speciﬁcally, we use Skip-Gramsw , an extension
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
http://bit.ly/facebookAIpanic
2
http://bit.ly/FacebookAICount
3
https://www.wired.com/2015/12/psychology-of-clickbait/
4
http://bit.ly/FacebookClickbaitStudy

8216

