The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Understanding Over
Participation in Simple Contests
Priel Levy, David Sarne
Department of Computer Science
Bar Ilan University, Israel
priel.levy@live.biu.ac.il, sarned@cs.biu.ac.il

chance of winning free stays), contests run by not-for-proﬁt
organizations such as the Hult Prize (www.hultprize.org)
and multi-agents competitions such as the Trading Agent
Competition (TAC) (Collins, Ketter, and Sadeh 2010) and
the Automated Negotiation Agent Competition (ANAC)
(Baarslag and others 2013). Common to all the above examples that the contest initiator is interested in maximizing the
expected best contribution (or the k best contributions) made
throughout the contest, quality-wise. As such, the study of
contest design, i.e., the relationship between the design of
contest and the strategic behavior of contestants, has attracted much attention in recent years, introducing and evaluating different incentive schemes for inducing high quality contributions from utility-maximizing contestants that
need to exert costly efforts (Archak and Sundararajan 2009;
Cavallo and Jain 2012; Gao et al. 2012).
Alongside the many theoretical contributions made to
the ﬁeld, there is much experimental research aiming at
empirically investigating individual behavior in contests
(Dechenaux, Kovenock, and Sheremeta 2015). One common ﬁnding in this literature is that people tend to exert more effort in contests compared to the theoretical
equilibrium-based (as well as alternative model-based) predictions, leading to better expected contributions overall
(Sheremeta 2013). This phenomenon was explained primarily by people’s non-monetary utility from winning in
a contest (Schmitt et al. 2004; Sheremeta 2010) along
with a plethora of secondary explanations such as mistakes and systematic biases (Shupp et al. 2013; Chowdhury,
Sheremeta, and Turocy 2014), lack of experience in contests
(Sheremeta 2011) and caring about relative payoffs maximization (Mago, Samak, and Sheremeta 2016). All these
seem to assume the contest itself is a signiﬁcant inﬂuencing
factor.
In this paper we report the results of a set of comprehensive experiments aiming to determine whether indeed more
effort is exerted in contests due to the competitive nature
of the setting (i.e., because contestants have some utility
from “winning”), or perhaps this phenomenon should be attributed to other factors (speciﬁcally people’s tendency to
risk) that are possibly found also in non-strategic decision
settings. Our experiments use a unique design that enables
comparing contestants’ decisions in similar decision situations, differing only in whether it is a part of a contest or not.

Abstract
One key motivation for using contests in real-life is the substantial evidence reported in empirical contest-design literature for people’s tendency to act more competitively in
contests than predicted by the Nash Equilibrium. This phenomenon has been traditionally explained by people’s eagerness to win and maximize their relative (rather than absolute) payoffs. In this paper we make use of “simple contests”,
where contestants only need to strategize on whether to participate in the contest or not, as an infrastructure for studying
whether indeed more effort is exerted in contests due to competitiveness, or perhaps this can be attributed to other factors
that hold also in non-competitive settings. The experimental
methodology we use compares contestants’ participation decisions in eight contest settings differing in the nature of the
contest used, the number of contestants used and the theoretical participation predictions to those obtained (whenever
applicable) by subjects facing equivalent non-competitive decision situations in the form of a lottery. We show that indeed
people tend to over-participate in contests compared to the
theoretical predictions, yet the same phenomenon holds (to
a similar extent) also in the equivalent non-competitive settings. Meaning that many of the contests used nowadays as
a means for inducing extra human effort, that are often complex to organize and manage, can be replaced by a simpler
non-competitive mechanism that uses probabilistic prizes.

Introduction
Contests are an important and widely in use mechanism for
eliciting individual efforts (Araujo 2013; Vojnovic 2016). In
fact, many economic, political and social environments can
be described as contests where contestants expand some resources in order to win one or more prizes. Perhaps the most
famous crowdsourcing contest is the Netﬂix Prize Challenge
which was an open competition over improving the accuracy of user’s movie preference predictions used by Netﬂix (www.netﬂixprize.com), with a one million USD prize.
Other examples include the DARPA challenges (Robotics
Challenge, Grand Challenge), which are high-payoff contests for developing technologies to be used by the military,
ﬁrms that use contests for branding or coming up with new
products (such as the Four Season’s contest where users are
encouraged to take inspiring pictures of Toronto with the
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1571

