The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

Computer-Assisted Authoring for Natural Language Story Scripts
Rushit Sanghrajka

Wojciech Witoń

Disney Research

Disney Research

Sasha Schriber

Markus Gross

Mubbasir Kapadia

Disney Research

Disney Research

Disney Research
Rutgers University

story by asking questions, set up rules for their desired story
world, and look at the belief-desire based conﬂicts being recognized by the system. Our current system supports scripts
or screenplays and is an emerging technology. Handling of
unstructured stories like novels is an exciting avenue of future exploration.
There are various challenges that exist to this problem.
Natural language capabilities pose a challenge in information retrieval from complex stories: natural language understanding has a long way to go before being able to match the
level of inferencing the human brain can make from reading a story. Another challenge lies in the ability to analyze,
compare and sort information extracted from a screenplay or
a script. The ﬁeld of computational narratives has advanced
greatly to represent narratives with the help of story graphs
(Riedl and Young 2006), but these current data structures
cannot be formed directly from a text-based story.
The central aspect of our proposed solution is the ability
to extract meaningful information directly from the story itself, without any additional author supervision. We are able
to understand characters, their beliefs and desires, interactions, and their relations with other characters, along with
information about the narrative arc of the story. We introduce knowledge bytes to represent the information encapsulated in the script. Knowledge bytes can be deﬁned as
atomic structures which can represent a granular segment of
information about the narrative. We also introduce a crossknowledge base reasoning approach that is capable of reasoning across various character knowledge bases, the story
knowledge, as well as knowledge about the story world.
By building these different knowledge bases and sharing
streams of knowledge bytes across them, the reasoning system can make inferences and respond to the user’s queries
in real-time during the process of story writing.

Abstract
In order to assist scriptwriters during the process of storywriting, we have developed a system that can extract information from natural language stories, and allow for story-centric
as well as character-centric reasoning. These inferencing capabilities are exposed to the user through intuitive querying
systems, allowing the scriptwriter to ask the system questions
about story and character information. We introduce knowledge bytes as atoms of information and demonstrate that the
system can parse text into a stream of knowledge bytes and
use these mentioned reasoning capabilities through logical
reasoning.

1

Introduction

Story-writing requires creative focus, as the writer needs to
focus on making sure that their story is logical, and does not
have any inconsistencies and plot-holes (Ryan 2009). Moreover, for stories that may take place in large pre-existing
ﬁctional story worlds, such as the Harry Potter world or
Star Wars world, it becomes essential to maintain consistency with the existing laws of the world. For franchises like
Star Wars, fact-checking is essential to ensure that there is
no redundancy while introducing new characters or species
of creatures which may have already had a minor appearance or reference in the past. Moreover, ﬁctional universes
like Harry Potter may have additional rules of their own, for
example, the lack of use of electricity and technology in the
Wizarding World (Rowling 2005).
Such book-keeping of story worlds often detracts storywriters from the creative story-writing process itself. Most
computer-assisted writing software have features such as
automatic spelling and grammar checking features. Applications such as Final Draft (Final Draft 1990) are widely
used for screen-writing purposes for organization and efﬁciency in script and screenplay writing. However, commercially available options do not provide any reasoning or factchecking capabilities on the story and characters.
Our goal is to provide an interactive intelligent system that
can support screenwriters with feedback about the story by
understanding the events and interactions in the narrative.
The system should also allow them to interact with their

2

Related Work

There are detailed studies that focus on extracting a knowledge base from stories, such as Scheherazade (Elson 2012)
and ASM (Finlayson 2012), and even create ﬁctional story
worlds (Poulakos et al. 2015).
Boyang Li’s work in generating narrative intelligence and
determining causal links from a crowd-sourced narrative
is an interesting approach to creating a script of a narrative (2012). Shoulson et al. (2013) discuss an event-centric

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7811

