The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Armstrong’s Axioms and Navigation Strategies
Kaya Deuser, Pavel Naumov
Vassar College
124 Raymond Avenue
Poughkeepsie, NY 12604
{kdeuser, pnaumov}@vassar.edu

Abstract
0
a

The paper investigates navigability with imperfect information. It shows that the properties of navigability with perfect
recall are exactly those captured by Armstrong’s axioms from
database theory. If the assumption of perfect recall is omitted,
then Armstrong’s transitivity axiom is not valid, but it can be
replaced by a weaker principle. The main technical results are
soundness and completeness theorems for the logical systems
describing properties of navigability with and without perfect
recall.

1
e

c
1

1

0

0

1
g

h

0,1

0
0

0
b
1

Introduction

1

0
f

d
1

Figure 1: Transition System T0 .

Navigation is a commonly encountered task by autonomous
agents that need to reach a destination or, more generally, to
ﬁnd a solution to a problem, where the solution is a sequence
of instructions that transition a system from one state to another. This task is often performed when the agent does not
have precise information about her current location. Examples of such agents are self-navigating missiles, self-driving
cars, and robotic vacuum cleaners.
Figure 1 depicts an example T0 of a transition system.
This system consists of eight states a, . . . , h represented by
the vertices of the graph. The agent cannot distinguish state
a from state b and state c from state d, which is denoted by
dashed lines connecting the indistinguishable states. The directed edges of the graph represent transitions that the system can make and the labels on these edges represent the
instructions that the agent must give to do this. For example, if in state a the agent executes instruction 0, then the
system transitions into state g, if, instead, the agent executes
instruction 1, the system transitions into state e. Although in
this paper we consider non-deterministic transition systems
where the execution of the same instruction can transition
the system into one of the several states, for the sake of simplicity the transition system T0 is deterministic.
Note that, in system T0 the agent can navigate from state
a to state c by using instruction 1 in state a and the same instruction 1 again in state e. However, a different sequence of
instructions is required to reach state c from state b. As the
agent cannot distinguish state a from state b, in state a she
does not know which instructions to use to accomplish her

goal. Moreover, if the agent does reach state c, she cannot
verify that the task is completed, because she cannot distinguish state c from state d. For this reason, in this paper instead of navigation between states, we consider navigation
between equivalence classes of states with respect to the indistinguishability relation. For example, the agent can navigate from class ras “ ta, bu to class rcs “ tc, du by using
instruction 1 in each state she passes.
Perfect Recall In order to achieve a goal, the agent would
need to follow a certain strategy that must be stored in her
memory. We assume that the strategy is permanently stored
(“hardwired”) in the memory and cannot be changed during the navigation. For example, a robotic vacuum cleaner
might be programmed to change direction when it encounters a wall, to make a circle when the dirt sensor is triggered,
and to follow a straight path otherwise. A crucial question
for us is if the vacuum cleaner can remember the walls and
the dirty spots it has previously encountered. In other words,
we distinguish an agent that can keep track of the classes of
states she visited and the instructions she used from an agent
who only knows her current state. We say that in the former
case the agent has perfect recall and in the later she does not.
A strategy of an agent without perfect recall can only use
information available to her about the current state to decide
which instruction to use. In other words, a strategy of such
an agent is a function that maps classes of indistinguishable
states into instructions. A strategy of an agent with perfect
recall can use information about the history of previous tran-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6343

