The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Multimodal Keyless Attention
Fusion for Video Classiﬁcation
Xiang Long,1 Chuang Gan,1∗ Gerard de Melo,2
Xiao Liu,3 Yandong Li,3 Fu Li,3 Shilei Wen,3
1
Tsinghua University , 2 Rutgers University , 3 Baidu IDL
{longx13, ganc13}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, gdm@demelo.org, {liuxiao12, liyandong, lifu, wenshilei}@baidu.com

Abstract
The problem of video classiﬁcation is inherently sequential
and multimodal, and deep neural models hence need to capture and aggregate the most pertinent signals for a given input video. We propose Keyless Attention as an elegant and
efﬁcient means to more effectively account for the sequential
nature of the data. Moreover, comparing a variety of multimodal fusion methods, we ﬁnd that Multimodal Keyless
Attention Fusion is the most successful at discerning interactions between modalities. We experiment on four highly
heterogeneous datasets, UCF101, ActivityNet, Kinetics, and
YouTube-8M to validate our conclusion, and show that our
approach achieves highly competitive results. Especially on
large-scale data, our method has great advantages in efﬁciency and performance. Most remarkably, our best single
model can achieve 77.0% in terms of the top-1 accuracy and
93.2% in terms of the top-5 accuracy on the Kinetics validation set, and achieve 82.2% in terms of GAP@20 on the
ofﬁcial YouTube-8M test set.

0.79

0.68

0.54
0.15

0.18 0.16

0.04 0.06 0.04

0.90
0.58

0.01 0.01

0.15

0.04

RGB

0.44
0.12

Flow

0.10

Audio

Introduction
Figure 1: Examples of attention weights and corresponding
temporal segments, where different modalities may focus on
different time periods.

Video understanding is one of the most natural fundamental human abilities. From an early age, infants begin to recognize and understand events based on static imagery, motion, as well as sound. Although video classiﬁcation is a very
active research area in computer vision as well as machine
learning, the current state-of-the-art remains subpar in comparison with human performance.
Unlike image classiﬁcation, which takes still pictures as
input, video classiﬁcation is inherently multimodal, and thus
image, motion, as well as sound cues may be necessary to
make a comprehensive judgment. For instance, two musical instruments may be difﬁcult to distinguish based on their
mere appearance in a video, but might produce rather distinct sounds. In this case, acoustic features can greatly improve the accuracy of a video classiﬁcation model.
As in other areas of computer vision, approaches based on
deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved
state-of-the-art results. However, the improvements brought
by CNNs, given their focus on local patterns, have not been
as pronounced as for images. Due to the temporal sequential

nature of videos, which can be very long, recurrent networks
(RNNs) may be invoked to better capture longer-range temporal patterns and relationships. However, existing end-toend approaches are restricted to small-scale datasets. It remains very difﬁcult to combine CNN and RNN modeling
for joint end-to-end training directly on large-scale datasets
such as Kinetics and YouTube-8M.
A simpler approach to address this problem is to use a
pre-trained model, or to train single-modality CNN models separately. Multimodal features can then more easily be
extracted from a new video using the trained models. This
has several crucial advantages: ﬁrst, this facilitates transfer learning, such as from image classiﬁcation and audio
classiﬁcation to video classiﬁcation, or from one dataset
to another. Additionally, the extracted features are signiﬁcantly smaller in size than the raw RGB frame and audio
data. Finally, large-scale datasets, such as YouTube-8M, often already provide pre-extracted features in advance, which

∗

Corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7202

