The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Towards Generalization in
QBF Solving via Machine Learning
Mikoláš Janota
INESC-ID / Instituto Superior Técnico,
Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal
mikolas.janota@gmail.com

It is useful to see QBFs as two-player games, where the
existential player tries to make the formula true and the universal false. A winning strategy for the existential player
shows that it is true. The formula above is a good example
of a small winning strategy—the strategy for yi is the function syi (x1 , . . . , xn )  xi . The million dollar question here
is, where do we get the strategies? This paper builds on the
following idea: Observe a set of assignments and learn from
them strategies using machine learning. In another words,
rather than looking at individual assignments, collect a set
of them and generalize them into a strategy.
Learning a strategy is not enough—it must also be incorporated into a solving algorithm. A straightforward approach would be to test for the learned strategy whether it
is a winning one (that is possible with a SAT call (Kleine
Büning, Subramani, and Zhao 2007)). However, this would
put a lot of strain on the learning since we would have to
be quite lucky to learn the right strategy and eventually we
would have to deal with large training sets.
The algorithm presented in this paper takes inspiration in
the existing algorithm RAReQS, which gradually expands
the given formula by plugging in the encountered assignments (Janota et al. 2016). Instead of plugging in assignments, we will be plugging in the learned strategies. This
forms the second main idea of the paper: Expand the formula using strategies learned from collected samples and
then start collecting a new set of samples.

Abstract
There are well known cases of Quantiﬁed Boolean Formulas
(QBFs) that have short winning strategies (Skolem/Herbrand
functions) but that are hard to solve by nowadays solvers.
This paper argues that a solver beneﬁts from generalizing a
set of individual wins into a strategy. This idea is realized on
top of the competitive RAReQS algorithm by utilizing machine learning, which enables learning shorter strategies. The
implemented prototype QFUN has won the ﬁrst place in the
non-CNF track of the most recent QBF competition.

1

Introduction

Against all odds posed by computational complexity, logicbased problem solving had a remarkable success at research but also at industrial level. One of the impressive
success stories is the Boolean satisﬁability problem (SAT).
Quantiﬁed Boolean formulas (QBF) go one step further
and extend SAT with quantiﬁcation. This enables targeting a larger class of problems (Benedetti and Mangassarian 2008; Rintanen 2007; Schaefer and Umans 2002;
Giunchiglia, Marin, and Narizzano 2009). However, success
of QBF solvers comparable to SAT still seems quite far.
Nevertheless, we have recently seen a signiﬁcant progress
in the area almost every year, e.g. (Zhang and Malik 2002;
Biere 2004; Benedetti 2005; Tu, Hsu, and Jiang 2015; Goultiaeva and Bacchus 2010; Goultiaeva, Seidl, and Biere 2013;
Janota and Marques-Silva 2015; Rabe and Tentrup 2015;
Janota et al. 2012; Lonsing, Egly, and Seidl 2016; Tentrup
2016; Rabe and Seshia 2016). This paper aims to make a
case for the use of machine learning during QBF solving.
It has been observed that search is ofteninsufﬁcient. A
well-known example is the formula ∀X∃Y. xi ↔ yi with
X = {x1 , . . . , xn } and Y = {y1 , . . . , yn } (Letz 2002). Traditional search will easily ﬁnd an assignment (valuation) to
X and Y satisfying the matrix (the propositional part). However, to prove that there is an assignment for Y given any assignment to X is difﬁcult. Traditional search, even with various extensions, will try exponentially many assignments. A
human can easily see why the formula is true. Indeed, given
an arbitrary assignment to X, setting each yi to xi gives a
witness for the validity of the formula.

2

Preliminaries

A literal is a Boolean variable or its negation; complementary literal is denoted as ¯l, i.e. x̄ = ¬x, ¬x = x. For a
literal l = x or l = ¬x, we write var(l) for x. Analogously,
vars(φ) is the set of all variables in formula φ. An assignment is a mapping from variables to Boolean constants 0, 1.
For a formula φ and an assignment τ , we write φ[τ ] for the
application of the assignments to φ.

2.1

Quantiﬁed Boolean Formulas

Quantiﬁed Boolean Formulas (QBFs) (Kleine Büning and
Bubeck 2009) extend propositional logic by enabling quantiﬁcation over Boolean variables. Any propositional formula
φ is also a QBF with all variables free. If Φ is a QBF with
a free variable x, the formulas ∃x. Φ and ∀x. Φ are QBFs

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6607

