The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Agent Assist: Automating Enterprise IT Support Help Desks
Senthil Mani,1 Neelamadhav Gantayat,1 Rahul Aralikatte,1 Monika Gupta1
{sentmani, neelamadhav, rahul.a.r, monikgup}@in.ibm.com

Sampath Dechu,1 Anush Sankaran,1 Shreya Khare1
{sampath.dechu, anussank, shkahre4}@in.ibm.com

Barry Mitchell,2 Hemamalini Subramanian,2 Hema Venkatarangan2
bcm@us.ibm.com, {hesubram, hema.sudarshan}@in.ibm.com
1
2
IBM Reseach AI
IBM Global Business Services

Abstract
+XPDQH[SHUW

In this paper, we present Agent Assist, a virtual assistant
which helps IT support staff to resolve tickets faster. It is
essentially a conversation system which provides procedural and often complex answers to queries. This system can
ingest knowledge from various sources like application documentation, ticket management systems and knowledge transfer video recordings. It uses an ensemble of techniques like
question classiﬁcation, knowledge graph based disambiguation, information retrieval, etc., to provide quick and relevant
solutions to problems from various technical domains and is
currently being used in more than 650 projects within IBM.

1

.QRZOHGJHPRGXOH
/27-

,QJHVWVNQRZOHGJHIURP
PXOWLPRGDOGDWD
4XHVWLRQ
FODVVLILHUV

(QGXVHU

,QWHUDFWLRQPRGXOH

2UFKHVWUDWLRQ

7DNHVWH[WXDOTXHU\
LQSXWRUDQLPDJH
VFUHHQVKRW

5HFHLYHVLQIRUPDWLRQ
IURPWKHEUDLQDQG
GHFLGHVWKHQH[WVWHS

'LVDPELJXDWLRQ
HQJLQH

6HDUFK

&RUH%UDLQ

Figure 1: The architecture of Agent Assist explaining the
key modules involved in building the system.

Introduction

and a human expert in the loop as a last resort to ensure a
relevant answer is given to the end-user.
This system is one instantiation of the Cognitive Automation platform which encompasses the previously mentioned
components and others. The main aim of this system is to
automate the tasks of human help desk agents and fallback
on them only when absolutely necessary.

Answering complex questions has been one of the long
standing challenges of artiﬁcial intelligence (Clark et al.
2016). It is, in general, considered hard for even human experts as it warrants understanding large volumes of multimodal data and also resolution of the input query context.
Automating such a complex question answering system has
been a grand challenge for decades (Oh et al. 2016). In this
paper we present a novel system, Agent Assist, which is a
cognitive natural language question answering engine automating enterprise IT support help desks. In the domain of
IT support, the end-user (customer) expects an answer irrespective of the method employed to fetch it. Also, the information provided by the customer about the problem may not
be complete resulting in a wrong diagnosis by the agent. The
use of an automated system enhances the efﬁciency of support agents and also substantially reduces the cost incurred
in the maintenance process. Keeping these issues in mind,
we demonstrate three key aspects of our system:
1. a real time knowledge ingestion module, that accepts
large corpora of textual documents, ticket logs, and videos
2. an interaction module, that accepts a query from the enduser as textual input or an image screenshot
3. an orchestration module, that controls the brain of the system. The brain is an esemble of QA classiﬁers, a knowledge graph based disambiguation engine, a search system

2

Technical Architecture

Agent Assist has ﬁve major components as shown in Figure 1: i) The core brain of the system learns from vast corpora of technical question-answer (QA) pairs ii) The knowledge ingestion module reads data from various sources and
converts each chunk of information into a set of QA pairs iii)
The interaction module either takes a textual query as input or a screenshot of an error and extracts relevant information from the image iv) The orchestrator controls the brain
and decides how information ﬂows within the system v) The
Learning on the Job (LOTJ) component continuously learns
from user feedback and the conversations between end-user
and human agents.

2.1

Knowledge Ingestion

Agent Assist can currently ingest knowledge from four different data sources, namely: (i) manually curated QA pairs
from human experts, (ii) history of tickets logs, (iii) FAQ,
user manuals in HTML, .docx and .pdf formats, (iv) audiovideo documents explaining technical processes and knowledge transfers in .mp4 and .avi formats.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8210

