The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

On Cryptographic Attacks Using Backdoors for SAT ∗

1

Alexander Semenov,1 Oleg Zaikin,1 Ilya Otpuschennikov,1
Stepan Kochemazov,1 Alexey Ignatiev2,1
Matrosov Institute for System Dynamics and Control Theory SB RAS, Irkutsk, Russia
2
LASIGE, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal

An important practical area that gives birth to exceptionally hard computational problems is cryptography. Moreover, a number of attempts were made to tackle various
cryptanalysis problems using constraint satisfaction algorithms, e.g. SAT (Mironov and Zhang 2006; De, Kumarasubramanian, and Venkatesan 2007; Erkök and Matthews
2009; Soos, Nohl, and Castelluccia 2009; Tomb 2015) and
CSP (Gerault, Minier, and Solnon 2017).
Most of the cryptanalysis problems can be formulated in
the following way: given a known encryption algorithm and
its known output, one needs to ﬁnd the corresponding input
of the algorithm. There are a number of cryptographic attacks aiming at solving such problems, an important class of
which comprises guess-and-determine attacks (Bard 2009).
One may immediately notice an explicit relation between
backdoor sets for SAT and guess-and-determine attacks on
cryptographic functions. Indeed, they both follow a simple
strategy: ﬁrst, “guess” values of the variables from some
(backdoor) set, and then “determine” using a relatively efﬁcient algorithm whether or not the guess was correct. Usually, guess-and-determine attacks are constructed as a result
of a thorough analysis of the features of the considered cipher and whether or not they can be exploited by the intrinsic
characteristics of the algorithm used to solve the weakened
cryptanalysis problems.
The present paper investigates application of the stateof-the-art SAT technologies to automatically constructing
guess-and-determine attacks on relevant encryption algorithms. Unfortunately, in most of the cases backdoors introduced in previous works cannot be applied efﬁciently for
this purpose. The reason is that for every output of a cryptographic function one essentially has to construct a separate
backdoor set, i.e. it cannot be applied to a family of problems. Also, in some cases restrictions on the class of underlying algorithms (e.g. Strong Backdoors (Williams, Gomes,
and Selman 2003) assume the use polynomial-time procedures) are too severe.
The paper makes the following contributions. First, the
paper proposes a new type of backdoor sets for SAT called
Inverse Backdoor Sets (IBS). It extends the previously introduced notion of Strong Backdoors (Williams, Gomes,
and Selman 2003) towards allowing one to use algorithms
for solving problems from NP as well as incomplete algorithms when solving simpliﬁed/weakened subproblems.

Abstract
Propositional satisﬁability (SAT) is at the nucleus of state-ofthe-art approaches to a variety of computationally hard problems, one of which is cryptanalysis. Moreover, a number of
practical applications of SAT can only be tackled efﬁciently
by identifying and exploiting a subset of formula’s variables
called backdoor set (or simply backdoors). This paper proposes a new class of backdoor sets for SAT used in the context of cryptographic attacks, namely guess-and-determine attacks. The idea is to identify the best set of backdoor variables
subject to a statistically estimated hardness of the guess-anddetermine attack using a SAT solver. Experimental results on
weakened variants of the renowned encryption algorithms exhibit advantage of the proposed approach compared to the
state of the art in terms of the estimated hardness of the resulting guess-and-determine attacks.

Introduction
During the last two decades, algorithms for solving the
Boolean satisﬁability problem (SAT) has become one of the
key components of the state-of-the-art approaches to computational problems from a multitude of practical domains including artiﬁcial intelligence, software and hardware veriﬁcation, computation biology, among many others. Nevertheless, there always remain exceptionally hard SAT instances
that require additional effort to be solved efﬁciently. A common way to deal with a hard CNF formula is to attempt to
determine so-called backdoors of the formula. Here, a backdoor or a backdoor set is a subset of variables of the formula
that enables decomposing the original problem into a family of “weakened” subproblems, which are relatively easy to
solve (Williams, Gomes, and Selman 2003). Typically, solving the subproblems requires a polynomial-time algorithm.
A signiﬁcant upside of backdoor sets is that they often make
it possible to estimate the time required to solve the problem.
∗

A. Semenov, O. Zaikin, I. Otpuschennikov and S. Kochemazov
are supported by Russian Science Foundation (project 16-1110046). I. Otpuschennikov is partially supported by the Council for Grants of the President of Russia (grant SP-4751.2016.5).
A. Ignatiev is supported by FCT funding of post-doctoral
grant SFRH/BPD/120315/2016 and LASIGE Research Unit, ref.
UID/CEC/00408/2013.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6641

