The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Acquiring Common Sense Spatial
Knowledge through Implicit Spatial Templates
Guillem Collell

Luc Van Gool

Marie-Francine Moens

Department of Computer Science
KU Leuven
gcollell@kuleuven.be

Computer Vision Laboratory
ETH Zurich
vangool@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Department of Computer Science
KU Leuven
sien.moens@cs.kuleuven.be

animal or robot) that navigates in a physical world. In this
paper, we are interested in acquiring spatial commonsense
knowledge from language paired with visual data.
Computational and cognitive models often handle spatial representations as spatial templates or regions of acceptability for two objects under an explicit (a.k.a. deictic) spatial preposition such as “on”, “below” or “left” (Logan and Sadler 1996). Contrary to previous work that conceives spatial templates only for explicit spatial language
(Malinowski and Fritz 2014; Moratz and Tenbrink 2006;
Logan and Sadler 1996), we extend such concept to implicit (a.k.a. intrinsic) spatial language, i.e., relationships—
generally actions—that do not explicitly deﬁne the relative
spatial conﬁguration between the two objects (e.g., “glass
on table”) but only implicitly (e.g., “woman riding horse”).
In other words, implicit spatial templates capture the common sense spatial knowledge that humans possess and is not
explicit in the language utterances.
Predicting spatial templates for implicit relationships is notably more challenging than for explicit relationships. Firstly,
whereas there are only a few tens of explicit spatial prepositions, there exist thousands of actions, entailing thus a drastic
increase in the sparsity of (object1 , relationship, object2 )
combinations. Secondly, the complexity of the task radically
increases in implicit language. More precisely, while explicit
spatial prepositions1 are highly deterministic about the spatial
arrangements (e.g., (object1 , below, object2 ) unequivocally
implies that object1 is relatively lower than object2 ), actions
generally are not. E.g., the relative spatial conﬁguration of
“man” and the object is clearly distinct in (man, pulling, kite)
than in (man, pulling, luggage) yet the action is the same.
Contrarily, other relationships such as “jumping” are highly
informative about the spatial template, i.e., in (object1 , jumping, object2 ), object2 is in a lower position than object1 .
Hence, unlike explicit relationships, predicting spatial layouts from implicit spatial language requires spatial common
sense knowledge about the objects, actions and their interaction, which suggests the need of learning to compose the
triplet (Subject, Relationship, Object) as a whole instead of
learning a template for each Relationship.

Abstract
Spatial understanding is a fundamental problem with widereaching real-world applications. The representation of spatial
knowledge is often modeled with spatial templates, i.e., regions of acceptability of two objects under an explicit spatial
relationship (e.g., “on”, “below”, etc.). In contrast with prior
work that restricts spatial templates to explicit spatial prepositions (e.g., “glass on table”), here we extend this concept to
implicit spatial language, i.e., those relationships (generally
actions) for which the spatial arrangement of the objects is
only implicitly implied (e.g., “man riding horse”). In contrast
with explicit relationships, predicting spatial arrangements
from implicit spatial language requires signiﬁcant common
sense spatial understanding. Here, we introduce the task of
predicting spatial templates for two objects under a relationship, which can be seen as a spatial question-answering task
with a (2D) continuous output (“where is the man w.r.t. a
horse when the man is walking the horse?”). We present two
simple neural-based models that leverage annotated images
and structured text to learn this task. The good performance
of these models reveals that spatial locations are to a large
extent predictable from implicit spatial language. Crucially,
the models attain similar performance in a challenging generalized setting, where the object-relation-object combinations
(e.g.,“man walking dog”) have never been seen before. Next,
we go one step further by presenting the models with unseen
objects (e.g., “dog”). In this scenario, we show that leveraging
word embeddings enables the models to output accurate spatial predictions, proving that the models acquire solid common
sense spatial knowledge allowing for such generalization.

1

Introduction

To provide machines with common sense is one of the major long term goals of artiﬁcial intelligence. Common sense
knowledge regards knowledge that humans have acquired
through a lifetime of experiences. It is crucial in language
understanding because a lot of content needed for correct
understanding is not expressed explicitly but resides in the
mind of communicator and audience. In addition, humans
rely on their common sense knowledge when performing a
variety of tasks including interpreting images, navigation and
reasoning, to name a few. Representing and understanding
spatial knowledge are in fact imperative for any agent (human,

1

Some prepositions (e.g., “on”) might be ambiguous as they can
express other circumstantial arguments such as time. Here, we refer
to spatial prepositions once they have been disambiguated as such.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6765

