The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Social Recommendation with an Essential Preference Space
Chun-Yi Liu,1,2 Chuan Zhou,1,2 Jia Wu,3 Yue Hu,1,2 Li Guo1,2
1

2

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Department of Computing, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW 2109, Australia
{liuchunyi, zhouchuan, huyue, guoli}@iie.ac.cn, jia.wu@mq.edu.au

Abstract

EUDQG««

$SSHDUDQFHWUDLW
VRFLDO
SRVLWLRQ««

5DWLQJ,WHPV

6RFLDO1HWZRUN

4XDOLW\SULFH

Social recommendation, which aims to exploit social information to improve the quality of a recommender system, has
attracted an increasing amount of attention in recent years.
A large portion of existing social recommendation models
are based on the tractable assumption that users consider the
same factors to make decisions in both recommender systems and social networks. However, this assumption is not in
concert with real-world situations, since users usually show
different preferences in different scenarios. In this paper, we
investigate how to exploit the differences between user preference in recommender systems and that in social networks,
with the aim to further improve the social recommendation.
In particular, we assume that the user preferences in different scenarios are results of different linear combinations from
a more underlying user preference space. Based on this assumption, we propose a novel social recommendation framework, called social recommendation with an essential preferences space (SREPS), which simultaneously models the
structural information in the social network, the rating and
the consumption information in the recommender system under the capture of essential preference space. Experimental
results on four real-world datasets demonstrate the superiority of the proposed SREPS model compared with seven stateof-the-art social recommendation methods.

Figure 1: An explanatory example. The purple box is the
scenarios that the user rates items. The user mainly considers quality, price and brand to make decisions. The green
box is the scenarios in social networks, and the user regards
appearance, personality traits and social position to decide
whether to trust other people. Clearly, the user considers different latent factors in these two scenarios.

in real-world situations, since users may show different preferences in different scenarios. A more intelligent way is to
involve bias vectors between the user latent vectors in historical ratings and social relationships (Hsieh et al. 2016).
Although this method incurs different preferences, the two
kinds of latent vectors still belong to the same latent space.
Naturally, users in different real-world scenarios should consider completely different latent factors, with an explanatory
example shown in Fig. 1. In summary, the user latent vectors
in recommender system and social network should belong to
different latent spaces rather than two different vectors in the
same latent space.
To address this issue, in this paper we introduce an essential preference space to describe the user multiple preferences. The user latent spaces in recommender system and
the social network are assumed as different projections from
the essential preference space. Based on this assumption, we
propose a novel framework called SREPS, where the rating information, the consumption information (i.e., whether
a user rated an item) in the recommender system and the
structure information in the social network are utilized to
build user differential latent vectors for different scenarios
from the essential preference space. Speciﬁcally, rating information is modeled by well-studied matrix factorization.
A state-of-the-art network embedding model called largescale information network embedding (LINE) (Tang et al.
2015) is adopted to exploit the sparse structural information
of the social network. Consumption information is viewed as

Introduction
Social recommendation, which aims to incorporate social relations into recommender systems, has attracted more and
more attention in recent years. Previous studies have demonstrated the potential of social relations to improve recommendation performance and alleviate sparsity and cold-start
problems in recommender systems (Guo, Zhang, and Thalmann 2012; Guo, Zhang, and Yorke-Smith 2015; Gao et al.
2017). These studies are mainly based on the assumption
that user preferences are similar to his/her neighbors.
A large proportion of previous studies (Ma et al. 2008;
Tang et al. 2013; Yang et al. 2013; Rafailidis and Crestani
2016) collectively factorize the rating matrix and the social
relationship matrix, sharing the same latent vectors to characterize the user preferences in both item rating and social
relationship. However, this method is not always reasonable
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

346

