The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Directional Label Rectiﬁcation in Adaptive Graph
1

Xiaoqian Wang,1∗ Hao Huang2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 15261
2
GE Global Research, San Ramon, CA, USA, 94583
xqwang1991@gmail.com, haohuanghw@gmail.com

Abstract
With the explosive growth of multivariate time-series data,
failure (event) analysis has gained widespread applications.
A primary goal for failure analysis is to identify the fault signature, i.e., the unique feature pattern to distinguish failure
events. However, the complex nature of multivariate timeseries data brings challenge in the detection of fault signature. Given a time series from a failure event, the fault signature and the onset of failure are not necessarily adjacent,
and the interval between the signature and failure is usually
unknown. The uncertainty of such interval causes the uncertainty in labeling timestamps, thus makes it inapplicable to
directly employ any standard supervised algorithms in signature detection. To address this problem, we present a novel
directional label rectiﬁcation model which identiﬁes the faultrelevant timestamps and features in a simultaneous approach.
Different from previous graph-based label propagation models using ﬁxed graph, we propose to learn an adaptive graph
which is optimal for the label rectiﬁcation process. We conduct extensive experiments on both synthetic and real world
datasets and illustrate the advantage of our model in both effectiveness and efﬁciency.

(a) Event 1

Introduction

(b) Event 2

Recent advances in data collection, data storage and their
wide application in industrial business have led to the explosion of time-series data. The availability of large-scale
temporal datasets facilitates the in-depth study of the dynamic change and the trend evolution in different applications, whereas the complex nature of multivariate timeseries data also brings challenges in data analysis.
Given the large volume of multivariate data from different
sensors, fault analysis system is designed to identify the fault
signatures that characterize the failure events. The fault signature is usually represented by certain feature patterns w.r.t.
sensor records. When the input is on ﬂeet level, where the
data involves both failure and healthy assets (data sources),
the identiﬁed ﬂeet-level fault signature can be naturally employed for the discrimination between failure and healthy assets, thus strongly supports the root cause analysis in early
warning and anomaly detection system.

Figure 1: Illustration of two examples in real application
with unknown interval between the signature and the ﬁnal
failure. In Fig. 1(a), the signature is characterized by the concurrent occurrence of low value of feature A and high value
of feature B, which appears 15 days before the ﬁnal failure
and lasts for only 2 days. In Fig. 1(b), the signature corresponds to a level-shift in feature C, which happens around
one month before the failure with the duration of merely 5
days. Such level-shift signature can be depicted by slidingwindow based auto-correlation, i.e., feature C-auc.

There are several challenges in ﬂeet-level fault signature
discovery for multivariate time-series data: 1) The multivariate sensor records consist of not only features relevant to the
failure, but also a lot of redundant or irrelevant features; 2) In
a time series of a failure asset, the fault signature is not necessarily adjacent to the ﬁnal failure. As consequence, even
though the onset timestamp of failure is observed, the time
when the fault signature appears is usually unknown. Fig. 1

∗

Work done in part during internship at GE Global Research.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2548

