The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Non-Exploitable Protocols
for Repeated Cake Cutting
Omer Tamuz, Shai Vardi, Juba Ziani
{tamuz,svardi,jziani}@caltech.edu
California Institute of Technology,
1200 E California Blvd, Pasadena, CA 91125

to her own). When there are two players, envy-freeness implies proportionality (see, e.g., Procaccia 2016). The following well known cut-and-choose protocol is envy-free.
Protocol 1.1. One agent cuts the cake into two pieces, X
and X. The other agent chooses one of {X, X}. The agent
that cut the cake receives the remaining piece.
We make the standard assumption of the cake cutting literature that the agents use maximin solutions: they maximize their minimum utility over all possible actions of the
others (Wald 1945; 1949; Brams, Jones, and Klamler 2006;
Sinn 2012). It follows that in Protocol 1.1 the agent that cuts
the cake (henceforth the cutter) will cut the cake into two
pieces of equal value to her, and the agent that chooses (the
chooser) will choose a piece that is worth at least as much as
its complement. This is also sometimes referred to as riskaversion.
We consider now the following scenario. On each of n
days the chooser is approached by a different cutter that has
a divisible good (or cake). The chooser has the same valuation for all cakes, but each cutter may have a different valuation. Each cutter cuts the cake, and the chooser chooses
the piece she prefers. At ﬁrst glance, it seems like executing Protocol 1.1 every day is a good idea: it is envy-free on
every day. Indeed, if the cutters cannot observe the previous
choices made by the chooser, then all of the desirable properties of Protocol 1.1 carry over to the dynamic case. But
what if the cutters can observe the previous choices of the
chooser?
Say that on the ﬁrst day the ﬁrst cutter cuts the cake down
the middle into a = (0, 1/2) and b = (1/2, 1), and that the
chooser chooses a. If the second cutter values b at strictly
more than 1/2, she can cut the cake in the same place,
knowing the chooser will choose a again. Thus the cutter
no longer cuts the cake into two pieces that are equally valuable to her, and receives a utility strictly greater than 1/2.
In other words, the cutter is able the exploit the information
she learns about the chooser. If the ﬁrst k − 1 cutters make
different cuts, the k th cutter may have quite a bit of information that she can exploit. Thus, in this dynamic setting, it is
no longer true that the cutter always cuts the cake into two
equally valuable pieces, and always gets utility 1/2.
We note that we do not constrain the chooser to always
choose the larger of the two pieces offered to her. Indeed, it
may be reasonable for the chooser to try to trick the cutter

Abstract
We introduce the notion of exploitability in cut-and-choose
protocols for repeated cake cutting. If a cut-and-choose protocol is repeated, the cutter can possibly gain information about
the chooser from her previous actions, and exploit this information for her own gain, at the expense of the chooser. We deﬁne a generalization of cut-and-choose protocols—forced-cut
protocols—in which some cuts are made exogenously while
others are made by the cutter, and show that there exist nonexploitable forced-cut protocols that use a small number of
cuts per day: When the cake has at least as many dimensions as days, we show a protocol that uses a single cut per
day. When the cake is 1-dimensional, we show an adaptive
non-exploitable protocol that uses 3 cuts per day, and a nonadaptive protocol that uses n cuts per day (where n is the
number of days). In contrast, we show that no non-adaptive
non-exploitable forced-cut protocol can use a constant number of cuts per day. Finally, we show that if the cake is at
least 2-dimensional, there is a non-adaptive non-exploitable
protocol that uses 3 cuts per day.

1

Introduction

The problem of cake cutting or fair division concerns the
splitting of a divisible good among a number of agents, without transfers. This problem has important applications in
many ﬁelds, including multiple agent systems (Chen et al.
2010; Balkanski et al. 2014), and has attracted the attention
of mathematicians (Knaster 1944; Neyman 1946; Dubins
and Spanier 1961), computer scientists (Even and Paz 1984;
Edmonds and Pruhs 2006), political scientists (Brams and
Taylor 1996) and economists (Steinhaus 1948; Varian 1974)
for many decades.
Consider a heterogeneous divisible good (i.e., a cake),
represented by the interval (0, 1). There are two strategic
agents, each with a private (additive, non-atomic) valuation
function vi . The classical goal in the cake cutting literature
is to design a protocol that divides the cake fairly between
the two agents. There are several common deﬁnitions of fairness, including proportionality (each agent’s utility from her
piece is at least half of her utility for the entire cake) and
envy-freeness (neither agent prefers the other agent’s piece
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1226

