The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

PoseHD: Boosting Human Detectors
Using Human Pose Information
Zhijian Liu,† Bowen Pan,† Yuliang Xiu,† Cewu Lu‡∗
†

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China 200240
{liuzhijian, googletornado, yuliangxiu}@sjtu.edu.cn, ‡ lu-cw@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
As most recently proposed methods for human detection have
achieved a sufﬁciently high recall rate within a reasonable
number of proposals, in this paper, we mainly focus on how to
improve the precision rate of human detectors. In order to address the two main challenges in precision improvement, i.e.,
i) hard background instances and ii) redundant partial proposals, we propose the novel PoseHD framework, a top-down
pose-based approach on the basis of an arbitrary state-of-theart human detector. In our proposed PoseHD framework, we
ﬁrst make use of human pose estimation (in a batch manner)
and present pose heatmap classiﬁcation (by a convolutional
neural network) to eliminate hard negatives by extracting the
more detailed structural information; then, we utilize posebased proposal clustering and reranking modules, ﬁltering
redundant partial proposals by comprehensively considering
both holistic and part information. The experimental results
on multiple pedestrian benchmark datasets validate that our
proposed PoseHD framework can generally improve the overall performance of recent state-of-the-art human detectors (by
2-4% in both mAP and MR metrics). Moreover, our PoseHD
framework can be easily extended to object detection with
large-scale object part annotations. Finally, in this paper, we
present extensive ablative analysis to compare our approach
with these traditional bottom-up pose-based models and highlight the importance of our framework design decisions.

(a) Positive instances

(b) Hard negative instances

(c) Redundant partial proposals (in blue box)

Figure 1: Two typical challenges of human detection: i) hard
background instances (in Figure 1b), and ii) redundant partial
proposals (in Figure 1c). In Figure 1a and Figure 1b, images
in the ﬁrst row are some example proposals, and those in the
second row are the heatmaps containing all human keypoints.
In Figure 1c, we include the human pose for each proposal.

Introduction
Human detection, a long-standing task in computer vision,
has been extensively studied due to its wide applications
such as robotics, surveillance, and semantic understanding
of video footage. There have been a number of recently proposed human detectors (Girshick et al. 2014; Girshick 2015;
Ren et al. 2015; Redmon and Farhadi 2017; Liu et al. 2016;
Zhang et al. 2016a), and most human detectors perform well
in terms of their recall rates. However, these approaches normally suffer from low precision rates.
The challenges of improving precision are two-fold. The
ﬁrst is the hard background instances (hard negatives). Some
non-human instances (such as the pillar and the helmet in
Figure 1b) are identiﬁed as human because their overall appearance is human-like (containing some head-like and torso-

like parts). It is impractical to collect all these examples as
training data. The second challenge is redundant partial proposals (as illustrated in Figure 1c). These partial proposals are
produced mainly because of the occlusion examples (where
only part of the human body is visible) in the training data.
In order to correctly detect these examples, the models are
encouraged to also generate some partial proposals in their
predictions. These proposals are too difﬁcult to be eliminated
by the non-maximum suppression (NMS).
In this paper, our core insight is to introduce pose information to human detectors in a top-down way. We review the
mechanism of how we recognize a human: apart from overall

∗

Cewu Lu is the corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7186

