The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Eliciting Positive Emotion through Affect-Sensitive
Dialogue Response Generation: A Neural Network Approach
Nurul Lubis, Sakriani Sakti, Koichiro Yoshino, Satoshi Nakamura
Graduate School of Information Science,
Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Japan
{nurul.lubis.na4, ssakti, koichiro, s-nakamura}@is.naist.jp

emotional-well being of users has been growing as well. In
particular, emotionally intelligent systems could provide assistance and prevention measures through various affective
tasks, such as caring for the elderly, low-cost ubiquitous chat
therapy, or providing emotional support in general.
Two of the most studied emotional competences for
agents are emotion recognition and emotion simulation.
Emotion recognition allows a system to discern the user’s
emotions and address them in giving a response (Han, Kim,
and Lee 2015; Tielman et al. 2014). On the other hand, emotion simulation helps convey non-verbal aspects to the user
for a more believable and human-like interaction, for example to show empathy (Higashinaka, Dohsaka, and Isozaki
2008) or personality (Egges, Kshirsagar, and MagnenatThalmann 2004). These competences address some of the
user’s emotional needs (Picard and Klein 2002). However,
they are not sufﬁcient to provide emotional support in an interaction.
Recently, there has been an increasing interest in eliciting
user’s emotional response through Human-Computer Interaction (HCI), i.e. emotion elicitation. Skowron et al. have
studied the impact of different affective personalities in a
text-based dialogue system (Skowron et al. 2013), reporting consistent impacts with the corresponding personality
in humans. On the other hand, Hasegawa et al. constructed
translation-based response generators with various emotion
targets (Hasegawa et al. 2013), allowing elicitation of a predeﬁned emotional state. Despite the afﬁrming results, these
systems require strict deﬁnition of personality or target emotion on the system side. Furthermore, they have not yet paid
attention to the emotional experience of the users.
With a more user-oriented perspective, (Lubis et al. 2017)
have recently utilized examples of human emotion appraisal
process to elicit positive emotion. This study drew on an important overlooked potential of emotion elicitation: its application to maximize user emotional experience and promote positive emotional states, similar to that of emotional
support between humans. This can be achieved by actively
eliciting a more positive valence throughout the interaction, i.e. positive emotion elicitation. However, the examplebased approach employed in this study suffers from a limited
repertoire of responses and has difﬁculties handling out-ofexample (OOE) queries. In other words, to build a dynamic
and scalable version of such systems remains a challenge.

Abstract
An emotionally-competent computer agent could be a valuable assistive technology in performing various affective
tasks. For example caring for the elderly, low-cost ubiquitous
chat therapy, and providing emotional support in general, by
promoting a more positive emotional state through dialogue
system interaction. However, despite the increase of interest
in this task, existing works face a number of shortcomings:
system scalability, restrictive modeling, and weak emphasis
on maximizing user emotional experience. In this paper, we
build a fully data driven chat-oriented dialogue system that
can dynamically mimic affective human interactions by utilizing a neural network architecture. In particular, we propose
a sequence-to-sequence response generator that considers the
emotional context of the dialogue. An emotion encoder is
trained jointly with the entire network to encode and maintain
the emotional context throughout the dialogue. The encoded
emotion information is then incorporated in the response generation process. We train the network with a dialogue corpus
that contains positive-emotion eliciting responses, collected
through crowd-sourcing. Objective evaluation shows that incorporation of emotion into the training process helps reduce
the perplexity of the generated responses, even when a small
dataset is used. Subsequent subjective evaluation shows that
the proposed method produces responses that are more natural and likely to elicit a more positive emotion.

Introduction
Various parts of the globe are constantly facing societal
problems that require emotional competences to address:
an aging population, untreated affect-related problems, and
high levels of stress, to name a few. For example, stress
levels in the United States of America has steadily increased since 2007 (American Psychological Association
2015). Furthermore, a sizable portion of the people who reported stress problems also admitted to feel that they have
not done their best to manage this problem.
Social ties has been reported to powerfully predict health
and well-being in late life (Waldinger et al. 2015). Human
communications could provide an array of beneﬁts through
social sharing of emotion (Zech and Rimé 2005), preventing
longer-term, more serious emotion-related problems. As the
technology develops, the potential of agents to improve the
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5293

