The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Committee Selection with Intraclass and Interclass Synergies
Rani Izsak

Nimrod Talmon

Gerhard J. Woeginger

Weizmann Institute of Science
Rehovot, Israel
ran.izsak@weizmann.ac.il

Weizmann Institute of Science
Rehovot, Israel
nimrodtalmon77@gmail.com

RWTH Aachen
Aachen, Germany
woeginger@algo.rwth-aachen.de

selecting tables with matching chairs, where selecting one
table with 100 chairs might not increase the utility gained
from selecting the same table with, e.g., 8 chairs.
In this paper we consider partitions of the set of alternatives into certain natural classes, and model (positive and
negative) synergistic relations between alternatives of the
same class (intraclass synergies), as well as synergistic relations and diversity wishes between alternatives of different classes (interclass synergies). Our main modelling tool is
what we refer to as synergy functions (formal deﬁnitions are
given in the Preliminaries section). We concentrate on the
computational complexity of identifying a winning committee, while taking into account such intraclass and interclass
synergies. Intuitively, we would like each committee member to have reasonable support from the electorate while
maximizing (minimizing) the sum of the positive (negative)
synergies.
We show that, while the corresponding optimization problem is generally intractable (speciﬁcally, for general synergy
functions the problem is not even ﬁxed-parameter tractable
for the number of classes; roughly speaking, this means that
even with very few classes no efﬁcient algorithm for selecting an optimal committee exists), there are various cases for
which efﬁcient algorithms do exist. Speciﬁcally, we describe
efﬁcient algorithms that can identify committees satisfying
certain diversity wishes, as well as committees that optimize
certain non-trivial positive and negative synergies between
the alternatives.

Abstract
Voting is almost never done in void, as usually there are some
relations between the alternatives on which the voters vote on.
These relations shall be taken into consideration when selecting a winning committee of some given multiwinner election.
As taking into account all possible relations between the alternatives is generally computationally intractable, in this paper we consider classes of alternatives; intuitively, the number of classes is signiﬁcantly smaller than the number of alternatives, and thus there is some hope in reaching computational tractability. We model both intraclass relations and
interclass relations by functions, which we refer to as synergy
functions, and study the computational complexity of identifying the best committee, taking into account those synergy
functions. Our model accommodates both positive and negative relations between alternatives; further, our efﬁcient algorithms can also deal with a rich class of diversity wishes,
which we show how to model using synergy functions.

Introduction
The study of multiwinner elections is quite established by
now, however it is usually assumed that the alternatives (over
which the voters vote) are indistinguishable; the only differences between them are imposed by the preferences of the
voters. Many times, however, this is not the case; for example, consider selecting a committee where it is desired to
have: (1) the same proportion of men and women; and (2) as
many experienced people as possible.
In a case like that, we would like to not only select people
with great support from the electorate, but also to take diversity wishes into account. Notice how the alternatives are no
longer indistinguishable, as there are in fact certain classes
of alternatives (e.g., men and women). Indeed, in many cases
the alternatives can be naturally partitioned into classes, and
some intraclass or interclass synergies are known or are desired: as further examples, consider: (1) selecting different
cutlery items, where the utility gained from selecting one
fork and one knife might be greater than the utility gained
from selecting two forks; (2) selecting cellphones with their
power adapters, where the utility gained from selecting one
cellphone with its matching power adapter might be greater
than the utility gained from selecting two cellphones; or (3)

Related Work
The most relevant work is the recent work of Izsak 2017
about committee selection with synergies between the candidates. Through set functions, Izsak allows voters to express their preferences of being represented by several speciﬁc candidates together; e.g., the score a voter gives to two
candidates together can be higher than the sum of their individual scores (say, if they are known to work extremely
well together). As set functions might be too complex,
Izsak considers preference elicitation and algorithms based
on the supermodular degree (Feige and Izsak 2013) and
showed that existing algorithms (Feldman and Izsak 2014;
2017) can be used to obtain approximation guarantees that
depend on the supermodular degree. The supermodular degree, however, might be too large when some candidates

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1071

