The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Embedding of Hierarchically Typed Knowledge Bases
1

Richong Zhang,1 Fanshuang Kong,1 Chenyue Wang,1 Yongyi Mao2
BDBC and SKLSDE, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
2
School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Ottawa
{zhangrc,kongfs,wangcy}@act.buaa.edu.cn; ymao@uottawa.ca

The challenges in KB embedding lies in ﬁnding lowcomplexity representations of knowledge which preserve the
structure among the entities and relations and which support
inference, induction, deduction and other reasoning mechanisms. As such, any breakthrough in knowledge representation has the potential to greatly advance machine intelligence.
There have been various models presented for KB embedding, with promising performances demonstrated (Wen et al.
2016; Lin et al. 2015; Bordes et al. 2014; 2011; Socher et al.
2013; Lin, Liu, and Sun 2015; Xiao, Huang, and Zhu 2016;
He et al. 2015). All these models treat a KB simply as a collection of instances, and the type information of the entities
is disregarded.
The type labels of entities arguably contain useful information, since entities of having the same type label are expected to be similar or related in certain ways. Indeed, in
some other context, type information is proved useful (see,
e.g., (Krompa, Baier, and Tresp 2015; Chang et al. 2014;
Wang, Wang, and Guo 2015))
A recent work (Xie, Liu, and Sun 2016) suggests that
when type information is built into the model, the embedding performance can be further improved. The approach of
(Xie, Liu, and Sun 2016) to incorporating type information
is to build it into a particular embedding model, known as
TransR (Lin et al. 2015). This approach is speciﬁc to the
TransR model, and can not be extended to other embedding models. Despite its good performance, the training of
TransR and its typed version entails a time complexity that
is orders of magnitude higher than other simpler models. It
is then desirable to develop new low-complexity models that
are capable of utilizing type information. In fact, given that
various embedding models have already been proposed, it
would be nice to develop a general framework that turns any
“typeless model” (i.e. a model without considering type information) into a “typed model” (i.e. a model that exploits
type information). This is precisely the objective and contribution of this work.
Types in a KB are usually organized in a hierarchical
structure, to capture the ontology of the entities therein. Thus
a principled approach is required to exploit such hierarchical structure rather than treating types as unrelated labels.
Moreover, an entity usually has multiple types and some of
the types may be missing. This requires the framework to be

Abstract
Embedding has emerged as an important approach to prediction, inference, data mining and information retrieval based
on knowledge bases and various embedding models have
been presented. Most of these models are “typeless”, namely,
treating a knowledge base solely as a collection of instances
without considering the types of the entities therein. In this
paper, we investigate the use of entity type information for
knowledge base embedding. We present a framework that
augments a generic “typeless” embedding model to a typed
one. The framework interprets an entity type as a constraint
on the set of all entities and let these type constraints induce
isomorphically a set of subsets in the embedding space. Additional cost functions are then introduced to model the ﬁtness between these constraints and the embedding of entities
and relations. A concrete example scheme of the framework
is proposed. We demonstrate experimentally that this framework offers improved embedding performance over the typeless models and other typed models.

Introduction
Recently signiﬁcant efforts from industry and academia have
poured into constructing knowledge bases (Niu et al. 2012;
Zhang et al. 2017) to exploit the enormous amount of information available on the Internet. The emerging of KBs
such as YAGO, DBpedia, Freebase, etc is stimulating the
development of software applications that may have great
commercial and societal beneﬁts. This has fostered active
research in KBs (e.g., (Marin et al. 2014; Xiong and Callan
2015a)).
Among the diverse directions in KB research, KB embedding (Bordes et al. 2013; Wang et al. 2014; Wen et al.
2016) has received increasing attention. Brieﬂy, KB embedding aims at representing knowledge, namely, the crosslinked entities and relations, as quantities in some Euclidean
space. This approach appeals in many applications since it
turns the inherent discrete structure of the linked knowledge into a continuous topology, avoiding potential combinatorial complexity. Among other applications, the embedding approach has demonstrated great power in reconstructing missing links in KBs (Xiong and Callan 2015b;
Angeli and Manning 2013).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2046

