The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Doubly Approximate Nearest Neighbor Classiﬁcation
Weiwei Liu,† Zhuanghua Liu,‡ Ivor W.Tsang,‡ Wenjie Zhang,† Xuemin Lin†
†

School of Computer Science and Engineering, The University of New South Wales
‡
Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Technology Sydney
{liuweiwei863, liuzhuanghua1991}@gmail.com, ivor.tsang@uts.edu.au,
wenjie.zhang@unsw.edu.au, lxue@cse.unsw.edu.au

Recently, the emerging trends of ultrahigh dimensionality have been analyzed in (Tan, Wang, and Tsang 2010;
Zhai, Ong, and Tsang 2014; Tan, Tsang, and Wang 2014;
Liu and Tsang 2016; 2017; Liu, Shen, and Tsang 2017). For
example, the Web continues to generate quintillion bytes of
data daily, leading to a great challenge for KNN classiﬁcation on the WEBSPAM data set with 16,609,143 features,
collected from (Wang, Irani, and Pu 2012). The testing time
of KNN on this data set is unacceptable. Furthermore, KNN
achieves degenerated performance on the WEBSPAM data
set, because all vectors are almost equidistant to the testing
instance in 10 millions of dimensions. Therefore, KNN suffers from the curse of dimensionality (Beyer et al. 1999), and
how to precisely and efﬁciently scale the KNN classiﬁer to
very high dimensional settings poses a serious challenge.
It is desirable that an approximate nearest neighbor
(ANN) classiﬁcation algorithm, designed for very high dimensional settings, should meet two principles: 1) The number of distance computations should be reduced. 2) The cost
of each distance computation should be decreased. Unfortunately, the state-of-the-art ANN techniques fall short in
either of these two principles. Many tree-based algorithms,
such as KD-Tree and K-Means Tree (Muja and Lowe 2014),
have been developed to reduce the number of distance computations. However, such approaches still depend on the
original feature dimensions, which lead to high distance
computational cost and degenerated performance for very
high dimensions; the authors in (Weber, Schek, and Blott
1998) have already demonstrated the underperformance of
tree-based methods on high dimensions. In addition, hashing (Gionis, Indyk, and Motwani 1999; Charikar 2002;
Andoni et al. 2015; Shen et al. 2017) is one of the widelystudied dimension reduction methods for decreasing the cost
of distance computation by mapping high-dimensional data
into a short binary code and using Hamming distance as the
distance metric. Product quantization (PQ) (Jégou, Douze,
and Schmid 2011) is then proposed to obtain more precise distance than hashing and reduce the quantization error.
However, due to the non-convexity of binary embedding and
orthogonal constraints, the main drawback of most learningbased hashing and PQ is that they usually get stuck in local
minimum for their optimization problem.
This paper proposes a doubly approximation strategy
for nearest neighbor classiﬁcation, which marries the ad-

Abstract
Nonparametric classiﬁcation models, such as K-Nearest
Neighbor (KNN), have become particularly powerful tools
in machine learning and data mining, due to their simplicity
and ﬂexibility. However, the testing time of the KNN classiﬁer becomes unacceptable and the KNN’s performance deteriorates signiﬁcantly when applied to data sets with millions
of dimensions. We observe that state-of-the-art approximate
nearest neighbor (ANN) methods aim to either reduce the
number of distance comparisons based on tree structure or
decrease the cost of distance computation by dimension reduction methods. In this paper, we propose a doubly approximate nearest neighbor classiﬁcation strategy, which marries
the two branches which compress the dimensions for decreasing distance computation cost as well as reduce the number of
distance comparison instead of full scan. Under this strategy,
we build a compressed dimensional tree (CD-Tree) to avoid
unnecessary distance calculations. In each decision node, we
propose a novel feature selection paradigm by optimizing the
feature selection vector as well as the separator (indicator
variables for splitting instances) with the maximum margin.
An efﬁcient algorithm is then developed to ﬁnd the globally
optimal solution with convergence guarantee. Furthermore,
we also provide a data-dependent generalization error bound
for our model, which reveals a new insight for the design of
ANN classiﬁcation algorithms. Our empirical studies show
that our algorithm consistently obtains competitive or better
classiﬁcation results on all data sets, yet we can also achieve
three orders of magnitude faster than state-of-the-art libraries
on very high dimensions.

Introduction
Nonparametric models have played a vital role in machine
learning and data mining as a result of their simplicity and
ﬂexibility. One of the most popular nonparametric classiﬁcation methods is called K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN), and
is identiﬁed as one of the top 10 data mining algorithms.
KNN classiﬁcation has shown promising results to various
real world applications, such as face recognition, document
annotation and image processing. However, its linear dependence on the number of instances and features hinders its
use as a practical algorithm for large scale high dimensional
settings.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3683

