The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Rank Maximal Equal Contribution: a Probabilistic Social Choice Function
Haris Aziz

Pang Luo

Christine Rizkallah

Data61, CSIRO and UNSW
Sydney, Australia

Data61, CSIRO and UNSW
Sydney, Australia

University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, United States

to SD, if for all utility functions consistent with the ordinal
preferences, the former yields as much utility as the latter.
Although eﬃciency and strategyproofness with respect to
SD have been considered in a series of papers (Aziz, 2013;
Aziz and Stursberg, 2014; Aziz, Brandt, and Brill, 2013b;
Aziz, Brandl, and Brandt, 2014; Bogomolnaia, Moulin, and
Stong, 2005; Cho, 2012; Gibbard, 1977; Procaccia, 2010),
three notions of participation with respect to SD were formalized only recently by Brandl, Brandt, and Hofbauer
(2015a). The three notions include very strong (participating is strictly beneﬁcial), strong (participating is at least as
helpful as not participating) and standard (not participating
is not more beneﬁcial). In contrast to deterministic social
choice in which the number of possible outcomes are at most
the number of alternatives, probabilistic social choice admits
inﬁnitely many outcomes which makes participation even
more meaningful: agents may be able to perturb the outcome
of the lottery slightly in their favour by participating in the
voting process. In spirit of the radio channel example, voters
should ideally be able to increase the fractional time of their
favorite music genres by participating in the vote to decide
the durations.
One of the central results presented by Brandl, Brandt,
and Hofbauer (2015a) was that there exists a PSCF (RSD—
Random Serial Dictatorship) that satisﬁes very strong SDparticipation and ex post eﬃciency (Theorem 4, (Brandl,
Brandt, and Hofbauer, 2015a)). In this paper, we propose
a polynomial-time rule that satisﬁes the strongest notion of
participation and is also ex post eﬃcient. We show that it
also satisﬁes several other desirable properties.

Abstract
When aggregating preferences of agents via voting, two desirable goals are to incentivize agents to participate in the voting
process and then identify outcomes that are Pareto eﬃcient.
We consider participation as formalized by Brandl, Brandt,
and Hofbauer (2015) based on the stochastic dominance (SD)
relation. We formulate a new rule called RMEC (Rank Maximal Equal Contribution) that is polynomial-time computable,
ex post eﬃcient and satisﬁes the strongest notion of participation. It also satisﬁes many other desirable fairness properties.
The rule suggests a general approach to achieving very strong
participation, ex post eﬃciency and fairness.

Introduction
Making collective decisions is a fundamental issue in multiagent systems. Two fundamental goals in collective decision
making are (1) agents should be incentivized to participate
and (2) the outcome should be such that there exists no other
outcome that each agent prefers. We consider these goals
of participation (Fishburn and Brams, 1983; Moulin, 1988)
and eﬃciency (Moulin, 2003) in the context of probabilistic
social choice.
In probabilistic social choice, we study probabilistic social choice functions (PSCFs) which take as input agents’
preferences over alternatives and return a lottery (probability
distribution) over the alternatives.1 The lottery can also represent time-sharing arrangements or relative importance of
alternatives (Aziz, 2013; Bogomolnaia, Moulin, and Stong,
2005). For example, agents may vote on the proportion of
time diﬀerent genres of songs are played on a radio channel.
This type of preference aggregation is not captured by traditional deterministic voting in which the output is a single
discrete alternative which may not be suitable to cater for
diﬀerent tastes.
When deﬁning notions such as participation, eﬃciency,
and strategyproofness, one needs to reason about preferences over probability distributions (lotteries). In order to
deﬁne these properties, we consider stochastic dominance
(SD). A lottery is preferred over another lottery with respect

Contributions Our central contribution is a new probabilistic voting rule called Rank Maximal Equal Contribution
Rule (RMEC). RMEC satisﬁes very strong SD-participation
and ex post eﬃciency. Moreover RMEC is polynomial-time
computable and also satisﬁes other important axioms such
as anonymity, neutrality, fair share, and proportional share.
Fair share property requires that each agent gets at least
1/n of the maximum possible utility. Proportional share is
a stronger version of fair share. Whereas RMEC is ex post
eﬃcient, it is not SD-eﬃcient.
RMEC has two key advantages over RSD the known
rule that satisﬁes very strong SD participation. Firstly,

Copyright c
 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
PSCFs are also referred to as social decision schemes in the
literature.

910

