The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Generating Music Medleys via
Playing Music Puzzle Games
Yu-Siang Huang,† Szu-Yu Chou,†‡ Yi-Hsuan Yang†
†

‡

Research Center for IT innovation, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
Graduate Institute of Networking and Multimedia, National Taiwan University, Taiwan

Abstract
Generating music medleys is about ﬁnding an optimal permutation of a given set of music clips. Toward this goal, we
propose a self-supervised learning task, called the music puzzle game, to train neural network models to learn the sequential patterns in music. In essence, such a game requires machines to correctly sort a few multisecond music fragments.
In the training stage, we learn the model by sampling multiple non-overlapping fragment pairs from the same songs
and seeking to predict whether a given pair is consecutive
and is in the correct chronological order. For testing, we design a number of puzzle games with different difﬁculty levels, the most difﬁcult one being music medley, which requiring sorting fragments from different songs. On the basis of
state-of-the-art Siamese convolutional network, we propose
an improved architecture that learns to embed frame-level
similarity scores computed from the input fragment pairs to
a common space, where fragment pairs in the correct order
can be more easily identiﬁed. Our result shows that the resulting model, dubbed as the similarity embedding network
(SEN), performs better than competing models across different games, including music jigsaw puzzle, music sequencing, and music medley. Example results can be found at our
project website, https://remyhuang.github.io/DJnet.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: Similarity matrix between: (a) two identical music
fragments, (b) fragments from a song and its cover version
(i.e. the same song but different singer), (c) fragments from
two different songs of the same singer. The goal of the proposed network is to learn patterns from such matrices.

audio, which has been less attempted. In particular, we focus on learning from music sequences. Music is known for
its multilevel, hierarchical organization, with higher-level
building blocks made up of smaller recurrent patterns (Widmer 2016; Hudson 2011). While listening to music, human
beings can discern those patterns, make predictions on what
will come next, and hope to meet their expectations. Asking machines to do the same is interesting on its own, and it
poses interesting challenges that do not present, or have not
been considered, in the visual domain.
First, the input instances to existing models are usually
video frames (which are images) sampled from each video
sequence. Each frame can be viewed as a snapshot of a temporal moment, and the task is to correctly order the frames
per video. In contrast, meaningful basic unit to be ordered in
music has to be an audio sequence itself. Therefore, the input instances in our case are multisecond, non-overlapping
music fragments, which have a temporal dimension.
Second, existing works in the visual domain considered at
most four frames per video (Lee et al. 2017), mainly due to
the concern that the possible permutations increase exponentially along with the number of sampled frames. However, as
a song is typically a few minutes long, we consider up to ten
(multisecond) music fragments per song.
Lastly, while it makes less sense to order video frames
sampled from different video sequences, for music it is interesting and practically useful if we can ﬁnd an ordering
of a bag of music fragments sampled from different songs.

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed a growing interest in unsupervised methods for sequential pattern learning, notably in the
computer vision domain. This can be approached by the socalled self-supervised learning, which exploits the inherent
property of data for setting the learning target. For example,
(Misra et al. 2016), (Fernando et al. 2016) and (Lee et al.
2017) leveraged the temporal coherence of video frames as a
supervisory signal and formulated representation learning as
either an order veriﬁcation or a sequence sorting task. (Lotter, Kreiman, and Cox 2017), on the other hand, explored
prediction of future frames in a video sequence as the supervisory signal for learning the structure of the visual world.
These prior arts demonstrate that learning discriminative visual features from massive unlabeled videos is possible.
From a technical standpoint, this paper studies how such
a self-supervised learning methodology can be extended to
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2281

