The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Deep TAMER: Interactive Agent Shaping in High-Dimensional State Spaces
Garrett Warnell,1 Nicholas Waytowich,1,2 Vernon Lawhern,1 Peter Stone3
1

U.S. Army Research Laboratory, 2 Columbia University, New York, 3 The University of Texas at Austin
{garrett.a.warnell.civ,nicholas.r.waytowich.civ}@mail.mil,
vernon.j.lawhern.civ@mail.mil, pstone@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
While recent advances in deep reinforcement learning have
allowed autonomous learning agents to succeed at a variety of
complex tasks, existing algorithms generally require a lot of
training data. One way to increase the speed at which agents
are able to learn to perform tasks is by leveraging the input
of human trainers. Although such input can take many forms,
real-time, scalar-valued feedback is especially useful in situations where it proves difﬁcult or impossible for humans
to provide expert demonstrations. Previous approaches have
shown the usefulness of human input provided in this fashion
(e.g., the TAMER framework), but they have thus far not considered high-dimensional state spaces or employed the use of
deep learning. In this paper, we do both: we propose Deep
TAMER, an extension of the TAMER framework that leverages the representational power of deep neural networks in
order to learn complex tasks in just a short amount of time
with a human trainer. We demonstrate Deep TAMER’s success by using it and just 15 minutes of human-provided feedback to train an agent that performs better than humans on the
Atari game of B OWLING - a task that has proven difﬁcult for
even state-of-the-art reinforcement learning methods.

Figure 1: The Deep TAMER framework proposed in this paper. A human observes an autonomous agent trying to perform a task in a high-dimensional environment and provides
scalar-valued feedback as a means by which to shape agent
behavior. Through the interaction with the human, the agent
learns the parameters of a deep neural network, Ĥ, that is
used to predict the human’s feedback. This prediction then
drives the agent’s behavior policy. In this paper, we specifically consider the Atari game of B OWLING, which uses a
pixel-level state space.

prohibitively difﬁcult. Instead, good policies are often found
automatically through machine learning methods such as reinforcement learning (Sutton and Barto 1998). These techniques can compute optimal policies without explicit human
direction using only data available to the agent as it interacts
with its environment.
While most state-of-the-art reinforcement learning approaches to ﬁnding optimal decision-making policies enjoy
reasonable success, they also usually require a large amount
of time and/or data. This requirement is primarily due to
the fact that interesting tasks often exhibit high-dimensional
state spaces such as those that arise when the agent’s state information includes raw image data. In the absence of any a
priori information, performing reinforcement learning over
these state spaces requires that a large number of parameters
be estimated from scratch, and, as a result, even state-of-theart techniques typically require extremely large amounts of
training data, which often translates to large amounts of time
before agents are able to learn good policies. For example,
recent methods in deep reinforcement learning must acquire
tens of millions of video frames worth of experience in a
simulator before they can learn good strategies for playing
Atari games (e.g., (Mnih et al. 2015)).

Introduction
Many tasks that we would like autonomous agents to be able
to accomplish can be thought of as the agent making a series of decisions over time. For example, if an autonomous
robot is tasked to navigate to a speciﬁc goal location in a
physical space, it does so by making a series of decisions
regarding which particular movement actions it should execute at every instant. Solutions to these types of sequential
decision making problems can be speciﬁed by policies, i.e.,
mappings from the agent’s state (e.g., its physical location
within the environment) to actions that the agent might take
(e.g., to move in a certain direction). Armed with a particular policy, an agent may decide what actions to take by ﬁrst
estimating its state and then acting according to the output
of that policy.
In some very simple cases, human experts are able to
completely specify in advance (i.e., “hand code”) policies
that allow agents to accomplish certain tasks. For many complex tasks, however, specifying policies in such a manner is
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1545

