The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Content and Context: Two-Pronged Bootstrapped
Learning for Regex-Formatted Entity Extraction
Stanley Simoes

Deepak P

Munu Sairamesh

Indian Institute of Technology Madras
stanley@cse.iitm.ac.in

Queen’s University Belfast
deepaksp@acm.org

Indian Institute of Technology Madras
musram@gmail.com

Deepak Khemani

Sameep Mehta

Indian Institute of Technology Madras
khemani@iitm.ac.in

IBM Research - India
sameepmehta@in.ibm.com

Abstract

1-\d{3}-\d{3}-\d{4} for extracting phone numbers in the
US. However, this regex misses out on phone number instances
such as 1-800-FOR-SALE and 1-800-COMPANY which are phone
number representations of the kind regularly used by marketing
agencies (Murthy, P., and Deshpande 2012). Brauer et al. (2011)
cite a scenario involving invoice numbers from a particular domain,
where the human would think of instances such as 2010.08338
and 2000.348 as examples, to author the regex 20\d{2}\.\d+.
But this regex does not extract other valid invoice numbers such
as 2008-035465 and 11-093, as pointed out therein. Additionally,
they observe that entity types that are relevant to IE within industry
settings often follow a strict underlying syntactical pattern.
Further, regexes also need to be reﬁned continuously to cover
new variants of entities that did not previously exist. For example,
until a few years ago, the regex 9\d{9} was appropriate to extract
mobile numbers in India. Today, these mobile numbers also start
with 7 or 8, necessitating the generalization of the ﬁrst digit. Microprocessor product identiﬁers form another such example. Until the
end of the last decade, the regex i\d-\d{3} would identify every Intel Core i5 and i7 microprocessor. Since then, newer models
such as i5-3340S1 and i7-4770TE2 have been released, necessitating regex reﬁnement through generalization to cover them. In such
cases, it would prove beneﬁcial to have a system that assists the
human by automatically learning and suggesting (i) instances that
may have been overlooked, or better yet, (ii) meaningful regexes
themselves. The human can then author regexes that better cover
the entity using her domain knowledge in conjunction with the
learned instances or reﬁned regexes.
One direction towards ﬁnding high precision and high recall
regexes would be to infer such regexes from labeled data (Brauer
et al. 2011; Bartoli et al. 2016). Alternatively, a seed regex can be
progressively specialized (Li et al. 2008) or generalized (Murthy,
P., and Deshpande 2012), optionally soliciting user feedback in the
process. Among such reﬁnements, generalization is harder since it
requires taking a call on new/unseen matches. Thus, it has attracted
research attention, mainly employing active learning (Murthy, P.,
and Deshpande 2012; Bartoli et al. 2017).To the best of our knowledge, our work is the ﬁrst approach that does not require explicit
instance labeling for the regex generalization problem.
Our Contribution: This paper presents a two-stage approach for
enhancing the recall of regex-based entity extraction systems. In
the ﬁrst stage, we take a high precision seed regex as input, and

Regular expressions are an important building block of rulebased information extraction systems. Regexes can encode
rules to recognize instances of simple entities which can then
feed into the identiﬁcation of more complex cross-entity relationships. Manually crafting a regex that recognizes all possible instances of an entity is difﬁcult since an entity can
manifest in a variety of different forms. Thus, the problem
of automatically generalizing manually crafted seed regexes
to improve the recall of IE systems has attracted research attention. In this paper, we propose a bootstrapped approach to
improve the recall for extraction of regex-formatted entities,
with the only source of supervision being the seed regex. Our
approach starts from a manually authored high precision seed
regex for the entity of interest, and uses the matches of the
seed regex and the context around these matches to identify
more instances of the entity. These are then used to identify
a set of diverse, high recall regexes that are representative of
this entity. Through an empirical evaluation over multiple real
world document corpora, we illustrate the effectiveness of our
approach.

Introduction
Notwithstanding recent advancements in learning-based IE
systems, rule-based IE systems remain more popular in the
industry simply because rules are easier to understand and
maintain (Chiticariu, Li, and Reiss 2013). A core task in IE
systems is entity extraction, which involves identifying instances of entities in unstructured and semi-structured text.
In rule-based IE systems, regular expressions (regexes) provide an elegant means of characterizing entities since most
entities have an underlying pattern. Phone numbers, email
addresses, and social security numbers are some examples.
A good regex for a chosen entity would accurately match
most, if not all, of its instances, but manually designing such
a regex is often laborious. A human expert tasked with coining a good regex for an entity would typically think of a
few of its instances and try to generalize them to a regex.
While such a regex would likely match a large chunk of
instances, it might miss out on some rather intuitive variants. For example, a human expert would typically author

1

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List of Intel Core i5
microprocessors
2
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List of Intel Core i7
microprocessors

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5924

