The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Framework for Multistream Regression
with Direct Density Ratio Estimation
Ahsanul Haque, Hemeng Tao, Swarup Chandra, Jie Liu, Latifur Khan
Department of Computer Science
University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson TX
{ahsanul.haque, hxt160430, swarup.chandra, jxl164830, lkhan}@utdallas.edu

avoiding performance degradation, by appropriately adjusting its target function. Moreover, traditional supervised predictors may require storage of all historical data. This is not
practical in a data stream due to limited memory.
Studies in data stream classiﬁcation (Ikonomovska et al.
2009; Masud et al. 2011) have proposed multiple techniques
that adapt a predictor’s target function to changes in data
distribution over time. This change is referred to as Concept Drift (Gama et al. 2014). In general, a sliding windowbased technique is used to detect a change over time. Initially, a predictor is trained in a supervised manner, using sequential data instances observed within a window of a ﬁnite
size. This predictor is used to evaluate the response value
of each new data instance occurring in subsequent windows
along the stream. When a change in data distribution is detected, the target function is re-evaluated using a training set
formed by data instances in the current window. This technique can be applied to the regression problem as well. However, such a technique assumes availability of true target values for all recent data instances. Collecting true values often
require human effort, typically resulting in a costly and time
consuming process. Therefore, these techniques may not be
suitable in real-world scenarios under scarcity of true target
values, where data instances occur at a high velocity.
Instead of obtaining the true target value for each data
instance soon after prediction, active learning based mechanisms selectively sample from recent data instances for truth
extraction (Haque, Khan, and Baron 2016; Fan et al. 2004).
However, a sampling technique may induce bias in sampled data distribution. Such bias can be introduced due to
reasons such as availability and cost of obtaining truth values. For example, consider the scenario of predicting future
household electricity consumption for optimal distribution.
Data from each household only include the current power
consumption, and not a future estimate. Since it is an expensive process to require each household to continuously
provide an estimate of future power consumption, there is a
tendency to choose certain households to collect such estimates for monitoring predictor performance and adapting to
distribution changes when necessary. However, such a set of
households may result in under-representative samples for
a good long-term prediction performance in the whole market. Therefore, there is a need to correct bias before using
the data for predictor adaptation.

Abstract
Regression over a stream of data is challenging due to unbounded data size and non-stationary distribution over time.
Typically, a traditional supervised regression model over a
data stream is trained on data instances occurring within a
short time period by assuming a stationary distribution. This
model is later used to predict value of response-variable in
future instances. Over time, the model may degrade in performance due to changes in data distribution among incoming data instances. Updating the model for change adaptation requires true value for every recent data instances, which
is scarce in practice. To overcome this issue, recent studies
have employed techniques that sample fewer instances to be
used for model re-training. Yet, this may introduce sampling
bias that adversely affects the model performance. In this paper, we study the regression problem over data streams in a
novel setting. We consider two independent, yet related, nonstationary data streams, which are referred to as the source
and the target stream. The target stream continuously generates data instances whose value of response variable is
unknown. The source stream, however, continuously generates data instances along with corresponding value for the
response-variable, and has a biased data distribution with respect to the target stream. We refer to the problem of using
a model trained on the biased source stream to predict the
response-variable’s value in data instances occurring on the
target stream as Multistream Regression. In this paper, we describe a framework for multistream regression that simultaneously overcomes distribution bias and detects change in data
distribution represented by the two streams over time using a
Gaussian kernel model. We analyze the theoretical properties
of the proposed approach and empirically evaluate it on both
real-world and synthetic data sets. Importantly, our results indicate superior performance by the framework compared to
other baseline regression methods.

Introduction
Distribution of data generated continuously from a nonstationary domain may change over time due to various internal or external factors. Examples of such nonstationary domains include ﬁnancial transactions, telephone
calls, readings from sensor networks, etc. A predictor over
streams of data should adapt to changes in distribution, for
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3149

