The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

On the Approximation of Nash
Equilibria in Sparse Win-Lose Games
Zhengyang Liu

Ying Sheng

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
lzy5118@sjtu.edu.cn

Columbia University
ys2982@columbia.edu

on the parity argument such as Brouwer’s ﬁxed point theorem. Using the DGP framework, (Chen and Deng 2006) later
showed that ﬁnding a Nash equilibrium remains PPAD-hard
even in two-player games (or bimatrix games).
With signiﬁcant progress on the complexity of Nash equilibria, people continued to distill the hard core of the hardness, and more complexity results were proved for twoplayer games with speciﬁc restrictions — What if most of
the entries in payoff matrices are zeros? What if every entry
is as simple as win-lose (0 or 1)? What if the precision is
lower? (Chen, Teng, and Valiant 2007) proved that ﬁnding
a Nash equilibrium in a win-lose game, where each entry of
the two payoff matrices is either 0 or 1, is still PPAD-hard.
Another result by (Chen, Deng, and Teng 2006) showed that
in sparse games, in which each row and column contain at
most 10 non-zero entries, approximating a Nash equilibrium
is also PPAD-hard. Recently (Rubinstein 2016) proved that
approximating a Nash equilibrium of two-player games with
1−o(1)
n
time, assuming
even constant precision needs nlog
some convinced hypothesis.
Since the ﬁrst two results are both PPAD-hard, which is
believed to be more difﬁcult than the third one. However, we
still cannot understand what the complexity of a sparse game
or a win-lose game is. For sparse games, entries in the payoff matrices could be very complicated; for win-lose games,
there are so many possible ways to construct one row in the
matrices. One natural question arises from (Chen, Teng, and
Valiant 2007) and (Chen, Deng, and Teng 2006): what is the
complexity of ﬁnding a Nash equilibrium in a two-player
game that is both sparse and simple? In this paper, we study
this simple class of two-player games, showing that these
two kinds of game have their own difﬁculties separatively.

Abstract
We show that the problem of ﬁnding an approximate Nash
equilibrium with a polynomial precision is PPAD-hard even
for two-player sparse win-lose games (i.e., games with
{0, 1}-entries such that each row and column of the two n×n
payoff matrices have at most O(log n) many ones). The proof
is mainly based on a new class of prototype games called
Chasing Games, which we think is of independent interest
in understanding the complexity of Nash equilibrium.

Introduction
Game theory is a ﬁeld that studies the conﬂict and cooperation between rational agents. For non-cooperative games, the
concept of Nash equilibria (Nash 1951; 1950) captures the
stable state of complex interactions between agents and has
been used as a highly inﬂuential tool to analyze the behavior
of selﬁsh and rational players. Once each player plays according to a Nash equilibrium, one cannot change her strategy even if she knows strategies from others; in other words,
no single player can gain a strictly higher payoff by deviating from a Nash equilibrium.
Nash equilibrium has attracted great attention from different communities including researchers from economics,
biology and computer science due to its fundamental applications on various ﬁelds and its beautiful, deep mathematical structure. But given a game, how can we ﬁnd one such
equilibrium? Much effort has been devoted to the design of
efﬁcient algorithms for computing a Nash equilibrium based
on mathematical programming and other methods (Garcia,
Lemke, and Luethi 1973; Kuhn 1961; Lemke and J. T. Howson 1964; McKelvey and McLennan 1996; Shapley 1974;
Wilson 1971). However, no polynomial-time algorithm is
known after more than sixty years since Nash’s ﬁrst paper.
In the theoretical computer science community, the computational complexity of Nash equilibria has been studied
intensively during the past decade. (Daskalakis, Goldberg,
and Papadimitriou 2006) ﬁrst showed that ﬁnding a Nash
equilibrium in four-player game (4-Nash) is PPAD-hard,
where PPAD is a complexity class introduced by (Papadimitriou 1994) to characterized total search problems based

Our results
We continue to explore the hard-core of the hardness of Nash
equilibria in two-player games, by showing that the following problem is also PPAD-hard: Given a pair of n × n payoff
matrices in which every entry is either 0 or 1 and each row
and column contain at most O(log n) ones, we are asked to
ﬁnd an -approximate Nash equilibrium with a precision 
polynomially small in n, that is, correctly compute the equilibrium strategies of two players with a logarithmic number
of 0-1bits. Note that for any k-sparse two-player game, a
pair of the uniform distributions over all strategies gives us

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1154

