The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Multimodal Word
Representation via Dynamic Fusion Methods
Shaonan Wang,1,2 Jiajun Zhang,1,2 Chengqing Zong1,2,3
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Shanghai, China
{shaonan.wang,jjzhang,cqzong}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
the fact that meaning of concrete words like horse and
computer are mostly learned from perceptual experiences
of seeing, touching and listening. In contrast, more abstract
words, such as hope and lovely, are encoded mostly in
linguistic modality rather than perceptual modality, which
has been found in cognitive psychology (Wang et al. 2010;
Binder et al. 2016) and computational experiments (Hill, Reichart, and Korhonen 2014; Hill and Korhonen 2014).
All these factors motivate us to build a multimodal model
that can dynamically fuse information from linguistic and
perceptual modalities according to different types of words.
We can optimize the importance weights of different modalities for a word if the word has the gold representation. As
no gold word representation exists in reality, we resort to
word pairs which share the same meaning, so that they can
guide each other. In this paper we utilize word association
pairs1 , which are generated by subjects ﬁrstly reading a cue
word and then writing down the ﬁrst word(s) that come to
mind. Some examples are wealthy and rich, jigsaw
and puzzle, larger and bigger. We assume that these
association word pairs can lead us to learn the importance
weights for different modalities. For instance, representations of abstract words larger and bigger are composed
by linguistic and perceptual vectors, and the linguistic vectors are more important in representing abstract word meaning (i.e., the two words share more similarity in linguistic
modality). To achieve the goal of making these two association words obtain similar representations, the model will
assign more weights to their linguistic vectors.
In light of these considerations, we propose three novel
dynamic fusion methods to improve multimodal word representations. The three methods utilize a modality-speciﬁc
gate, category-speciﬁc gate and sample-speciﬁc gate respectively, to learn different weights of linguistic and perceptual
representations for each input modality, each supersense category and each word sample respectively. Furthermore, we
perform extensive analysis to shed light on the principle of
the proposed dynamic fusion methods. To summarize, our
main contributions are two-fold:

Abstract
Multimodal models have been proven to outperform textbased models on learning semantic word representations. Almost all previous multimodal models typically treat the representations from different modalities equally. However, it
is obvious that information from different modalities contributes differently to the meaning of words. This motivates
us to build a multimodal model that can dynamically fuse the
semantic representations from different modalities according
to different types of words. To that end, we propose three
novel dynamic fusion methods to assign importance weights
to each modality, in which weights are learned under the weak
supervision of word association pairs. The extensive experiments have demonstrated that the proposed methods outperform strong unimodal baselines and state-of-the-art multimodal models.

Introduction
Representing the meaning of a word is a prerequisite to solve
many natural language problems, such as calculating semantic relations between different words, ﬁnding the most relevant images of a word and so on. In recent years, computational semantic models that represent word meanings
from patterns of word co-occurrence in corpora have received a lot of research interests (Turney and Pantel 2010;
Mikolov et al. 2013; Clark 2015; Wang, Zhang, and Zong
2017a). However, compared to human semantic representation, these purely text-based models are severely impoverished for lacking perceptual information attached to the
physical world. This observation has led to the development
of multimodal word representation models that utilize both
linguistic (e.g., text) and perceptual information (e.g., images, audios). Such models can learn better semantic word
representations than text-based models, as evidenced by a
range of evaluations (Andrews, Vigliocco, and Vinson 2009;
Bruni, Tran, and Baroni 2014).
Learning good multimodal word representations relies not
only on the quality of the word representations from linguistic and perceptual inputs, but also the ability to productively combine these representations. However, the existing
multimodal models generally treat the word representations
from different modalities equally. This is inconsistent with

• We present a novel dynamic fusion method for multi1

We have also tried other resources, such as synonyms from
WordNet. However, these datasets are noisy and perform slightly
worse, thus we only report results of word associations.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5973

