The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Semi-Black Box: Rapid Development of Planning Based Solutions
Michael Katz

Dany Moshkovich

Erez Karpas

IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
michael.katz1@ibm.com

IBM Watson Health
Haifa, Israel
mdany@il.ibm.com

Technion
Haifa, Israel
karpase@technion.ac.il

depth ﬁrst search, or depth-ﬁrst iterative deepening (Korf
1985), can use these three functions to solve the planning
problem. To solve the problem more quickly, it is possible to use a heuristic evaluation function, or heuristic for
short, which estimates the distance from a given state to
the goal. Heuristic search algorithms (Hart, Nilsson, and
Raphael 1968) use such a heuristic to prune the search space.
Of course, the developer now also has to implement the H (s)
function, to allow heuristic search algorithms to be used.
The second approach is the model-based approach
(Geffner 2010), wherein one uses some symbolic language,
such as PDDL (Mcdermott et al. 1998), to describe the
planning problem. This typically involves deﬁning a set
of state variables and describing the initial state, the goal,
and action preconditions and effects in terms of these state
variables. It is then possible to automatically derive the
same three functions mentioned above, as well as a heuristic
evaluation function from the problem description (for example (Bonet and Geffner 1999)). Thus, it is possible to
use the same heuristic search algorithms to solve domainindependent planning problems.
However, a major challenge for using the model-based approach to solve planning problems of interest to real-world
users is that the average software developer has little to no
experience with modeling. This is further compounded by
the fact that some aspects of real world problems can be very
hard to model symbolically, as evidenced by approaches
such as planning with semantic attachments (Dornhege et
al. 2009; Hertle et al. 2012) and planning modulo theories
(Gregory et al. 2012), which allow the modeler to plug in
external code in a general programming language to deal
with speciﬁc aspects of the problem. Furthermore, others
have pointed out several shortcoming of PDDL in modelling
problems of practical interest (Frank, Golden, and Jonsson
2003; Boddy 2003). Additionally, McCluskey (2003) argues
that PDDL has both a theoretical and a practical purpose, but
it falls short of being perfectly suitable for both of these.
Our main motivation in this paper is the desire to make
solving deterministic planning problems accessible to software developers who are not necessarily experts in artiﬁcial
intelligence. The need to solve deterministic planning problems occurs not infrequently in real life, yet we are not aware
of any frameworks which are both accessible to non-experts,
and provide reasonable performance “out of the box”.

Abstract
Software developers nowadays not infrequently face a challenge of solving problems that essentially sum up to ﬁnding a
sequence of deterministic actions leading from a given initial
state to a goal. This is the problem of deterministic planning,
one of the most basic and well studied problems in artiﬁcial
intelligence. Two of the best known approaches to deterministic planning are the black box approach, in which a programmer implements a successor generator, and the modelbased approach, in which a user describes the problem symbolically, e.g., in PDDL. While the black box approach is
usually easier for programmers who are not experts in AI to
understand, it does not scale up without informative heuristics. We propose an approach that we baptize as semi-black
box (SBB) that combines the strength of both. SBB is implemented as a set of Java classes, which a programmer can
inherit from when implementing a successor generator. Using
the known characteristics of these classes, we then automatically derive heuristics for the problem. Our empirical evaluation shows that these heuristics allow the planner to scale up
signiﬁcantly better than the traditional black box approach.

Introduction
The ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence has spent considerable effort on the seemingly simple problem of deterministic planning. At a high level, this problem can be formulated as:
given an initial state, a desired goal, and a set of possible (deterministic) actions, ﬁnd a sequence of actions which leads
from the initial state to a state satisfying the goal. One popular approach to solving deterministic planning problems is
heuristic search. However, two very different ways of using
heuristic search algorithms to solve deterministic planning
problems have been pursued throughout the history of the
ﬁeld. The ﬁrst approach, which we will refer to as the “black
box” approach, involves implementing a piece of software
to represent the planning problem. While the details of deterministic planning problems can be quite complex, it is
enough to implement a very simple interface consisting of
three functions: GET- INIT- STATE (), which returns an object
representing the initial state, GET- SUCCESSORS (s), which
returns the successors of a given state s, and IS - GOAL ?(s),
which checks whether the given state s is a goal state. Standard forward search algorithms, such as breadth ﬁrst search,
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6211

