The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Improving the Adversarial Robustness and Interpretability
of Deep Neural Networks by Regularizing Their Input Gradients
Andrew Slavin Ros, Finale Doshi-Velez
Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
andrew ross@g.harvard.edu, ﬁnale@seas.harvard.edu

models trained on the same dataset. Particularly for images,
these adversarial examples can be constructed to fool models across a variety of scales and perspectives (Athalye and
Sutskever 2017), which poses a problem for the adoption of
deep learning models in systems like self-driving cars.
Although there has recently been a great deal of research
in adversarial defenses, many of these methods have struggled to achieve robustness to transferred adversarial examples (Tramèr et al. 2017b). Some of the most effective defenses, such as feature squeezing (Xu, Evans, and Qi 2017),
simply detect and reject adversarial examples rather than
making predictions. The most common, “brute force” solution is adversarial training, where we simply include a
mixture of normal and adversarially-generated examples in
the training set (Kurakin, Goodfellow, and Bengio 2016b).
However, Tramèr et al. (2017a) show that the robustness
adversarial training provides can be circumvented by randomizing or transferring perturbations from other models
(though ensembling helps).
In addition to concerns about robustness, domain experts
are also often concerned that DNN predictions are uninterpretable. The lack of interpretability is particularly problematic in domains where algorithmic bias is often a factor (Angwin et al. 2016) or in medical contexts where safety
risks can arise when there is mismatch between how a model
is trained and used (Caruana et al. 2015). Cases like these
have motivated research in explaining DNN predictions,
which can reveal their implicit biases (Adler et al. 2016)
or alert a domain expert that a prediction was made for the
wrong reasons. The form these explanations often take is
an interpretable local surrogate model, often a linear model,
which simulates how the network will respond to small perturbations of its inputs (Ribeiro, Singh, and Guestrin 2016).
One choice for generating these local linear models is
simply to take the model’s gradient with respect to its inputs,
which provides a local linear approximation of the model’s
behavior (Baehrens et al. 2010). However, especially for image classiﬁcation tasks, few researchers examine the raw input gradients directly because they are noisy and difﬁcult
to interpret. This issue has spurred the development of techniques like integrated gradients (Sundararajan, Taly, and Yan
2016) and SmoothGrad (Smilkov et al. 2017) that generate
smoother, more interpretable saliency maps from noisy gradients. The rationale behind these techniques is that, while

Abstract
Deep neural networks have proven remarkably effective at
solving many classiﬁcation problems, but have been criticized recently for two major weaknesses: the reasons behind their predictions are uninterpretable, and the predictions
themselves can often be fooled by small adversarial perturbations. These problems pose major obstacles for the adoption
of neural networks in domains that require security or transparency. In this work, we evaluate the effectiveness of defenses that differentiably penalize the degree to which small
changes in inputs can alter model predictions. Across multiple attacks, architectures, defenses, and datasets, we ﬁnd
that neural networks trained with this input gradient regularization exhibit robustness to transferred adversarial examples
generated to fool all of the other models. We also ﬁnd that
adversarial examples generated to fool gradient-regularized
models fool all other models equally well, and actually lead
to more “legitimate,” interpretable misclassiﬁcations as rated
by people (which we conﬁrm in a human subject experiment). Finally, we demonstrate that regularizing input gradients makes them more naturally interpretable as rationales for
model predictions. We conclude by discussing this relationship between interpretability and robustness in deep neural
networks.

Introduction
Over the past several years, progress in training deep neural
networks (DNNs) has greatly expanded the scope of what
machine learning models can accomplish. However, especially as they start to be used in settings which are securitysensitive or have legal ramiﬁcations (Kang and Kang 2017),
many in the ﬁeld have noted important problems that fall
into two major categories.
The ﬁrst is that DNNs can be easily manipulated into
making incorrect predictions on carefully doctored examples which, to humans, look indistinguishable from examples it classiﬁes correctly (Szegedy et al. 2013). Although
many techniques for generating these examples (which we
call “attacks”) require access to model parameters, Papernot et al. (2017) have shown that it is possible and even
practical to attack black-box models in the real world, in
large part because of the transferability of adversarial examples; examples generated to fool one model tend to fool all
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1660

