The Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18)

Discovering Program Topoi through Clustering
Carlo Ieva,1,2 Arnaud Gotlieb,1 Souhila Kaci,2 Nadjib Lazaar2
1

SIMULA Research Laboratory, Oslo, Norway
2
LIRMM, University of Montpellier, France
{carlo, arnaud}@simula.no, {souhila.kaci, nadjib.lazaar}@lirmm.fr

functions entry points and the sorting criterion is based on
the distance between common functions and entry points.
The whole method can be summarized according to its three
main steps:

Abstract
Understanding source code of large open-source software
projects is very challenging when there is only little documentation. New developers face the task of classifying a huge
number of ﬁles and functions without any help. This paper
documents a novel approach to this problem, called FEAT,
that automatically extracts topoi from source code by using
hierarchical agglomerative clustering. Program topoi summarize the main capabilities of a software system by presenting to developers clustered lists of functions together with
an index of their relevant words. The clustering method used
in FEAT exploits a new hybrid distance which combines
both textual and structural elements automatically extracted
from source code and comments. The experimental evaluation of FEAT shows that this approach is suitable to understand open-source software projects of size approaching
2,000 functions and 150 ﬁles, which opens the door for its
deployment in the open-source community.

1. Preprocessing. Source code, with its comments, is parsed
generating for every code unit (either functions in procedural languages or methods in object oriented ones) a corresponding textual document. Additionally, a graph representation of the caller-callee relationship (call graph) is
also created in this step.
2. Clustering. Code units are grouped together by means of
hierarchical agglomerative clustering (HAC).
3. Entry Point Selection. Within the context of every cluster,
code units are ranked and those placed in higher positions
will constitute a program topos.
The contribution of this paper is three-fold:
1. FEAT is a novel, fully automated approach for program
topoi extraction based on clustering units directly from
source code. To exploit HAC, we propose an original hybrid distance combining structural and semantic elements
of source code. HAC requires the selection of a partition
among all those produced along the clustering process,
our approach makes use of a hybrid criterion based on
graph modularity (Donetti and Muñoz 2004) and textual
coherence (Foltz, Kintsch, and Landauer 1998) to automatically select the appropriate one;

Introduction
The development of large-scale open-source projects involves many distinct developers contributing to the creation
of large code repositories. As an example, the July 2017 release of the Linux kernel (v. 4.12), amounting to almost 20
MLOC (lines of code), requested the effort of 329 developers marking a growth of 1 MLOC respect to its predecessor. This ﬁgures make clear that, whenever a new developer
wants to become a contributor, he/she has to face the problem of understanding a huge amount of code, organized as
an unclassiﬁed set of ﬁles and functions.
Organizing the code in a more abstract way, closer to humans is an attempt that received interest from the Software
Engineering community. Unfortunately, there is no recognized recipe or tool that can concretely provide any help in
dealing with large software repositories.
We propose an effective solution to this problem by automatically extracting program topoi which are ordered lists of
function names associated with an index of relevant words.
How does the sorting take place? FEAT does not consider all functions as equal: some of them are considered
like a gateway to the implementation of high-level, userobservable capabilities of a program. We call these special

2. Clusters of code units need to be analyzed to extract program topoi. We deﬁne a set of structural elements obtained from source code and use them to create an alternative representation of clusters of code units. Principal
Component Analysis (PCA), with its capability of dealing
with multi-dimensional data, provides us a way to measure the distance of code units respect to an ideal entry
point. This distance is the basis for code units’ ranking
shown to end-users.
3. We implemented FEAT on top of a general-purpose software analysis platform and performed an experimental
study over some open-source software projects. During
the evaluation we analyzed FEAT under several perspectives: the clustering step, effectiveness in topoi discovery
and, scalability of the approach.

Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7771

