The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Byte-Level Machine Reading across Morphologically Varied Languages
Tom Kenter∗

Llion Jones

Daniel Hewlett

University of Amsterdam
Amsterdam
The Netherlands

Google Research
Mountain View
United States

Google
Mountain View
United States

3

Abstract
The machine reading task, where a computer reads a document and answers questions about it, is important in artiﬁcial
intelligence research. Recently, many models have been proposed to address it. Word-level models, which have words as
units of input and output, have proven to yield state-of-theart results when evaluated on English datasets. However, in
morphologically richer languages, many more unique words
exist than in English due to highly productive preﬁx and sufﬁx mechanisms. This may set back word-level models, since
vocabulary sizes too big to allow for efﬁcient computing
may have to be employed. Multiple alternative input granularities have been proposed to avoid large input vocabularies, such as morphemes, character n-grams, and bytes. Bytes
are advantageous as they provide a universal encoding format across languages, and allow for a small vocabulary size,
which, moreover, is identical for every input language. In this
work, we investigate whether bytes are suitable as input units
across morphologically varied languages. To test this, we introduce two large-scale machine reading datasets in morphologically rich languages, Turkish and Russian. We implement
4 byte-level models, representing the major types of machine
reading models and introduce a new seq2seq variant, called
encoder-transformer-decoder. We show that, for all languages
considered, there are models reading bytes outperforming
the current state-of-the-art word-level baseline. Moreover, the
newly introduced encoder-transformer-decoder performs best
on the morphologically most involved dataset, Turkish. The
large-scale Turkish and Russian machine reading datasets are
released to public.

1

3161

14636

1067

1628

-

В прошлом году Дмитрий работал нейрорадиологом.
15916

1211

1067

3

3161

14636

Чем занимался Дмитрий в прошлом году?
-

Нейрорадиолог
Figure 1: Example from the Russian machine reading
dataset. Document: Dmitry worked as neuroradiologist last
year. Question: What was Dmitry’s occupation last year?
Answer: Neuroradiologist. Numbers are positions in a frequency ordered vocabulary of over 950K words.

components like stemmers or parsers, yield state-of-the-art
results (Cheng, Dong, and Lapata 2016; Hermann et al.
2015; Hewlett et al. 2016). An advantage of English in
this context is its relatively limited morphology that allows
word-based models to get a broad coverage of word types
actively used, while maintaining a manageable vocabulary
size. However, in morphologically richer languages, e.g.,
Turkish, Russian, Finnish and Czech, many more word types
exist, due to highly productive preﬁx and sufﬁx mechanisms,
and even very large vocabularies cannot provide extensive
coverage. To illustrate, Figure 1 shows a Russian example
in which two forms of the word neuroradiologist do not appear in a vocabulary of over 950,000 most frequent words.
In a setting like English, with less morphological transformations, a word-level model with a pointer mechanism (see,
e.g., (Wang and Jiang 2017)), that can copy strings verbatim from the input to the output, would be able to reproduce
the unknown word, but in this case doing so would lead
to the incorrect answer. Answering this query is therefore
impossible for a word-level model with a ﬁxed vocabulary,
even if it contains the 950,000 most frequent words. For a
byte-level model, on the other hand, it is possible to reproduce the relevant word from the input and to apply the right
morphological transformation, learned from similar training
examples, even if the word itself was never observed during training. As another example, in Turkish, kolay means
easy, kolaylaştırabiliriz means we can make it easier, while
kolaylaştıramıyoruz means we cannot make it easier. Similarly, zor means hard or difﬁcult, zorlaştırabiliriz means
we can make it harder, while zorlaştıramıyoruz means we
cannot make it harder. This illustrates that a lot of seman-

Introduction

Natural language understanding is one of the long-standing
goals of artiﬁcial intelligence. It encompasses tasks like textual entailment (Rocktäschel et al. 2015), information extraction (Dong et al. 2014), semantic textual similarity (Kenter, Borisov, and de Rijke 2016), question answering (Fader,
Zettlemoyer, and Etzioni 2013) and machine reading (Hermann et al. 2015). In this work we focus on the latter task
of machine reading, where a machine reads a document and
answers questions about it.
On English machine reading tasks, neural word-level
models, trained end-to-end without any additional NLP
∗

Work performed during an internship at Google Research.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5820

