The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Sensor-Based Activity Recognition via Learning from Distributions
†

Hangwei Qian,† Sinno Jialin Pan, ‡ Chunyan Miao‡
Joint NTU-UBC Research Centre of Excellence in Active Living for the Elderly, Interdisciplinary
Graduate School, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
‡
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
qian0045@e.ntu.edu.sg, {sinnopan, ascymiao}@ntu.edu.sg

step is to segment continuous streaming sensor readings automatically or manually (Yin et al. 2005; Janidarmian et al.
2017). Each segment contains sensor readings received from
a set of sensors in a speciﬁc period of various lengths, and is
supposed to correspond to one activity category. After that,
the second step is to learn a predictive model to map each
segment to its corresponding activity label. This is referred
to as a multivariate time series classiﬁcation problem. In this
work, we assume segments of the streaming sensor data is
prepared beforehand (yet the number of frames1 of each segment can be different), and focus on solving the time series
classiﬁcation problem for activity recognition. In this context, as each segment is multi-dimensional and of various
lengths, a key research issue is how to construct a feature
vector to represent each segment because conventional classiﬁcation algorithms are vector based (Lockhart and Weiss
2014), i.e., an input, either training or test instance, to a classiﬁcation algorithm needs to be a feature vector of ﬁxed dimensionality.
A simple solution to address the aforementioned research
issue is to consider each individual frame of a segment as an
instance, i.e., a vector of readings received from a ﬁxed set
of sensors at a particular time stamp, and assign each frame
a label as the activity category of the segment. In this way,
conventional classiﬁcation algorithms can be performed in
the frame-level instead of the segment-level to train a classiﬁer. For instance, suppose only one sensor is used, whose
frequency is set to be 1Hz, and a segment, whose activity
label is “walking upstairs”, lasts 5 seconds, which means
that 5 frames are recorded. Frame-level approaches assign
the activity label “walking upstairs” to each frame of the
segment, and consider each framework as an individual instance. An alterative solution is to aggregate all the frames
within a segment to generate a single feature vector. For example, an average vector of all the frames in a segment can
be used to represent the segment. Consider the “walking upstairs” example. One can use the average vector of the 5
frames to represent the whole segment. In the past, one of
the most widely used feature extraction approaches is to calculate statistical metrics, e.g., mean, variance, etc., from the

Abstract
Sensor-based activity recognition aims to predict users’ activities from multi-dimensional streams of various sensor readings received from ubiquitous sensors. To use machine learning techniques for sensor-based activity recognition, previous
approaches focused on composing a feature vector to represent sensor-reading streams received within a period of various lengths. With the constructed feature vectors, e.g., using predeﬁned orders of moments in statistics, and their corresponding labels of activities, standard classiﬁcation algorithms can be applied to train a predictive model, which will
be used to make predictions online. However, we argue that
in this way some important information, e.g., statistical information captured by higher-order moments, may be discarded
when constructing features. Therefore, in this paper, we propose a new method, denoted by SMMAR , based on learning from distributions for sensor-based activity recognition.
Speciﬁcally, we consider sensor readings received within a
period as a sample, which can be represented by a feature
vector of inﬁnite dimensions in a Reproducing Kernel Hilbert
Space (RKHS) using kernel embedding techniques. We then
train a classiﬁer in the RKHS. To scale-up the proposed
method, we further offer an accelerated version by utilizing
an explicit feature map instead of using a kernel function. We
conduct experiments on four benchmark datasets to verify the
effectiveness and scalability of our proposed method.

Introduction
Recently, activity recognition has become one of the most
crucial techniques in many real-world applications, such as
healthcare, smart homes, security (Lara and Labrador 2013;
Bulling, Blanke, and Schiele 2014; Frank, Mannor, and Precup 2010; Ravi et al. 2005). The goal of activity recognition is to classify streams of sensor readings received from
different types of sensors with the use of artiﬁcial intelligence (Bulling, Blanke, and Schiele 2014; Mannini and
Sabatini 2010). In general, approaches to activity recognition can be classiﬁed into two categories: sensor-based and
vision-based (cameras can also be considered as a special
type of sensors) (Chen et al. 2012). In this work, we focus
on wireless sensor-based activity recognition.
To build a recognition model from raw sensor readings to
high-level activities, it mainly consists of two steps. The ﬁrst

1

The term “frame” is often used in vision-based cases. In this
paper, a frame is a vector of sensor readings from multiple sensors
at a particular timestamp. A segment contains multiple frames.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6262

