The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

A Uniﬁed Model for Document-Based Question Answering
Based on Human-Like Reading Strategy
Weikang Li, Wei Li, Yunfang Wu∗
Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics, Peking University, MOE, China
{wavejkd,liweitj47,wuyf}@pku.edu.cn

sentences from document as document summary for the answer selection task.
However, the simple transfer between deep learning and
DBQA is not so logical. In our opinion, DBQA is similar to
the reading comprehension test, which is deﬁned to test people’s comprehension of a document. In their school years,
students would do lots of reading comprehension tests. In
this paper, we provide a solution for the problem to stimulate men’s reading strategy of doing the tests. With the assumption, the detailed reading strategy is as follow:

Abstract
Document-based Question Answering (DBQA) in Natural
Language Processing (NLP) is important but difﬁcult because
of the long document and the complex question. Most of previous deep learning methods mainly focus on the similarity
computation between two sentences. However, DBQA stems
from the reading comprehension in some degree, which is
originally used to train and test people’s ability of reading
and logical thinking. Inspired by the strategy of doing reading comprehension tests, we propose a uniﬁed model based
on the human-like reading strategy. The uniﬁed model contains three major encoding layers that are consistent to different steps of the reading strategy, including the basic encoder,
combined encoder and hierarchical encoder. We conduct extensive experiments on both the English WikiQA dataset and
the Chinese dataset, and the experimental results show that
our uniﬁed model is effective and yields state-of-the-art results on WikiQA dataset.

• 1. Go over the document quickly to get a general understanding of the document;
• 2. Read the question carefully equipped with the general
understanding of the document;
• 3. Go back to the document with the prior knowledge of
question and get the right answer.
Such a reading strategy could be implemented by neural network models.
As we know, the document in reading comprehension
tests usually has a title, which has an important impact
on doing reading comprehension tests for people. Unfortunately, the title information is neglected by most researches
on DBQA. In this paper, we use the title information (a natural document summary) as the general understanding of a
document. As for the document without title, we make many
attempts to get the general understanding of the document,
by using the ﬁrst sentence, the last sentence and training a
LDA or LSA model to get the topic of a document. In addition, we have tried many ways to understand questions well
given the general understanding of the document.
At the end, we propose a uniﬁed neural network model
according to the human-like reading strategy above.
Our contributions in this paper can be summarized as follows:

Introduction
Document-based Question Answering (DBQA) is an important issue in natural language processing(NLP). Given a document and a question related to the document, the system
is required to give an answer for the question. The answer
could be a word, a text span or a sentence extracted from the
document. Table 1 gives an example of DBQA. Recently,
more and more researches have focused on this challenging
problem.
A lot of achievements have been achieved via deep learning models, which obtain better performances than traditional machine learning methods. Inspired by the great success of deep learning methods in voice and image recognition, researchers have adopted various ways to solve the
problem of DBQA, including convolutional neural network
(CNN) (Feng et al. 2015), recurrent neural network (RNN)
(Tan et al. 2015), Attention-Way (Seo et al. 2016) and generative adversarial networks (GAN) (Wang et al. 2017). Many
other ways have emerged to dig out more information to
solve the problem of DBQA. Document summary could also
be seen as an effective information in many NLP tasks. Choi
et al. (2017) and Miller et al. (2016) used the most related

• We propose a human-like reading strategy for DBQA task
which is similar to the logic of students when they do the
test of reading comprehension.
• Based on the reading strategy, we make a good combination of general understanding of both document and question.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

604

