The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Hierarchical Video Generation from Orthogonal
Information: Optical Flow and Texture
Katsunori Ohnishi∗

Shohei Yamamoto∗

Yoshitaka Ushiku

Tatsuya Harada

The University of Tokyo
ohnishi@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

The University of Tokyo
yamamoto@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

The University of Tokyo
ushiku@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

The University of Tokyo
RIKEN
harada@mi.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

However, video generation is a very challenging task. The
difﬁculties lie not only on that (a) each frame should be a
realistic image as generated image, but also that (b) the same
scene and foreground should be generated in each video and
that (c) the generated video should have plausible motion.
In this study, we focus on the above-mentioned fundamental difﬁculties of generating a realistic video and propose the generation of videos through GAN spitting into two
orthogonal information types: motion and appearance. Because previous GANs for video (Vondrick, Pirsiavash, and
Torralba 2016; Saito and Matsumoto 2016) have not focused
on these difﬁculties, they can not produce motion realistic
videos.
Unsupervised video generation should learn without any
annotation. Thus, we utilize optical ﬂow as motion information. Calculating optical ﬂow does not require annotations
on each dataset and can be generally obtained with unsupervised method, which means our method still can be trained
in an unsupervised manner.
Our model, Flow and Texture Generative Adversarial Networks (FTGAN), consists of two GANs: FlowGAN and
TextureGAN. We ﬁrst generate optical ﬂow with FlowGAN,
and then convert optical ﬂow into RGB videos with TextureGAN. This hierarchical approach is explained in detail
below. The characteristics of optical ﬂow are as follows: it
has edges of moving objects, contains time-directional continuity, and does not contain texture information. Therefore,
optical ﬂow generation is much easier than RGB video generation. Optical ﬂow generation ﬁrst assures and achieves
reasonable motion and rough edges for generated videos.
Next, TextureGAN colors the optical ﬂow supplementing
rough outlines. TextureGAN provides texture information
to the generated optical ﬂow while maintaining scene and
foreground consistency. Thus, we can obtain more realistic
videos containing plausible motion.
As an application for video generation, it is important for
a model to express a wide range of datasets. However, in
the existing video generation, the appeance and motion are
limited to the combinations that exist in the dataset. Since
motion and appearance information are learnt separately, our
model can control the appearance and motion information of
a generated video independently. Thus, our model can generate nonexisting motion and attribute combination in the
training dataset comprising a video in which a person is do-

Abstract
Learning to represent and generate videos from unlabeled
data is a very challenging problem. To generate realistic
videos, it is important not only to ensure that the appearance of each frame is real, but also to ensure the plausibility of a video motion and consistency of a video appearance in the time direction. The process of video generation
should be divided according to these intrinsic difﬁculties. In
this study, we focus on the motion and appearance information as two important orthogonal components of a video, and
propose Flow-and-Texture-Generative Adversarial Networks
(FTGAN) consisting of FlowGAN and TextureGAN. In order to avoid a huge annotation cost, we have to explore a way
to learn from unlabeled data. Thus, we employ optical ﬂow
as motion information to generate videos. FlowGAN generates optical ﬂow, which contains only the edge and motion
of the videos to be begerated. On the other hand, TextureGAN specializes in giving a texture to optical ﬂow generated by FlowGAN. This hierarchical approach brings more
realistic videos with plausible motion and appearance consistency. Our experiments show that our model generates more
plausible motion videos and also achieves signiﬁcantly improved performance for unsupervised action classiﬁcation in
comparison to previous GAN works. In addition, because our
model generates videos from two independent information,
our model can generate new combinations of motion and attribute that are not seen in training data, such as a video in
which a person is doing sit-up in a baseball ground.

Introduction
Video understanding is a core problem in computer vision. Given the considerable progress in video recognition
(e.g., action classiﬁcation, event detection), video generation
and unsupervised learning of video representation (e.g., future frame prediction) have been gaining considerable attention. Automatic video generation can potentially help human
designers and developers to convert their high-level concepts into pixel-level videos. Some works (Vondrick, Pirsiavash, and Torralba 2016; Saito and Matsumoto 2016) have
tried to generate videos with generative adversarial networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) approach.
∗

indicates equal contribution.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2387

