The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Cross-Domain Human Parsing via
Adversarial Feature and Label Adaptation
Si Liu,1,4,5 Yao Sun,1 Defa Zhu,1 Guanghui Ren,1 Yu Chen,2 Jiashi Feng,3 Jizhong Han1
1

Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
JD.com 3 Department of ECE, National University of Singapore
4 Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Big Data Analysis Technology /B-DAT, Nanjing University of Information Science & Technology
5 Collaborative Innovation Center of Atmospheric Environment and Equipment Technology
Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
{liusi, sunyao, zhudefa, renguanghui, hanjizhong}@iie.ac.cn, chenyu6@jd.com, elefjia@nus.edu.sg
∗ corresponding author
Abstract
Human parsing has been extensively studied recently (Yamaguchi et al. 2012; Xia et al. 2017) due to its wide applications in many important scenarios. Mainstream fashion parsing models (i.e., parsers) focus on parsing the high-resolution
and clean images. However, directly applying the parsers
trained on benchmarks of high-quality samples to a particular application scenario in the wild, e.g., a canteen, airport
or workplace, often gives non-satisfactory performance due
to domain shift. In this paper, we explore a new and challenging cross-domain human parsing problem: taking the benchmark dataset with extensive pixel-wise labeling as the source
domain, how to obtain a satisfactory parser on a new target domain without requiring any additional manual labeling? To this end, we propose a novel and efﬁcient crossdomain human parsing model to bridge the cross-domain differences in terms of visual appearance and environment conditions and fully exploit commonalities across domains. Our
proposed model explicitly learns a feature compensation network, which is specialized for mitigating the cross-domain
differences. A discriminative feature adversarial network is
introduced to supervise the feature compensation to effectively reduces the discrepancy between feature distributions
of two domains. Besides, our proposed model also introduces
a structured label adversarial network to guide the parsing
results of the target domain to follow the high-order relationships of the structured labels shared across domains. The
proposed framework is end-to-end trainable, practical and
scalable in real applications. Extensive experiments are conducted where LIP dataset is the source domain and 4 different datasets including surveillance videos, movies and runway shows without any annotations, are evaluated as target
domains. The results consistently conﬁrm data efﬁciency and
performance advantages of the proposed method for the challenging cross-domain human parsing problem.

'd>ĂďĞůƐ͗
/ŵĂŐĞƐ͗

^ŽƵƌĐĞĚŽŵĂŝŶƐǁŝƚŚƉůĞŶƚǇŽĨůĂďĞůĞĚĚĂƚĂ
Wŝ ů ŝ
ǆĞůͲǁŝƐĞĚĂƉƚĂƚŝŽŶ
/ŵĂŐĞƐ͗

/ŵĂŐĞƐ͗

WĂƌƐŝŶŐ
ZĞƐƵůƚƐ͗

WĂƌƐŝŶŐ
ZĞƐƵůƚƐ͗

dĂƌŐĞƚĚŽŵĂŝŶϭ͗ĐĂŶƚĞĞŶ

dĂƌŐĞƚĚŽŵĂŝŶϮ͗ƌŽĂĚ

͕
Ɖ
ŝĨĨĞƌĞŶĐĞƐ͗ŝůůƵŵŝŶĂƚŝŽŶ͕ǀŝĞǁƉŽŝŶƚƐ͕ŝŵĂŐĞƐƐĐĂůĞ͕ƌĞƐŽůƵƚŝŽŶ͕ĞƚĐ͘
ŽŵŵŽŶĂůŝƚŝĞƐ͗ƐƉĂƚŝĂůƉƌŝŽƌƐ͕ƌĞůĂƚŝǀĞƉŽƐŝƚŝŽŶƐ͕ƐŚĂƉĞƐŽĨƚŚĞůĂďĞůƐ

Figure 1: Cross-domain human parsing: the upper panel is
the source domain with a large amount of training data, e.g.,
the LIP dataset; the lower panel shows the target domain,
e.g, canteen and road, without any manual labeling.

Existing human parsing algorithms can be divided into
following two categories. The ﬁrst one is constrained human parsing. More speciﬁcally, the clean images of wellposed persons are collected from some fashion sharing websites, e.g., Chictopia.com, for training and testing. Representative datasets include Fashionista (Yamaguchi et al. 2012)
with 685 images, Colorful-Fashion dataset (Liu et al. 2014)
with 2, 682 images and ATR dataset (Liang et al. 2015a)
with 7, 700 dataset. Each image in these datasets contains only one person, with relatively simple poses (mostly
standing), against relatively clean backgrounds. The human
parsers trained in such strictly constrained scenario often fail
when applied to images captured under the real-life, more
complicated environments. The second category is unconstrained human parsing. Representative datasets include
Pascal human part dataset (Chen et al. 2014b) with 3, 533
images and LIP dataset (Gong et al. 2017) with 50, 462 images. The images in these dataset present humans with varying clothing appearances, strong articulation, partial (self-)
occlusions, truncation at image borders, diverse viewpoints
and background clutters. Although they are closer to real environments than the constrained datasets, when applying the
human parser trained on these unconstrained datasets to a

Introduction
Recently human parsing (Liu et al. 2015) has been receiving
increasing attention owning to its wide applications, such
as person re-identiﬁcation (Zhao, Ouyang, and Wang 2014),
people search (Li et al. 2017), fashion synthesis (Zhu et al.
).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

7146

