The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Multi-Level Variational Autoencoder: Learning
Disentangled Representations from Grouped Observations
Diane Bouchacourt

Ryota Tomioka, Sebastian Nowozin

OVAL Group
University of Oxford ∗
diane@robots.ox.ac.uk

Machine Intelligence and Perception Group
Microsoft Research
Cambridge, UK
{ryoto,Sebastian.Nowozin}@microsoft.com

Abstract
We would like to learn a representation of the data that reﬂects
the semantics behind a speciﬁc grouping of the data, where
within a group the samples share a common factor of variation. For example, consider a set of face images grouped by
identity. We wish to anchor the semantics of the grouping into
a disentangled representation that we can exploit. However,
existing deep probabilistic models often assume that the samples are independent and identically distributed, thereby disregard the grouping information. We present the Multi-Level
Variational Autoencoder (ML-VAE), a new deep probabilistic
model for learning a disentangled representation of grouped
data. The ML-VAE separates the latent representation into semantically relevant parts by working both at the group level
and the observation level, while retaining efﬁcient test-time
inference. We experimentally show that our model (i) learns
a semantically meaningful disentanglement, (ii) enables control over the latent representation, and (iii) generalises to unseen groups.

1

(a) Objects of mul- (b) Objects grouped (c) Objects grouped
tiple shapes and col- by shape.
by color.
ors.

Figure 1: Shape and color are two factors of variation.

We propose group-level supervision: observations (or
samples) are organised in groups, where within a group the
observations share a common but unknown value for one
of the factors of variation. For example, consider a data set
of objects with two factors of variation: shape and color,
as shown in Figure 1a. A possible grouping organises the
objects by shape, as shown in Figure 1b. Another possible grouping organises the objects by color as in Figure 1c.
Group supervision allows us to anchor the semantics of
the data (shape and color) into the learned representation.
Grouping is a form of weak supervision that is inexpensive
to collect, and we do not assume that we know the factor of
variation that deﬁnes the grouping.
Deep probabilistic generative models learn expressive
representations of a given set of observations. Examples
of such models include Generative Adversarial Networks
(GAN) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) and the Variational Autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma and Welling 2014; Rezende, Mohamed, and Daan 2014). In the VAE model, an encoder
network (the encoder) encodes an observation into its latent representation (or latent code) and a generative network
(the decoder) decodes an observation from a latent code.
The VAE model allows efﬁcient test-time inference by using amortised inference, that is, the observations parametrise
the posterior distribution of the latent code, and all observations share a single set of parameters to learn. However, the
VAE model assumes that the observations are independent
and identically distributed (iid). In the case of grouped observations, this assumption is no longer true. Consider again
the toy example of the objects data set in Figure 1, and assume that the objects are grouped by shape. The VAE model
processes each observation independently and takes no ad-

Introduction

Representation learning refers to the task of learning a representation of the data that can be easily exploited (Bengio,
Courville, and Vincent 2013). Our goal is to build a model
that disentangles the data into separate salient factors of variation and easily applies to a variety of tasks and different
types of observations. Towards this goal there are multiple difﬁculties. First, the representative power of the learned
representation depends on the information one wishes to extract from the data. Second, the multiple factors of variation
impact the observations in a complex and correlated manner. Finally, we have access to very little, if any, supervision
over these different factors. If there is no speciﬁc meaning
to embed in the desired representation, the infomax principle Linsker (1988) states that an optimal representation is
one of bounded entropy that retains as much information
about the data as possible. By contrast, in our case there
exists a semantically meaningful disentanglement of interesting latent factors. How can we anchor semantics in highdimensional representations?
∗
This work was done while Diane was an intern at Microsoft
Research.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

2095

