The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Deep Semantic Role Labeling with Self-Attention
Zhixing Tan,1 Mingxuan Wang,2 Jun Xie,2 Yidong Chen,1 Xiaodong Shi1∗
1

School of Information Science and Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
2
Mobile Internet Group, Tencent Technology Co., Ltd, Beijing, China
playinf@stu.xmu.edu.cn,
{xuanswang, stiffxie}@tencent.com,
{ydchen, mandel}@xmu.edu.cn
achieved the state-of-the-art results. He et al., (2017) reported further improvements by using deep highway bidirectional LSTMs with constrained decoding. These successes
involving end-to-end models reveal the potential ability of
LSTMs for handling the underlying syntactic structure of
the sentences.
Despite recent successes, these RNN-based models have
limitations. RNNs treat each sentence as a sequence of
words and recursively compose each word with its previous hidden state. The recurrent connections make RNNs
applicable for sequential prediction tasks with arbitrary
length, however, there still remain several challenges in
practice. The ﬁrst one is related to memory compression
problem (Cheng, Dong, and Lapata 2016). As the entire history is encoded into a single ﬁxed-size vector, the model
requires larger memory capacity to store information for
longer sentences. The unbalanced way of dealing with sequential information leads the network performing poorly
on long sentences while wasting memory on shorter ones.
The second one is concerned with the inherent structure of
sentences. RNNs lack a way to tackle the tree-structure of
the inputs. The sequential way to process the inputs remains
the network depth-in-time, and the number of nonlinearities
depends on the time-steps.
To address these problems above, we present a deep attentional neural network (D EEPATT) for the task of SRL1 . Our
models rely on the self-attention mechanism which directly
draws the global dependencies of the inputs. In contrast to
RNNs, a major advantage of self-attention is that it conducts direct connections between two arbitrary tokens in a
sentence. Therefore, distant elements can interact with each
other by shorter paths (O(1) v.s. O(n)), which allows unimpeded information ﬂow through the network. Self-attention
also provides a more ﬂexible way to select, represent and
synthesize the information of the inputs and is complementary to RNN based models. Along with self-attention, D EEP ATT comes with three variants which uses recurrent (RNN),
convolutional (CNN) and feed-forward (FFN) neural network to further enhance the representations.
Although D EEPATT is fairly simple, it gives remarkable
empirical results. Our single model outperforms the previ-

Abstract
Semantic Role Labeling (SRL) is believed to be a crucial step
towards natural language understanding and has been widely
studied. Recent years, end-to-end SRL with recurrent neural networks (RNN) has gained increasing attention. However, it remains a major challenge for RNNs to handle structural information and long range dependencies. In this paper, we present a simple and effective architecture for SRL
which aims to address these problems. Our model is based
on self-attention which can directly capture the relationships
between two tokens regardless of their distance. Our single model achieves F1 = 83.4 on the CoNLL-2005 shared
task dataset and F1 = 82.7 on the CoNLL-2012 shared task
dataset, which outperforms the previous state-of-the-art results by 1.8 and 1.0 F1 score respectively. Besides, our model
is computationally efﬁcient, and the parsing speed is 50K tokens per second on a single Titan X GPU.

Introduction
Semantic Role Labeling is a shallow semantic parsing task,
whose goal is to determine essentially “who did what to
whom”, “when” and “where”. Semantic roles indicate the
basic event properties and relations among relevant entities
in the sentence and provide an intermediate level of semantic
representation thus beneﬁting many NLP applications, such
as Information Extraction (Bastianelli et al. 2013), Question
Answering (Surdeanu et al. 2003; Moschitti, Morarescu, and
Harabagiu 2003; Dan and Lapata 2007), Machine Translation (Knight and Luk 1994; Uefﬁng, Haffari, and Sarkar
2007; Wu and Fung 2009) and Multi-document Abstractive
Summarization (Genest and Lapalme 2011).
Semantic roles are closely related to syntax. Therefore,
traditional SRL approaches rely heavily on the syntactic
structure of a sentence, which brings intrinsic complexity and restrains these systems to be domain speciﬁc. Recently, end-to-end models for SRL without syntactic inputs
achieved promising results on this task (Zhou and Xu 2015;
Marcheggiani, Frolov, and Titov 2017; He et al. 2017).
As the pioneering work, Zhou and Xu (2015) introduced
a stacked long short-term memory network (LSTM) and
∗

Corresponding author.
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

1
Our source code is available at https://github.com/XMUNLP/
Tagger

4929

