The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Hawkes Process Inference with Missing Data
Christian R. Shelton

Zhen Qin

Chandini Shetty

University of California, Riverside
cshelton@cs.ucr.edu

University of California, Riverside
tzqin001@cs.ucr.edu

University of California, Riverside
cshet001@cs.ucr.edu

inﬂuence maximization (Du et al. 2013), armed conﬂicts
(Blundell, Heller, and Beck 2012; Mohler 2013; Linderman and Adams 2014), and topic modeling (He et al. 2015;
Guo et al. 2015; Du et al. 2015).
Hidden (unobserved) variables are an essential modeling
tool. They can simplify a model, be used to ﬁnd hidden
structure, or express the modeler’s prior knowledge. Previous
uses of Hawkes processes have used complete event data: all
event times are observed. This paper expands the modeler’s
toolkit by allowing partially and fully unobserved events
types. This allows hypothesizing about events associated
unobserved actors, communication paths, servers, or other
variables. It also allows the full use of datasets in which actors
enroll or dropout at various times.
For example, we can add unobserved (but modeled) actors in a social network event process. Or, we can allow for
periods of non-observation of known actors (for instance,
prior to enrolling in a study). Unobserved events in other
arenas might correspond to weather, news, or political events.
More generally, a Hawkes process between two event-types,
A and B, allows for each to self-excite or to excite the other
event-type, producing clusters of events that stem from a
single seed event of one type. However, if we add a third
type, C, and postulate that the observed times of events for A
and B result from the marginalization of a Hawkes process
over all three event types, this provides a richer model of the
relationship between events of types A and B, which includes
relationships where A and B do not trigger each other, but
both are temporally correlated (through type C).
We consider the situation in which the set of possible labels
(types of events) is known. Yet, for some labels for some
periods of time, it is known that any events during that time
were unobserved (and during other times, all occurring events
for this label were observed). This allows for completely
hidden event types, as well as masking certain types during
certain time intervals.
While other applications placed priors on the parameters
of the Hawkes process or other parts of the model and used
Gibbs sampling (or similar) over these parameters (Linderman and Adams 2014; Rasmussen 2013), no work to date has
considered unobserved events to the extent that we do in this
paper. Yang and Zha (2013) used mixtures of Hawkes processes and developed a variational inference method. However, all events were observed; only their assignments to

Abstract
A multivariate Hawkes process is a class of marked point
processes: A sample consists of a ﬁnite set of events of unbounded random size; each event has a real-valued time and a
discrete-valued label (mark). It is self-excitatory: Each event
causes an increase in the rate of other events (of either the
same or a different label) in the (near) future. Prior work has
developed methods for parameter estimation from complete
samples.
However, just as unobserved variables can increase the modeling power of other probabilistic models, allowing unobserved
events can increase the modeling power of point processes. In
this paper we develop a method to sample over the posterior
distribution of unobserved events in a multivariate Hawkes
process. We demonstrate the efﬁcacy of our approach, and its
utility in improving predictive power and identifying latent
structure in real-world data.

Marked Point Processes
Many applications work with records of events and their
times: social networks (information propagation or network
changes), computer systems (system calls, hardware failures,
network events), global politics (treaties, armed conﬂicts), as
examples. The times are real-valued, and the event types (or
labels or marks) are drawn from a ﬁnite set.
The general class of marked point processes (MPPs) provide families of distributions over such data. The Poisson
process is the simplest and most familiar, but the event sets
from any two non-overlapping intervals of time are independent, and thus it does not provide strong modeling power.
More complex MPPs include Cox processes and Poisson
cluster processes.
In machine learning, a variety of structured MPPs have
been developed including Poisson-networks (Rajaram, Graepel, and Herbrich 2005) and piecewise-constant conditional
intensity models (PCIMs) (Gunawardana, Meek, and Xu
2011). We concentrate on Hawkes processes (Hawkes 1971).
They have been used in earthquake modeling (Marsan
and Lengliné 2008), ﬁnance (Linderman and Adams 2014;
Bacry, Mastromatteo, and Muzy 2015), social networks
(Simma and Jordan 2010; Zhou, Zha, and Song 2013;
Perry and Wolfe 2013; DuBois, Butts, and Smyth 2013),
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

6425

