The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Learning Across Scales — Multiscale
Methods for Convolution Neural Networks
Eldad Haber,1,2 Lars Ruthotto,2,3 Elliot Holtham,2 Seong-Hwan Jun4
1

Dept. of Earth and Ocean Science, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada eldadhaber@gmail.com
2
Xtract Technologies, Vancouver, BC, Canada, elliot@xtract.tech
3
Dept. of Mathematics and Computer Science, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA, lruthotto@emory.edu
4
Dept. of Statistics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada, seong.jun@stat.ubc.ca
Crucial design parameters in CNN are the network architecture and, currently, the resolution of the image data.
Changing any of those parameters in the training or prediction phase can severely affect the performance of the CNN.
For example, CNNs are typically trained using images of a
ﬁxed resolution, and classifying images of a different resolution requires interpolation. This can be computationally
expensive, particularly on resource-limited systems or if the
data represents videos or high-resolution 3D images as is
common in applications, e.g., in medical imaging and geosciences (see Jiang, Trundle, and Ren; Karpathy et al. (2010;
2014)).
In this paper, we derive a framework that allows scaling
CNNs across image resolution and network depth and thus
enables multiscale learning. As a backbone of our methods,
we present an interpretation of deep CNNs as an optimal
control problem involving a nonlinear time-dependent differential equation. This understanding leads structure that is
very common in ﬁelds such as path planning, data assimilation, and nonlinear Kalman ﬁltering (see, e.g., Biegler et
al. (2009) and reference therein).
We present new methods for scaling CNNs from low- to
high-resolution image data and vice versa. We propose an
algebraic multigrid approach to adapt the coefﬁcients of the
convolution kernel across scales and demonstrate the importance of this step. Our method allows multiscale learning
using image pyramids, where the network is trained at different resolutions. Such a process is known to be very effective in other ﬁelds, giving rise to computational savings
and adding robustness to local minima (see, e.g., Modersitzki; Haber and Modersitzki; ans A. Ratcliffe et al. (2004;
2004; 2013)). Our new method also enables one to classify
low-resolution images using networks that have been designed for and trained using high-resolution images without
interpolation of the coarse scale image to ﬁner scales.
We also present a method for scaling the number of layers
in a deep CNN. Our method uses the interpretation of the
forward propagation in CNN as a discretization of a timedependent nonlinear differential equation. In our framework,
the number of layers corresponds to the number time steps.
This observation motivates the use of multilevel learning algorithms that accelerate the training of deep networks by
solving a series of learning problems from shallow to deep
architectures.

Abstract
In this work, we establish the relation between optimal control and training deep Convolution Neural Networks (CNNs).
We show that the forward propagation in CNNs can be interpreted as a time-dependent nonlinear differential equation and learning can be seen as controlling the parameters
of the differential equation such that the network approximates the data-label relation for given training data. Using this continuous interpretation, we derive two new methods to scale CNNs with respect to two different dimensions.
The ﬁrst class of multiscale methods connects low-resolution
and high-resolution data using prolongation and restriction of
CNN parameters inspired by algebraic multigrid techniques.
We demonstrate that our method enables classifying highresolution images using CNNs trained with low-resolution
images and vice versa and warm-starting the learning process. The second class of multiscale methods connects shallow and deep networks and leads to new training strategies
that gradually increase the depths of the CNN while re-using
parameters for initializations.

1

Introduction

We consider the problem of designing and training Convolution Neural Networks (CNNs). CNNs have been a major ﬁeld of research over the last years, after showing remarkable success, e.g., in classifying images of hand writing, natural images, videos (see, e.g., LeCun and Bengio;
Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton; LeCun, Kavukcuoglu,
and Farabet (1995; 2012; 2010) and references therein). This
success has resulted in thousands of research papers and a
few celebrated software packages.
Despite their success, CNNs are not fully understood,
and in fact, tuning network architecture and parameters
can be very hard in practice. Often many trial-and-error
experiments are required to ﬁnd a CNN that is effective
for a speciﬁc class of data. In addition to the computational costs associated with those experiments, in many
cases, small changes to the network can yield substantial
changes in the learning performance. To overcome the difﬁculty of learning, systematic approaches using Bayesian
optimization have been proposed to infer the best architecture (see Hernández-Lobato et al. (2016)).
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

3142

