The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Schur Number Five
Marijn J. H. Heule
Computer Science Department
The University of Texas at Austin
2317 Speedway, M/S D9500
Austin, Texas 78712-0233

satisﬁability (SAT) solving techniques to solve the resulting formula. This approach has been successful in recent
years, leading to the solution of hard open problems such
as the problem of determining the sixth van der Waerden
number (Kouril and Paul 2008), the Erdős discrepancy problem (Konev and Lisitsa 2015), and the Pythagorean triples
problem (Heule, Kullmann, and Marek 2016). Trying to
solve a SAT encoding for Schur Number Five with off-theshelf SAT solving tools turned out to be a hopeless endeavor.
We therefore came up with a dedicated approach, which is
intended to be applicable to related problems as well. We
modiﬁed existing tools to efﬁciently solve our encoding.
Still, even with our optimized approach, the total computational effort to solve the problem was over 14 CPU years.
If it takes a computer several CPU years to solve a problem, it is only natural to question the correctness of the supposed solution. To deal with this issue, we automatically
constructed a proof of the propositional formula that encodes the main statement. The size of this proof is more than
two petabytes, making it about ten times larger than “the
largest math proof ever” (Lamb 2016). Despite its tremendous size, we were able to verify the correctness of the
proof with a formally veriﬁed proof checker. Due to recent
progress in proof validation (Cruz-Filipe, Marques-Silva,
and Schneider-Kamp 2017), checking the correctness of
such proofs is now nearly as efﬁcient as the actual construction of the proofs by a SAT solver (Cruz-Filipe et al. 2017;
Lammich 2017). In our case, the time spent on proof checking was a little more than 36 CPU years.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We constructed a propositional formula that is satisﬁable
if and only if S(5) ≥ 161. Our proof of unsatisﬁability
for this formula is over two petabytes in size.
• We certiﬁed the proof using a program formally veriﬁed
by ACL2 (Kaufmann and Moore 1997), thereby providing
high conﬁdence in the correctness of our result.
• We enumerated all 2 447 113 088 ﬁve-colorings of the
numbers 1 to 160 without a monochromatic a + b = c.
• We designed a decision heuristic that allows solving
Schur number problems efﬁciently and enables lineartime speedups even when using thousands of CPUs.
• We developed an efﬁcient hardness predictor for partitioning a hard problem into millions of easy subproblems.

Abstract
We present the solution of a century-old problem known as
Schur Number Five: What is the largest (natural) number n
such that there exists a ﬁve-coloring of the positive numbers
up to n without a monochromatic solution of the equation
a + b = c? We obtained the solution, n = 160, by encoding
the problem into propositional logic and applying massively
parallel satisﬁability solving techniques on the resulting formula. We constructed and validated a proof of the solution to
increase trust in the correctness of the multi-CPU-year computations. The proof is two petabytes in size and was certiﬁed
using a formally veriﬁed proof checker, demonstrating that
any result by satisﬁability solvers—no matter how large—can
now be validated using highly trustworthy systems.

Introduction
In the beginning of the 20th century, Issai Schur studied
whether every coloring of the positive (natural) numbers
with ﬁnitely many colors results in monochromatic solutions
of the equation a + b = c. This work gave rise to the concept of so-called Schur numbers: Schur number k, denoted
by S(k), is deﬁned as the largest number n for which there
exists a k-coloring of the positive numbers up to n with
no monochromatic solution of a + b = c.1 For example,
S(2) = 4: Assume we use the two colors red and blue. If
we color 1 with red, we have to color 2 with blue due to
1 + 1 = 2. This forces us to color 4 with red because of
2 + 2 = 4. After this, 3 must become blue due to 1 + 3 = 4.
But then, no matter if we color 5 with red or blue, we end up
with a monochromatic solution of 1 + 4 = 5 or 2 + 3 = 5.
Although Schur’s Theorem states that S(k) is ﬁnite for
any ﬁnite value of k (Schur 1917), determining the exact values of S(k) is an open problem in elementary number theory (Guy 1994). In fact, only the values S(1) = 1, S(2) = 4,
S(3) = 13, and S(4) = 44 have been known so far (Golomb
and Baumert 1965). We came up with a highly optimized
automated-reasoning method for showing that S(5) = 160.
To obtain this solution, we ﬁrst encoded the Schur Number Five problem into propositional logic and then applied
c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1
An alternative deﬁnition used in the literature picks the smallest n s.t. all k-colorings of 1 to n result in a monochromatic solution. The values of S(k) differ by one, depending on the deﬁnition.

6598

