The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Efﬁcient Large-Scale Multi-Modal Classiﬁcation
Douwe Kiela, Edouard Grave, Armand Joulin, Tomas Mikolov
Facebook AI Research
{dkiela,egrave,ajoulin,tmikolov}@fb.com

less storage, yet is still able to beneﬁt from the inclusion
of multi-modal information. To the best of our knowledge,
this work constitutes the ﬁrst attempt to examine the accuracy/speed trade-off in multi-modal classiﬁcation; and the
ﬁrst to directly show the value of discretized features in this
particular task.
If current trends continue, the Web will become increasingly multi-modal, making the question of multi-modal classiﬁcation ever more pertinent. At the same time, as the Web
keeps growing, we have to be able to efﬁciently handle ever
larger quantities of data, making it important to focus on
machine learning methods that can be applied to large-scale
scenarios. This work aims to examine these two questions
together.
Our contributions are as follows. First, we compare various multi-modal fusion methods, examine their trade-offs,
and show that simpler models are often desirable. Second,
we experiment with discretizing continuous features in order to speed up and simplify the fusion process even further.
Third, we examine learned representations for discretized
features and show that they yield interpretability as a beneﬁcial side effect. The work reported here constitutes a solid
and scalable baseline for other approaches to follow; our investigation of discretized features shows how multi-modal
classiﬁcation does not necessarily imply a large performance
penalty and is feasible in large-scale scenarios.

Abstract
While the incipient internet was largely text-based, the modern digital world is becoming increasingly multi-modal. Here,
we examine multi-modal classiﬁcation where one modality
is discrete, e.g. text, and the other is continuous, e.g. visual
representations transferred from a convolutional neural network. In particular, we focus on scenarios where we have to
be able to classify large quantities of data quickly. We investigate various methods for performing multi-modal fusion and
analyze their trade-offs in terms of classiﬁcation accuracy and
computational efﬁciency. Our ﬁndings indicate that the inclusion of continuous information improves performance over
text-only on a range of multi-modal classiﬁcation tasks, even
with simple fusion methods. In addition, we experiment with
discretizing the continuous features in order to speed up and
simplify the fusion process even further. Our results show that
fusion with discretized features outperforms text-only classiﬁcation, at a fraction of the computational cost of full multimodal fusion, with the additional beneﬁt of improved interpretability.

Text classiﬁcation is one of the core problems in machine
learning and natural language processing (Borko and Bernick 1963; Sebastiani 2002). It plays a crucial role in important tasks ranging from document retrieval and categorization to sentiment and topic classiﬁcation (Deerwester et al.
1990; Joachims 1998; Pang and Lee 2008). However, while
the incipient Web was largely text-based, the recent decade
has seen a surge in multi-modal content: billions of images
and videos are posted and shared online every single day.
That is, text is either replaced as the dominant modality, as
is the case with Instagram posts or YouTube videos, or it is
augmented with non-textual content, as with most of today’s
web pages. This makes multi-modal classiﬁcation an important problem.
Here, we examine the task of multi-modal classiﬁcation
using neural networks. We are primarily interested in two
questions: what is the best way to combine (i.e., fuse) data
from different modalities, and how can we do so in the most
efﬁcient manner? We examine various efﬁcient multi-modal
fusion methods and investigate ways to speed up the fusion
process. In particular, we explore discretizing the continuous
features, which leads to much faster training and requires

Related work
Text classiﬁcation. Neural network-based methods have
become increasingly popular for text classiﬁcation (Socher
et al. 2011; Wang and Manning 2012). Recent work has used
neural networks for text classiﬁcation either at a sentence
(Kim 2014; Hill, Cho, and Korhonen 2016) or full document
(Le and Mikolov 2014; Baker, Kiela, and Korhonen 2016;
Joulin et al. 2016) level. Many core NLP tasks are essentially text classiﬁcation, from tweets (Sriram et al. 2010)
to reviews to spam. Even though there has been extensive
work on feature engineering for text classiﬁcation (Chen et
al. 2009), modern approaches often make use of word embeddings (Mikolov et al. 2013) or sentence representations
(Kiros et al. 2015) learned from a large corpus in an unsupervised fashion.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5198

