The Twenty-Third AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium

Cross-Lingual Learning with Distributed Representations
Matúš Pikuliak
Faculty of Informatics and Information Technologies
Slovak University of Technology, Bratislava, Slovak Republic
matus.pikuliak@stuba.sk

Even though researchers already tried to perform such
transfer with various deep NLP architectures, there is still a
lot of open questions to be answered. First, the correspondence can be established on character-level, word-level or
sentence-level. We can model all these with distributed representations. It is however not clear what are the advantages
and disadvantages of these approaches, when should one
choose one over the other nor how to combine them successfully. One could for example combine different transfer
techniques for different language pairs to fully exploit their
respective similarities. Currently usually only one language
is used as source language but using multiple languages with
different properties could be beneficial.
This is the basic open question I try to tackle, but there
are other interesting questions at hand:
• What is the critical amount of various resources we need
for successful transfer? What is the effect of imperfect
machine translation on the resulting model? We are interested in the properties linguistic resources should have
and how to predict their effect on learning.
• What exactly is being learnt by these neural networks
when they are being trained in cross-lingual setting? We
are interested in on what level is the correspondence between languages established and how does it compare to
our existing knowledge about languages.
• How does the choice of neural network architecture affect
the results? Are there qualitative or only quantitative differences between various approaches? A lot of architectures were proposed recently in NLP and they can be in
usually in some way used for cross-lingual learning as
well. Is any of them especially well-suited for transferring
knowledge across languages?
• Can we combine knowledge from more languages to help
us solve tasks? I am interested in scenario where each
source language can help us in different way. E.g. we can
use linguistically very similar language to learn building
word representations from characters while we use other
language for task supervision?

Abstract
Cross-lingual Learning can help to bring state-of-the-art deep
learning solutions to smaller languages. These languages in
general lack resource for training advanced neural networks.
With transfer of knowledge across languages we can improve
the results for various NLP tasks.

Introduction
Deep learning in recent years managed to improve the results for a plethora of Natural Language Processing (NLP)
tasks. These new methods are however very data demanding
and therefore can be effectively applied only to a handful of
languages with sufficient resources. English language is in
this regard the richest language while the others are behind
by significant margin. Instead of laborious dataset assembly
we can try to exploit these existing English resources and
models and try to transfer the knowledge from them to other
languages. If we can do this automatically we can significantly cut on the time required to build NLP solutions.
Cross-lingual Learning is one way of approaching this
idea. From Artificial Intelligence point of view cross-lingual
learning is a type of Transfer Learning. Transfer learning is
a paradigm of machine learning dealing with cases when
there is a difference between the data we are training on and
the data we are using the trained model on. In cross-lingual
setting we are trying to train a model using data from one
language and then apply it to other languages. Of course the
change in data distribution is quite severe in this case as we
might transfer knowledge between languages that are completely different from linguistic point of view. In extreme
cases they might even have a different alphabet, so there is
not much connection to be found between them. To bridge
this gap we can employ a variety of linguistic resources that
can help us establish correspondence between languages.
This could mean using bilingual dictionary, parallel corpora
or machine translation systems inter alia.
Copyright © 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8032

