The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

DeepType: Multilingual Entity
Linking by Neural Type System Evolution
Jonathan Raiman

Olivier Raiman

OpenAI
San Francisco, California
raiman@openai.com

Agilience
Paris, France
or@agilience.com

it is worse to confuse sheepdogs and skyscrapers than it is
to confuse sheepdogs and poodles) (Wu, Tygert, and LeCun
2017), a loss function that trades off speciﬁcity for accuracy by incorporating hypo/hypernymy relations (Deng et
al. 2012), using NER types to constrain the behavior of an
Entity Linking system (Ling, Singh, and Weld 2015), or
more recently integrating explicit type constraints within a
decoder’s grammar for neural semantic parsing (Krishnamurthy, Dasigi, and Gardner 2017). However, current approaches face several difﬁculties:

Abstract
The wealth of structured (e.g. Wikidata) and unstructured
data about the world available today presents an incredible
opportunity for tomorrow’s Artiﬁcial Intelligence. So far, integration of these two different modalities is a difﬁcult process, involving many decisions concerning how best to represent the information so that it will be captured or useful, and
hand-labeling large amounts of data. DeepType overcomes
this challenge by explicitly integrating symbolic information
into the reasoning process of a neural network with a type
system. First we construct a type system, and second, we use
it to constrain the outputs of a neural network to respect the
symbolic structure. We achieve this by reformulating the design problem into a mixed integer problem: create a type system and subsequently train a neural network with it. In this
reformulation discrete variables select which parent-child relations from an ontology are types within the type system,
while continuous variables control a classiﬁer ﬁt to the type
system. The original problem cannot be solved exactly, so we
propose a 2-step algorithm: 1) heuristic search or stochastic
optimization over discrete variables that deﬁne a type system
informed by an Oracle and a Learnability heuristic, 2) gradient descent to ﬁt classiﬁer parameters. We apply DeepType to
the problem of Entity Linking on three standard datasets (i.e.
WikiDisamb30, CoNLL (YAGO), TAC KBP 2010) and ﬁnd
that it outperforms all existing solutions by a wide margin,
including approaches that rely on a human-designed type system or recent deep learning-based entity embeddings, while
explicitly using symbolic information lets it integrate new entities without retraining.

1

• Selection of the right symbolic information based on the
utility or information gain for a target task.
• Design of the representation for symbolic information (hierarchy, grammar, constraints).
• Hand-labelling large amounts of data.
DeepType overcomes these difﬁculties by explicitly integrating symbolic information into the reasoning process
of a neural network with a type system that is automatically designed without human effort for a target task. We
achieve this by reformulating the design problem into a
mixed integer problem: create a type system by selecting
roots and edges from an ontology that serve as types in a type
system, and subsequently train a neural network with it. The
original problem cannot be solved exactly, so we propose a
2-step algorithm:
1. heuristic search or stochastic optimization over the discrete variable assignments controlling type system design,
using an Oracle and a Learnability heuristic to ensure that
design decisions will be easy to learn by a neural network,
and will provide improvements on the target task,

Introduction

Online encyclopaedias, knowledge bases, ontologies (e.g.
Wikipedia, Wikidata, Wordnet), alongside image and video
datasets with their associated label and category hierarchies
(e.g. Imagenet (Deng et al. 2009), Youtube-8M (Abu-ElHaija et al. 2016), Kinetics (Kay et al. 2017)) offer an unprecedented opportunity for incorporating symbolic representations within distributed and neural representations in
Artiﬁcial Intelligence systems. Several approaches exist for
integrating rich symbolic structures within the behavior of
neural networks: a label hierarchy aware loss function that
relies on the ultrametric tree distance between labels (e.g.

2. gradient descent to ﬁt classiﬁer parameters to predict the
behavior of the type system.
In order to validate the beneﬁts of our approach, we focus on applying DeepType to Entity Linking (EL), the task
of resolving ambiguous mentions of entities to their referent
entities in a knowledge base (KB) (e.g. Wikipedia). Specifically we compare our results to state of the art systems on
three standard datasets (WikiDisamb30, CoNLL (YAGO),
TAC KBP 2010). We verify whether our approach can work
in multiple languages, and whether optimization of the type
system for a particular language generalizes to other lan-

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

5406

