The Thirty-Second AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-18)

Disarmament Games with Resources
Yuan Deng, Vincent Conitzer
Department of Computer Science
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708, USA
{ericdy,conitzer}@cs.duke.edu

phase, the current player can remove any of his pure strategies in the normal-form game. Once players stop disarming,
the players play the normal-form game consisting of the remaining pure strategies. This results in a larger (extensiveform) game that includes the disarmament phase, and the
goal is to identify desirable equilibria of this larger game,
which generally result in much better outcomes than the
equilibria of the game without disarmament.1 That is, we
try to have players disarm so as to achieve a better outcome,
but we must ensure that players are incentivized to take these
disarmament steps.
However, in real disarmament games, the removal of individual pure strategies would often be hard to achieve.
It is often possible to remove a resource (say, a particular
weapon), but doing so generally eliminates many strategies,
namely all those that involved the use of that resource. Moreover, removing resources does not allow one to remove the
pure strategy of not using any resources at all. Finally, even
in an environment where it is somehow possible to remove
individual pure strategies (i.e., subsets of resources), the
number of pure strategies is exponential. Moreover, Deng
and Conitzer (2017) only consider Nash equilibrium as the
solution concept, which may consist of incredible threats in
subgames of the extensive-form disarmament games. However, it is hard to generalize to subgame perfect equilibrium
when considering normal-form games since the computation
of Nash equilibrium in a normal-form game is already hard.
Motivated by these observations, in this paper, we directly
model the removal of resources instead of pure strategies. To
do so, we deﬁne multi-resource games, in which each player
has some resources, the use of which will impact the players differently. We then consider a disarmament model for
these games and investigate whether and how we can reach
desirable outcomes for several variants (requiring subgame
perfection or not and allowing fractional removals or not).

Abstract
A paper by Deng and Conitzer in AAAI’17 introduces disarmament games, in which players alternatingly commit not
to play certain pure strategies. However, in practice disarmament usually does not consist in removing a strategy, but
rather in removing a resource (and doing so rules out all
the strategies in which that resource is used simultaneously).
In this paper, we introduce a model of disarmament games
in which resources, rather than strategies, are removed. We
prove NP-completeness of several formulations of the problem of achieving desirable outcomes via disarmament. We
then study the case where resources can be fractionally removed, and prove a result analogous to the folk theorem that
all desirable outcomes can be achieved. We show that we can
approximately achieve any desirable outcome in a polynomial number of rounds, though determining whether a given
outcome can be obtained in a given number of rounds remains
NP-complete.

Introduction
Computing game-theoretic solutions has long been a topic
of interest to AI researchers and other computer scientists. In
earlier days, the main focus was on computing Nash equilibria (Gilboa and Zemel 1989; Porter, Nudelman, and Shoham
2008; Conitzer and Sandholm 2008; Daskalakis, Goldberg,
and Papadimitriou 2009; Chen, Deng, and Teng 2009).
While computing Nash equilibria remains a very active topic
of research, much of the recent work on computing gametheoretic solutions done in the AI community has focused
on computing optimal strategies to commit to, also referred
to as Stackelberg strategies (Conitzer and Sandholm 2006;
von Stengel and Zamir 2010). Algorithms for computing
these solutions have been deployed in a variety of real-world
domains (Tambe 2011). All this work concerns models in
which one player commits, and then another responds to
the commitment. A recent exception is a paper by Deng and
Conitzer (2017), who show that sometimes, much more can
be achieved by allowing players to go back and forth, alternatingly committing not to play certain pure strategies. They
call the resulting games disarmament games.
In these disarmament games, there is a disarmament
phase before the players play the game. In a step of this

Example 1. Suppose that there are two players, 0 and 1.
Each of them has two resources, x and y. Using x results
in 1 utility for the player who plays it and −2 utility for the
opponent; using y results in 0 utility for the player who plays
1
There will also always be an undesirable equilibrium of the
disarmament game where nobody disarms, but it seems reasonable
to believe that better equilibria will be played in practice, if they
can be identiﬁed.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

981

