The Twenty-Third AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium

Abstraction Sampling in Graphical Models
Filjor Broka
Department of Computer Science
University of California, Irvine
fbroka@ics.uci.edu

Introduction

Background

This research project is in collaboration with my thesis advisor Dr. Rina Dechter and with Dr. Kalev Kask and Dr.
Alexander Ihler, also at the University of California, Irvine.
We present a new sampling scheme for approximating hard
to compute queries over graphical models, such as computing the partition function. The scheme builds upon exact algorithms that traverse a weighted directed state-space
graph representing a global function over a graphical model
(e.g., probability distribution). With the aid of an abstraction function and randomization, the state space can be compacted (trimmed) to facilitate tractable computation, yielding a Monte Carlo estimate that is unbiased. We present the
general idea and analyze its properties analytically and empirically.

A graphical
 model can be deﬁned by a 4-tuple M =
(X, D, F, ), where X = {Xi : i ∈ I} is a set of variables
indexed by a set I, and D = {Di : i ∈ I} is the set of ﬁnite
domains of values for each Xi . F = {ψα : α ∈ scopes(F )}
is a set of discrete functions, where α ⊆ I and Xα ⊆ X is
A graphical model represents a global functhe scope of ψα .
). A
popular task is to compute
tion P r(X) ∝ α ψα (Xα
the partition function Z = X α ψα (Xα ).
A graphical model can also be expressed via a weighted
state space graph. In an OR search space, the states are
partial assignments relative to a variable ordering, where
each layer corresponds to a new assigned variable. A graphical model can also be transformed into a more compact
AND/OR search space (Dechter and Mateescu 2007), deﬁned relative to a pseudo tree of the primal graph, by capturing conditional independence in the model, thus facilitating
more effective algorithms (Marinescu and Dechter 2009).

Related Works
Imagine that we want to compute a function over a weighted
directed graph where the graph is given implicitly, e.g., using a generative state-space search model whose explicit
state graph is enormous and does not ﬁt in memory. Clearly
algorithms that need to traverse such a state-space graph
will fail. Knuth and Chen (Knuth 1975; Chen 1992) proposed a pioneering sampling scheme for estimating quantities that can be expressed as aggregates (e.g., sum) of
functions deﬁned over the nodes in the graph. They focused on estimating the number of nodes in such graphs
(Knuth 1975). Our work is inspired by their scheme and extends it to a more general class of functions deﬁned over
weighted directed graphs or trees. In particular, this extension is applicable to reasoning tasks over graphical models e.g., probability of evidence or partition function over
probabilistic networks since they can be transformed into
tasks over weighted directed state graphs (Dechter and Mateescu 2007). The work of Knuth and Chen (Knuth 1975;
Chen 1992) was also extended more recently in the context of predicting the size of search trees in heuristic search
(Lelis, Zilles, and Holte 2013) and for search algorithms in
graphical models (Lelis, Otten, and Dechter 2014).

Abstraction Sampling Algorithm
Abstraction sampling for AND/OR trees (AOAS) uses an
abstraction function that partitions the nodes in the search
tree into subsets of abstract states under the assumption that
nodes in the same abstract state represent similar subproblems and can therefore be merged into a “typical” single representative. Given an abstraction function over a weighted
directed tree T , our algorithm generates a weighted directed
subtree T̃ using a generative randomized process. In particular, the scheme chooses randomly, using importance sampling probabilities, a single representative node from each
encountered abstract states and associates it with a weight
that estimates the total contribution of all states it represents.
Importance sampling probabilities are chosen proportional
to the current weight of the node, the cost of the path to the
root, and an estimate of the total mass of the subtree rooted
by this node, given by a heuristic function. An estimator to
our query over T can be computed over the generated representative tree T̃ , which is supposed to be far smaller. Clearly,
if the number of abstract states is bounded, the generated tree
is small and the estimator can be computed efﬁciently. For
general AND/OR trees (as opposed to OR trees), we enforce
a restriction on abstraction functions, called properness.

c 2018, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Copyright 
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

8010

